
The Scene
A raucous party on the eve of the Battle of Bosworth field in 1485, wine flows by the gallon, the table bends under the weight of the meat and breadcrumbs fly across the table as Richard III rises painfully to address his loyal peers:

Now is the summer of our sweet content,
Made overcast winter by these Tudor clouds.
And I that am not shaped for black-faced war,
I that am rudely cast and want true majesty,
Am forced to fight, To set sweet England free.
I pray to Heaven we fare well,
And all who fight us go to Hell
(transcription of the audio recording (British Broadcasting Corporation 2009), checked against (Curtis 2001)).
Thus starts Rowan Atkinson’s fabulously funny alternate history of Britain, the History of the Black Adder (Atkinson et al. 1983), one of the hallmark BBC sitcoms of the 1980s.

Fast forward through the show, right to the closing credits: “Written by Richard Curtis and Rowan Atkinson with additional dialogue by William Shakespeare”. And, indeed, even Richard III’s short speech contains at least three near-verbatim citations from Shakespeare’s play of the same name (and actually a fourth and a fifth, but more on that later):

Now is the Winter of our Discontent
Made glorious Summer by this Son of Yorke: […]
But I, that am not shap'd for sportiue trickes, […]
I, that am Rudely stampt, and want loues Maiesty, […]
And that so lamely and vnfashionable,
That dogges barke at me, as I halt by them [1]
All would be good if the citations were indeed verbatim, but they are not — the wit of Richard’s speech and indeed of much of Blackadder’s attraction depends on twisting citations, creating tension between original and new wordings. Blackadder like much of postmodern British Sitcom consciously sees history as a “cluttered patchwork of questionable stories which have been re-written, re-evaluated and ridiculed“ ((Roberts 2012), pos. 26, Kindle edition), using allusions precisely to enhance the sense of a subjective, patchwork-like history.

Enter Agents for Actors
Agents for Actors (AfA) (https://github.com/mwkuster/agents-for-actors) is an experimental, LGPL-licensed Open Source “framework for distributed microservices for text linking and visualization” that the author has developed to calculate precisely the types of “twisted” citations that we are seeing. It takes some inspiration from W. Artes’ Bachelor thesis (Artes 2012) on Similarity Search (cf. also (Hedges et al. 2012)), that the author has supervised, especially on the choice of NGram models for comparison, but is an independent implementation that deviates in the way the NGram model is built (cf. below). AfA is linked to TextGrid’s Text-Text-Image-Link Editor (Selig, Küster, and Conner 2012).

Afa identifies allusions between texts and their presumed sources and gives exact provenance information as XPointers (Küster et al. 2011). As an additional spin we make the comparison of Black Adder’s modern orthography transcript against the original-spelling First Folio, transcribed by Trevor Howard-Hill (http://ota.ox.ac.uk/id/3014).

AfA is extendable to other similarity models and measures and could be adapted for new visualization frontends. Given the computational complexity it embraces multicore architectures and parallelizes computations wherever possible. AfA situates itself between the macro-vision of big data digital humanities (e.g. (Jockers 2012) and the forthcoming (Jockers 2013)) and the micro-vision of the classical, manually encoded critical apparatus.

Implementation
AfA is implemented in the functional language Clojure (Hickey 2010) (Emerick, Carper, and Grand 2012; Halloway and Bedra 2012) on top of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Clojure thrives on immutable functional data structures (Okasaki 1999) for heavily multithreaded applications. Mutable operations are largely under control of Clojure’s Software Transactional Memory (STM).

AfA uses two Clojure paradigms to parallelize activities:

Futures: non-blocking threads that are transparently managed to parallelize calculations
Agents: asynchronous, used to interact with the visualization layer
The code basis itself consists of a number of individual functions for interacting with files, calculating similarity measures, handling visualization etc. They can be regrouped flexibly.

Handling XML
AfA currently expects both source and target to be encoded in XML. Both therefore contain parts such as the TEI header, cast lists or stage directions that without filtering generate noise when searching for references. Still, we need to preserve the exact pointers to source and target fragments in the underlying XML files to guarantee traceability.

With mutable data structures this objective would be difficult to attain without costly copying operations of XML structures in memory. The immutable abstraction of Zippers (Huet 1997) offers a solution by having the XML structures only once in memory, the algorithm operating on pointers to individual elements (“locations”). Furthermore, unlike e.g. XML DOMs Zippers are generic abstractions for tree structures, not only XML. AfA can hence be adapted to any form of structured data sources.

Measuring similarity
The AfA framework allows for multiple models and measures. At is simplest, the comparison is done using NGram models (cf. (Manning and Schuetze 1999)), that are used for fuzzy text comparison, e.g. in (Kestemont, Daelemans, and De Pauw 2010) and (Bernholz and Pytlik Zillig 2011), not to mention in Google-style big-data (Google 2010).

The tests presented in this paper are done with a variation of the NGram model, combining NGrams of words, that move in a slider over the text, creating chunks of size C, with NGrams of letters for the actual comparison of those chunks.

In the following example C=5. This way, the phrase “Now is the summer of our sweet content” into four chunks of five words each:


Each of these chunks is compared with a chunk from the supposed source material, built with the same algorithm, so that the totality of compared chunks is the Cartesian product NxM, N being the number of chunks in the source and M that in the target. Each of these pairs of chunks is compared using an NGram of ngram-count characters to smoothen over differences in spelling. The respective confidence level for a hit is calculated using the maximum dice-coefficient (cf. (Manning and Schuetze 1999), table 8.7) applied to this combination of chunks: (apply max (map (fn [[t1 t2]] (dice-coefficient (ngrams ngram-count t1) (ngrams ngram-count t2))) (for [chunk1 chunk-seq1 chunk2 chunk-seq2] [chunk1 chunk2]))) The algorithm works for other measures returning similarities normalized to [0,1].

Applying this admittedly computationally expensive algorithm to Richard’s speech with C=6, N=4 and a minimum confidence level of 0.65 identifies in Shakespeare’s complete First Folio precisely the expected links (XPointers referring to http://ota.ox.ac.uk/id/3014):


The algorithm cannot identify the fourth allusion, though, that contrasts the concepts of “overcast winter” with “glorious Summer”.

Dressing up
For visualization AfA uses Neo4j, an increasingly popular Open Source Non-SQL graph database (Neo4j.org 2012). Neo4j centres around two Topic Map (ISO/IEC 2002) like concepts, nodes and relationships. Both have unique identifiers and can have arbitrary properties besides. Relationships must have a start and an end node.

With neocons (Klishin 2012) Neo4j has an intuitive Clojure interface that permits to store and query the graph. Neo4j’s admin interface also has one of the more innovative graph UIs available in an off-the-shelf database.


Intertextuality and a bit of theory
This screenshot shows the individual phrases of Richard’s speech in Blackadder with their links to their source (“part-of”) and the phrases they cite (“cites”), giving a good visualization of the intertextuality (Kristeva 1969) (Barthes and Marty 1980; Barthes 1968) (Allen 2011) that animates much of Atkinson’s comedy.

Note that AfA does not “interprete” the links. Statistical methods rarely have an obvious interpretation, their epistemological openness and continuity being an asset for postmodern texts in a world of “stylistic and discursive heterogeneity without a norm” (Jameson 1991). If anything, Genette’s theory of hypertextualité (Genette 1982) might give us an adequate terminological apparatus.

Outlook
Three of the citations in Richard’s speech AfA has identified for us, the fourth we have discussed — but there is a fifth. Films are more than dialogue; intertextuality can just as well be construed without words. When Atkinson’s Richard is halfway through his speech we hear a dog barking — Richard is so ugly that “dogges barke at me”. Also, there is open linked data out there that situates Blackadder in context, here linking manually to Freebase movie data with some of Atkinson’s other films (for handling Freebase data cf. (Redmond and Wilson 2012), chapter Neo4j/Big data):


In the end an approach focussed on a narrow understanding of intertextuality will not suffice for audiovisual media; it must evolve into a network including knowledge and symbols (Peirce 1998), contextual, textual and non-textual. Now we can only manually add nodes establish these links, but there may be another untold history ahead.

References
Allen, G. (2011). Intertextuality. 2nd edn. Abdingdon: Routledge.
Artes, W. (2012). In Marc Wilhelm Küster, (ed). “Konzeption Und Entwicklung Eines Plug-in Basierenden SOAP-Services Für Die Ähnlichkeitsanalyse Im Text-Text-Link-Editor.” Worms: University of Applied Sciences Worms.
Atkinson, R., B. Blessed, E. Gray, R. East, T. McInnerny, and R. Robinson (1983). In Shardlow, M. The Black Adder. http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p006cx8w.
Barthes, R. (1968). “La Mort De l'Auteur.” Manteia (4e trimestre).
Barthes, R., and E. Marty (1980). Oeuvres Complètes: 1974-1980.
Bernholz, C. D., and B. L. Pytlik Zillig (2011). “Comparing Nearly Identical Treaty Texts: a Note on the Treaty of Fort Laramie with Sioux, Etc., 1851 And Levenshtein's Edit Distance Metric..” Llc 26.1: 5-16. doi:10.1093/llc/fqq016.
British Broadcasting Corporation. (2009). The Black Adder. Unabridged. AudioGO Ltd.
Curtis, R.. (2001). Blackadder: the Whole Damn Dynasty: 1485-1917. Re-issue. Penguin Books, Limited (UK).
Emerick, C., B. Carper, and C. Grand (2012). “Clojure Programming — Practical LISP for the Java World.” O'Reilly 2012.
Gérard, G. (1982). Palimpsestes. La Littérature Au Second Degré. Paris: Éditions du seuil.
Google. (2010). Google Books NGram Viewer.
Halloway, S., and A. Bedra (2012). Programming Clojure. Second Edition. Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Hedges, M., A. Jordanous, S. Dunn, C. Roueche, M.W. Küster, T. Selig, M. Bittorf, and W. Artes (2012). “New Models for Collaborative Textual Scholarship.” In, 1-6. doi:10.1109/DEST.2012.6227933.
Hickey, R. (2010). “Clojure.”
Huet, G. (1997). “The Zipper.” Journal of Functional Programming 7 (5) (September).
ISO/IEC. (2002). ISO/IEC 13250: Information Technology — SGML Applications — Topic Maps. {ISO}.
Jameson, F. (1991). Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham: Duke University Press.
Jockers, M. L. (2012). “Computing and Visualizing the 19th-Century Literary Genome.” In Hamburg. http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/computing-and-visualizing-the-19th-century-literary-genome/.
Jockers, M. L. (2013). Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History (Topics in the Digital Humanities). 1st edn. University of Illinois Press. http://www.matthewjockers.net/macroanalysisbook/.
Kestemont, M., W. Daelemans, and G. De Pauw (2010). “Weigh Your Words - Memory-Based Lemmatization for Middle Dutch..” Llc 25.3 287-301. doi:10.1093/llc/fqq011.
Klishin, M. (2012). “Neocons.” Clojureneo4j.Info. Accessed October 29. http://clojureneo4j.info/.
Kristeva, J. (1969). Semeiotike. Recherches Pour Une Sémanalyse. Éditions du seuil.
Küster, M. W., C. Ludwig, Y. Al-hajj, and T. Selig (2011). “TextGrid Provenance Tools for Digital Humanities Ecosystems.” In, 317-323. doi:10.1109/DEST.2011.5936615.
Manning, C. D., and H. Schuetze (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. 1st edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neo4j.org. (2012). “Neo4j.” Neo4j.org. http://neo4j.org/.
Okasaki, C. (1999). Purely Functional Data Structures. Cambridge University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1998). “What Is a Sign?.” In The Essential Peirce. 1893-1913, ed. Peirce Edition Project. 2 Bloomington.
Redmond, E., and J. R. Wilson (2012). Seven Databases in Seven Weeks: a Guide to Modern Databases and the NoSQL Movement. Pragmatic Bookshelf.
Roberts, J. F. (2012). The True History of the Black Adder: the Unadulterated Tale of the Creation of a Comedy Legend. Preface Publishing.
Selig, T., M.W. Küster, and E. Conner (2012). “Semantically Connecting Text Fragments — Text-Text-Link-Editor (Poster).” In, ed. Jan Christoph Meister, 518—520. Hamburg. http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/HamburgUP_dh2012_BoA.pdf.
Notes
1. The Tragedy of Richard the Third, cited after Shakespeare’s First Folio as transcribed in http://ota.ox.ac.uk/id/3014
Poetry visualization is used mostly to highlight patterns detected using computational tools. These tools aim to help scholars carry out the critical analysis of poetry and are based on data mining algorithms and visual tools (Bradford Paley). The purpose of these tools is to synthesize and bring forward certain key elements such as the structure of the narrative, the organization of the poem, the language elements, and the metaphors employed (Chaturvedi, 2011). This purpose is achieved by intentionally bringing forward the graphical elements of poetry by carefully layering annotations (Tufte, 1990) based on literary criticism, thus creating new methods to analyze poetry. Additionally, these visualization tools can place special emphasis in viewing the poems from different perspectives (Meneses et al., 2011) and visualizing the textual representation of the poetic texts in their formal structure (Audenaert et al., 2007).

However, poetry visualization can also be used to create new forms of expression. These new forms of expression apply deformation and transformation techniques to the original poem to create a new art form that in some cases retains the original characteristics of the poem. Examples of this transformation include Visualizing Text by Diana Lange (Lange), Poetry on the Road (Schaffors et al.), Text Universe (Rapati) and Ira Greenberg’s Syntactic Arthropod (Greenberg).

We believe that the tools used nowadays to visualize poetry have three important characteristics. First, the visualizations are created after the poem has been published. Second, the scholars who create and use the visualization usually do not have any relationship to the author who created the original literary work. Third, the visualizations are a direct consequence of the transformations applied to the original text. When we put together all three characteristics we are left with a visualization tool that serves its purpose when highlighting certain passages in a poem, but does not have any effect or significant influence on the author as the poem was written beforehand.

In our research, we are attempting to challenge the three notions that in our opinion have defined how poetry is visualized. For this purpose, we are building an interactive framework to write and visualize poetry. We have named this framework “Ambiances”. The main goal of our framework is to create a tool that affords a symbiotic relationship between writing and visualizing a poem. In our framework, the process of writing a new poem influences its resulting visualization and the visualization also affects the process of writing. At first, we envisioned mechanisms that allowed the author to carry out the writing and visualizing processes interactively. However, our tool also brings forth new possibilities of interaction when a different author designs the visualization. In this case, this interaction between the author of the poem and the designer of the visualization can engage in collaborative authorship. Additionally, our prototype borrows some of the concepts behind Storyspace (Bernstein, 2002, Bernstein, 2009). One of our goals is to design a tool that allows the author to create visualizations (Bernstein, 2009) that give aesthetic clues about the contents of the narrative.

We developed the first prototype of the system using Processing , an open-source programming language designed specifically for visual artists and designers with the purpose of teaching the fundamentals of programming. Casey Reas and Ben Fry started Processing as a project in 2001. However, Processing has evolved through the years and it is used beyond its original pedagogical scope. Nowadays, Processing is also widely used by visual artists and designers to create new ways of displaying of data, animations and digital artworks.

Using Processing has some obvious advantages that are concerned how with how the source code is executed and its portability. Processing is an extension of the Java Imaging Library, so Processing files can be executed as Java programs. Additionally, the Processing language is also available as a Javascript port , making it possible to run this system entirely on a modern web browser. However, we believe that the main advantage derived from using Processing is the simplification of the development process by encapsulating the complex data structures into simpler objects and methods.

The Ambiances framework is composed of different areas or “environments”. The first environment is a text editor where the author writes and composes the poem. The second area consists of a minimalist-programming environment optimized for writing Processing code. The third is a visualization environment that uses the poem and the source code as input materials to create a resulting visualization interactively. We specifically chose to emphasize the visualization environment and make it an integral part of the system. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of a prototype of our framework using the poem “Bright Star” by John Keats.


Figure 1.
Ambiances and a visualization of the poem “Bright Star” by John Keats.

The layout of the environments in the user interface allows the authors to engage in interesting ways. People have a natural tendency to create visual structures to organize resources when they share a workspace, which helps them to communicate interpretations and coordinate activities (Shipman et al., 2001a). This tendency towards the creation of visual structures facilitates the exchange and interpretation of visual information. In our prototype, the environments are linked together in a single widow frame.

The layout of the environments allows users to collaborate synchronously: authoring the poem and the visualization at the same time, or asynchronously: working at different times. Additionally, the interface encourages the authors to receive instant feedback through the visualization. Given that the authors cannot critique each other directly and can communicate through the visualization, Ambiances provides an unobtrusive way of writing poetry collaboratively that encourages unexpected interactions. For example: in the specific case where the visual elements are developing in syncopated opposition, we believe that the visualization and the interactions will provide hints that will allow the author of the poem to modify certain figures of speech accordingly. Our vision also allows authors to collaborate remotely from different locations. We will place special emphasis on evaluating the interactions in this case, as authors will communicate mostly through the visualization environment. However, at this point we do not discard allowing the authors to communicate using other means.

We plan on evaluating the affordances and the implications of our system by recording and analyzing the user interactions with the system prototype. This method of evaluation has been used in the past successfully in hypertext systems. In the specific case of the Visual Knowledge Builder (VKB), Shipman et al. recorded, logged and analyzed user interactions and found that their user interface created a strong relationship among documents, environments and their evolution through time (Shipman et al., 2001b). Similarly, our system allows authors to save sets of documents for a later time. This allows authors to expand their creative and explorative processes through multiple sessions, thus making their use of the system into a more complete experience.

In the end, developing the prototype for Ambiances left us with questions that we still need to answer. One of them is if Ambiances will work better with authors in specific genres, writing styles, languages and cultural backgrounds. It is not unconventional to assume that it will, but we still need proof. For this purpose, we are gathering a diverse group of authors to participate in this study. The feedback that we will collect from the authors and their interactions will be included in the new iterations of the system.

The contribution of our research is to explore the advantages, issues and challenges that a framework for writing and visualizing poetry interactively and can provide. More specifically, we are interested in the feedback that authors obtain in real time from the visualizations and how it can affect their writing. Additionally, we will also address the multiple authorship issues and the implications that will surface from the use of our framework. In the end, our research aims to implement, analyze and study new interactive methods for creating and visualizing poetry.

References
Flare — Data Visualization for the Web http://flare.prefuse.org (accessed 1 November 2012.)
Juxta — Collation Software for Scholars http://www.juxtasoftware.org (accessed 1 November 2012.)
Many Eyes http://www-958.ibm.com/software/data/cognos/manyeyes/ (accessed 1 November 2012.)
Processing.js http://www.processingjs.org/ (accessed 22 August 2012.)
Processing.org http://www.processing.org/ (accessed 2 April 2012).
Audenaert, N., U. Karadkar, E. Mallen, R. Furuta, and S. Tonner Viewing Texts: An Art-Centered Representation of Picasso’s Writings. Digital Humanities 2007, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 14- 16.
Bernstein, M. (2002). Storyspace 1. Proceedings of the thirteenth ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia — Hypertext '02. College Park, Maryland, USA.
Bernstein, M. (2009). On hypertext narrative. Proceedings of the 20th ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia — Ht '09. Torino, Italy.
Bradford Paley, W. TextArc.org Home http://textarc.org (accessed 1 November 2012.)
Chaturvedi, M. (2011). Visualization of TEI Encoded Texts in Support of Close Reading. M.A. thesis, Miami University.
Greenberg, I. syntactic_arthropod: Built with Processing http://iragreenberg.com/poetess/viz02/ (accessed 22 August 2012).
Lange, D. Visualizing text — OpenProcessing http://openprocessing.org/sketch/44133. (no date).
Meneses, L., C. Monroy, R. Furuta, and E. Mallen (2011). Computational Approaches to a Catalogue Raisonné of Pablo Picasso's Works. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic Linguistics and Semiotic Analysis.
Rapati, T. Text Universe http://openprocessing.org/sketch/10383 (accessed August 22,2012.)
Schaffors, A., B. Muller, and F. Pfeffer esono.com — Poetry on the Road 2006 http://www.esono.com/boris/projects/poetry06/ (accessed 22 August 2012.)
Shipman, F., R. Airhart, H. Hsieh, P. Maloor, P. Moore, J. M. Moore, and D. Shah Visual and spatial communication and task organization using the visual knowledge builder. Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, 2001 Boulder, Colorado, USA. 500325: ACM, 260-269.
Shipman, F., H. Hsieh, P. Maloor, and J. M. Moore The visual knowledge builder: a second generation spatial hypertext. Proceedings of the twelfth ACM conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia — Hypertext '01, 2001b Arhus, Denmark. 113-122.
Tufte, E. (1990). Envisioning Information, Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press.
Introduction
One barrier to locating serialized fiction in a digital newspaper archive is the fact that the serialized fiction themselves are not indexed, and individual articles do not have subject terms or tags associated with them that would identify them as fiction. As a result, articles are difficult to find unless the reader browses a large volume of issues or simply hits upon a salutary keyword search. Keyword searching of the collection is more effective for articles on topics in farming or farm life than for works of fiction. Unless the reader is looking for stories by a specific author or for a known story title, keyword searching of fiction is highly ineffective.

While the software used by most archives does a good job of connecting articles in a single issue, the reader does not know where to find the next installment in a serialized work of fiction, so he or she has to find it manually by browsing the collection or doing a keyword search. Finally, while the OCR scanning was done to the highest standard, this is an imperfect process, and much of the content cannot be adequately OCR’d due to background noise and broken letters, features of the original newspapers that impede scanning.

This paper summarized the process of our project that was completed over 15 weeks in the summer of 2012. Our goal was to complete the manual indexing process that had already been started previously, display serialized fiction articles in a new repository, evaluate multiple software packages to see which ones were the most promising for use in the future, and evaluate any automated ways of finding serialized fiction.

Method and Results
Manual Indexing
We experimented with three digital library systems, a Drupal/Fedora based repository (Islandora) (http://islandora.ca/), converting the fiction into TEI P5 and displaying it in the California Digital Library’s eXtensible Text Framework (XTF) (http://www.cdlib.org/services/publishing/tools/xtf/) and Omeka (http://omeka.org) a PHP-based publishing platform for digital library objects. We were unable to get Islandora’s OCR correction module installed so we stopped using it in favor of Omeka. We used XSLT to transform the PrXML into very simple TEI5 files, which we were able to upload to XTF, but the lack of an editor and the intensely manual process of text encoding was also rejected in favor of Omeka. TEI Example: http://uller.grainger.uiuc.edu:8080/xtf/search

Ultimately, we decided on using Omeka with the Scripto Plugin for correction. Serialized fiction articles in one title, the Farmer’s Wife, was manually indexed in a spreadsheet, and graduate assistants converted those stories from PrXML into an exhibit, added Dublin Core metadata and links to the newspaper archive from the new serialized fiction collection. The end result was index of serialized fiction that would increase the accessibility of these articles. Omeka Exhibit: http://uller.grainger.illinois.edu/omeka/

Crowdsourcing OCR correction
The University of Illinois Digital Newspaper collections are in Olive Software ActivePaper Archive, which has a method for administrators to correct text but not users. Omeka provides a plugin called ‘Scripto’ for text correction that we were able to successfully use to correct the text in selected articles. We also evaluated Veridian (http://www.dlconsulting.com/veridian/), which is a commercial digital newspaper library solution used by Trove Digitised Newspapers (National Library of Australia), From the Page (http://beta.fromthepage.com/) and Islandora (http://www.islandlives.ca/). From the Page and Islandora were both very difficult to install and administer, and while not free we felt Veridian was a much better approach and we are evaluating it as part of our future newspaper digitization efforts.

Text Analysis
How can we identify serialized fiction without having to have a human find it, index it in a spreadsheet and manually extract it from the archive? Certain n-grams are common within serialized fiction such as ‘chapter’, ‘the end’, ‘to be continued’ and could be used to simply search for keywords within documents; we could also calculate which words occur most frequently in fiction vs. other types of articles and use those terms to automatically tag articles.

We also evaluated using topic analysis to find fiction. We evaluated the 580 articles we had already identified as serialized fiction using Mallet to find 25 topics with 25 words each. Figure 1. shows the top 25 topics modeled as a network using Gephi, while figure 2 shows the topic words ordered by frequency.


Figure 1


Figure 2

Nodes were ranked by betweenness centrality and topic 14 had the highest at 51,321.01 and its component n-grams along with the other top topics could be used to find serialized fiction in other titles.

One final text analysis technique that could be useful is identifying proper names is Named Entity Extraction. While we made an effort to manually remove names from the topic analysis, as you can see they kept reappearing in the results. By using named entity extraction we could eliminate proper names from the topic analysis to make them more accurate, and to link fiction together by the character’s names. All three of these techniques (keyword frequency, topic analysis, named entity extraction) I plan on evaluating in a future study.

Conclusion
Serialized fiction is an important component of historical newspapers and by making it more accessible to patrons and researchers we can expand the use and usefulness of our digital newspaper collections. The manual indexing approach was relatively inexpensive to accomplish but was time consuming and difficult to do over a large corpus of pages. Two promising approaches to find and digitize serialized fiction in our newspaper archive are adding a crowdsourcing feature to enable users to identify article types and correct mistakes, and utilizing text analysis techniques to identify fiction programmatically. We hope to report on our efforts at the latter at the DH 2013 conference.

References
Bastian M., S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy (2009). Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating networks. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
Brandes, U. (2001). A Faster Algorithm for Betweenness Centrality. Journal of Mathematical Sociology25 163-177.
Cohen, D. (2008). Introducing Omeka. Dan Cohen's Digital Humanities Blog. http://www.dancohen.org/2008/02/20/introducing-omeka/.
Islandora. http://islandora.ca/.
Island Lives. http://www.islandlives.ca/
McCallum, A. K. (2002). MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://www.cs.umass.edu/~mccallum/mallet.
Veridian. http://www.dlconsulting.com/veridian/.
Librarians from Emory's Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library and the library's Data Center envisioned building a base of historic maps from library mao collections that would allow scholars to research aspects of the history of Atlanta, especially its racial history. As a first step the librarians digitized and georeferenced a 1928 Atlas of Atlanta. At the same time the library also digitized the 1928 city directory of Atlanta, which was then proofread and marked up in TEI. In addition funeral home records from 1930 were transcribed and marked up to be added to the text collections. The addition of texts encoded in TEI allows flexible searching, giving the public access to the text records. The GIS work allows researchers to visualize and analyze complex patterns of development. This poster will show the work being done in the library by the volunteer labor of a variety of librarians, and some of the connections between the TEI and GIS use of the data.


The TEI development
The text portion of the research is hosted in an eXist database, and can allow queries from public users and researchers to search names and street locations. To prepare the data staff and students proofed the city directory, and marked up the address listings in TEI. Records from the funeral home from the same period have been transcribed and will be encoded and available for searching also. The xml-encoded city directory document allows the production of lists of names and addresses in various forms to automate much of the geocoding. When the geographic references from the geocoder are added to the coding in the city directory, a search by name will be able to bring up map references showing the locations associated with that name. Web based users can search and to locate names and streets with Google Maps or Google Earth using the georeferenced locations harvested from the geocoder and added back the TEI encoding.

The GIS development
The GIS coding allows researchers with access to GIS software to pursue research via the data encoded in layers of the geographic maps. While the construction of a geodatabase is core to the GIS users, the development of a geocoding reference layer and a specific address locator is what enables us to construct geocoding tools for Atlanta circa 1928. The geocoding reference layer's construction is facilitated by the automation allowed by the TEI encoding of the city directory.


A geocoder transforms data such as addresses into a location on the surface of the earth so the data can be quickly plotted on a map. Using a Geographic Information System (GIS), this project will create an application similar to Google Maps, but it will be a digital research tool for Atlanta from the late 1920s through the early 1950s, not for contemporary Atlanta. The geocoder assigns addresses and maps all of the 250,000 building footprints in Atlanta and its environs in 1930. Students, faculty, and researchers can then add layers and tag attributes to a series of addresses in the historic city. With this research tool, researchers interested in Public Health could explore the correlation between topography, elevation, and incidence of disease in Atlanta, urban historians could map out more complicated, nuanced, and fluid racial residential patterns, political scientists could map the locations of fire hydrants, manhole covers, and sidewalks to provide accurate data about how segregation influenced city services, and historians could map the “watersheds” of churches and discover how far members of a particular congregation lived from a particular church. The goal of the project is to create a digital tool to visualize and analyze historical Atlanta by providing new ways to integrate spatial and non-spatial data in the classroom and in research. This combination of GIS technology and unique datasets will change the way Jim Crow Atlanta is studied.

References
Re-Mapping Segregated Atlanta http://marbl.library.emory.edu/remapping
MARBL Historic Map Collection http://www.digitalgallery.emory.edu/luna/servlet/EMORYUL~3~3
The transcription of primary textual sources is at the center of digital editing projects. The capacity offered by the digital medium allows for the inclusion of much more detailed transcriptions than is possible within the frame of printed editions. But this capacity tempted scholars into attempts to capture every possible aspect of the document in their transcription. Unless we are very careful about the choices that we make in relation to the transcription of a document, we risk making an enormous effort and spending a great deal of money on transcriptions that end up not being very useful. This paper describes our use of an encoding system that allows scholars to present a transcription of the text of the document alongside the variant states of the text, making it possible to go beyond the encoding of documents.

Some important projects in digital humanities are focused on the transcription of documents. Notable examples of this are Transcribe Bentham (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/), the Jane Austen’s Fiction Manuscripts Digital Edition (http://www.janeausten.ac.uk) or Nietzsche Source (http://www.nietzschesource.org/). Moreover, editors such as Hans Walter Gabler who have made the transition from print to digital and who advocate critical editions are shifting their focus towards the transcription of primary sources. For example, Gabler, in his article “The Primacy of the Document in Editing,” asserts that:

…the text should be seen fundamentally as a function of the document. For, after all,… it is documents that we have, and documents only. In all transmission and all editing, text are (and, if properly recognized, always have been) constructs from documents. (Gabler 199)

This re-definition of text as construct from a document develops in Gabler’s argument to become “…a set of document functions comprehensively deriving from the continuous manuscript posited…” (207). This represents a shift from what has been considered the traditional role of the editor as the scholar that establishes the text. Indeed, Peter Robinson points out that:

[Gabler] proposes a complete refocusing [sic] of editorial perspective: away from a concentration on the finished product, the editorial text which is supported by reference to various documents, towards a concentration on the documents themselves, from which an editorial text may (or may not) emerge. This is an immense shift. Gabler proposes that the intense editorial effort which for centuries has seen as its goal the construction of an editorial text, should now focus on the construction of the text of the documents. (Robinson 5)

Robinson’s interpretation of Gabler’s text is informed by my own concept of the text of the document, as developed for the article “The Commedia Project Encoding System.” While working on the electronic edition of the Divine Comedy, I developed a complex encoding system to represent, within a single file, the text of the document and the variant states of the text. In this article, I explain that:

I use the phrase the ‘text of the document’ to refer to the sequence of marks present in the document, independently of whether these represent a complete, meaningful text. That is: the reader sees a sequence of letters, occurring in various places in relation to each other (perhaps between the lines or within the margins) and carrying various markings (perhaps underdottings or strikethroughs). These make up what I here refer to as the text of the document. (Bordalejo 2010).

I am not the first in referring to text of the document, G. Thomas Tanselle has contrasted the text of the document (1978; 1996) with “the text of the work” (Tanselle, 1996).

The text of the document, then, can be recorded as a sequence of meaningful marks present on a particular document. MS. Riccardianna 1005, a witness of Dante’s Divine Comedy, presents the following example:


This could ordinarily be represented by: <del>dura</del><add>duro</add>

In our transcriptions, however, we represent this as: <app>  <rdg type="orig">dura</rdg>  <rdg type="c1">duro</rdg> <rdg type="lit"> dur<hi rend="ud">a</hi>o</rdg> </app>

Here, the last reading, <rdg type="lit">, represents the text of the document literally. Unlike traditional TEI recommended encoding we do not use <add> or <del>, on the premise that both of these confound a statement of editorial interpretation (this is a deletion or an addition, so we should read the text with or without these characters) with a statement of what appears on the document (there is a mark under these characters; they are placed interlineally). In our view, the statement of what we see on the page is a different order of declaration from a statement of how we think this should be read. The aim of <rdg type="lit"> is to present the meaningful marks we see on the document. The statement of how we think these marks should be read, as a sequence of readings, should be left for the other elements within <app>: thus, <rdg type="orig"> and <rdg type="c1">, representing the different perceived stages a particular text has gone through during a process of revision, from its original (“orig”) to first corrected state (“c1”). All these statements — <rdg type="lit">, <rdg type="orig"> and <rdg type="c1"> — are interpretive. However, they are interpretive in different ways and serve different purposes.

The TEI, in “An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions” (http://users.ox.ac.uk/~lou/wip/geneticTEI.doc.html#index.xml-body.1_div.1_div.1) includes some similar elements to the ones developed for our edition of the Commedia. Consider this example from “An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions”:

“The following example, taken from a manuscript of Jane Austen's Sanditon, shows a rewriting where a pencilled passage has been fixed with ink, with some modification:



Image from page 70 of the Sanditon manuscript

In this example, Austen sees in the fixation an opportunity to manipulate the text previously written, and thus changes the pencilled could but get to the inked could get. A simple way of encoding this might be as follows: <ge:rewrite cause="fix" hand="ja2" stage="#s1"> Now, if we could get <del stage="0">but</del> a young Heiress</ge:rewrite>”

In our proposed system, not originally designed for genetic encoding but easily adaptable for this purposes, we would encode it as: <app> <rdg type="orig">Now, if we could but get </rdg>  <rdg type="c1">Now, if we could get</rdg>> <rdg type="lit"> <seg type="overwritten"> <seg type="orig" rend="pencil">Now, if we could but get </seg> <seg type="c1" rend="ink">Now, if we could get</seg> </seg> </rdg> </app> Both systems explicitly state that there was an original text, written by Jane Austen and that the text was rewritten by herself. The “lit” reading in my proposed transcription specifies that this was originally written in pencil and that the second version of the text was written in ink. In my transcription, it is clearly stated that the original form of the text was “Now if we could but get ” (written in pencil) and that this was altered to “Now if we could get” (written in ink). In contrast, in the proposed TEI encoding it is not at all clear from the use of the various attributes (stages “0” and “#s1”) and from the <ge:rewrite> and <del> elements what was originally written, what it was revised to, and how this was done.

For our purposes, we find that by stating explicitly what occurred to the text, that is whether it was stroke through, underdotted, underlined, erased, scrapped or rewritten, we avoid the ambiguity of the <del> element. The <add> element has also been set aside, to be replaced with markup that indicates position or mode of insertion.

The encoding system being used in our projects is TEI compliant, but it attempts to serve the purposes of various types of scholarly editions. For the purposes of textual scholarship, it is necessary to have a clear idea of what is meant by “representing the text of the document.” In any case, it is not enough to represent the text of the document, we must also represent variant states of the text and give editorial interpretation a more explicit place in the transcription of primary sources.

References
Bordalejo, B. (2010). The encoding system. In Prue Shaw (ed.) The Commedia of Dante Alighieri: A Digital Edition. Saskatoon: Scholarly Digital Editions.
Burnard, L., F. Iannidis, E. Pierazzo, and M. Rehbein (n.d.) An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions. http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html. (Accessed November 1st, 2012).
Gabler, H. W. (2007). The Primacy of the Document in Editing. Ecdotica, 4, 197–207.
Pierazzo, E. (2011). A Rationale of Digital Documentary Editions. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26, 463–477.
Robinson, P. (2013). Towards a Theory of Digital Editions. Variants 10, 105-32.
Tanselle, G. T., (1978). Editing Historical Documents Studies in Bibliography 31, 1-56.
Tanselle, G. T., (1996). Editing Historical Documents Studies in Bibliography 49, 1-60.
Reflecting on her life, Jane Rule suspected that so far as the media was concerned in she was “the only lesbian in Canada” (Martin) the year her novel, Desert of the Heart, Canada’s first English-language literary lesbian novel was published. Online she is one of the best-represented figures in the Canadian gay and lesbian liberation movement, a movement captured byLesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada (LGLC), an infrastructure pilot project of the Canadian Research Writing Collaboratory (CWRC) at the University of Alberta. After introducing the LGLC project, the issues that underpin our TEI encoding, and the CWRC project’s extension of existing personographic records, we, the LGLC project’s co-directors, demonstrate the stakes in producing authority records for the online recuperation and discoverability of underrepresented gay and lesbian activism.
Starting Out: A Single and Singular Source Text
The LGLC project reconfigures Donald McLeod’s remarkable monograph, Lesbian and Gay Liberation In Canada: A Selected Annotated Chronology, 1964-1975, as a TEI-encoded resource within CWRC. The chronology is organized by date and then by location, with each entry neatly summarizing a small moment in history, followed by a bibliography of sources. The book focuses primarily on “self-declared lesbians and gay men and their activities in regard to the forging of lesbian and gay communities and liberation in Canada,” and therefore, dedicates most attention to demonstrations, political actions, lobbying, and legal reforms (McLeod viii). As a secondary and supplementary focus, the book notes “artistic and cultural contributions with significant lesbian or gay content” as part of the chronology, and includes three appendices listing lesbian and gay organizations, periodicals, bars, and clubs (McLeod viii-ix). Heterosexuals who were instrumental either in supporting or opposing the gay liberation movement are included, and foreign events are noted if they either had a direct impact on the Canadian gay liberation movement, or featured prominent involvement by gay Canadians. The start date of the chronology corresponds with the formation of the Vancouver-based Association for Social Knowledge (ASK), the first large-scale homophile organization in Canada. The end date coincides with the founding of the National Gay Rights Coalition/Coalition national pour les droits des homosexuels (NGRC/CNDH), the “first truly national coalition of Canadian lesbian and gay groups” (McLeod viii).
We originally planned the LGLC project as a straightforward and independent representation of Donald McLeod’s book in HTML and KML, both underpinned by TEI, to be housed on the Canadian Lesbian and Gay Archives website. The LGLC’s inclusion within CWRC allows us to capitalize on their infrastructure: a repository and suite of tools dedicated to preserving and showcasing Canadian history and writing. The CWRC infrastructure will cast the LGLC project as an online research and social space — visitors will be able to plot the events of the Canadian gay liberation movement on maps and timelines; read and annotate the text; converse with one another; and contribute their own images and reflections.
The Problem of Representation: Modeling Personhood in TEI and RDF
The LGLC project works within CWRC not solely to recover gay history, but to respond, at the level of code, to the debates that have shaped that history. The LGLC project’s initial personographic encoding has been motivated by the movement to recuperate lost lesbian and trans histories. The debates may be familiar: in the 1980s there was a rush to claim biological females who lived as men, like surgeon James Barry, music hall performer Annie Hindle, and jazz pianist Billy Tipton, as lesbians who had not had access to “lesbian” as an identity marker. In the following decade the transgender community rejoined with competing claims that these historical actors are part of trans history (Halberstam). What ought the conscientious encoder do in the face of such temporal specificity? In building a reliable and ethically responsible code, we are mindful of Alan Galey and Stan Ruecker’s call to make “a virtue of the entanglement of past and future intentions in any artifact”(421); however, we have still experienced anxiety about TEI’s modes of expression. The standards, which for example, only allow four designations for categorizing sex [1] , facilitate interoperability, but limit our encoding’s expressiveness.
Judicious customization that meets the needs of our host project helps us balance our twin goals of ethical representation of the queer community and conformance to digital humanities community practice. Our mid-term objective is to model the history of the queer community’s nonce naming practices through TEI, with the long-term goal of using the CWRC space to allow for user-added folksonomic tagging (Ornelas 231). In the meantime, our aim is to extend our event encoding without resorting to schema customization. CWRC is in the process of defining a wide range of RDF predicates to express the relationship between people in its aggregate data sets. Currently, within an event, encoders can tag time, places, agents of action, and recipients of action. CWRC draws on the TEI encoding to write out RDF triples representing the relationship between incidents, time, and people. CWRC allows encoders to draw from CWRC’s local authority records, authority records on the web, to offer alternate identifiers complete with name and URI, or to write a new personographic records. This opportunity for strategic customization certainly helps the LGLC project model personhood with more nuance, and, looking forward, will allow for a more fine-grained articulation of the relationships between all the people CWRC’s aggregate datasets.
Authoritative Solutions: Dissemination and Discoverability Online
In addition to our desire to integrate LGLC events with other events in Canadian literary history, we are anxious to make the LGLC records widely discoverable. The Canadian lesbian and gay liberation movement is a much-neglected part of Canadian history, one often overshadowed by Stonewall narratives. We aim to rectify the scarcity and relative invisibility of Canada’s gay and lesbian liberation movement online. It is challenging, even when doing traditional research, to draw out all the connections between the organizations, events, and people that make up Canadian LGBT history. The activists in the movement are underrepresented in Wikipedia, and often have only partial records in the Virtual International Authority Files (VIAF), Katalog der Deutsche National Bibliothek (DNB), Freebase, and the Library of Congress Authorities.
CWRC houses its own authority records, which, using linked open data, are connected to VIAF, the DNB, and the Library of Congress, among other authorities. Encoders within CWRC can take their identification of a person further, and create a CWRC-specific authority record for that person, supplementing or even contesting the information housed in other authority records. The actors in LGLC dataset give us an opportunity to code for self-identification over time, correcting VIAF, LC Authorities, Freebase and DBpedia’s failure to account for activists’ changing identities and multiple names, outside of the prose descriptions that they link to or draw from Wikipedia. As legitimate authority records, CWRC’s personographies can serve as the basis for more accurate Wikipedia articles, thus feeding back into VIAF, DBpedia, and Freebase, all of which link to Wikipedia. Encoding practices within the CWRC framework offer a new way to comprehend the relationship between the gender performance, sexual practice, and cultural context embedded in identity naming practices, and provide a way to make those relationships discoverable online.
Our paper shows how the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada project ensures the representation of historical queer Canadian experience in online resources. Ultimately, as co-directors of the LGLC project, we offer our code and our data modeling principles as methods to overcome the limitations of extant authority records. In this way, LGLC contributes to the existing feedback, citation, and authority models in a manner that supports the LGBT community and improves online access to often overlooked histories — after all, Jane Rule was not the only lesbian in Canada in the 1960s.
References
Galey, A., and S. Ruecker (2010). How a Prototype Argues. Literary and Linguistic Computing 25.4: 405–424.
Ornelas, A. (2010). Queer as Folksonomies. In Greenblatt, E. (ed). Serving LGBTIQ Library and Archives Users: Essays on Outreach, Service, Collections and Access. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 229–239.
Halberstam, J. J. (1998). Transgender Butch: Butch/FTM Border Wars and the Masculine Continuum. GQL: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 4.2: 287–310.
Martin, S. (2007). 'B.C. Novelist Wrote a Cult Classic and Became a Lesbian Role Model'. The Globe and Mail.
McLeod, D. W. (1996). Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada: A Selected Annotated Chronology, 1964-1975. Toronto: ECW Press/Homewood Books.
Notes
The four values permitted on the sex’s value attribute are male, female, unknown, and not applicable.
The focus of my doctoral studies at the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities is the creation of a digital edition of the oldest surviving manuscript of S. Augustine's De Civitate Dei. The manuscript dates back to the early fifth century and most of the existing, scarce research we have predates the 1950s. Its much debated provenance and authorship, due to it being contemporary to Augustine himself, are as intriguing as its rare palaeographical features and marginalia. My research seeks to, firstly, examine best practice in the field of digital editions by collating relevant evidence in a detailed catalogue of extant digital editions. The catalogue records features, scope, philological as well as technological aspects of each edition and aims at becoming a collaborative scholarly endeavour for the benefit of the Digital Humanities community. Secondly (and consequently), lessons learnt from the catalogue will inform the production of an electronic edition of De Civitate Dei, which will include transcriptions of the text and the scholia, high-definition images, a short critical apparatus, as well as background information and links to relevant resources.

What makes a good digital edition? What features do digital editions share? What is the state of the art in the field of digital editions? Why are there so few electronic editions of ancient texts?

To address these questions, I have collated relevant evidence in a detailed catalogue of digital editions. Amongst other things, the catalogue makes a distinction between scholarly and non-scholarly editions; provides a list of tools used; open source and open access projects which will help flag up potential data links; funding bodies which will serve as a popularity record; digital humanities standards compliant projects (TEI, Creative Commons License, linked open data, etc.); and texts under examination as well as their repositories as a means of assessing which countries, areas or cultural institutions are more actively digitising.

Why does this project bring to the Digital Humanities community? A catalogue of digital editions is greatly beneficial as it provides:

an accessible, unique record of which texts have had digital editions created and the historical period they belong to;
a data bank of features, tools, licences, funding bodies and locations;
an insight into past, present and future projects;
the possibility of viewing trends or patterns (e.g. what time periods are most covered or which institutions produce the largest number of digital editions);
a platform where collaborators can engage in live discussions and update information as it becomes available;
a means of identifying which areas need to be improved.
The editions I include in the catalogue come from numerous sources and their selection follows basic criteria: the electronic texts can be ongoing or complete projects [1] , born-digital editions or electronic reproductions of print volumes. These were gathered from existing catalogues [2] , lists, such as Projects using the TEI [3] , RSS feeds, [4] publications (articles, reviews and books), Google Scholar alerts, tweets, word of mouth, web browsing and chaining.

Data is carefully collected and assessed both quantitatively and qualitatively. Content analysis is being carried out along two parallel tracks: a passive approach, whereby I contact each team with a short questionnaire aimed at gaining a deeper understanding of both the production and user ends of the project; and a more active, observational examination of the electronic editions through website and related publications analysis.

The catalogue has been produced using existing tools, Google Spreadsheets and Google Fusion Tables, whose progressive development offers new opportunities in the field of data collection and visualisation. This choice was dictated by a number of factors, namely cost, ease, collaboration, functionality and output. [5] Google Spreadsheets and Tables also provide inbuilt sharing and communication tools, opening up possibilities for live, collaborative and synergetic work.

Once all the data has been analysed, it will be possible to establish the state of the art in the field of electronic editing, draw up a best practice profile and make reliable inferences from which further research can stem and develop.

To date, the catalogue showcases some three-hundred digital editions (this is the estimate figure for July 2013), collected and examined over a period of ten months. Of course, there are many more editions left to include and, indeed, many more to come.

However, interesting facts are already beginning to emerge: several projects, for instance, have not set up analytics as a means of studying usage; projects urging the digital reunification of manuscript fragments are often internally fragmented themselves, having split the project between institutions rather than centralising the material for easy retrieval and management; and TEI guidelines are not as widely adopted in the field of digital editions as we might think.

While initially collated for personal research purposes, I am developing the catalogue into a larger resource, available at: https://sites.google.com/site/digitaleds. The website enables people to report bugs and errors, comment and make suggestions for improvement. Although initially curated by myself, a wider group of administrators is envisaged for a more reliable and smoother experience: regular and prompt updates, continuous support and wider outreach. Scholars can join the project as administrators or editors by contacting the author.

The ultimate aim of the catalogue is not only to be used as a project reference tool but also to bring together scholars in the field, thus systematically and collaboratively creating a unique bank of data which would figure alongside other prominent Digital Humanities resources such as centerNet, the Digital Classicist Wiki and the various associations (ADHO, ACH, ALLC, etc.).

Notes
1. Still active on the web

2. Dr. Patrick Sahle's Catalog of Digital Scholarly Editions (available at: http://www.uni-koeln.de/~ahz26/vlet/vlet-about.html); Dr. Paolo Monella (available at: http://goo.gl/smy6p, section 2.2); Dr. Cinzia Pusceddu (available at: http://www.digitalvariants.org/e-philology); Dr. Aurélien Berra (available at: http://philologia.hypotheses.org/corpus); the Monastic Manuscript Project (available at: http://earlymedievalmonasticism.org/listoflinks.html#Digital); Hunter College (available at: http://goo.gl/cBjci); the Digital Classicist (available at: http://goo.gl/r8eUt and http://goo.gl/GSpLl) and the Associazione per l’Informatica Umanistica e la Cultura Digitale wikis (available at: http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip/index.html). Another notable catalogue is UCLA’s Catalogue of Digitized Medieval Manuscripts which, however, records some 3126 fully digitised manuscripts as opposed to digital editions (available at: http://manuscripts.cmrs.ucla.edu/index.php ).

3. Available at: http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Projects/index.xml (Accessed: 2 March 2013).

4. The Ancient World Online (available at: http://ancientworldonline.blogspot.co.uk/); arts-humanities.net (available at: http://www.arts-humanities.net/); Digital Classicist seminars (available at: http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip/index.html).

5. The data can be exported in different formats: Microsoft Excel (.xlsx); Open Document Format (.ods); PDF Document (.pdf); Comma Separated Values (.csv); Plain Text (.txt); Web Page (.html).
The digital edition has long been conceived not only as a set of transcriptions of the witnesses that underlie a work, but also as the images of the manuscript and book pages that physically represent it. Showing a readable transcription next to the facsimile of its source document provides the reader with the same level of evidence enjoyed by the editor of a print edition.
Connecting ranges of text to areas in the image is useful wherever a manuscript has been heavily corrected or was written long ago in a writing style now hard to decipher. Even for printed works, the absence of such links forces the reader to waste time scanning the facsimile whenever the layouts differ, spelling variations have been regularised, or the text emended (Kiernan, 2006). Establishing text-image links was first explored in the electronic Beowulf edition (Dektyar et al., 2004). Other examples include the British Museum’s electronic Codex Sinaticus (2009) and, using a different display technique, the ‘zoom topographic’ view of the Samuel Beckett digital manuscript project (Van Hulle et al., 2011). But the technical requirements of providing this form of interaction for any digital edition are considerable. There are three main problems:
•        1. How to display text-image links at the line and word-level over the Web
•        2. How to edit and automate the creation of links
•        3. How to store them in a reusable and efficient form
The following sections describe solutions to these problems and how they can be combined into a single system for storing, displaying and editing text to image links. This solution forms part of the AustESE (Australian electronic scholarly editing) project (Osborne, 2012), which aims to create interoperable Web-based tools for managing and creating digital editions.
1. Viewing links
As a solution to problem 1 a background image (Figure 1c) is overlaid first by a transparent pane or canvas on which drawing is done (b), and second by a set of invisible areas (a) that trigger simultaneous highlighting in the text and image as the mouse moves over them (Schmidt, 2012c). Polygonal areas are needed, since in many cases, e.g. curved or slanted lines, corrections, inserted text-blocks etc. rectangles are simply too imprecise. It is also versioned: the highlighted areas change according to the version of the text (base or corrected) chosen on the right.
 
Figure 1: Web visualisation of image areas
In an alternative technique described by Cayless (2008), images of the text are converted to SVG surrogates (an XML format), and their bounding rectangles computed, to facilitate linking with the XML-encoded text. However, this increases the overall complexity of the encoding, and invites overlap between existing markup and the newly added spans. The solution described here, on the other hand, requires only simple features of HTML5, and is more amenable to automation.
2. Creating and editing links
There have been several tools already developed for creating and updating links from areas in a facsimile to spans in a transcription. This operation should be distinguished from more general kinds of image annotation, because text-image links are far more numerous, more specialised and, as Kiernan notes (2006b), likely to overwhelm any standard annotation system.
There appear to be only three tools that meet this narrow definition. The first is EPPT, created for the electronic Beowulf edition (Iacob and Kiernan, 2009) as part of the ArchWay project (Kiernan et al, 2005). This was an Eclipse plug-in (a programmer’s tool) that created simple shapes without automation. The Textgrid TBLE tool is likewise an Eclipse plug-in (Al-Hajj, 2011). Although it does not yet support automation, it can draw polygons. However, having the editing tool available over the Web would facilitate updating through scholarly collaboration and crowd-sourcing (e.g. ANL, 2012). TILE (Reside et al., 2009) is so far the only Web-based solution to the text-to-image editing problem, but it remains incomplete.
Our need was for an immediate solution for both print and manuscript texts so we could begin entering data for projects like the Charles Harpur archive (SETIS). This is a collection of large manuscript anthologies (100-350 pages) and newspaper cuttings. Thus, to be practical, the text to image linking process would have to be largely automated. Our program was designed as an applet (a Java web plug-in) because this allows for rapid and stable development, support for image analysis, and Web presentation. It is called TILT (text-image linking tool) because it is designed to deal with moderately curved or slanting text (Schmidt 2012b). This is frequently found in facsimilies due to the difficulty of laying books or manuscripts absolutely flat, and also in manuscripts where the text is written in crooked lines or at an angle. TILT uses automation at several levels:
•        1. Auto-recognition of pages at the word or line-level
•        2. Auto-outlining of individual lines in response to a click or tap
•        3. Auto-outlining of individual words similarly
•        4. Manual drawing of polygons and rectangles
•        5. Automatic linking of the current shape to the text
The idea is that when one technique fails another can be used with finer control, and with manual adjustment in case of error.
Word recognition
When the user clicks on a word, a small square is assessed around the click-point (Figure 2). If the darkness of this square exceeds the average document darkness it is accepted (solid outlines, left). Adjacent squares are assessed similarly. If a square fails the test it is subdivided into four. If any one of these smaller squares is accepted then adjacent full-size squares are assessed as before. Otherwise it is discarded (dotted outlines, left). This leads to a rapid determination of word-boundaries. The basic outline is then converted into a bounding box (solid outline, right), or if this is too wasteful, into a polygon (dotted outline, right).
 
Figure 2: Detection of word boundaries
Line recognition
To facilitate line-recognition, the facsimile, which is often in colour, is first reduced to grayscale, then to pure black and white by application of a localised contrast filter, which erases differences caused by uneven lighting.
Baselines of the text can be found by summing the pixels in each horizontal row of the image. Rows with peak pixel-counts exceeding the average background darkness may be interpreted as baselines. These can be further constrained to lie within the text block, and only where there is surrounding text. The user can see the detected baselines by clicking the Lines tool. To detect entire lines the word-detection algorithm is simply applied along each baseline. To detect slanted or wavy baselines the image could be vertically divided into strips, and the lines in each strip joined up, although this is not yet implemented.
Linking word-shapes to the text
Word-shapes detected in the image are allocated approximately to corresponding word-positions in the text. Although breaking up the text into lines will make this more accurate, manually specifying positions where words and shapes do in fact match will allow this approximation to be gradually refined. Thus it is expected that, in practice, little human intervention will be needed to connect all word shapes to their correct words. For well laid-out facsimilies, e.g. of printed books, whole page recognition may be sufficient to link everything in one go.
3. Storing links
There have been several proposals for recording the data of text-image links. The model described by Audenart and Furuta (2009) focuses on the images rather than the work, whereas for our needs the latter is primary. The markup schemes described by Dekhtyar et al. (2005), and in TEI P5 (22.3) are based on embedded XML. As Kiernan (2006b) notes, text to image links, if embedded in the text, usually overlap with any markup already present. The resulting mixture of milestones and ordinary tags can be very complex.
On the other hand, simply using standoff properties (Schmidt 2012a), which are based on LMNL (Piez, 2010), to record the links, would simplify things considerably. Although saving is not yet implemented in TILT, each link, consisting of a shape and a textual span, could be saved as a separate layer. Links could then be merged with the other markup in the text, or used to generate the map which overlays the image (Figure 1a).
Conclusions and future work
The most important goal of TILT will be the testing of user requirements, which can only happen once a practical tool has been built. For example, how to deal with line-breaks in the middle of words, and what level of granularity (word or line) will work best must still be determined. TILT still lacks essential features like zooming, saving, the ability to change images as the user scrolls through the text, and export to other formats. However, based on current progress it is anticipated that these features will be completed by July 2013. There seems to be a pent-up demand for a text-image linking tool like this, given the current interest in digital facsimiles and the general exploration of more interactive interfaces for digital editions.
References
Al-Hajj, Y. A. A., and M. W. Küster (2011). The Text-Image-Link-Editor: A tool for Linking Facsimiles & Transcriptions and Image Annotations. Proceedings of Digital Humanities http://dh2011abstracts.stanford.edu/xtf/view?docId=tei/ab-197.xml;query=Al%20Hajj;brand=default (accessed 25 October 2012).
ANL, (2012). Trove, Australian National Library, http://trove.nla.gov.au (accessed 19 October 2012)
Audenart, N., and R. Furuta (2009). Annotated Facsimile Editions: Defining macro-level structure for image-based electronic editions. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24.2 pp. 143-151.
Cayless, H. A. (2008). Linking Page Images to Transcriptions with SVG. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference. held 12-15 August in Montréal, Canada. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies 1, doi:10.4242/BalisageVol1.Cayless01.
Codex Sinaticus, (2009). http://codexsinaiticus.org (accessed 25 October 2012).
Dekhtyar, A., I. E. Iacob, J. W. Jaromczyk, K. Kiernan, N. Moore, and D. C. Porter (2005). Support for XML Markup of Image-based Electronic Editions International Journal on Digital Libraries.
Iacob, E. and K. Kiernan (2009). Installing the EPPT-Trial. http://beowulf.engl.uky.edu/~eft/eppt-trial/EPPT-Install.htm(accessed 19 October 2012).
Kiernan, K. (2006a) Electronic Textual Editing: Digital Facsimiles in Editing. In Burnard, L., O'Brien, K., O'Keeffee and Unsworth, J. (eds), Electronic Textual Editing. New York: Modern Language Association of America.
Kiernan, K. (2006b). Technology.http://beowulf.engl.uky.edu/~kiernan/eBoethius/tech.htm#tech (accessed 25 October 2012).
Kiernan, K., J. W. Jaromczyk, A. Dekhtyar, D. C. Porter, K. Hawley, S. Bodapati, and I. E. Iacob (2005). The ARCHway Project: Architecture for Research in Computing for Humanities through Research, Teaching, and Learning.Literary and Linguistic Computing 20 (Suppl) pp. 69-88.
Osborne, R.http://austese.wordpress.com AustESE: Australian Electronic Scholarly Editing (accessed 25 October 2012).
Piez, W. (2010). Towards Hermeneutic Markup: An Architectural Outline. Digital Humanities Conference. held 7-10 July at Kings College. London.
Porter, D. (2009). The Text Image Linking Environment. Digital Humanities Summer Institute held at the University of Victoria. http://www.youtube.com?v=BiiNfDLqs6I (accessed 25 October 2012).
Reside, D., D. Lester, D. Porter, and J. Walsh (2011). tile–text image linking environment. http://mith.umd.edu/tile/(accessed 25 October 2012).
Schmidt, D. (2012a). The Role of Markup in the Digital Humanities. Historical and Social Research/Historische Sozialforschung 37.3 pp. 125-146.
Schmidt, D. (2012b). TILT http://austese.net/tests/tilt (accessed 25 October 2012).
Schmidt, D. (2012c). Image. http://austese.net/tests/image (accessed 25 October 2012).
SETIS, The Sydney Electronic Text and Image Service. Harpur. http://setis.library.usyd.edu.au/ozedits/harpur/(accessed 26 October 2012).
Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. TEI P5, TEI Consortium(eds). http://www.tei-c.org/P5/(last accesed 26 October 2012).
Van Hulle, D., M. Nixon, and V. Neyt (2011). Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project.http://www.beckettarchive.org/demo/ (accessed 31 October 2012).
Collation comes from the Latin confero (perfect participle collatum) meaning ‘bring together’. There are several meanings in English, among them ‘bring together for comparison … in order to ascertain points of agreement and difference’ (OED, 2012). Even here collation may refer to a mechanical, manual or computerised process of comparing texts. My focus is on the latter, because it derives from an originally manual process as described, for example, by West (1973, 66f) and Dearing (1962, 14ff). Collation was a key part of the preparation of a critical edition because it supplied the raw differences between a chosen copy text and the other versions that aided the establishment of a single text suitable for printing.

Vinton Dearing in 1962 described what is perhaps the world’s first collation program (1962, 18-19). It compared two texts, one line at a time, within a window of 10 lines in either direction. Once a line (or later a word) was matched in the two versions being compared, the window was moved on. This allowed it to recognise insertions, deletions, substitutions and transpositions over short distances. The window was used probably because memory on the IBM 7090 for which it was written, was limited. This basic design was then followed in all subsequent collation programs. For example the collation program of Froger (1968 234), ‘EDIT’ (Silva and Bellamy 1969, 41-25), ‘OCCULT’ (Petty and Gibson 1970), the collation program of Gilbert (1973), ‘UNITE’ (Marín 1991), ‘PC-CASE’ (Shillingsburg 1996, 144-148), ‘TUSTEP-Collate’ (1979), ‘URICA!’ (Cannon and Oakman 1989), ‘DV-Coll’ (Stringer and Vilberg 1987) and ‘Collate’ (Robinson 1989, 1994) all appear to use the same ‘sliding window’ technique. The size of the window varies, and in various programs extra features are added such as the ability to embed references, define transposed blocks and perform spelling normalisation (Collate), or the ability to merge collation output from each run (TUSTEP, PC-CASE).

One point often mentioned in these early collation programs is that they were developed to automate the manual process of producing a print edition. As Cannon explains: ‘automatic collation should proceed as it would be performed manually’ (1976, 33). Robinson also admits, when talking of the automatic treatment of variants that ‘most electronic editions do the same as book editions: they just do more of it, perhaps with marginally more convenience’ (2003).

The sliding window technique has come to define what automatic collation is, but it has some serious technical limitations. For example, it cannot see alignments of words outside of the window, and this makes it prone to mistakes, which must be manually corrected. However, modern computers have no need of a window, as they can easily load into memory the entire text for comparison.

One may also ask whether a print-based collation technique is really suited to a modern fluid medium like the Web. Differences discovered by a machine are not always suitable for display on a screen. As Robinson points out: ‘Some differences will be just, well, noise: only a few ... are real variants, of real interest to real scholars.’ (2009, 349). Hence all the early collation programs employ filtering, whether some kind of fuzzy matching, or a normalisation table to discount minor spelling variants. However, an apparatus generated in this way cannot subsequently be recombined with the base text to produce the faithful text of another version, because after filtering it contains only a tiny fraction of the true differences. It thus can only be attached to a base version as a series of notes, which limits the possibilities for display and interaction between user and text.

Another problem arises from the use of embedded markup. When SGML and then XML became popular from around 1990, there was a notable decrease of interest in collation programs. Existing programs were not updated, and replacements that fully handle XML have not yet emerged. The reason seems to be that if the computed differences between two texts contain disconnected start or end-tags, how does one supply the missing tags? In the case of an apparatus entry generated from TEI-XML such as: ‘word</hi>’, what is the format of ‘word’? It could be anything because the start-tag and its attributes have been lost. So markup must be stripped out before collation can take place, as is done, for example, in Juxta Commons (2012). But stripping out markup is prone to error: how, for example, does one deal with embedded notes, and interpretations, or alternatives like ‘sic’ and ‘corr’ or embedded variants? (Schmidt 2012a). It also makes it difficult to compare formatting differences, and to later restore the markup, because the differences only refer to the stripped text.

A further problem is whether people really want to see a print apparatus on the screen. Although it may be defended as a traditional form of variant display, what the modern user ultimately wants is interactivity. The essence of the modern Web is animation or the ability to edit and contribute in real time, not statically formatted data.

From collation to merging
What is needed for the medium of the Web is a thorough reassessment of the collation process. As a first step the difficulties in comparing embedded markup can be avoided by separating the text from its properties. ‘Standoff properties’ (Schmidt 2012a), which are modelled on LMNL (Piez, 2010), can be used in place of embedded XML, and may be generated from plain text or XML files. For each version this produces one version of the text and one or more markup files. The text and markup can then be merged separately, using the nmerge program (Schmidt 2009), into multi-version documents, which record the differences between all the versions globally – not merely between the base version and the rest. Because it doesn’t use a sliding window, but looks for differences over the entire text, nmerge doesn’t lose its way. The separately computed differences in the markup and the text are merged with the text’s own structural properties and then formatted into HTML, without the need for XML. This new platform for digital editions facilitates various techniques for displaying variation (Figure 1). Each display is generated as a partial web-page so it can be incorporated into any kind of Web-delivery system:


Figure 1:
Collation workflow using MVD+standoff properties

The most popular of these is the side-by-side display. Examples include MEDITE (Bourdaillet and Ganascia 2006), the MVD-GUI (Schmidt et al. 2008), Juxta Commons (2012), the Trein der Traagheid electronic edition (Roelens et al. 2012), the Versioning Machine (Schriebman 2011), etc. Some of these programs have synchronised scrolling, which helps keep compared versions in alignment. Side by side view is more suited to programs like MEDITE or nmerge that compute character-level differences as opposed to word-level differences, because the user can see at a glance how two similar words differ. And multi-version documents already contain all the differences between versions, which don’t need to be recomputed each time, resulting in a much faster response, as can be seen in the AustESE (Australian electronic scholarly editions) test web interface (Schmidt 2012b).

Another popular type of variant display is the table, as found in CollateX (Dekker et al. 2011), and in the Cervantes hypertext edition (Urbina 2008). This is particularly useful in textual criticism because it presents much the same information as the old apparatus, but in a native digital form. In the AustESE test interface, table view (Figure 2) offers several options to reduce variant clutter without resorting to filtering. Character-level granularity can be easily extended to word-level, which is more useful for this type of display. Table view has the advantage over side-by-side in that it allows the user to explore the differences between a larger set of versions. Combining a horizontally scrolling table of variants with a synchronised vertically scrolling main text even produces a credible replacement for the print critical edition in digital form (Schmidt 2012b).


Figure 2:
Table view

Conclusion
The goal of collation on the Web is to provide the user with a variety of display options for exploring variation in a work. Collation conceived as a process for producing an apparatus or a filtered set of differences external to the text is too limited a technique to satisfy the flexible delivery options of the Web. Merging variant versions into a single digital object, on the other hand, provides a more efficient and direct way to query differences between versions, and to present the results through various views. Embedding markup into the text also creates problems for collation, and its removal allows differences between versions of text and markup to be merged as separate layers into the final result. The medium of the Web thus offers more than just new ways to display old data. It challenges us to rethink fundamentally the way we create the modern edition.

References
Bourdaillet, J. and J. G. Ganascia (2006). MEDITE: A Unilingual Textual Aligner. In J. G. Carbonell and J. Siekmann (eds). Lectures Notes in Artificial Intelligence. 4139: 458-469.
Cannon, R. L. (1976). OPCOL: An Optimal text Collation Algorithm. Computers and the Humanities 10(1): 33-40.
Cannon, R. L., and R. L. Oakman (1989). Interactive Collation on a Microcomputer: The URICA! Approach. Computers and the Humanities 23: 469-472.
Dearing, V. A. (1962). Methods of Textual Editing, Los Angeles: William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, University of California.
Dekker, R. H., T. Andrews, B. Buitendijk, Z. Green, T.A. Griffitts, G. Middell, M. Mielnicki, L.-J. Olsson, T. Parkola, T. Vitt, and J. van Zundert (2011). CollateX. http://collatex.sourceforge.net (accessed 8 Oct, 2012).
Froger, D. J. (1968). La critique des textes et son automatisation. Paris: Dunod.
Gilbert, P. (1973). Automatic Collation: A Technique for Medieval Texts. Computers and the Humanities 7(3): 139-145.
Juxta Commons (2012). Juxta. http://www.juxtasoftware.org (accessed 8 Oct 2012).
Marín, F. (1991). Computers and Text Editing: A Review of Tools, an Introduction to UNITE and Some Observations Concerning its Application to Old Spanish Texts. Romance Philology 35: 102-122.
OED (2012). Oxford English Dictionary Online. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ott, W. (1979). A Text Processing System for the Preparation of Critical Editions. Computers and the Humanities 13: 29-35.
Petty, G. R., and W. M. Gibson (1970). Project OCCULT: The Ordered Computer Collation of Unprepared Literary Texts. New York: New York University Press.
Piez, W. (2010). 'Towards Hermeneutic Markup: An Architectural Outline'. Digital Humanities Conference. held July 7-10 2010 at Kings College London.
Roelens, X., R. Van den Branden, and E. Vanhoutte (2012). De trein der traagheid. http://edities.ctb.kantl.be/daisne/index.htm (accessed 8 Oct 2012).
Robinson, P. M. W. (1989). The Collation and Textual Criticism of Icelandic Manuscripts (1) Collation. Literary and Linguistic Computing 4(2): 99-105.
Robinson, P. M. W. (1994). Collate 2: A User Guide. Oxford: Oxford Computing Service.
Robinson, P. M. W. (2003). Where we are with electronic scholarly editions and where we want to be. Computerphilologie 5: 125-146. http://computerphilologie.tu-darmstadt.de/jg03/robinson.htm.
Robinson, P. M. W. (2009). Towards a Scholarly Editing System for the Next Decades. In: Huet, G., A. Kulkarni, and P. Scharf, (eds), Sanskrit Computational Linguistics 2007/2008. LNCS. 5402: 346–357.
Schmidt, D., D. Fiormonte, and N. Brocca (2008). A Multi-Version Wiki. In Opas-Hänninen, L.L., M. Jokelainen, I. Juuso, T. Seppänen (eds.), Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2008 held June 2008 in Oulu, Finland. 187-188.
Schmidt, D. (2009). Merging Multi-Version Texts: a General Solution to the Overlap Problem, in The Markup Conference 2009 Proceedings held August in Montreal.
Schmidt, D. (2012a). The Role of Markup in the Digital Humanities, Historical and Social Research/Historische Sozialforschung 37(3): 125-146.
Schmidt, D. (2012b). http://austese.net/tests/ (accessed 8 Oct, 2012).
Schriebman, S. (2011). The Versioning Machine. http://v-machine.org (accessed 8 Oct 2012).
Shillingsburg, P. (1996). Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age Theory and Practice. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Silva, G., C. Bellamy. (1968). Some Procedures and Programs for Processing Language Data. Clayton: Monash University.
Stringer, G., W. Vilberg. (1987). The Donne Variorum Textual Collation Program. Computers and the Humanities. 21(2): 83-89.
Urbina, E. (ed). (2008). Electronic variorum edition of the Quixote. http://cervantes.tamu.edu/V2/CPI/variorum/index.htm (accessed 8 Oct, 2012).
West, M. L. (1973). Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique. Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner.
This paper is concerned with stylometric classification applied to French seventeenth-century plays. It reports on ongoing investigations into parameter setting and its impact on classification of such texts by author, genre, or form, using Eder & Rybicky's stylometric scripts for R (Eder & Rybicky 2011). Based on an investigation into the Corneille-Molière controversy, several methodological issues standing in the way of reliable results have been identified. One issue concerns the degree to which such authorship classification tasks are influenced by genre (here, comedy or tragedy) and form (here, verse or prose). Investigation of this issue shows that input parameters have indeed effects on the relative influence of authorship, genre and form in the classification of plays. Stylometry today: advances and challenges
Stylometry has made significant advances in recent years, due no doubt to the increased availability of electronic texts, of sophisticated and accessible stylometric tools, and of proposed classification methods and distance measures. Based on this range of resources, researchers in stylometry are able to use various linguistic features as input for classification tasks and may adjust a wide range of parameters.

This situation, however, also brings renewed urgency to the issue of fine-tuning input parameters and distance measures, depending on the materials under scrutiny and the type of inquiry. Arguably, this is somewhat less of an issue today for a language such as English, where a well-established stylometric tradition exists. However, despite recent advances for some languages (Van Dalen-Oskam & Van Zundert 2007, Rybicky & Eder 2011), parameter setting remains an insufficiently explored issue for languages such as German, French, Spanish, or Latin, and many more.

The Corneille-Molière controversy
This has been particularly apparent in the domain of seventeenth-century French drama, because work in this area has recently fuelled a controversy over whether or not Corneille was in fact the author of some or several plays traditionally attributed to Molière. In this controversy, traditional biographical and archival research (Boissier 2004) was complemented with results from stylometric analyses (Labbé & Labbé 2001; for a knowledgeable critique, see Brunet 2004; for a more recent approach, see Marusenko & Rodionova 2010). However, the methodological basis for stylometric analyses of this type of material seems to have been insufficiently investigated..

The conditions for reliable stylometric attribution results in this domain are challenging. The strong codification of classical literary discourse and the prevalence of stringent metrical forms mean that stylistic differences between authors are often subtle. At the same time, the available plays vary widely as to dramatic genre (e.g. comedy or tragedy) and form (i.e. verse or prose). Preliminary investigations into the Corneille-Molière corpus using Eder and Rybicky's stylometric scripts have indeed shown the fragility of the results. Depending on the composition of the text collection, on the linguistic material used as input, and on distance calculation measures, results vary widely.

Fine-tuning for author, genre and form
On the one hand, then, it can be challenging to make clear author attributions on material that is heterogeneous as to genre or form. For example, relevant research relying on the „unmasking“ technique showed unsatisfactory results for cross-genre authorship attribution (Kestemont et al. 2012). On the other hand, if only relatively homogeneous material is taken into account, the overall amount of data available for classification may be significantly reduced. What is needed is knowledge about how to limit the influence of factors other than the one of concern in any given classification task. The most relevant factors in the present case are authorship, genre (here, comedy or tragedy) and form (here, verse or prose). If the goal is to make reliable author attributions, how can the influence of genre and form be limited? The research reported on here was designed in order to explore such issues. All investigations are based on the Théatre classique collection (Fièvre 2007-2013), which provides XML/TEI versions of all plays. Texts were uniformely preprocessed to retain only character speeches, but no lemmatization was applied.

A first collection of plays was investigated limiting the number of relevant categories to just two, authorship and genre, and balancing the number of plays for each category. This resulted in a collection of 32 plays by Pierre Corneille and Thomas Corneille, with an equal number of comedies and tragedies by each author. The question at hand was to find out at which settings the classification would be dominated by either one of the author or genre category, and to what extent. Systematic variation was introduced as to the range of words from the frequency list taken into account: All runs relied on 100 words from the word frequency list, and each run took these from a moving onset point onwards, at an interval of 50 words.

For each run, the data was subjected to a distance measurement using Burrows' Delta (Burrows 2002), the results forming the basis of a cluster analysis. The distance tables were saved for each run, and the proportions of the different low-level pairs for each run were extracted. The low-level pairs found can be of the following types: author-and-genre match, author-only match, genre-only match, or pairs without a match. The proportions of author-only and genre-only matches is assumed to indicate to which extent the chosen settings give precedence to textual features associated with authorship or genre, respectively. Figure 1 visualizes the results from this investigation.


Figure 1

Author-and-genre matches decrease overall with increasing onset points, and the proportion of author-only matches remains relatively stable. However, the proportion of genre-only matches increases markedly with increasing onset points. In the range of onsets points between 0 and 1150 words (with two exceptions at 300 and 750 words), pairing is predominantly related to authorship, not genre. In the range of onset points from 1150 to 1650 words, pairing is related both to authorship and to genre, in varying proportions, while genre seems to be taking over more markedly beyond an onset point of 1650 words.

A similar investigation was run with a collection of plays with variation only as to authorship and form (verse or prose). The collection of plays consisted of 28 comedies, with an equal number of prose and verse plays by each of the following authors: Dufresny, Scudéry, Regnard, and Molière. Again, the nature and proportions of the different low-level pairs was assessed. With adjustment for the asymmetrical number of authors and forms, the graph shown here as figure 2 was constructed.


Figure 2

There is a very strong fall-off for author-and-form matches from an onset point of around 800 words. Although author-only and form-only matches increase somewhat over the range of onset points, this does not correspond to the decrease in author-and-form matches. The most important result is that over the entire frequency range, form-only matches are always present and in many though not all cases, they have a higher proportion than the author-only matches. Compared to the authorship vs. genre comparison (figure 1), there is certainly no clear cut-off point below or above which author-only matches would dominate form-only matches.

Conclusions
Despite their limitations, these preliminary results give some useful indications for authorship attribution studies in French classical verse drama, and may increase reliability of attributions. First, text collections of mixed dramatic sub-genre may be used in authorship classification tasks, provided that the wordlist used does not exceed the first 1150 most frequent words, so that influence from features related to genre remains limited. Second, form is a prevalent factor in the entire range of the frequency list, and should be controlled for when creating text collections. Applying these insights to the Molière-Corneille problem permits to enlarge the corpus of comparison texts beyond comedies, thus yielding a broader basis for classification tasks, but not beyond verse plays. While the procedure described here could be used for other languages and genre pairs, the results may be difficult to generalize: the best distinguishing parameters will likely be different from the ones found here for French classical drama.

However, more work needs to be done before the results obtained are sufficiently reliable. On the one hand, the approach taken here could be improved by enhancing the assessment of the dendrograms to take higher-level groupings into account as well. On the other hand, the fact that there are quite a few exceptions to overall trends shows the limit of this approach. In fact, a mechanism like feature selection may be more appropriate to solve the issue. Using supervised machine learning techniques with authorship, genre or form as separate target classes, and combining this with information gain analysis for each target class, would allow generating lists of features relevant for each target category.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jan Rybicky and Maciej Eder for introducing me to their tools as well as João Guerra for helping me with some Python coding.

References
Boissier, D. (2004). L'affaire Molière. La grande supercherie littéraire, Jean-Cyrille Godefroy.
Brunet, É. (2004). Où l’on mesure la distance entre les distances. Texto!. (4) http://www.revue-texto.net/Inedits/Brunet/Brunet_Distance.html (accessed 10 March 2013).
Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’: a Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. LLC 17 (3) 267-287. 10.1093/llc/17.3.267
Eder, M., and J. Rybicki (2011). Stylometry with R. In DH2011: Conference Abstracts. Stanford University, Stanford, 308-11.
Fièvre, P., (ed.) (2007-2013). Théâtre classique, http://www.theatre-classique.fr/ (accessed 10 March 2013).
Kestemont, M., K. Luyckx, W. Daelemans, and T. Crombez (2012). Cross-Genre Authorship Verification Using Unmasking. English Studies
Labbé, C., and D. Labbé (2001). Inter-textual Distance and Autorship Attribution Corneille and Molière. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics. 8(3): 213-231. 10.1076/jqul.8.3.213.4100
Marusenko, M., and E. Rodionova (2010). Mathematical Methods for Attributing Literary Works When Solving the ‘Corneille-Molière’ Problem. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 17(1): 30-54.
Rybicki, J., and M. Eder (2011). Deeper Delta Across Genres and Languages: Do We Really Need the Most Frequent Words? LLC. 26(3): 315-321. 10.1093/llc/fqr031.
Van Dalen-Oskam, K., and J. van Zundert (2007). Delta for Middle Dutch. Author and Copyist Distinction in Walewein. LLC. 22(3): 345-362. 10.1093/llc/fqm012.
Alongside the increasing number of digital humanities job listings, postdoctoral fellowships, and graduate programs, we have begun to see a number of introductory digital humanities courses and the creation of several programs at a wide range of undergraduate institutions — everything from small liberal arts colleges to state universities to research-intensive private institutions. Consequently, it seems opportune to think closely about how the digital humanities will shape undergraduate education — and vice versa. New jobs and fellowships presuppose undergraduates who have been and will be introduced to conversations of the digital humanities as well as humanities faculty who will teach them. While the late 1990s sparked discussions among Canadian and US institutions about the creation of undergraduate and master’s programs (Rockwell 1999; Unsworth 2001; Sinclair and Gouglas 2002), new technologies and institutional interest have renewed the conversation (Spiro 2010; Fitzpatrick 2010; Brier 2012; Reid 2012; Davis and Alexander 2012). Because such a large number and range of institutions are now considering implementing some training in the digital humanities, it now seems timely to contemplate the future of undergraduate digital humanities.

This panel considers how we might recalibrate the digital’s role in the humanities by making undergraduate education—and not simply digital pedagogy — a more central preoccupation. Building on recent, compelling discussions of infrastructure and curriculum for digital humanities graduate programs (Clement 2010; Thaller et al. 2012; Boggs et al. 2012) as well as roundtables on alternative careers (Nowviskie et al. 2011), dynamic constellations for undergraduate education are emerging from the interactions among new computational methods, hybrid classroom spaces, reimagined curricula, and alternative career paths for college graduates. This panel gathers several initiators of such digital humanities programs for undergraduates to discuss their past and future.

More than simply creating students to enroll in new graduate programs, introducing the methods of the digital humanities to undergraduates provides opportunities for them to do something traditionally reserved for students in the sciences: original, collaborative research (Blackwell and Martin 2009; Norcia 2008). Moreover, digital humanities has arguably brought renewed attention to discussions of praxis and pedagogy, with online journals such as Hybrid Pedagogy and The Journal of Interactive Pedagogy and Technology; Brett D. Hirsch’s recent Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles, Politics (2012); multiple panels on digital pedagogy at the 2012 MLA (Harris 2012; Berens and Croxall 2012) and a digital pedagogy unconference at the 2013 MLA (Croxall and Koh 2013); Brown University’s “Teaching with TEI” seminar (2012); a dedicated track at recent Digital Humanities Summer Institutes (Harris, Sayers, and Jakacki 2012; Jakacki 2013); and several poster presentations at recent Digital Humanities Conferences (Bonsignore et al., 2011; Harris 2011; Singer 2012; Croxall 2012). Our hope is that a roundtable discussion, drawing on participants from different fields and representing many different types of U.S. institutions, will help, first, to identify some of the best contemporary approaches to undergraduate digital humanities curricula, infrastructure, course scaffolding, and praxis and, second, to sketch out new directions for the future of undergraduate education at a variety of undergraduate institutions.

Organization
Each speaker will talk for 7 minutes about a particular institutional praxis or curricular infrastructure. The organizers will then pose questions for the entire roundtable for 20 minutes, leaving the remainder of the conversation for discussion among panelists and the audience.

To begin with, panelists will map out the multiple and competing histories of digital humanities’ recent incursion into undergraduate education, just as Matthew Kirschenbaum (2010) and others have sought to understand digital humanities by reflecting on its institutional histories. Part of this multiplicity, of course, is due to the ways in which “digital humanities” is understood differently at each institution, due to the specific interests of individual scholars, the focus of particular departments, and the demands of institutional mission. With these issues in mind, panelists will present several different models for integrating digital humanities into undergraduate coursework: from introductory seminars for first-year students who may lack technological skills through advanced courses for majors to specialized, independent research projects as capstone experiences. In doing so, we will consider both how best to structure something like an “Introduction to Digital Humanities” course and how to connect disparate projects, faculty, and upper-level courses. Such scaffolding naturally begs the larger question of whether digital humanities is best introduced to undergraduates as a separate discipline or as a crucial part of traditional humanities courses. Finally, while all panelists generally agree on a praxis-based approach to such courses, they will also discuss how best to execute and theorize praxis in the different disciplines.

Questions that panel organizers might pose during the subsequent discussion include:

Is digital humanities a topic that should be based within particular departments? Or is it something that should be taught across all humanities undergraduate departments?
What departmental or university infrastructure and support are necessary for a digital humanities undergraduate curriculum?
What is necessary to prepare students for digital humanities work at the graduate level? Is adequate preparation possible without more formalized graduate programs in place?
How do we redesign curricula to incorporate both DH courses and incursions into traditional disciplines?
Is digital humanities a methodology or a topic of study? How can the two approaches be best integrated in the undergraduate classroom?
What are best practices for praxis methodologies and project-based research approaches in the undergraduate classroom?
How might we envision curricula to be redesigned in the future with digital tools and digital critical thinking in mind?
How might national and international conceptions of undergraduate education shape digital humanities incursions differently?
Speakers
Recognizing the importance of undergraduate education in the future of the digital humanities, all six speakers have enthusiastically committed to attend and present at DH in Lincoln.

Cheryl E. Ball, Associate Professor of English, Illinois State University
Ball highlights how digital writing studies (a discipline in its fourth decade that integrates digital technology into its writing pedagogy and research) has always focused on issues current to discussions of “making” in the digital humanities: collaboration, openness, multimodality, and peer-review. Ball argues that a digital publishing curriculum, in which undergraduate students theorize and produce texts meant for an audience outside of the classroom (a key concept to digital writing studies pedagogy), is a model for DH in how it bridges theory and praxis across multiple disciplines in the humanities.
Ryan Cordell, Assistant Professor of English, Northeastern University
Cordell writes frequently about technology and teaching for the ProfHacker blog at the Chronicle of Higher Education and has taught digital humanities-inflected courses at both a liberal arts college and a research university. He will draw on those experiences in his contribution to this panel, where he will contend that undergraduates do not share their instructors' fascination with defining or theorizing digital humanities qua digital humanities. Rather than dwelling on such debates, he will suggest that DH instructors should embrace undergraduate disinterest in DH as an aid to curricular incursion, allowing digital practices to be introduced as routine aspects of scholarly practice.
Rebecca Frost Davis, Program Officer for the Humanities, National Institute for Technology in Liberal Education (NITLE)
Davis will discuss results of NITLE’s 2012 Survey of Digital Humanities at Liberal Arts Colleges, institutions that largely integrate digital methodologies via disciplinary coursework and student scholarship, rather than as a separate academic program. Her research explores the motivations and mechanisms for creating, integrating, and sustaining digital humanities within and across the undergraduate curriculum.
Jarom McDonald, Associate Research Professor and Director, Office of Digital Humanities, Brigham Young University
McDonald will address the topic, "Considering a Moneyball approach to Digital Humanities Education." BYU has just finished a multi-year assessment project of their long-running Computers and the Humanities minor, gathering empirical data through surveys, collaborative faculty input sessions, student tracking, and external review. He will discuss how he and colleagues are now working to understand how to best implement the wealth of evidence they've collected to help their program evolve for current and future students' needs.
Miriam Posner, Digital Humanities Coordinator and Research Technology Consultant, UCLA
Posner, who both coordinates and teaches in UCLA’s Digital Humanities program, is helping build a new interdisciplinary minor in digital humanities. She will speak on “knowledge design,” a pedagogical approach she and her colleagues have adopted that emphasizes an environment of project-based collaboration. Drawing on theories advanced by Johanna Drucker and Jerome McGann, she will describe the program’s studio model in which students are assigned a novel problem and asked to work across disciplines and hierarchies to solve it together.
John Theibault, Director, South Jersey Center for Digital Humanities, Richard Stockton College of New Jersey
Theibault began his academic career as a historian of early modern Europe and is currently Director of the South Jersey Center for Digital Humanities at Stockton College. He started teaching "Introduction to Digital Humanities" to undergraduates in the General Studies program at Stockton in 2011, which prompted his reflections about where such a course fits within a broader digital humanities curriculum for undergraduates, the topic of his presentation.
Organizers
Dr. Brian Croxall, Digital Humanities Strategist & Lecturer of English, Emory University
Dr. Kate Singer, Assistant Professor of English, Mount Holyoke College
References
Alexander, B., and R. F. Davis (2012). Should Liberal Arts Campuses Do Digital Humanities? Process and Products in the Small College World. Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minnesota University Press. 368-389.
Berens, K. I., and B. Croxall (2011). Session Proposal. Building Digital Humanities in the Undergraduate Classroom. 28 Nov. 2011. Web. http://www.briancroxall.net/buildingDH/2011/11/28/session-proposal/. 17 Oct. 2012.
Blackwell, C., and T. R. Martin (2009). Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research. Digital Humanities Quarterly. 3(1). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/1/index.html. 17 Oct 2012.
Boggs, J., et al. (2012). Realigning Digital Humanities Training: The Praxis Program at the Scholars’ Lab. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 18 July 2012. Poster presentation.
Bonsignore, B., et al. (2011). The Arcane Gallery of Gadgetry: A Design Case Study of an Alternate Reality Game. Digital Humanities 2011. Stanford University. 21 June 2011. Poster presentation.
Brier, S. (2012). Where’s the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital Humanities. Debates in Digital Humanities. Minnesota UP: 350-367.
Clement, T. (2010). An Undergraduate Perspective. Digital Literacy for the Dumbest Generation. Digital Humanities 2010. King’s College London. 8 July 2010.
Croxall, B. (2012). Courting ‘The World’s Wife’: Original Digital Humanities Research in the Undergraduate Classroom. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 18 July 2012.
Croxall, B., and A. Koh. (2013). A Digital Pedagogy Unconference. Modern Language Association Convention. Boston. 3 January 2013. http://www.briancroxall.net/digitalpedagogy/. 17 Oct. 2012.
Fitzpatrick, K. (2010). Undergrads Reimagine the Humanities. Planned Obsolescence. 11 December 2010. http://www.plannedobsolescence.net/blog/undergrads-reimagine-the-humanities/. 25 February 2013.
Harris, K. D. (2011). Pedagogy & Play: Revising Learning through Digital Humanities. Digital Humanities 2011. Stanford University. 21 June 2011. Poster presentation.
Harris, K. D. (2011). Acceptance of Pedagogy & DH MLA 2012. triproftri. 14 May 2011. http://triproftri.wordpress.com/2011/05/14/acceptance-of-pedagogy-dh-mla-2012/. Web. 17 Oct. 2012.
Harris, K. D., J. Sayers, and D. Jakacki. (2011) Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities. Digital Humanities Summer Institute. University of Victoria. June 2011 and June 2012.
Hirsch, B. D. (2012). Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers, 2012.
Jacacki, D. (2013). Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities. Digital Humanities Summer Institute. University of Victoria. June 2013.
Kirschenbaum, M. G. (2010). What is Digital Humanities and What’s it Doing in English Departments? ADE Bulletin 150: 1-7.
Norcia, M. (2008). Out of the Ivory Tower Endlessly Rocking: Collaborating across Disciplines and Professions to Promote Student Learning in the Digital Archive. Pedagogy 8(1): 91-114.
Nowviskie, B., et al. (2011). The "#alt-ac" Track: Digital Humanists off the Straight and Narrow Path to Tenure. Digital Humanities 2011. Stanford University. 22 June 2011.
Reid, A. (2012). Graduate Education and the Ethics of the Digital Humanities. Debates in Digital Humanities. Minnesota UP, 390-401.
Rockwell, G. (1999). Is Humanities Computing an Academic Discipline? http://www.iath.virginia.edu/hcs/rockwell.html. 25 February 2013.
Sinclair, S., and S. W. Gouglas (2002). Theory into Practice: A Case Study of the Humanities Computing Master of Arts Programme at the University of Alberta. Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 1.2: 167-183.
Singer, K. (2012). The Melesina Trench Project: Markup Vocabularies, Poetics, and Undergraduate Pedagogy. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 18 July 2012.
Spiro, L. (2010). Opening Up Digital Humanities Education. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. 8 September 2010. http://digitalscholarship.wordpress.com/ 2010/09/08/opening-up-digital-humanities-education/. 25 February 2013.
Thaller, M. et al. (2012). Digital Humanities as a University Degree: The Status Quo and Beyond. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 18 July 2012.
Unsworth, J. (2001). A Master’s Degree in Digital Humanities: Part of the Media Studies Program at the University of Virginia. 25 May 2001. http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~unsworth/laval.html. 25 February 2013.
Women Writers Project. (2012). Taking TEI Further: Teaching with TEI. Brown University Seminar. 20-22 August 2012.
This paper investigates the nature of the index and its role within scholarly publishing by means of an experiment using the Dynamic Table of Contexts Browser to publish a scholarly essay collection that offers a full intellectual index combined with semantic encoding and free-text search functionality.
Extended Abstract
The index has long been a feature of printed text. The noun form of the word developed from various material pointers, whether literal fingers or portions of instruments, into the more abstract concept of a sign or token that emerged simultaneously with the lists placed at the backs of books in the late sixteenth century (“Index,” def. n. 1, 2a, 4b, 5b).
The concept of the index is all over the digital world. Symptomatically, the most recent change to the meaning of the verb form emerged from computing in 1962 (“Index,” def. n. 5d). The digital humanities themselves trace their origin back to Father Busa’s concordance of the Index Thomisticus, a machine-generated index produced at IBM (Burton). Yet the conceptual index produced through the intellectual engagement of a human being with the meaning of the text, that is, the kind of index that we as scholars most value from print culture, is exceedingly rare in the context of digital texts, where instead the automated, machine-generated index abounds.
The immense gains resulting from the ability of computers to generate indefatigably exhaustive and unimaginably extensive indices or to deliver with lightning speed the portions of a text containing a word on which the user searches are undeniable. However, the fate of the intellectual index is uncertain given the rise of digital books generally and of semantic encoding within digital humanities publishing in particular. This paper reflects on the role of the index within scholarly publishing by means of an experiment using the Dynamic Table of Contexts Browser to publish a scholarly essay collection that offers a full professionally produced intellectual index, semantic encoding of recurrent features, and free text search.
The Dynamic Table of Contexts Browser was designed as a reading environment for digitally encoded texts that would combine the table of contents with tools drawing on embedded semantic markup to create new affordances for reading in a digital environment. The familiarity of the table of contents provides prospect and navigational assistance, while the browser leverages the embedded semantic markup to allow users, as a description of an earlier instance of the browser put it, “to add or subtract what are essentially index items in and out of the table of contents” (Ruecker et al., 180; Nelson et al., 12). The combination aims to provide an advance over the standard fixed-content, if expandable and contractable, digital table of contents, and thereby solve some key usability challenges related to lengthy digital texts.
What an index item is, “essentially,” however, is far from simple. The investigation described here revolves in part around the tension between free text and controlled vocabulary as the basis for indexing. There has long been an unresolved, antagonistic relation between free-text terms and controlled vocabulary terms. [1] Both describe ways of representing and retrieving information in a digital context. Yet, long before the invention of the computer, scholars quibbled over the value and effectiveness of uncontrolled vocabularies and free-text searches (Svenonius, 333). This controversy falls into three stages: the nineteenth century “title-term or title-catchword indexing” of library catalogues; the invention of keyword in context (KWIC) indexing in 1959 by Hans Peter Luhn; and the rise of “instantaneous keyword searching” so familiar to us today (Svenonius, 333; Garret). These debates frequently focus on optimizing access to the vast collections of digital texts on and off the web, but at the level of the book the emphasis on generalized controlled vocabularies gives way to the question of the value of highly granular and customized intellectual indexes, produced by professional indexers, which seem to be struggling for survival against the generalized free-text search function offered by eBook interfaces.
At stake in the transition from the traditional print index to digital modes of retrieving and organizing knowledge is not only the profession of the indexer, but the broader socio-cultural signification and future of the ‘index’. The first generation of eBooks often omitted indexes entirely, even when present in the printed book, or included them as passive page images lacking navigational features. [2] The American Society for Indexing (ASI) is working with the International Digital Publishing Forum (IDPF) to “ensure inclusion of usable indexes in nonfiction digital book formats and e-books” (“Digital Trends Task Force”) in the creation of the specifications for EPUB 3.0. [3] The new workflow required to “output in various formations (e.g. eBook, HTML, PDF for print, etc.)” is part of the challenge for the publishing industry, to which XML seems to be emerging as a leading solution, due to its separation of “function from layout” (“Moving to XML Workflow”). However, the differences between encoding and conventional indexing practices do not figure in considerations to date (MacGlashan).
Semantic encoding is, after all, indexical. It demarcates and hence allows an interface to point to a section of a text; it labels a span of text according to a controlled vocabulary of values that has been devised to elucidate the nature of the text being encoded and conceptually groups that particular span of text with all other spans that have been encoded likewise. The <index> tag in the Text Encoding Initiative tagset is defined as follows: “(index entry) marks a location to be indexed for whatever purpose” (TEI Consortium, “TEI element”). The TEI documentation provides an excellent summary of the tension between what it terms manual indexing and free-text search:
The indexing of scholarly texts is a skilled activity, involving substantial amounts of human judgment and analysis. It should not therefore be assumed that simple searching and information retrieval software will be able to meet all the needs addressed by a well-crafted manual index, although it may complement them for example by providing free text search. The role of an index is to provide access via keywords and phrases which are not necessarily present in the text itself, but must be added by the skill of the indexer. (“TEI Consortium, “3 Elements”)
This begs the question further, however, about the indexical function of markup, since most TEI indexing is still “manual” and much scholarly markup that uses the TEI involves tags, particularly named entities, that overlap substantially with a conventional index. Other semantically oriented schemas, such as the bespoke one developed by the Orlando Project to encode feminist literary history, provide numerous tags that overlap considerably with the terrain of the traditional index: a tag like <education> or <relationsWithPublisher> serves to index portions of the text collection that may not contain such keywords or phrases, but which have been identified as relevant to these concepts by the skilled encoders (Brown et al.). There are significant differences between markup and professional or manual indexing, [4] but the extent of overlap between the two is evident in the ways that such markup functions within interfaces which offer the user the ability to look up spans of text marked with those terms. Yet whereas markup generally is considered quite synonymous with indexing, broadly conceived, particularly where a controlled vocabulary is being employed, whatever the theoretical value of the intellectual index, it seems in practice to have been deemed as dispensable to online digital humanities projects as it has been to early eBooks.
Our survey of a range of online projects, as well as of systematic reviews of features of the digital edition, show little evidence that the backbone of scholarly print resource navigation, the semantic index, is deemed crucial to digital scholarly resources. [6] This probably has in part to do with cost balanced against perceived benefits. [7] User studies in information science show that the strengths of the manual index are rivaled or even outstripped by automated indexing and information retrieval: “users find them, on balance, more or less equally effective” (Anderson and Pérez-Carballo, 233; cf. Barnum et al.; cf. Fidel 575). However, the former is far more costly than the latter, particularly as the volume of digitized materials grows. Furthermore, some of the functionality of the back-of-the-book index is covered by standard entity markup, which is frequently combined with controlled-vocabulary markup associated with the particular domain of the resource. As John Walsh has argued of the image vocabulary employed by the Blake Archive, such controlled-vocabulary markup functions very much like an index (Walsh).
General usability studies do not, however, get at the value of the intellectual or subject index to the scholarly or expert user. Indeed, the Bureau of National Affairs, a Virginia, USA publisher of highly specialized news in such areas as law, employment, the environment, and health care, conducted a usability study at law schools comparing text searching and index-aided research, and found that index users had an 86 percent success rate while text searchers had only a 23 percent success rate, particularly for tasks that departed from specific facts (“Using Online Indexes”). This result suggests the power of intellectual indexing and the potential need for such indexing within online scholarly resources.
To evaluate the role of the intellectual index and its relationship to more common forms of indexing, via markup, in digital humanities publishing, we combined the two in an online edition within a new version of Dynamic Table of Contexts (DToC) interface to publish an online version of Canadian Women Writers: Connecting Texts and Generations, edited by Marie Carrière and Patricia Demers, in partnership with the University of Alberta Press and in conjunction with their print publication. The online version incorporates the same extensive intellectual index as the printed version, along with semantic markup for named entities and other recurrent features of the text, some of which (such as named entities) overlap with index terms. To accommodate the index, the interface has been revised to incorporate a specialized panel for the index terms that operates as an alternative to the panel for tags; users can use the two panels to see both types of term embedded together in the table of contents. It incorporates free-text search, coinciding with the ASI proposal to EPub that user interfaces combine search and index functionality (Wright et al., “DTTF proposal to EPub,” 2, 7), and draws on the utility of the concordance in the provision of KWIC-like snippets for index terms and tags as well as keyword searches.
This paper describes the markup strategy used to encode the collection, including the index, in TEI; summarizes the team’s revisions to the interface; and demonstrates the function of the intellectual index within the interface in relation to table of contents, the markup of named entities, and other features of the text. The Dynamic Table of Contexts Browser retains the traditional content of the intellectual index prepared for the back of the print edition, but dramatically reorients its location in the digital interface by placing it at the “front” or within the persistent navigation features of the reading interface. We will present some preliminary results of combining markup with an intellectual index by reporting on an initial user study undertaken with scholars from the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory community from which the collection emerged, and suggest future directions for investigating the function of the intellectual index within digital scholarly editions.
References
Anderson, J. D., and J. Pérez-Carballo. (2001). The Nature of Indexing: How Humans and Machines Analyze Messages and Texts for Retrieval. Part 1: Research, and the Nature of Human Indexing. Information Processing and Management. 37: 231-254.
Barnum, C., et al. (2004). Index Versus Full-text Search: A Usability Study of User Preference and Performance.Technical Communication. 51(2): 187-206.
Brown, S., S. Fisher, P. Clements, K. Binhammer, T. Butler, K. Carter, I. Grundy, and S. Hockey. (1998). SGML and the Orlando Project: Descriptive Markup for an Electronic History of Women’s Writing. Computers and the Humanities. 31: 271-85.
Burnard, L. Technical Documentation. TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/Customization/Lite/U5-techdoc.html
Burton, D. (1981). Automated Concordances and Word Indexes: The Fifties. CHum. 15(1): 1-14.
Butler, T. J., S. Fisher, G. Coulombe, P. Clements, I. Grundy, S. Brown, J. Wood, and R. Cameron. (2000). Can a Team Tag Consistently? Experiences on the Orlando Project. Markup Languages: Theory & Practice 2(2): 111-125.
Digital Trends Task Force. American Society for Indexing. American Society for Indexing,http://www.asindexing.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3647 (accessed 15 October 2012).
Fidel, R. (1994). User-Centered Indexing. Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 45(8): 572-576.
Garret, J. (2006). KWIC and Dirty? Human Cognition and the Claims of Full-Text Searching. Journal of Electronic Publishing. 9(1).
OED Online. (2013). “Index, n.” Def. n. 1, 2a, 4b, 5b, 5d. Oxford University Press.http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/94372?rskey=ZKOmMc&result=1&isAdvanced=false (accessed 28 October 2012).
Jansen, L., H. Luijten, and N. Bakker. (eds). (2010). Vincent van Gogh — The Letters. Amsterdam & The Hague: Van Gogh Museum & Huygens ING. http://vangoghletters.org (accessed 28 October 2012).
Lamb, J. (2011). Kindle and the Index. … Turning it Off and On. Wordpress.com.http://ccgi.jalamb.com/2011/05/kindle-and-the-index/ (accessed 1 May 2011).
MacGlashan, M. (ed). (2012). The Indexer. 30.1 Sheffield, UK: The Society of Indexers.
Moving to XML Workflow. WordCo Indexing Services Inc. WordCo, http://www.wordco.com/ebook/xml.shtml(accessed 25 October 2012).
Nelson, B., S. Ruecker, M. Radzikowska, S. Sinclair, S. Brown, M. Bieber, and the INKE Research Group.(2011). A Short History and Demonstration of the Dynamic Table of Contexts. Research Foundations for Understanding Books and Reading in a Digital Age: Text and Beyond. held 18 November 2011 at Ritsumeikan University. Kyoto: Japan.
Ruecker, S., S. Brown, M. Radzikowska, S. Sinclair, T.M. Nelson, P. Clements, I. Grundy, S. Balasz, and J. Antoniuk. (2009). The Table of Contexts: A Dynamic Browsing Tool for Digitally Encoded Texts. In Dolezalova, L. (ed). The Charm of a List: From the Sumerians to Computerised Data Processing. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 177-187.
Svenonius, E. (1986). Unanswered Questions in the Design of Controlled Vocabularies. Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 37(5): 331-340.
TEI Consortium. (eds). (2012). 3 Elements Available in all TEI Documents. In TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.3.0. TEI Consortium. held 17 January 2013. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/CO.html#CONOIX (accessed October 28, 2012).
TEI Consortium. (eds). TEI element index (index entry). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.3.0. TEI Consortium, 17 Jan. 2013. Web. 28 Oct. 2012. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-index.html
The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (2008). Using Online Indexes. BNA Law School Education Series.http://www.levtechinc.com/pdf/Using%20BNA%20Indexes%20study.pdf (28 October 2012).
Van Vliet, H. T. M., and A. Kets-Vree (2000). Scholarly Editing in the Netherlands. Literary and Linguistic Computing. 15(1): 65-72.
Walsh, J. A. (2008). Multimedia and Multitasking: A Survey of Digital Resources for Nineteenth-Century Literary Studies. In Siemens, R., and S. Schreibman (eds.), A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell.
The Models Editions Partnership Consortium. (1996). Why Markup is Important. A Prospectus for Electronic Historical Editions. http://wyatt.elasticbeanstalk.com/mep/misc/prospectus.html#Section 4 (accessed 12 March 2013).
Wright, J. (2012). The devil is in the details: indexes versus Amazon's X-Ray. The Indexer. 30(1): 11-16.
Wright, J., D. Ream, and the Digital Trends Task Force (DTTF). (2012). DTTF proposal to EPub 3.0 Working Group. American Society for Indexing’s Digital Trends Task Force (DTTF). American Society for Indexing,http://www.asindexing.org/files/DTTF/DPFIndex_functionality_in_ePub.pdf (29 October 2012).
Notes
1. “Controlled vocabulary terms are variously called index terms, descriptors, subject headings and, somewhat erroneously and increasingly ambiguously, keywords. Terms not belonging to a controlled vocabulary are called free-text terms, natural language terms and, again, keywords. Free-text is also used as an adjective to describe a type of searching, viz., searching that can be performed without the constraint of having to translate one’s own vocabulary into the vocabulary used by a particular system” (Svenonius, 332).
2. Blogger John Lamb notes that when the Amazon Kindle was released in 2007 it did not support an index. When publishers created an eBook for it they “often excluded the index, even when it existed in the print version” (Lamb). In November 2011, Amazon released a new search tool to replace the index, called the Kindle X-Ray: “a new search and information feature that allows you to find information about characters, events, and topics in books” (Wright, “Amazon”, 11).
3. The DTTF’s “proposal moved forward quickly and an Indexes Charter document was published for a vote. The IDPF approved the formation of the EPUB 3.0 Indexes Working Group in December 2011 […] When completed it will be added as a modular update” (Digital Trends Task Force).
4. These include the plurality of the encoders involved and the fact that the indexical terms were developed in advance and applied to multiple texts (Butler et al.). The plurality of the encoders also suggests an aspect of the potential of digital systems for novel forms of indexing that is beyond the scope of this paper: the crowdsourcing of keywords, and perhaps even relations among them, as a basis for a folksonomic navigational aid.
5. It is telling that one of the more extensive discussions of how to encode indexes in the TEI documentation relates to the encoding of “existing ‘pre-electronic’ documents” (Burnard). A section called “Why Markup is Important” from A Prospectus for Electronic Historical Editions, a methodological framework compiled by the Steering Committee of the Model Editions Partnership, indicates the extent to which early thinking about TEI considered indexing an intrinsic function of markup (“Why Markup is Important”).
6. The Rossetti Archive and Orlando, for example, provide quite sophisticated search capabilities including Boolean functions or ones that draw on sub-elements or attributes in the markup. However, digital humanities projects seldom include anything resembling the intellectual index with its carefully organized hierarchy of terms systematically synthesizing the contents of the book. The exemplary edition of Vincent Van Gogh’s letters project offers a case in point. Whereas the 6-volume hardback edition includes a “full index,” the online edition provides access to the letters by period, correspondent, place, or other features that could easily be flagged via structural and entity markup (Jansen et al.). Portions of the scholarly apparatus are available via a table of contents or through the same searches (Van Vliet and Kets-Vree).
7. It is noteworthy that even in the embattled context of print scholarship, the intellectual index seems to be losing ground: indexes are often absent from scholarly collections of essays altogether, or limited to named entity listings.
This poster will present the beta version of the Textual Communities transcription tool, describing its underlying principles, its innovative structure, and its functionality.
Study of literary works that exist in many different forms is one of the most important and difficult tasks in the humanities. The number of forms a work may have—eighty-four fifteenth-century manuscripts and printed texts of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, more than eight hundred manuscripts of Dante’s Comedia, and five thousand manuscripts of the Greek New Testament — is both testimony to their significance and a challenge to scholars. In order to understand these texts and how they relate, we have to discover as much as we can of how they came to be written and disseminated. Only then can we seek to establish how they might best be read and prepare texts (in the form of scholarly editions) for scholars to use.
The work of building archives of primary materials for this kind of work is daunting and prohibitive in the old lone scholar method. At the same time that scholars working on large editing projects have opted for a team approach, several projects internationally have demonstrated the tantalizing possibilities of crowd-sourcing for processing large amounts of textual data. The challenge it to coordinate this work in a way that produces high-quality, useful results.
The work of building archives of primary materials for this kind of work is daunting and prohibitive in the old lone scholar method. At the same time that scholars working on large editing projects have opted for a team approach, several projects internationally have demonstrated the tantalizing possibilities of crowd-sourcing for processing large amounts of textual data. The challenge it to coordinate this work in a way that produces high-quality, useful results.
The Textual Communities workspace is a tool, in the first instance, for defining, transcribing, and linking textual materials for a digital archive or edition and for marshaling and managing a community of participants with an array of community building tools.
There are many transcription tools under development and a few that are already functional. There are three defining features that make this tool different than the rest: its integrated participant and document management systems, and its mapping of fundamental document-entity structure. These features correspond to two underlying principles: that the work of amassing large corpora of textual materials is best accomplished by a well-managed community of interested participants from within, but also potential from outside the academy; and that for the resulting materials to be useful, their relationships must be clearly articulated.
As its name suggests, the Textual Communities tool is designed for gathering and organizing multiple participants around a common editorial project. It supports a wide range of relational structures, from a carefully crafted team to ad hoc community built on crowd-sourcing. Crucially, it enables definition of roles in the project with varying degrees of access to project materials, and authority to do the work of pressing these materials, and oversight over other participants. It is also built on a data structure that uses RDF files built on the FRBR ontology to identify and relate the produced transcriptions (“texts”), the exemplars they derived from (“documents,” usually in the form of a digital image of a particular witness), and the intellectual construct they instantiate (the “work," or our preferred term, "entity"). Thus anyone interested in John Donne’s poem “The Good Morrow” will find various “texts” (transcriptions) of this work as found in the extant “documents” (the poem as it is found in each of the manuscripts and printed books that contain it).
The tool itself enables uploading of digital images of primary documents in jpeg, tiff, or pdf, and linkage of these images with a transcription space. The user supplies information for each document, which produces an RDF file that defines the text that is to be transcribed and its relationship to the source document and entity. The user also defines the structure of the document, which is rendered behind the visible transcription in TEI conformant XML. The transcription area, which is automatically linked to the source image, can also support any XML markup that is desired or required for intelligent transcription of the source document.
This open-source tool will be freely available free of charge for use and adaptation by anyone anywhere. Development of this tool is funded by a generous grant from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation with the support of the Digital Research Centre at the University of Saskatchewan.
This poster will be accompanied by a live demonstration of the transcription workspace.
Introduction
Arthur Schnitzler: Digitale historisch-kritische Edition. Werke 1904-1931 is a long-term project founded by the Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaften with a runtime of 18 years. The aim is to create a digital critical edition of both the majority of works published during Schnitzler's lifetime and his literary estate, providing scholars with an up-to-date, philologically dependable textual basis.

The first project phase (2012-14) is primarily about conceptional groundwork and focuses on two texts, Fräulein Else and Komödie der Verführung which were chosen both for their literary value and their usefulness as a testbed. Editing them will go hand in hand with finalizing the editorial principles and establishing the digital workflow.

To this end, the team of editors at Bergische Universität Wuppertal closely cooperates with computer scientists at Trier Center for Digital Humanities who are developing a customized virtual research environment. Based upon a unified data model, it will support all editorial steps from entering the meta data through transcribing the textual witnesses to preparing the online publication and printouts. This paper shall outline the philological challenges of the project and show how the projected platform is to meet them.

Initial Situation and Objectives
For scholars working on Schnitzler’s writings, the availability of a philologically well founded textual basis is currently a key desideratum. Arthur Schnitzler is probably the only German-language author of literary world rank of whom there are to this day neither a commented student edition nor a (historical) critical edition. The project seeks to remedy this situation by:

Providing the first edition of most of the works published during Arthur Schnitzler‘s lifetime with an authentic, critically constituted text.
Providing a genetic edition of the major part of the literary estate (belonging to both published and unpublished work).
Making the whole edited material accessible by text-critical comments and contextualizing its literary-historical background
The underlying material is just as comprehensive as manifold. Beyond the printed work, there are extensive preliminary works and sketches, as well as numerous unpublished dramatic, narrative, lyrical, aphoristic and essayistic texts. In addition to this literary estate material (which is complemented by film scripts and screenplays) there is a sizable number of non-literary writings. These can be either scientific (e.g. medical) treatises, literary criticisms and other comments, self-criticisms and records about the history of his own works — or, on the other hand, “ego-documents”: autobiography, diaries, dream journaling, correspondences. Thus, the catalogue of the Literaturarchiv Marbach lists about 28,000 letters and the estate material archived at Cambridge University Library comprises approximately 40,000 sheets.
Given this constellation, the integral approach of the projected edition has to be emphasized: The edited material in its diversity is to be united within a homogeneous central data pool, allowing for different types of output. Following the principle of single-source publishing, the projected public online edition could be completed in the future by an annotated student edition or even a critical edition.

Challenges in Scholarly Editing
The new edition of Schnitzler’s — published as unpublished — oeuvre is rich in philological challenges. It presents itself as a dynamic yet coherent system of most diverse transformation processes, branchings and cross-links. The individual literary "work" proves to be an unreliable unit; Schnitzler used to work for several years or even decades on a text. In this process, not only the genre would occasionally change, but there also may occur genetic bifurcations (one draft becoming multiple works) or fusions (several drafts being merged into one work).The project thus chooses the text witness in its materiality as a basis, prioritizing the categories of topography, genesis and intertextuality. Hence, the individual witness has to be described not only in its semantics, but also in its physical form and its processuality (writing stages). Moreover, the cross-links and correspondences of sequences and fragments between text witnesses are of particular interest.

Literary Computing and Software Development
In terms of literary computing, two aspects are to be emphasized: Firstly, the various requirements in scholarly editing (meta data capture, transcription, annotation, linking text and facsimile, linking text sequences with each other, collation, preparation of indices and critical apparatus) can only be met with a series of appropriate tools.

Secondly, these tools must be coordinated. In practical terms, this means above all that they have to fit into a unified philological workflow. This brings to the fore a facet that is often considered of minor interest in digital editorial projects: the aspect of the data format.

It is essential to determine a data model which can serve as a basis for the whole philological process, possibly without laborious intermediate conversions. From meta data collection through transcription and annotation to topography, networking and publication, all editorial stages need to be supported. This is complicated all the more by a set of overlapping hierarchies:

Firstly, there is the documentary view (with reference to the material witness, i.e. the single sheet), secondly the semantic-textual view (the text in its philological structure), thirdly sequences of any size have to be linked. This is not a trivial constellation for the XML-format, and the project currently evaluates how different standards deal with this problem. The benchmark are both the guidelines of the TEI and their concrete implementation in current projects (such as the digital Faust-edition). However, some of the proposed strategies, such as a splitting up into multiple files with different markup or the breaking up of subsidiary hierarchy levels, may add great complexity to the editor’s work. So we currently test if the workflow could alternatively build on a database system, out of which the current processing status can be exported or archived any time into an international, platform-independent standard.

Virtual Research Environment
The tools needed for the project are currently being developed and made interoperable at the Trier Center for Digital Humanities. As for the meta data management, an adapted module of the Forschungsnetzwerk und Datenbanksystem FuD is used which allows the physical description of textual witnesses and their often complex tradition via specially customized input masks. For some other tasks (see below), currently existing solutions will be evaluated and tested in terms of usability. However, the core functionality is to be covered largely by Transcribo, an entirely new transcription, topography and edition software.

Transcribo
Transcribo is developed in close collaboration between computer scientists and philologists of the project partners. The graphical user interface is centered around the digital facsimile, i.e. usually the scanned witness. Units of varying extent (e.g. words, lines or paragraphs) can be marked by means of a rectangle-or polygon-tool, and then be transcribed and annotated. Each image file is displayed twice: the original can be examined on the left while the view on the right is used as a work space, where the transcribed text is placed topographically exact on top of the slightly attenuated facsimile. Where the spatial arrangement does not match the textual word order, words can be combined into sequences to preserve the semantic relationships in the transcript. As a central feature, the program further allows to mark genetic and philologically relevant phenomena in each transcribed unit and add annotations to them. This is done by a context menu with a selection of project-specific options. These include so far different variants of corrections (such as immediate corrections or late corrections with single, double or multiple strikethroughs and overwritings), the marking of highlightings, uncertain readings and non-identifiable graphs. This selection, however, can be extended and will be adjusted over the entire course of the project to meet the requirements of the underlying material.


Fig. 1:
Transcription and annotation in Transcribo.

Further Extensions
FuD and Transcribo lay the basis for scholarly editing in an online environment by covering the key requirements: meta data management, transcription, topography description and basic annotations. This nucleus will be expanded over the next years to a virtual research environment that supports the entire project-specific workflow in a unified interface. This implies the integration of a number of additional features:

Collation; here it has to be stressed that we will not only have to compare fixed texts, but also to identify similar sequences in a large data pool.
The linking of freely definable sequences within or between text witnesses.
The identification of dependencies between witnesses, in particular the creation of genetic paths.
A publishing program for printouts.
While in the domain of publishing and collation, there are programs that can be adapted (we evaluate at present: XML-Print and CollateX, Juxta, TUSTEP), the remaining tools are to be developed. The result will be a research environment that — due to its platform-independent and modular design — can be adapted to meet the needs of numerous other editorial projects. Concrete interest in using this environment or individual modules of it has already been expressed by several projects such as:
August Wilhelm Schlegel "Kritische Ausgabe der Vorlesungen“ Band IV–VI
Digitalisierung und elektronische Edition der Korrespondenz August Wilhelm Schlegels
Wolfgang Koeppens „Jugend“
References
Arthur Schnitzler: Digitale Historisch-Kritische Edition. http://www.buw-output.uni-wuppertal.de/ausgabe4/lukas/.
Trier Center for Digital Humanities. http://kompetenzzentrum.uni-trier.de.
Digitale Faustedition. https://faustedition.uni-wuerzburg.de/dev/project/about/.
TEI guidelines. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
FuD. http://fud.uni-trier.de/.
XML-Print. http://kompetenzzentrum.uni-trier.de/de/projekte/projekte/xml-print/.
Schlegel, A. W. Kritische Ausgabe der Vorlesungen“ Band IV–V:I. http://www.uni-tuebingen.de/fakultaeten/philosophische-fakultaet/fachbereiche/neuphilologie/deutsches-seminar/abteilungen/neuere-deutsche-literatur/mitarbeitende/lehrstuhl-braungart/projekte/august-wilhelm-schlegel.html.
Digitalisierung und elektronische Edition der Korrespondenz August Wilhelm Schlegels. http://www.slub-dresden.de/ueber-uns/projekte/erschliessung-und-digitalisierung/edition-schlegel/.
Koeppens, W. „Jugend“. http://www.phil.uni-greifswald.de/philologien/deutsch/forschung-kooperation/wka/dfg-projekt-jugend.html.
Funded by the Academy of Finland (2011-2014), the Digital Orationes Project is an interdisciplinary initiative intended to bring an important unpublished Early Modern manuscript into the scholarly arena. The manuscript, preserved as Lit. MS E41 in the archive of Canterbury Cathedral, was collected, and in part composed, by George Lovejoy (c. 1675), Headmaster of the King’s School, Canterbury, after the English Civil War. The texts within it represent one of the most substantial unpublished sources of English School Drama from the period. As well as containing a previously unnoticed adaptation of a pre-war play by a major author (James Shirley), this large volume, comprising 656 folio pages and running to some 230,000 words, includes a number of short plays and dramatized orations written in English, Latin and Greek by the scholars and staff of the King’s School. (Amid much else, these works celebrate the Restoration of Charles II to power, re-enact the Gunpowder plot, discuss a wide range of topical issues, and provide a wealth of information about the role of drama in Early Modern schooling.)

The overall aim of the project has been to create a state-of-the-art digital archive which makes the texts in the manuscript available to a wider audience at the same time as it offers new affordances for its scholarly users. In this, we have been responding to, and actively critiquing, best practices within the field of digital editions so succinctly summarized by Pierazzo (2011). The final digital interface for the manuscript will enable the searching of its handwritten text by means of visual recognition of the letter forms as well as the more usual text-based functions relating to the transcribed, translated, and edited manuscript; and simultaneously allow access to a number of higher scholarly functions. Accordingly, the present paper will focus on ongoing developments concerning three elements in the (otherwise, substantially developed) package: a) an image calibration tool (i.e. a tool to flatten pages, scale them consistently and link with the transcript); b) an image search prototype (which can search for graphic features in the manuscript using visual cues); and c) the blueprint for the final Orationes user interface. We are presenting these features before they have been packaged into a single polished user-friendly entity – and at the penultimate stage of a larger project involving an international team from four Universities (Oulu, Åbo Akademi, Helsinki [Finland], and Austin, Texas) – in order to make new research available at the same time as we solicit the feedback which will make our final interface as helpful as possible within the DH community.

In its basic form, the Orationes manuscript is represented by a rich digital edition that utilizes the high resolution scanned images of the manuscript pages and TEI-compliant transcriptions created by domain experts. As demonstrated in our JADH-2012 presentation (Opas-Hänninen et al. 2012), our modus operandi has been to approach the work from two opposite directions. First, the team created an uncompromising TEI-XML version of the manuscript (a process which has not only involved rigorous textual transcription but also entailed the translation of the Latin and Greek portions of the material and the identification of features of interest for use in a rich visual interface). Second, it has been working on the production of a reusable software package which, without sacrificing functionality or source integrity, can be used to generate digital editions from similar XML and image source materials in a straightforward manner. In order to combine these two goals successfully, the team navigated the requisite TEI guidelines (tweaking them where necessary as developments within, rather than departures from, the system), constructed an automatic linking mechanism between image and text, and have been creating efficient search mechanisms for TEI data: not to mention an interface that is both intuitive and generic at the same time.

The high resolution scanned images of the manuscript were produced by experts at the Canterbury Cathedral Archives. When beginning the work on image searching, i.e. the recognition of graphical forms such as letters and punctuation, it quickly became evident that in order to be able to carry out any such work, the images of the manuscript would need to be flattened and scaled consistently first, because of slight warping on the inner edges of the pages. Preprocessing will simplify the actual pattern recognition search process, because there will be less variation to account for and thus better results should be achieved; it is also beneficial for creating a clean GUI. Thus we set out to develop a process for calibrating the images, which we think will be very useful for other projects which use similar manuscripts that simply can’t be flattened as the scanned images are produced.

Although, since 2012, the Digital Orationes interface has been able to allow for full searches of the transcribed text (along with translations from the relevant Latin or Greek passages), links to the apparatus and editorial notes, or a layered comparison (at varying magnifications) between the written text and the transcription, our endeavours in the present move considerably closer to an engagement with the manuscript as an artefact and the sort of operations which a professional palaeographer or historical linguist might require of it. In particular, by developing an optical recognition faculty which is able to identify and search out letters and other graphical forms manifested in the manuscript (such as varieties of dashes and other idiosyncracies of punctuation), the 2013 prototype indicates how our edition might contribute to raising the bar for palaeographers: helping them to search, line up, or compare visual features across the manuscript in an easy, intuitive way. Looking ahead, the presenters of the 2013 poster will also be prepared to engage with the wider perspective of how, adapting a tool developed and presented for other purposes (Juuso et al. 2011), our final interface will also be able to serve historians of language and literature by keying in to etymological dictionaries of English, Latin or Greek, identifying new words and colour-coding lexical items according to the first date of occurrence in the historical corpus.

References
Pierazzo, E. (2011) A Rationale of Digital Documentary Editions, LLC: The Journal of Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 26(4): 463-477.
Opas-Hänninen, L. L., I. Juuso, T. Toljamo, A. W. Johnson, and T. Seppänen (2012). The Orationes Project: Bringing a Restoration Manuscript Online. Paper presented at JADH2012, Tokyo, 17 September 2012.
Juuso, I., L. L. Opas-Hänninen, A. W. Johnson, and T. Seppänen (2011). The Time Machine: capturing Worlds Across Time in Texts. Paper presented at DH2011, Stanford 18 June 2011.
While the promise of interoperability has been one of the major driving forces in the adoption of standards such as TEI, it has long been recognized that interoperability has only limited practicality (McDonough 2008; Sperberg-McQueen 2008). As large-scale digitization projects have matured, it has become apparent that the most effective approach to interoperability between them is based on loose coupling through APIs and metadata exchange services such as OAI-PMH, rather than wholesale convertibility or aggregation (see, for example, Bol, Hsiang and Fong 2012; Matei 2012).
The Map of Early Modern London (MoEML) and the Internet Shakespeare Editions (ISE) are mature projects, and both are under active development. While MoEML's text database is steadily growing, the literary texts in the ISE collection, on the same network and sharing some of the same research team, have become a tempting target for integration. MoEML’s goal is to give users a sense of the lived space of London, particularly as that space was invoked by the implied geography of early modern plays. Shakespeare’s ten history plays are rich in references to London places. 1 Henry IV moves between Eastcheap and Westminster; the title character of Richard III bustles through London; and the Tower looms ominously over the action of nearly every play. Ingesting and mapping these references in the MoEML environment would stimulate research questions about Shakespeare and London alike. How typical is Shakespeare’s invocation of London? How do his characters move through the urban environment? What is the relationship between London and the court in Shakespeare’s historical vision? How does this vision compare to that of other playwrights, such as Thomas Heywood, and to that of historians like Holinshed and Stow?
MoEML maps the streets, sites, and significant boundaries of London from 1560 to 1640, basing its interface on the Agas Map of London, which dates originally from the 1560s. The project incorporates a detailed gazetteer, topical essays, and digital texts from the period, and will soon include three editions of John Stow's A Survey of London. At the heart of the project is an XML placeography incorporating over 720 streets, churches, wards, neighbourhoods, and sites of interest. Places are both geo-referenced and linked to the Agas Map.
One goal is to use the Agas Map as a platform on which to visualize the locations in texts of the period. To that end, MoEMLincludes a library of early modern texts with all the toponyms identified and tagged. With dramatic texts, we have until now included only the “Dramatic Extracts” that contain London toponyms. It would be preferable, though, to extract toponyms dynamically from existing digital editions and plot them on the Agas map. The simple data visualization in Figure 1 shows a prototype for Richard III, with each location sized according to the number of references to it, demonstrating the manner in which the Tower dominates the action.
 
Figure 1:
The London locations in Richard III on the Agas Map, sized according to the number of references to them.
The Internet Shakespeare Editions is primarily an open-source digital anthology of Shakespeare's plays. The ISE's programming platform also runs the Queen's Men's Editions (QME) and the Digital Renaissance Editions (DRE). Between these three projects, all the plays of Shakespeare and his contemporaries from 1500 to 1640 will be available in standardized XML base texts. At the heart of the projects are carefully edited texts of each play, in both their early printed forms and in modern editions with spelling and punctuation regularized. ISE editors already tag the base texts with simple tags that are converted to XML. We could ask the ISE, DRE, and QME editors to add in the London references; however, they are likely to turn to MoEML for help with identifying specific locations, so it is preferable to process their XML files and identify the toponyms ourselves. We propose to begin our prototyping with the ten history plays because five of them are complete or nearly complete.
TEI versions of the ISE plays are currently indexed in an eXist XML database (like the MoEML texts) in order to provide search capabilities. The ISE textbase also includes modern-spelling versions of the texts, and all its versions of each core text are linked using "through line numbers" (TLNs) based on the First Folio. These features provide the basis for a comprehensive system to identify placename references throughout the texts.
We will use a multi-phase approach to identifying relevant placename instances. First, we will deploy a Named Entity Recognition tool such as the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer, trained on a subset of texts selected to provide sufficient variety of genre and known to include a useful number of London place references. We will combine the results with the entries in a dictionary of spelling variants of London placenames extracted from our MoEML collection. We will generate results in a form that includes:
•        Candidate placename
•        Surrounding context (paragraph, line selection, etc.)
•        Link to online version of the text using TLN
•        ID and name of candidate match location in MoEML database (if there is one)
•        Link to MoEML location data
This manner of reporting the results will allow research assistants to rapidly accept, reject, or correct the placename instance. Confirmed references will be stored in a TEI document in the form of <linkGrp> elements: <linkGrp target="mol:CHAR1" n="Charing Cross">  <link target="ise:1H4/M/scene/2.1#tln-659|76-88"/>  </linkGrp>
This tagging encodes a link between the MoEML placeography (Charing Cross, which has the @xml:id "CHAR1") and theISE's modern-spelling version of Henry IV Part 1. Any other links to the same location will be encoded using <link> elements inside the same <linkGrp>. These links use Private URI Schemes for the sake of convenience. The pointers prefixed with "mol:" are dereferenced in the context of the MoEML database through XPath (//TEI[@xml:id="CHAR1"] in this case). The "ise:" prefix can be similarly dereferenced to construct a full URI to the target location in the document:http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Library/Texts/1H4/M/scene/2.1#tln-659. The last component of the pointer contains the character offset range for the placename. A formal method for documenting and mechanically dereferencing private URI schemes and similar abbreviated pointers has been proposed (Holmes 2012) and is being considered for adoption by the TEI Council.
Once candidate placenames have been encoded for the modern-spelling editions of the plays, the TLN referencing system in use by the ISE can be used to identify corresponding references in the other editions. We will use this automated process for identifications:
•        1. Retrieve the text following the corresponding TLN from an original-spelling edition of the text.
•        2. Search for the placename as it appears in the modern-spelling edition. If found, record its offsets and generate a <link>.
•        3. If not found, try a search for each variant spelling of the placename known to the MoEML database.
•        4. If a match is still not found, tokenize the target text, create bigrams and trigrams, and run similarity metrics between the original-spelling placename and each n-gram. If a similarity threshold is reached, assume a match and create a <link>.
Various similarity metrics might be appropriate here, including the Universal Similarity Metric (USM; see Holmes 2010). Where a similarity metric is invoked, the results will be flagged for manual checking. Pursuing this particular example, theFirst Folio has Charing Cross with the spelling "Charing-crosse". A Java implementation of the USM gives these a similarity score of 0.206, which represents high similarity (scores are between 0 and 1, with 0 representing identity). Processing theFirst Folio edition would generate a second <link>: <link target="ise:1H4/F1/scene/2.1#tln-660|37-50"/>
 
Figure 2:
A flowchart representing the placename identification process.
 
Figure 3:
Mapping placename identification in the modern-spelling texts onto original-spelling versions.
The complete process is represented in the flow charts in Figures 2 and 3. This approach will enable us to generate a large number of matches and resulting links without excessive human labour. The link groups will be stored in the MoEMLdatabase. No modification of MoEML or ISE texts is required; this is the "loose coupling" mentioned above. Links to instances of London placenames in the ISE texts can be provided as part of MoEML's online placeography. Meanwhile, theISE team has expressed interest in linking out to MoEML location data, which could easily be achieved either by processing the MoEML link groups to add annotations directly into the ISE texts, or (pursuing the loose coupling methodology) by making calls to an API provided by MoEML when rendering sections of ISE texts to incorporate relevant links.
References
Bol, P. K., J. Hsiang, and G. Fong (2012). "Prosopographical Databases, Text-Mining, GIS and System Interoperability for Chinese History and Literature." Digital Humanities 2012 Conference Abstracts, 43-51.
Hirsch, B. (ed.) Digital Renaissance Editions. http://digitalrenaissance.uvic.ca/.
Holmes, M. (2010). Using the Universal Similarity Metric to Map Correspondences between Witnesses.http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab-693.html.
Holmes, M. (2012). "Prefix Definition Proposal." http://wiki.tei-c.org/index.php/Prefix_Definition_Proposal.
The Map of Early Modern London. Dir. Janelle Jenstad. http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca.
Matei, S. A. (2012). "ARTL@S and BasArt: A loose coupling strategy for digital humanities." Artl@s Bulletin, 1: 27-30.
McDonough, J. (2008). “Structural Metadata and the Social Limitation of Interoperability: A Sociotechnical View of XML and Digital Library Standards Development.” Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008, Montréal, Canada, August 12 - 15. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, 1. doi:10.4242/BalisageVol1.McDonough01. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol1/html/McDonough01/BalisageVol1-McDonough01.html.
Ostovich H., A. Griffin, P. Cockett, and J. Roberts-Smith (eds.) Queen's Men Editions.http://qme.internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/.
Rasmussen, E., M. Best, et al. (eds.) Internet Shakespeare Editions http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2008). “But wait, there's more!” Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008, Montréal, Canada, August 12 - 15. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, 1. doi:10.4242/BalisageVol1.Sperberg-McQueen02. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol1/html/Sperberg-McQueen02/BalisageVol1-Sperberg-McQueen02.html.
From the middle ages to the early 20th century, a bewildering variety of calendars and dating methods was in use across Europe. This presentation will address issues involved in encoding historical dates during the early modern period, and look at strategies for enhancing computability and interoperability in date-encoding.

Although other calendars are in use across the world, nearly all societies have adopted the Gregorian calendar to some degree; wherever you go in the modern world, the date and time are generally uncontroversial. In past centuries, this was far from true. Jardine (2009) cites the case of William of Orange, whose invasion fleet left the Netherlands on November 11, 1688, but landed in England on November 5, having negotiated not only the English Channel but also the ten-day discrepancy between the Gregorian calendar in use in the Netherlands and the Julian still used in England. The complicated history of the adoption of the new Gregorian calendar across Europe, between its introduction by Pope Gregory in 1582 and its final consolidation in the early part of the 20th century, is familiar to scholars (see for instance Cheney 2000 and Duncan 1998).

Our project, the Map of Early Modern London (MoEML), falls squarely within the period of maximum calendar confusion for England. The two principle sources of difficulty are the discrepancy between the Gregorian and Julian calendars (ten days during most of the period) and the change in New Year's Day, which from the 12th century onward was March 25 rather than January 1. The resulting ambiguity in actual dating is compounded by the ways in which writers, both in the period and after it, have chosen to deal with the difficulty. The terms "Old Style" and "New Style" (O.S. and N.S.) have been variously used to indicate the start-of-year convention in use, the leap-day adjustment between Julian and Gregorian calendars, or both; so if we see, for instance, "February 11 1650 New Style", it is by no means clear whether the date referred to would have been viewed by contemporaries as February 1 1650 (calendar adjustment), February 11 1649 (start-of-year adjustment), or February 1 1649 (both).

These issues of dating have been a major challenge for MoEML's encoders. Our collection of TEI born-digital documents and historical texts includes dates from many calendars. When we encode dates in historical texts, we first must determine which dating method was used by the clerk or author. Dates are given in terms of many possible systems: regnal years, papal years, mayoral years, legal terms, years calculated from a particular feast day, and even Anno Mundi figures (years since the creation of the world); we follow Cheney (2000) and Fryde (1986) in parsing these references and converting them to Julian dates. We give a few examples.

Julian date from primary source: "Alfred king of the weſt Saxons, in the yere 886..." (Stow 1598 8)

regnal date: “a par[l]iament being holden at Carlile in the [...] 35. of Edwarde the firſt" (Stow 1598 11)

Anno Mundi dates, combined with proleptic Julian: "[...] Eneas, the ſonne of Venus, daughter of Iupiter, aboute the yeare of the world 2855. the yeare before Chriſtes natiuitie, 1108. builded a Citie [...]" (Stow 1598 1)

We also use a wide variety of modern sources such as the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. The ODNB has precise methods of expressing uncertainties in dates and date ranges, but does not specify how uncertainties arise, which means we can determine precision from the ODNB but not accuracy.

We have attempted to discover whether other projects are concerned with calendar issues, and if so, whether they have adopted similar encoding methods. A brief survey of the projects listed on the TEI Projects page (http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Projects/) shows, at the time of writing, 152 projects in total. Of those, 68 projects could be expected to contain materials in the historical range that concerns us. We were able to retrieve XML from 19, 16 of which contained encoded dates that would be subject to calendar issues. Only three of those projects appear to have taken account of calendars in their encoding. The prevalent view is well expressed by Godfried Croenen (personal communication, 2012-10-05):

"All medievalists use Julian dates to refer to any date before the introduction of the Gregorian calendar, and so all the dates before the 16th century I have ever encoded into XML TEI documents are in Julian dates. I never felt it would be useful to convert these dates to Gregorian dates, as nobody would know what I was referring to."

Croenen also expresses doubt as to whether it is practical or useful to attempt date conversion between calendars. Others have pointed out that, where date encoding involves only the year, there is no reason to worry about the calendar, and one might as well encode using @when (whose datatype is explicitly Gregorian) with a Julian date. However, in the case of England between the 12th century and 1752, assuming Julian years amounts to an allowance that nearly one in four dates is likely to be wrong, because of the New Year issue. Another objection to regularizing all date-encoding to use Gregorian is that it is unconventional to use the Gregorian calendar proleptically. However, it is a long-standing practice to use the Julian calendar proleptically, referring to dates in antiquity — in fact, Stow does this in one of the examples above, in which he glosses the Anno Mundi date 2855 as 1108 BC.

In our encoding of dates for the MoEML project, we have two major concerns: that dates be as accurate as possible so that we know when an event occurred (or at least that the source and scope of inaccuracy be clearly expressed), and that they be computable. We are constructing an eventography, and we want to be able to plot event sequences on timelines. We would also like to be able to integrate our data with that of other early modern projects, many of which will have data from countries whose calendar usage varies substantially from English practice. As a result of these concerns, we are early adopters of some recently-added features of TEI that are intended to formalize accurate encoding of dates from differing calendars.

The original P5 attributes for encoding dates included two distinct classes: att.datable.w3c, and att.datable.iso. These two classes allow slightly different forms of date encoding (derived from XML Schema datatypes, and ISO 8601 respectively), but both are explicitly based on the Gregorian calendar. In other words, it is clearly wrong to encode a Julian date using one of these attributes:
*<birth when="1566" calendar="#julianEngland">1566</birth>

The recently-added att.datable.custom class remedies this deficiency by providing a full suite of dating attributes designed for non-Gregorian calendars, along with the @datingMethod attribute through which the calendar used can be specified (@calendar refers to the calendar used in the text content of a dating element, not its attributes). We can now encode a date with these attributes and Julian dates :

<birth when-custom="1566" datingMethod="#julianEngland" calendar="#julianEngland">1566</birth>

These tags show that both the attribute value and the text date use the Julian calendar. Given that our purpose is computability, though, the question arises: why not simply convert all our dates to (proleptic) Gregorian before encoding them? If we take the example above, this conversion would be the result:

<birth notBefore="1566-04-04" notAfter="1567-04-03" calendar="#julianEngland">1566</birth>

The conversion, in accounting for the New Year issue and the leap day discrepancy, becomes a rather unwieldy range. Moreover, this conversion is itself computable, so it is unnecessary to impose this burden on our encoders. Instead, we encode Julian dates using @when-custom. On the website, we generate tooltips for all such dates showing the equivalent date or date-range in Gregorian. For the purposes of interoperability, the same conversion could be used to insert Gregorian dating attributes.

Until now, the encoding of historical dates in TEI projects appears to have been haphazard, for a variety of reasons, including the lack of adequate encoding mechanisms, academic convention, and historical practice. However, we now have a set of attributes that enable us to be more precise, and we can easily create conversion functions between (for instance) Julian and Gregorian dating systems. Moreover, as we begin to integrate data from different projects, and create timelines and event sequences that require accurate dating, there is more reason than ever for developing and propagating good practice in date encoding; we do not want to end up creating inter-project timelines in which (for example) the invasion force of William of Orange arrives in England several days before it sets off from the Netherlands. In presenting our date-encoding practices and the issues we have encountered, we hope to stimulate a discussion on accurate date encoding that will encourage those working on projects involving non-Gregorian calendars to be aware of the issues, and to collaborate in creating methods for encoding and interchange that will obviate these problems.

References
Cheney, C. R. (2000). A Handbook of Dates for Students of British history. Revised by Michael Jones. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duncan, D. E. (1998). Calendar: Humanity’s Epic Struggle to Determine a True and Accurate Year. New York: Avon Books.
Duncan, D. E. (1999). Calendar. Smithsonian 29 (11). 48-58.
Fryde, E. B., D. E. Greenway, S. Porter, and I. Roy (1986). Handbook of British Chronology. 3rd edn. London: Offices of the Royal Historical Society.
Jardine, L. (2009). Another point of view. London: Preface.
Stow, J. (1598). A SVRVAY OF LONDON. London: John Windet for John Wolfe.
A significant number of scholars in Europe and North America are now involved in projects utilizing or encoding historical financial and tabular records. Many of them hope that it will be possible to develop guidelines that account for both the idiosyncrasies of such manuscripts and the semantic information embedded in them.

A genre of primary sources that includes such materials as bills, receipts, cashbooks, journals, and account ledgers, historical financial records (HFRs) are abundant in traditional archives. Most current digitization projects do not capture the full range of financial information, and if they do, they have yet to develop a common method for fully expressing this range.

HFRs share certain structural characteristics with such other genres of historical records as plague bills, theatre returns, and probate records. Documents from such genres are generally represented as lists or tables, and in many cases they include numerical sums. The apparent regularity of these documents presents perhaps the most significant challenge for those who seek to encode them, as it often collapses in use. Thus such tabular records tend to include information that cannot be represented through simple transcription of tabular layout. In fact, they tend to contain significant variations and idiosyncrasies, often within the same document or collection.

In the subgenre of double entry accounts, the impulse to keep regular records produced a set of standards for recording financial information. Through the centuries, various influential texts offered ordinary businessmen opportunities to learn how to keep regular accounts. But the popularity of these texts did not guarantee perfect adherence to their principles.

HFRs tend to include three levels of data to consider: layout, textual expression, and a third, more abstract level of financial semantics that are not as yet easily captured through TEI conformant markup. Attention to layout may or may not be necessary. In cases where page images are included in online publication, for example, some projects may choose to omit digital representation of layout. Similarly, different projects place varying emphasis on particular textual features.

At the more abstract level, double entry bookkeeping uses a specialized vocabulary, a professional jargon that requires data modeling with attention to the special meanings of the terms “debtor” and “creditor,” as well as the relationships between transactions recorded in the journal and accounts kept in a separate ledger. We are developing a TEI customization for conveying such meanings and their expressions within double entry account books through a “transactionography” that will represent the relationships among such records in abstracted form.

As currently conceived a “transactionography,” like a “personography,” provides information about the financial information within each transaction separately from the transcribed text. “Transactionographies” follow the principles of double entry accounting to model transactions as a sequence of one or more transfers of anything of value from one account to another. Thus, the simple purchase of a candy bar from a convenience store is represented as two <transfer>s: one of a candy bar from the vendor’s stock account to the buyer, and one of $1.25 from the buyer’s cash account to the vendor’s cash account.

We believe that this model will be sufficient to represent double entry bookkeeping, though we have not yet tested it thoroughly. We are presenting a (working) ODD file for a first cut at such a “transactionography” at the TEI meeting in fall 2012, and we hope to have a more refined version for presentation at DH2013.

This abstract only begins to suggest the research opportunities that might eventually be available should large numbers of HFRs be digitally accessible in machine processable form. As editors of the Alcalá Account Book Project have noted with regard to their digital edition of the account books of the Royal Irish College of Saint George the Martyr in Alcalá, such records promise “insight into the day-to-day running of the college with valuable information on diet, discipline, and domestic matters.” Standardized digitization of HFRs, a rich yet currently inaccessible genre of texts, has the potential to produce harvestable data that could open significant new lines of inquiry about economic, social, and cultural history.

References
The Alcalá Account Book Project http://archives.forasfeasa.ie/index.shtml.
Burnard, L., and S. Bauman (eds.) TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.0.2. 2012-02-02T17:24:24Z. http://www.tei-c.org/P5/.
Gleeson-White, J. (2011). Double Entry: How the Merchants of Venice Created Modern Finance New York: Norton.
Mair, J. (1765). Book-keeping Methodiz’d; or, A methodical treatise of Merchant-accompts, according to the Italian form. Wherein the theory of the art is fully explained,... To which is added, a large appendix. ... Edinburgh: W. Sands, A. Murray, and J. Cochran.
McCusker, J. J. (2001). How Much Is That in Real Money?: A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States Worcester, MA: American Antiquarian Society.
Pacioli, L. The Rules of Double-Entry Bookkeeping: Particularis de computis et scripturis. Michael Schemmann, ed. Orig. pub. 1494. International Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 2012.
Poovey, M. Genres of the Credit Economy: Mediating Value in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Britain. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Visible Prices: A Collection of Literary and Historical Economic Information. http://staff.washington.edu/paigecm/vp.
When building digital environments that provide suitable tools for scholarly research, there is a design tension between being generalisable and configurable: purpose-tailored tools only work with specific subjects and objects, while generalised tools can be difficult to use for a specific subject and object. However, there are meta-Use Cases that traverse many disciplines, and it is possible to build tools to support these within in a single hosting environment. In this paper we describe a hosting environment, CRADLE, that is configurable and generalisable.

At An Foras Feasa we repeatedly faced the same meta-Use Cases; researchers wished to create digital versions of their source-system (which might either be a single source represented by components within the system e.g. a manuscript of page-components, or multiple sources connected together, e.g. an archive of diverse materials [1] ) that were reflective of their personal theoretical perspective, provided tools for investigation, and permitted personal and community re-use. This extended to researchers who wished to use the digital source-system to support their teaching remit and to others; allowing them to reinterpret and repurpose hosted digital source-systems to create a digital version consistent with their own theoretical position. This implied that any solution would need to be able to handle multiple, configurable, versions of a digital source-system, and multiple metadata descriptions of any single component within the source-system.

CRADLE (collaborate, research, archive, discuss, learn, engage) was designed as a general software solution to support the hosting of multi-modal Humanities sources, discourse and learning resources. CRADLE has been designed to provide support for a variety of theories and interpretations of source collections. In particular, the general, but sophisticated, creator-user can configure multiple structures for their collections, and also describe multiple versions of each source-object within the collection. Furthermore, it is possible for other users to repurpose and reconfigure those source-objects to suit their own perspective upon them.

In the following fictionalised scenarios, we provide an example of how CRADLE supports this multiplicity of representation. A post-doctoral fellow with the Institute, Jane, is a professional editor, researcher and lecturer. She wanted to create a digital critical edition of an old Irish tale, originally extant in three manuscripts, so that she and her students could undertake research upon them. The digital surrogate object was composed of high-quality images of the manuscripts, their diplomatic transcriptions in XML documents, her edited best-version critical edition in XML, and an english translation of the critical edition. CRADLE provides a comparison panel to show any two of the three versions at a time(figure 1). When examining text, the XML versions are rendered, and equivalent passages across image or text versions can be located. Other tools are available to her and are briefly described further on within this paper.


Figure 1.
The CRADLE comparison panel for digital critical edition components.

Let us now examine the multiplicity of the structures and descriptions that underlie Jane’s version of her Irish Tale. Importantly, Jane self-consciously considers herself to be building a Digital Critical Edition, not a representation of the real work, within CRADLE. She holds that the XML diplomatic transcriptions are inherited from the extant manuscript, not an abstract work. As such, they are less authentic than the manuscripts. Furthermore, she does not consider the images of the manuscripts to be surrogates for the original manuscripts because they have different materiality. Each of the objects is described in metadata, but the images have two descriptions: one for their manuscript-self (in TEI), and one for the digital-image-self(in VRA). Thus, she would describe and arrange all of these objects in a hierarchy as shown below.


Figure 2.
Jane's personal view of the structure of her source-system, a digital critical edition.

Another researcher and lecturer wants to (re-)use the source-system. Contrary to Jane, Steven believes that all extant versions, including the XML and the translation, have the same scholarly merit and that no single one is more authentic than another. For him, all of the versions, including the XML documents, are children of a single, parent, abstract work. Steven wants to use CRADLE to describe this actual work, not the digital version of it. Therefore, he wants the manuscripts to be fully represented by their digital images. Steven wants to be able to explain this to his students, and then to examine the tale from his own scholarly perspective. In CRADLE it is possible dynamically redefine the spring-graph-displayed relationships between the components of the digital critical edition in a personalised user space ("My Collection"). He can also redefine the metadata description associated with the images — while Jane had associated two metadata descriptions with the images (VRA for the image and TEI for the original manuscript page), he only wants to describe the manuscript page because he is using the system as if it really were the work. The structure of this system follows:


Figure 3.
Steven’s personal view of the structure of Jane’s original source-system.

This configuration and reconfiguration of editions, in particular, along previously undefined lines and based on personal interpretation is a direct response to calls from Eggert (2009) and Burnard (1999), among others, for what Burnard terms “an uncritical edition”, and while operating at a higher level of abstraction than that to which he referred, it nonetheless allows for user-driven and defined editions. In this way, it extends the conceptual work already started in projects such as Wittgenstein's Nachlass: The Bergen Electronic Edition (BEE), which allows users to manipulate the edition within the online environment, but through predefined and encoded versions. Gabler’s recent call for a means to navigate the “pyre of humanities objects” using the tools of digital humanities to “allow us to relate, or to model, their relationships — to inscribe the relations and correlations into the materials we digitise” (Gabler, 2012) is also answered with this type of approach. It is possible to use it as a direct model of the source or system, where the reader-user suspends their disbelief and operates within the collection as if it really were the real-world collection, or as an indirect model, where the difference between the real-world collection and digital collection is made obvious and described in detail.

Existing repository solution software, such as FEDORA or Hydra, support the hosting of sources and the many configurations such a system would demand, but they require significant expertise to operate. Other digital library solutions could support multiple representations of sources, but do not supply source-specific tools for detailed investigation, such as the comparison panel; nor do they support dynamic source structural re-configuration in a way that is open to general Users to manage. As far as the authors are aware, no existing systems allow for the direct association of discussion forums or learning resources with sources within a single environment. CRADLE was therefore designed to sit on top of existing repository software(currently FEDORA), provide an intuitive front-end to users wishing to create complex digital versions of their source systems, and provide tools for the research-driven interrogation of those, along with teaching and learning support.

Below it is possible to see the configurable relationships within the test collection used during development of CRADLE; the 1950s newsreel Amharc Eireann Archive, held in the Irish Film Institute.


Figure 4.
Examining the relationships between the newsreel sources within an archive collection.

Metadata describing structure, such as TEI or VRA, can be interpreted by CRADLE and used to generate the relationship graphs. Here, two sample newsreels have been configured as a collection, and that collection is a child of the parent digital Amharc Eireann Archive object. On the left, the source is depicted. On the right, its relationships are viewed in a spring-graph of objects, showing their associated learning resources (a single annotation) and discourse (35 discussions). Once the new user’s personal collection has been created (using the ‘Create New Collection’ option, in the top right of the image), it is the relationships within these graphs that can be clicked and edited to redefine the relationships. The creator-user can then control permission on the new collection to share it with colleagues, students or teachers.

Multiple perspectives on the nature and structure of humanities sources can be accommodated within CRADLE, even for the same real-world objects. Using CRADLE to create models that not only describe our sources, but represent their structure in a manner that is manipulable, reconfigurable and shareable allows researchers to define their own understanding of their material, while also making that material usable to a much wider community. Along with the many source-specific tools, and the provision of a hosting environment for learning resources and discourse associated directly with the humanities sources, this provides a valuable solution to those active in the area of digital humanities research.

References
Burnard, L. (1999). Is Humanities Computing an Academic Discipline? or, Why Humanities Computing Matters. IATH Seminar. http://www.iath.virginia.edu/hcs/burnard.html. (Accessed 31 October 2012)
Eggert, P. (2009). Text-encoding, Theories of the Text, and the “Work-Site”. Literary and Linguistic Computing 20(4). 25. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gabler, H. (2012). The Importance of Digital Humanities. Panel 1. Digital Repository Ireland Conference: Realising the Opportunities of Digital Humanities. held 23-25 October 2012 in Dublin, Ireland.
Notes
1. These distinctions are loosely based on the VRA view of collections, objects and images.
1. Introduction
The Australian Electronic Scholarly Editing project is a collaboration between the University of Queensland, University of NSW, Curtin University, University of Sydney, Queensland University of Technology, Loyola University, Chicago and the University of Saskatchewan. The aim of the project is to develop a set of interoperable services to support the production of electronic scholarly editions by distributed collaborators in a Web 2.0 environment.

One of the fundamental challenges faced by the AustESE project is the development of an interoperable data model. In recent years, research focussed on the production and use of electronic scholarly editions has increasingly involved the development and employment of ontologies (Robinson and Meschini 2010; Romanello et al. 2009). The Text Encoding Initiative has provided the necessary elements to describe the textual and material character of documents, but TEI has addressed neither the naming of components of an edition nor the relationships between these components (Robinson & Meschini 2010). Such frameworks are necessary to support the interoperability of the electronic edition and to facilitate and coordinate greater levels of user engagement with annotations.

One of the most significant contributions that ontologies can make to electronic scholarly editions is to more precisely model and capture the dynamic nature of the ‘work’. This provides a more stable framework onto which metadata and annotations can be accurately attached, and also facilitates the efficient execution of workflows that support scholarly editing practices. The importance of acknowledging the complexity and the contingency of the work has been made clear in recent years (Shillingsburg 1997, Eggert 2009). In order to logically integrate the elements of a work into a knowledge-site (Shillingsburg 2006) or a work-site (Eggert 2005), and, at the same time, protect the integrity of transcriptions and images, our approach enables the augmentation of images and transcriptions with stand-off mark-up in the form of annotations. Such an approach contributes not only to theories of scholarly textual editing, but also to theories of knowledge representation in computation (Clement 2011). In this paper we describe the project’s overall objectives and the ontology that we are using to underpin the AustESE Workbench, and we will discuss the practical and theoretical implications of the delivery of an integrated workbench that promises to re-invigorate scholarly editing in Australia.

2. Project Objectives and Ontology
The specific objectives of the AustESE project are to provide the Australian scholarly editing community with an online integrated Workbench that provides:

collation tools for automatically detecting, identifying and highlighting variations between different versions of a work and that allow the relationship between texts to be visualized, authored or edited
annotation tools that:
enable scholars to create and reply to scholarly commentary attached to texts, variants and images;
capture the annotations as stand-off markup that is discoverable, shareable, and re-usable;
provide search, browse and visualisation interfaces for annotations;
enable both manual and automated migration of annotations between transcriptions and facsimiles.
a workflow engine that captures the sequence of tasks and decision-making steps as well as the provenance of generating an electronic scholarly edition;
publishing tools that automatically compile electronic scholarly editions into standard publication formats;
and a repository that supports the discovery, search, retrieval, exploration and re-use of texts and electronic editions.
AustESE Workbench
The AustESE workbench coordinates the scholarly editing workflow and provides access to online tools that support scholarly editing tasks. For the AustESE project, we have adopted a Service-Oriented Architecture, illustrated in Figure 1, with the aim of developing modular, reusable, and potentially distributed components that can be assembled and substituted according to the requirements of each scholarly edition project. To implement this architecture, we are extending existing scholarly editing tools with REST APIs to enable their integration with our content repository and workflow engine, and implementing new open source software to bridge the gaps between existing tools.


FIGURE 1:
AUSTESE TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE

Ontologies
The AustESE ontology includes key classes Work, Version, Artefact, Agent and Event, and provides the data model used to organise the metadata and conceptual entities represented within the repository. The AustESE ontology can be mapped onto the IFLA FRBR to link with entities from related databases such as AustLit: The Australian Literature Resource, however it provides additional concepts to those defined by FRBR, to make it easier to model and analyse manuscript materials and fine-grained differences at the level of ‘impressions’ and ‘states’.

The Open Annotation W3C Community Group provides a common data model (Sanderson, Ciccarese & Van de Sompel, 2012) for representing annotations across tools, architectures and collections. The model, which is expressed as an OWL ontology, is intended to be extensible, so that it can be refined to meet the annotation requirements of specific communities. To support the production of apparatus and commentary within electronic editions, we build on the OA core data model with specialised annotation Motivations, as illustrated in Figure 2. We categorise annotations as ExplanatoryNotes, providing commentary or TextualNotes, which provide support for editorial decisions. VariationAnnotations are a type of TextualNote that describe textual variation between versions of a work. These annotation Motivations can be used in search queries and for filtering and sorting annotations to enable selective display and inclusion for print or electronic publication.


Figure 2:
AustESE Open Annotation Motivation subclasses

We have defined additional properties that may be used within the body of a VariationAnnotation, (as shown in the example in Figure 3), to record metadata about the agent, date or cause of the variation as well as documentary evidence including links to manuscript facsimiles. Within our RDF-based annotation tool and annotation repository, we have adopted a Linked Data approach of using HTTP URIs to identify entities that may be referenced within annotations, including Agents (people or organisations) and conceptual entities (Works, Versions, Artefacts, Events). We use FOAF and Dublin Core to record annotation provenance, and we apply properties from the AustESE ontology to relate the transcriptions and corresponding facsimile images that are being annotated.

Such a conceptual framework necessarily directs attention to the material artefacts it aims to describe, ‘making the archives talk’ through the arguments of editors and readers (West 2011). A ‘virtual archive’ of artefact images provides a foundation upon which transcription and commentary can be overlaid, satisfying the archival impulse of scholarship, and providing a space for multiple, and, perhaps, competing views about how works could and should be represented (Shillingsburg 2010). With the Workbench, the AustESE project aims to facilitate such processes and to support collaborative editorial models that contribute to the development of social editions (Siemens et al 2012).


Figure 3:
Annotating Textual Variation

3. Practical and Theoretical Implications
The development of the AustESE Workbench has been informed by several case-studies, particularly the requirements of Paul Eggert’s Charles Harpur Critical Archive and Roger Osborne’s electronic edition of Joseph Furphy’s Such is Life. The complex textual and material situations faced by these projects require the type of infrastructure provided by the AustESE Workbench in order to efficiently store, describe, organise and analyse large numbers of image files and their related transcriptions. Projects such as these can still argue for a particular editorial rationale and contribute new, critically established texts to the system. But with the facility to support solitary and collaborative interpretation in the form of annotations across the archive, the editor’s version can be critiqued or ignored if readers object to the editorial approach. Hans Walter Gabler has recently described the emerging phase of electronic scholarly editions as a ‘paradigm of a relational interplay of discourses, dynamically correlated both among themselves and with an edition’s readers and users: that is, to a paradigm once again of text and ongoing commentary.’ (Gabler 2010) While granting due attention to the integrity of the images and transcriptions within the archive, such a paradigm lends itself to the compilation of ‘revision narratives’ (Bryant 2002) and general commentary that will help to reinvigorate and sustain research on literary works into the future. The AustESE Workbench will achieve this by drawing on Web 2.0 technologies and the Semantic Web to support collaborative social editions and/or finely argued editions produced by solitary editors.

Acknowledgements
The University of Queensland is proud to be in partnership with the National eResearch Collaboration Tools and Resources (NeCTAR) project to create a unique opportunity to develop eResearch Tools that support the Collaborative Authoring and Management of Electronic Scholarly Editions.

References
Australian Electronic Scholarly Editing Project http://itee.uq.edu.au/~eresearch/projects/austese/services.html
Bryant, J. (2002). The Fluid Text: A Theory of Revision and Editing for Book and Screen. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 157-161.
Clement, T. (2011). Knowledge Representation and Digital Scholarly Editions in Theory and Practice. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 1. http://jtei.revues.org/203
Eggert, P. (2005). Text-encoding, Theories of the Text, and the “Work-site.” Literary and Linguistic Computing. 20. 425-35.
Eggert, P. (2009). The Editorial Gaze and the Nature of the Work, in Securing the Past: Conservation in Art, Architecture, and Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 214-40
Gabler, H. W. (2010). Theorizing the Digital Scholarly Edition. Literature Compass 7 (2). 43.
Robinson, P., and F. Meschini (2010). Works, Documents, Texts and Related Resources for Everyone, DH 2010, http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab-816.html
Romanello, M. et al. Rethinking Critical Editions of Fragmentary Texts by Ontologies, Elpub, Milano, Italy, http://conferences.aepic.it/index.php/elpub/elpub2009/paper/view/158
Sanderson, R., P. Ciccarese, and H. Van de Sompel (2012). ‘Open Annotation Core Data Model’, http://openannotation.org/spec/core
Shillingsburg, P. (1997). Text as Matter, Concept and Action. In Resisting Texts: Authority and Submission in Constructions of Meaning, Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. 49-103
Shillingsburg, P. (2006). An Electronic Infrastructure for representing Script Acts. In From Gutenberg to Google. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 80-125.
Shillingsburg, P. (2010). How Literary Works Exist: Implied, Represented, and Interpreted. In McCarty, W. (ed). Text and Genre in Reconstruction: Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions. Cambridge: OpenBook Publishers. 165-182.
Siemens, R., et al. (2012). Toward modeling the social edition: An approach to understanding the electronic scholarly edition in the context of new and emerging Media. Literary and Linguistic Computing 27 (4). 445-61.
West, J. L. W. (2011). Making the Archives Talk. Pennsylvania University Press.
Along with open data about sources and places, open data about historical people provides one of the three legs for an open framework for historical information, since it is one of the three most obvious "entry points" into a potentially shared world of historical data.
DDH has been involved in a number of prosopographical projects (PBE, PBW, PASE, CCEd, PoMS, BoB [1] and most recently the Making Charlemagne's Europe project), and we have become convinced that prosopography is particularly well suited to the world of open and linked data, since its purpose is to establish unique digital identities for people that could be used by other researchers. Furthermore, although we here at DDH have done quite a bit of work on structured prosopography we have found that "one size does not fit all" when it comes to structuring the prosopographical materials. Several of our projects have, at their core, a common approach we are calling "factoid prosopography". However, several of them (Clergy Church of England, Early Modern London Theatres) [2] do not. Finally, of course, many other people take on prosopographical work in their research without taking up a model of their data like ours: one thinks of the "personography" model work within the TEI, for example, and we know of other colleagues with prosopographical components that have developed a different model for their data.
The issue of prosopography as a open, shared resource goes beyond the provision merely of an identity for historical persons. In the same way that CIDOC-CRM (CIDOC-CRM 2011) was developed to record information about cultural heritage objects and therefore not only help uniquely to identify them but also to allow different systems to share a much broader range of data about these objects, a prosopography for historical persons would work to find common ground among the different ways in which different projects collect data about historical persons so that semantic links between them could more effectively be exploited. Indeed, it would seem that much of such a prosopographical ontology would usefully be based on CIDOC-CRM, since there is often significant overlap between the two domains: prosopography often comes into the work of people working with heritage objects, and there are thus substantial elements of prosopography in CIDOC-CRM. We have done some exploring of this idea in a recently created paper by Michele Pasin and myself (Pasin and Bradley, 2012) that takes the "factoid" in our prosopographical model and explores how it might be represented primarily in CIDOC-CRM terms.
We propose calling this shared ontological model for prosopography an Ontology for Historical Persons. By the very nature of such a thing, it would need to be developed out of as broad a shared perspective on the different ways that prosopographical data is being collected as possible. As an early step in thinking about this ontology, we have already been in touch with not only our project partners for the prosopographies we have already done, but also with a range of colleagues who have worked on the question of structured prosopography outside of our own projects, and with colleagues who have worked on the development of CIDOC-CRM. In our talk we would also describe the current state of our ontology, and explain how we think it would link with CIDOC-CRM. However, we'd be most interested in hearing of other people who are working on structured prosopography, and who would be interested in working with us towards enabling the open data potential that an ontology for historical persons might provide.
References
CIDOC-CRM (2011). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model website. At http://www.cidoc-crm.org/
Pasin, M., and J. Bradley. (2012). Factoid-based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies: towards an integrated approach. Submitted for possible publication. Draft available at http://www.michelepasin.org/papers/43/
Notes
1. PBE: Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire, PBW: Prosopography of the Byzantine World (http://www.pbw.kcl.ac.uk), PASE: Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (http://www.pase.ac.uk), CCEd: Clergy of the Church of England Database (http://www.theclergydatabase.org.uk/index.html), PoMS: People of Medieval Scotland (http://www.poms.ac.uk), BoB: Breaking of Britain (http://www.breakingofbritain.ac.uk/).
2. http://www.emlot.kcl.ac.uk
In 1862 the United States' Congress passed two bills which legislated the liberation of slaves in the District of Columbia, making Washington, DC the first emancipated city in the nation. The inaugural act, passed on April 16, called for the compensated emancipation of all persons "held to service or labor" in the District. Provisions of the April act required slave owners to submit written petitions to receive compensation. The second, supplemental act of July 12 allowed slaves who were freed under the April act to file for certificates of freedom on their own behalf if their former masters had not petitioned for compensation. Offering valuable descriptions about the lives of former slaves, the documents filed pursuant to these acts have been the focus of our recent work to examine race, slavery, and emancipation for the digital thematic research collection, Civil War Washington (civilwardc.org; CWW). This poster presentation will summarize the digitization process that brought the petitions to CWW (microfilm digitization, transcription and TEI markup, XSLT transformation, and SOLR search/indexing) and, more importantly, it will demonstrate the compelling work yet to be done with the petitions; specifically, the poster will present a case study of what enriched encoding of the petitions — including encoding of monetary values and person roles — contributes to historical scholarship and to the broader understanding of these documents.

In preparing the petitions for publication, the project team was guided by our scholarly understanding of these documents as well as our desire to make them broadly available to students, scholars, and the general public as soon as possible. Our TEI markup distinguishes between handwritten and printed content, identifies personal and place names, records values for dates, notes instances where petition forms have been left blank, and acknowledges illegible words and characters in the text. In developing our encoding practices, we took a pragmatic approach, balancing the urge to encode all complexities that make the petitions such significant documents, with the utility of presenting complete transcriptions of heretofore largely inaccessible texts. However, a longer term project goal is the addition of more detailed encoding. Therefore, working with a subset of files, we have expanded the encoding as described below. Our poster explains and illustrates this expanded encoding and showcases what such additional encoding enables for both the visual presentation and the computer-assisted analysis of the documents.

The April act required petitioners to declare the monetary value of their claim and provide a justification for this valuation. A special board of commissioners was established to determine how much remuneration slaveholders would receive. The board's decisions are documented in their Final Report on Compensated Emancipation in the District of Columbia (1864). Encoding these monetary values allows us to compare these amounts and enables readers to see the results of the petition in this financial sense: what did a petitioner claim and what did he receive? Similarly, by performing calculations with the encoded figures, we can provide users of the site with the monetary equivalent of each award in today’s dollars. These calculations are performed in the XSLT stylesheet used for transforming the TEI files into HTML. Additionally, this encoding, when taken alongside further encoding of details about each slave, enables drawing correlations between the value assigned to each slave and other features. To be sure, we recognize the complex set of problems raised by highlighting the monetary value of people claimed as property. Our intention is to bring this sensitive issue to the forefront in order to encourage discussion and analysis of the complicated calculus at work in the texts and in American history. We mean for our treatment of the financial aspects of these materials to be thought-provoking, not cold and quantitative.

We have also expanded the encoding of the participant description in the TEI header to include a regularized version of the name of every person who appears in a petition. Our long-term goal is to connect every instance of person names to records in the project database. The expansion of the participant description is an intermediate step toward standardizing person names across and within petitions and making people/social connections across documents. The enriched encoding we have implemented here enhances the interpretive and analytical possibilities for understanding slavery and emancipation in Washington. We encourage others to download our TEI files and add encoding that is relevant to their own research interests. Our poster presentation illustrates some of the possibilities that micro-level encoding offers for the study of complex historical documents.
We have discussed in some detail elsewhere, including in a longer paper at this conference, our ongoing development of software that visualizes poems as complex dynamic systems (Abdul-Rahman, et al. 2013a; Abdul-Rahman, et al. 2013b). In this presentation, we will discuss how working within this interdisciplinary context, which forced us to think about how poems work both as large, complex systems and on their most granular levels, has already led us to new insights about poetry, its features, and its operations. Our focus here will be not on the technology itself, nor on the literary perspectives we have been bringing to bear in its design. Rather, we will discuss how working collaboratively with visualization scientists, whose research practices and values could not be more different from our own, has caused us to imagine poems differently, and on how this adjustment in our thinking, which would not otherwise have happened, has in itself, independently of the technology, led us to new insights about poetry. Interdisciplinary dialogues are also revising our ideas about broader subjects like aesthetics and information as well as the specific ways our different fields perceive them acting on each other. For this reason, we argue, collaboration across the boundaries of very different disciplines has its own inherent value, even to a discipline like ours in which writing, reading, and the ‘freedom to explore’ has most traditionally been associated with solitude.
Even as interest in distant reading (Moretti 2007) rises in the digital humanities, close reading remains central to the practices at the heart of literary scholarship. As helpful as it can be in opening new directions of criticism, distant reading — with its reliance on abstract models based on data mining and quantification — removes human readers from the center of the reading process, bringing them in after the ‘reading’ phase is finished to interpret not texts but data. Thus, these approaches fail to support the most important practice in the study of poetry, which is valued precisely because of its experiential richness. In contrast, close readers engage texts directly, intimately and in detail; they trace the finest interactions among such literary features as rhyme and meter, sound, figures, and syntax, noting how even the subtlest movements and operations (a comma, a repeated vowel, etc.) influence a reader’s interpretation(s) and experience(s) of a particular poem. While the words in a given poem in a given version remain the same, different skilled readers will interact with those words in different ways by choosing moment by moment what to engage and what to ignore. Thus, there is no single ‘correct’ solution to any close reading problem, though there may be many incorrect solutions. A reader’s choices are led both by what is happening on the page and by the reader’s preferences and interests. Close reading, as both expression and experience, thus manifests interactions between poems and human minds.
While close reading is sometimes positioned as belonging to the set of practices not amenable to digitization, we have found in our own work and in a review of the work of others that this is not necessarily the case. In fact, there is no shortage of software designed and applied with the intention to aid close reading practice, whether or not it is yet effective in doing so (Chaturvedi 2011; Chaturvedi, et al., 2012; Clement 2012; Plamondon 2006; Ruecker, et al., 2008; Unsworth and Mueller 2009). This abundance indicates, in our view, an urgent desire in the literary community to embrace and explore the power of computation while at the same time prioritizing and protecting the relationship between literature and human readers. As we explain in our longer paper, one distinguishing feature of our project is the strong emphasis we are placing on poetry’s experiential quality, which we locate in its radical multidimensionality — especially its relationship to time. But we are also, through our interdisciplinary discussions, endeavoring to theorize how to position data visualization and computers as potential — and potentially potent—tools to aid close reading.
Our goal of using visualization to heighten poetic experience has been challenging to describe, understand, and pursue for all the members of our team. In fact, we have struggled to integrate into this overarching objective two distinct and not always obviously compatible elements: intensified aesthetic experience and revelation of new information. Early in our research, we looked to music visualizations for possible analogies that might inform our work. But sometimes impassioned discussions have shown us, for instance, that while visualizers like MilkDrop (Geiss 2012) and the ‘visual music’ of multimedia artists Abstract Birds (2012) may enhance aesthetic pleasure by combining visual and aural elements, they do not necessarily lead viewers to new intellectual perceptions about the music. The computer scientists in our group prioritize information clarity and communication through timesaving tools and techniques. Accustomed to collaborating with biologists, engineers, physicists and physicians to visualize phenomena like combustion, the brain and its electrical impulses, magnetic fields, etc., they have emphasized that their work is more than ‘just pretty pictures.’ At the same time, we poets have consistently defended the aesthetic as meaningful: in poet Robert Creeley’s words, "FORM IS […] AN EXTENSION OF CONTENT" (Olson 1966, p. 16, emphasis original). More is at stake than superficial display, we have argued; especially when visualizing aesthetic objects, events, or systems (like poetry), aesthetic choices are necessarily core design considerations. The aesthetics of individual visualizations should somehow reflect the uniqueness of individual poems.
Similarly, our visualization scientist colleagues are used to identifying specific problems to solve, data to isolate, hypotheses to test: explicit aims that help them define programming strategies and evaluation techniques for very complicated software. Our stance on verifiability and accuracy is more ambivalent and ambiguous. Initially we resisted the very idea of literary hypotheses-making and testing, until we saw it as describing the many questions and choices a close reader constantly makes on the fly in her encounter with a poem. We continue to contemplate what ‘poetic data’ might mean, and what its relationship to literary forms and devices like lineation and metaphor might be. Even in our initial focus on poetic sound, the issue of accuracy has proven difficult to treat. How should we mathematically define rhyme? What constitutes the smallest measurable repeating sonic cluster? Of course we want our program to be able to correctly identify single repeating phonemes to show assonance and consonance. But accuracy becomes categorically more uncertain and tenuous as soon as we move beyond single phonemes. Should only full end rhymes qualify as rhymes? What about internal rhymes? Slant rhymes? As we build this software in hopes of its being useful for as many readers as possible, we want to consider not only how we, but how others whose literary perspectives differ from our own, might answer such questions. We want our software to allow individual reader-users to choose how to define some of these parameters in order to best support their unique close readings.
In our program, then, visualizations are not authoritative arbiters to reduce poetic complexity, give definitive answers, or merely save time; rather, they are aesthetic agents, using visual constructs and perception to reveal poetic features, patterns, and qualities readers might not otherwise have noticed by prompting them toward fresh experiences, insights, and questions. Thus, the visualizations do not replace close reading; they suggest rich avenues for initial and subsequent explorations, cuing the reader into which operations of the poem may merit further investigation. This orientation has also encouraged us to consider how the human-computer interaction developing through this software may prove more nuanced than the word ‘tool’ superficially suggests. It has provoked us to ask whether and in what sense the computer generating these visualizations might fruitfully be considered a fellow literary entity and even collaborator in the close reading process—questions we have differed on, as we will explain in our presentation.
Given our usual scholarly practices — based in the essentially experiential and qualitative nature of poetry, not to mention in the space of determined solitude where poetry is usually experienced—we were not natural targets for a project in visualizing poetry or even for a project that is highly collaborative. Of course we recognize that collaboration can generate programs and poems that otherwise would not have been possible. And this interdisciplinary project is indeed accomplishing those results. But it is also challenging us to examine fundamental issues, including our expectations and understanding of collaboration itself. We were brought into the project by our collaborators’ commitment to respond to our existing values and practices. Among the surprises for us has been the usefulness of collaboration itself to the practices and priorities we already embrace. At the same time, when one of the computer scientists in our group recently invoked Gregory Bateson’s notion of information as ‘the difference which makes a difference,’ (1972, p. 453, emphasis original) we recognized it as an apt description of our interdisciplinary research: exploring our various differences is not only leading us to new territory, it is helping us see familiar ground anew.
Funding
This work was supported by a Digging Into Data Challenge grant: in the US, by the National Endowment for the Humanities; and in the UK by the Arts and Humanities Research Council, Economic and Social Research Council, and JISC. We would also like to acknowledge and thank our collaborators: Alfie Abdul-Rahman, Min Chen, Christopher Johnson, Eamonn Maguire, Miriah Meyer, and Martin Wynne.
References
Abdul-Rahman, A., K. Coles, J. Lein, and M. Wynne (2013a). Freedom and Flow: A New Approach to Visualizing Poetry. Paper to be presented at Digital Humanities 2013, University of Nebraska-Lincoln. July 2013.
Abdul-Rahman, A., J. Lein, K. Coles, E. Maguire, M. Meyer, M. Wynne, A. E. Trefethen, C. Johnson, and M. Chen (2013). Rule-based Visual Mappings — with a Case Study on Poetry Visualization. Paper conditionally accepted to EuroVis, Leipzig, Germany.
Abstract Birds. (2012). http://www.abstractbirds.com (accessed 19 February 2013).
Bateson, G. (1972). Form, Substance, and Difference. In Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine.
Chaturvedi, M. (2011). Visualization of TEI Encoded Texts in Support of Close Reading. M.S. thesis. Ohio: Miami University of Ohio. http://etd.ohiolink.edu/sendpdf.cgi/Chaturvedi%20Manish.pdf?miami1323623830 (accessed 6 September 2012).
Chaturvedi, M., G. Gannod, L. Mandell, H. Armstrong, and E. Hodgson (2012). Myopia: A Visualization Tool in Support of Close Reading. Digital Humanities 2012. held July 2012 at University of Hamburg.http://lecture2go.uni-hamburg.de/konferenzen/-/k/13930(accessed 6 September 2012).
Clement, T. (2012). Methodologies in the Digital Humanities for Analyzing Aural Patterns in Texts. Proceedings of the 2012 iConference. Toronto, Canada, February 2012. ACM Digital Library: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2132213(accessed 6 September 2012).
Geiss, R. (2012). MilkDrop. http://www.geisswerks.com/milkdrop/ (accessed 19 February 2013).
Moretti, F. (2007). Maps, Graphs, and Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. London: Verso.
Plamondon, M. (2006). Virtual Verse Analysis: Analysing Patterns in Poetry. Literary and Linguistic Computing.21(Suppl), 127-141. http://llc.oxfordjournals.org (accessed 3 December 2012).
Ruecker, S., M. Radzikowska, P. Michura, C. Fiorentino, and T. Clement. (2008). Visualizing Repetition in Text.CHWP A.46 http://projects.chass.utoronto.ca/chwp/CHC2007/Ruecker_etal/Ruecker_etal.htm (accessed 6 September 2012).
Unsworth, J., and M. Mueller. (2009). The MONK Project Final Report.http://www.monkproject.org/MONKProjectFinalReport.pdf (accessed 6 September 2012).
Project outline
The Great Parchment Book of the Honourable The Irish Society is a major survey, compiled in 1639 by a Commission instituted by Charles I, of all the estates in Derry, Northern Ireland, managed by the City of London through the Irish Society and the London livery companies. Damaged in a fire at London’s Guildhall in 1786, it has been unavailable to researchers for over 200 years (Moody 1939; Curl 2000). The damaged manuscript has however remained part of the City of London’s collections held at London Metropolitan Archives (LMA). As part of the commemoration of the 400th anniversary of the building of Derry’s city walls in 1613, it was decided to attempt to make the document available as a central point of the planned exhibition. The book represents an important source for the City’s role in the colonisation and administration of Ulster and, given the relative paucity of archival records for early modern Ireland, the manuscript should also reveal key data about landholding and population in 17th-century Ulster.

This ambitious project has attracted support from several funders, including the UK’s National Manuscripts Conservation Trust, the Marc Fitch Fund, the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), a number of London livery companies and the Irish Society itself. University College London (UCL), Derry Heritage and Museums Service (DHMS), and LMA have also provided funds and staff time.

Physical description and conservation issues
The manuscript consists of 165 separate parchment membranes, all damaged in the fire. Uneven shrinkage and distortion has rendered much of the text illegible.

Traditional conservation alone would not produce sufficient results to make the manuscript accessible or suitable for exhibition, the parchment being too shrivelled to be returned to a readable state. Much of the text is visible but distorted; following discussions with conservation and imaging experts, it was decided to flatten the parchment sheets as far as possible, and to use multi-modal digital imaging to gain legibility and enable digital access.

The project
A partnership with the Department of Computer Science and the Centre for Digital Humanities at UCL established a four year EngD in the Virtual Environments, Imaging and Visualisation programme in September 2010 (jointly funded by the EPSRC and LMA) with the intention of developing software that will enable the manipulation (including virtual stretching and alignment) of digital images of the book rather than the object itself. The aim is to make the distorted text legible, and ideally to reconstitute the manuscript digitally.

Conservation work on the membranes encompassed cleaning, humidification, and tension drying, using magnets placed on top of the parchment above a metal sheet to hold creases open during the drying process. This opened out areas of parchment where the camera could not reach the text (De Stefani 2012).

The practical conservation of the membranes was the essential first step, followed by the imaging work being carried out by UCL, where a set of typically 50-60 22MP images is captured for each page and used to generate a 3D model containing 100-170MP, which allows viewing at archival resolution. These models can be flattened and browsed virtually, allowing the contents of the book to be accessed more easily and without further handling the document. A readable and exploitable version of the text is also being prepared, comprising a searchable transcription and glossary of the manuscript. This element of the project has received a grant from the Marc Fitch Fund towards the employment of a palaeographer who is also encoding appropriate terms using TEI to capture structural and semantic information about the texts enabling comprehensive searching of the document.

The transcript and images of the document will be published online. We are currently working with web-designers Headscape to develop a website to enable sophisticated online presentation and searching of the document contents.

From 2013, both DHMS and LMA plan to use the document in their interpretation and outreach programmes, developing resources for schools and colleges based on the information it contains. There is also considerable interest from academics, including the University of Ulster. Our work on the computational approach to model, stretch, and read the damaged parchment will be applicable to similarly damaged material as we believe we are developing best practice computational approaches to digitising highly distorted, fire-damaged, historical documents.

Summary
The digital imaging and transcription will provide a lasting resource for historians researching the Plantation of Ulster in local, national and international contexts. The progress of the project is being recorded on a blog (LMA 2012).

References
Curl, J. S. (2000). The Honourable the Irish Society and the Plantation of Ulster, 1608-2000: the City of London and the colonisation of County Londonderry in the Province of Ulster in Ireland: a history and critique. Chichester, West Sussex: Phillimore.
De Stefani, C. (2012). Conservation of the Great Parchment Book. Presentation held at ARA Annual Conference 2012, Brighton August 29-31.
London Metropolitan Archives (2012). The Great Parchment Book: Conserving, Digitally Reconstructing, Transcribing, and Publishing the Manuscript Known as the Great Parchment Book. http://greatparchmentbook.wordpress.com (accessed 1 November 2012).
Moody, T. W. (1939). The Londonderry Plantation, 1609-41: the City of London and the Plantation in Ulster. Belfast: W. Mullan and son.
1 Introduction and Goals
The Holocaust's aftermath on memory discourses still represents an important research field. Almost 70 years after the end of the Second World War, there will soon be no direct witnesses of the Nazi crimes anymore. What will remain are texts bearing witness to the crimes. These texts are to be collected, preserved, and made accessible in a systematic manner. Especially the early texts are of great interest: texts written or published between 1933 and 1949, particularly in the years 1944/1945. In this context Germany, bearing the guilt for the Holocaust, and Poland, as a Nazi-occupied country where large parts of the Holocaust took place, are of special relevance.


Figure 1:
Outline of the GeoBib project workflow

Unfortunately, the early texts on the Holocaust were soon forgotten or suppressed. With the formation of the two German states (1949), a process of suppression of the texts of the victims began (Cf. Hickethier 1986, p. 578). The official artistic doctrine in the GDR and Soviet Poland excluded certain authors, themes, and forms of presentation.

The goal of the interdisciplinary [2] GeoBib project is to build a systematic and geo-referenced online bibliography of the early German and Polish Holocaust and camp literature: the first complete, bilingual, i.e. with respect to texts written both in German and Polish, research platform for information on the texts. On these, GeoBib seeks to collect annotations and metadata. This includes short summaries, keywords, biographical information on the authors, reviews, scientific literature, information on persons, geographical data, as well as time periods mentioned in the texts. The goal is to make information on these widely unknown texts accessible and searchable for a broad and interdisciplinary audience of researchers. Due to legal restrictions, the project does not, however, aim at annotating the whole texts. The focus lies on the collection and integration of these various kinds of information.

The combination of literary and geo-temporal annotations, as well as the implementation of different (geographical) search mechanisms, enables scholars to conduct innovative research in different scientific domains like literature or history, but is also intended to suit the needs of students, teachers, and the interested public. Maps and other visualizations of geo-temporal information are expected to reveal “historical relations that might otherwise go unasked” (White 2010, p.6).

2 Workflow and Technical Implementation
Since various research areas are involved, we need to aggregate a multitude of different information from the fields of literature, history, and geography — a challenge in data management and text technology. An adaptation of the TEI standard, using an ODD file, is being used to build a schema that serves to integrate the intended collection of the different kinds of metadata mentioned above.

Starting with the texts, annotation data is collected in TEI files that will be used as input for different processing steps (see Fig. 1): Bibliographical, biographical, and other metadata on the text need to be saved in a database and will be linked to the annotated geo-temporal data. Places need to be mapped to coordinates and annotated with the corresponding timestamp. The geographical data will be used in a geographic information system (GIS) and in an online database to support search queries across all relevant annotation data (see Fig. 2). The combination of time and space, extracted from the texts, will be used to display the data in form of geographical maps.


Figure 2:
Exemplary queries that the GeoBib system is expected to support by returning a list of relevant bibliographic references.

3 Context and Outlook
The Holocaust was a traumatic event that has recently been examined with increasing focus on space and time. Or as Beorn et. al. (2009, p. 563) put it: the “Holocaust was a profoundly geographical event, rooted in specific physical spaces, times, and landscapes”. Their project ‘Geographies of the Holocaust’ is actively working on analyzing the Holocaust from a geo-spatial point of view.

Others are looking at how geography is represented in texts (cf. Eide 2012, Appadurai 2010). Specialized software projects were developed to make the representation of, or the work with, geographical information in the humanities easier, e.g. Neatline (Nowviskie et. al. 2012).

Geo-spatial information extracted from literary texts, e.g. Google Ancient Places (GAP), can play a “vital role in improving efficiency for researchers” (Isaksen 2011, p. 82).

Hence, the GeoBib project is active in a growing field of interdisciplinary geo-spatial research as well as the European Holocaust research community (cf. Kahn 2011).

The GeoBib team is looking forward to collaborate in this context.

References
Appadurai, A. (2010). How Histories Make Geographies: Circulation and Context in a Global Perspective, Transcultural Studies. 1: 4–13.
Beorn, W., T. I. M. Cole, S. Gigliotti, et al. (2009). Geographies of the Holocaust, Geographical Review. 99(4): 563–574.
Eide, Ø. (2012). Underspecified, Ambiguous or Formal. Problems in Creating Maps Based on Texts. http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/underspecified-ambiguous-or-formal-problems-in-creating-maps-based-on-texts/ (acessed 10 April 2012).
Hickethier, K. (1986). Biographie, autobiographie, Memoirenliteratur. In Fischer, L. (ed.), Literatur in der Bundesrepublik bis 1967. München 574–584.
Isaksen, L., E. Barker, E. Kansa, et. al. (2011). GAP: a NeoGeo approach to classical resources, Leonardo, 45(1): 82–83.
Kahn, R. (2011). The EHRI Project: building an online archive for European Holocaust research. SCONUL Focus. (52). 21–22.
Nowviskie, B., W. Graham, D. McClure, et al. (2012). Geo-Temporal Interpretation of Archival Collections Using Neatline. Digital Humanities 2012. Conference Abstracts. 299–302.
White, R. (2010). What is Spatial History? http://www.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/pub.php?id=29. (acessed 10 April 2012).
Notes
Textometry is a methodology of text corpora analysis combining qualitative and quantitative techniques (kwic concordances, word frequency lists, collocations, factorial analysis, etc.) and producing valuable results for various fields of the humanities (linguistics, literary studies, history, geography, etc.).
The first generation of textometric software operated mainly on “raw text” with limited metadata and structural markup. In the recent years, a great number of digital resources with complex markup have been created. These can include multiple languages, various readings and other forms of critical apparatus, annotations like word lemmas or part of speech, syntactic structures, etc. As a general markup environment, the TEI guidelines provide a common framework for encoding all kinds of textual resources, although this framework allows a great flexibility and sometimes the same information can be encoded in many different ways. It is a challenge for the software and for the researcher to interpret these data correctly out of the context of their original project but it is also an opportunity to make the textometric analysis deeper and more precise.
A new generation of textometric open-source software called TXM was initiated by the Textométrie research project [1] funded by the French ANR agency (2007-2010) bringing together previous textometric techniques and state-of-the-art text encoding and corpus-building technologies: Unicode, XML, TEI, NLP (Heiden, 2010; Heiden et al., 2010). The TXM platform can be downloaded for free at http://sf.net/projects/txm with its sources. This article presents the design and the current state of the import environment being developed since to allow the platform to analyze various kind of TEI encoded sources.
The TXM platform addresses the challenge of importing TEI encoded corpora by “translating” the source document structure into the terms (or objects) relevant for textometric analysis. The main objects are: “text units” (define text limits in a corpus), “text metadata” (associate texts with their properties), “lexical units” (the way the word forms are separated), “word properties” (how to get their lemma or morpho-syntactic description if available), “text divisions” (book parts, sections, paragraphs...), primary and secondary “text surface” (what is the main language of the text to run NLP tools on the right tokens and possible secondary languages: foreign quotations or section titles provided by the editor of a historical source text), “out-of-text”: parts not to be considered as part of the source text (critical apparatus, encoding comments, etc.), “pagination” (to build an edition of the texts), etc.
For each type of source corpus, one has to precisely define how the textometric objects are encoded in the TEI sources and how to extract them to express the corresponding objects in a specially designed XML-TXM pivotal format before being instantiated inside the platform. The XML-TXM format is specialized in analytic data categories, in a way similar to the “TEI Analytics” format of the MONK project (Brian L. Pytlik Zillig, 2009), but is richer in data categories and is a formal TEI extension.
The extraction process is implemented by a combination of specific XSLT stylesheets, XPATH expressions and Groovy script parameters [2] .
We will describe how that approach has been validated on a comprehensive set of completely unrelated TEI encoded corpora: “Bibliothèques Virtuelles Humanistes” corpus (BVH collection of 16th century books: http://www.bvh.univ-tours.fr), Flaubert’s “Bouvard et Pécuchet” 19th century novel corpus: http://dossiers-flaubert.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr, corpus of 5 years issues of the “DISCOURS” linguistic journal: http://discours.revues.org/?lang=en) and the TEI version of the Brown 1 million words corpus from the NLTK project: http://nltk.org.
TXM TEI import environment and its XML-TXM pivotal format have proven to be flexible enough to process various data sources efficiently. In further developments, we will define a complete ODD description of the XML-TXM format to document it better for the TEI community and to contribute to the discussion on the ability of software tools to analyze TEI encoded data.
References
Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. 24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation. Éd. Kiyoshi Ishikawa Ryo Otoguro. Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, 4-7 November 2010. 389-398.
Heiden, S., J.-P. Magué, and B. Pincemin (2010). TXM : Une plateforme logicielle open-source pour la textométrie – conception et développement, in Bolasco, S., et al. (eds.), Statistical Analysis of Textual Data -Proceedings of 10th International Conference JADT.
Pytlik Zillig, B. L. (2009) TEI Analytics: converting documents into a TEI format for cross-collection text analysis.Literary and Linguistic Computing 24(2):187-192; doi:10.1093/llc/fqp005.
Notes
1. http://textometrie.ens-lyon.fr/?lang=en
2. The TXM import environment is implemented by several dynamic scripts written in the Groovy progamming language. All that software environment is directly accessible to the user to be modified and adapted: platform sources, import scripts, XSLT stylesheets, etc.
Introduction
Despite the relative longevity of Digital Humanities (its origins are usually pinpointed to at least 1949, when Fr Roberto Busa, an Italian, Jesuit priest, began work on an index variorum of some 11 million words of medieval Latin in the works of St Thomas Aquinas and related authors) very little is known of history. In this paper we will present the key findings of the pilot stage of the ‘Hidden Histories’ project, which is building an oral prosopography that explores the social, cultural and intellectual factors that helped to shape the work of Digital Humanities scholars since c.1949. We will also demonstrate that Oral History is an important and productive methodology in such research and that it has resulted in the creation of primary sources that not only offer new information and interpretations of the field but that can also be used for further historical research.
Research context and key aims
Contributions and notes towards a history of the field have been appearing since at least 1996 (for example, Fraser 1996; McCarty 2003; Hockey, 2004). The most substantial contribution published to date, that of Hockey (2004), is a chronological outline that emphasises key developments such as TEI. As welcome and important as such contributions are they neither are, nor aim to be, comprehensive histories of the field. As McCarty has argued “For computing to be of the humanities as well as in them, we must get beyond catalogues, chronologies, and heroic firsts to a genuine history. There are none yet.” (McCarty 2008: 255).
Nevertheless, more recent and ongoing research is enabling us to fill in aspects of the broad outlines of such a history. Barnet has researched, inter alia, the evolution of the Memex (2009) and the hypertext editing systems HES and FRESS (2010); Rockwell et al (2011) have presented on the incunabular history of computing in Canada and both Willard McCarty (forthcoming, see http://www.mccarty.org.uk/) and Edward Vanhoutte (forthcoming, seehttp://www.edwardvanhoutte.org/onderzoek/index.htm) are at work on book-length studies of DH literary history and editions.
Looking to the history of computing we can identify a number of the technological developments that gave rise to the possibility of viewing computers as more than mere number crunchers that were unsuitable for use in Humanities research. Given the nature of the Humanities, and its long standing oppositions — between, inter alia, techné and episteme; lone scholars and collaborative teams; discipline and interdiscipline— we hold that the very fact that the computer was used in Humanities research at all is as significant as the results it has yielded. However, the social, cultural and educational factors that helped to shape the early uptake of computing in the Humanities are little understood; it is this gap that the project sought to address. A key aim of the pilot was to investigate the appropriateness of Oral History as a methodology for capturing memories, observations and insights that are rarely recorded in the scholarly literature of the field. Accordingly, we carried out a number of pilot interviews in order to test and refine our methodology, aims and research questions. This paper will describe the key findings of the pilot project 'Uncovering the “hidden histories” of computing in the Humanities 1949–1980,' which has resulted in the creation of primary sources that will further research in this area (for example, McCarty, Nyhan et al forthcoming; Rockwell, Nyhan et al forthcoming; Short, Nyhan et al forthcoming; Siemens, Welsh et al forthcoming; Unsworth, Welsh et al forthcoming).
Methodology
During the pilot phase oral history interviews were carried out with ten prominent scholars in the field including, among others, Willard McCarty, Geoffrey Rockwell, Harold Short, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth. Now into a further iteration of the project the range of people who are being interviewed has been extended. This is to ensure a better balance between the contributions of emeritus, established, mid- and early career scholars as well as gender. Also being interviewing are those who have not necessarily followed a purely academic career path but have worked in research management, funding, foresight and strategy and service or support positions.
The chief methodology of the project was an oral history one. Oral history has been defined as “the investigation of the past by means of personal recollections, memories, evocations or life stories, where the individual talks about their experiences, attitudes and values to a researcher” (Hitchcock and Hughes 1995, 220). Semi-structured interviews were based around the following questions:
•        1) Please tell me about your earliest memory of encountering computing technology
•        2) Did you receive formal training in programming or computing?
•        3) How did you first get involved in what we now refer to as Digital Humanities?
•        4) Which people particularly influenced you and how?
•        5) What about scholars who were not using computers in their research do you have some sense of what their views about humanities computing were?
•        6) What was your first engagement with the 'conference community' and how did that come about?
Content analysis was initially investigated in order to analyse the interviews; however, this was ultimately rejected in favour of a close reading approach. As will be explored in greater detail in the full paper one of the chief strengths of an oral history methodology is its propensity to expose, rather than gloss over the heterogeneity, dissent and difference that is an integral part of the history of computing in the humanities. In seeking to move away from the hitherto evolutionary and catalogue-based approach to the history of computing in the humanities that has often been pursued it seemed especially important to give due regard to this.
Key themes that emerged from the interviews
The forthcoming publications referred to above are to transcripts and audio recordings of five interviews carried out during the pilot phase. The paper will present the key findings of the pilot project based on an analysis of all of the interviews carried out. Specifically we will:
•        (i) Identify and reflect on the advantages and disadvantages of using an Oral History methodology for such research
We will also explore in detail two of the key themes that emerged from the interviews and their implications:
•        (ii) The interviews revealed that historically, both the entry routes through which people entered the field and the levels of formal training in computing that they had access to differ substantially. For example, Willard McCarty did not have access to formal training in computing when he was at Reed college in the 1960s, instead he learned programming ‘by doing’ (McCarty, Nyhan et al forthcoming). In contrast, Ray Siemens, had access to formal training in computing when he was in the English department of the University of Waterloo in the mid-1980s (Siemens, Welsh et al forthcoming). All data collected on this theme will be presented and possible implications discussed. For example, looking to the present time, as more and more dedicated Digital Humanities courses are being founded in countries such as the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada and the USA etc, students have the opportunity to undertake formal and focused training in the subject. It will be most interesting to see, in due course, how this formalisation of the routes of entry into the discipline will effect interpretations about what it is. Will we still be having the ‘what is digital humanities’ debate in ten years and how important will it be to understanding the early history of the emergence of the discipline?
•        (iii) Some interviews, for example, that carried out with Harold Short reveal the importance of the social, intra-personal and administrative work that appears to have been so central to the establishment and institutionalisation of Digital Humanities. Nevertheless, this work tends to be of lower profile that formal scholarly research and is rarely explored in historical studies of the field. The data collected on this will be presented and its wider comparative context with other emerging disciplines will be explored.
Conclusion
The history of Digital Humanities is a research topic that has been neglected not only by those working in long established Humanities subjects but also by the Digital Humanities community itself; much interesting and essential work in this area remains to be done. This paper will present the new findings that the Hidden Histories project has uncovered and will also argue that Oral History has a central role to play in such research. Furthermore, it will draw attention to the pressing need that exists for histories of Digital Humanities.
References
Barnet, B. (2010). Crafting the User-Centered Document Interface: The Hypertext Editing System (HES) and the File Retrieval and Editing System (FRESS). Digital Humanities Quarterly 4.1
Barnet, B. (2008). The Technical Evolution of Vannevar Bush’s Memex. Digital Humanities Quarterly 2.1
Fraser, M. (1996). A Hypertextual History of Humanities Computing. http://users.ox.ac.uk/~ctitext2/history/
Hitchcock, G., and D. Hughes. (1995). Research and the teacher: a qualitative introduction to school-based research. Routledge.
Hockey, S. (2004). The History of Humanities Computing. In Schreibman, S., et al. (eds), A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/
Mahoney, M. S. (1996). Issues in the history of computing. In Bergin Jr., T. J., and Gibson, R. G. (eds), History of programming languages — II. New York: ACM.
McCarty, W., J. Nyhan, A. Welsh, and J. Salmon. Questioning, Asking and Enduring Curiosity: an Oral History Conversation between Julianne Nyhan and Willard McCarty. Digital Humanities Quarterly [Forthcoming]
McCarty, W. (2003). Humanities Computing. In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. New York: Marcel Dekker. 1224-1235.
McCarty, W. (2008). Whats going on? Literary and Linguistic Computing 23.3: 253-261.
Rockwell, G., J. Nyhan, A. Welsh, J. Salmon. Trading Stories: an Oral History Conversation between Geoffrey Rockwell and Julianne Nyhan. Digital Humanities Quarterly [Forthcoming]
Rockwell, G., V. S. Smith, and S. Hoosein, et al. (2011a). Computing in Canada: a history of the incunabular years.Digital Humanities 2011 http://dh2011abstracts.stanford.edu/xtf/view?docId=tei/ab-311.xml;query=;brand=default
Short, H., J. Nyhan, A. Welsh, and J. Salmon Collaboration must be fundamental or it's not going to work: an Oral History Conversation between Harold Short and Julianne Nyhan. Digital Humanities Quarterly [Forthcoming]
Siemens, R., A. Welsh, J. Nyhan, and J. Salmon. Video-gaming, Paradise Lost and TCP/IP: an Oral History Conversation between Ray Siemens and Anne Welsh. Digital Humanities Quarterly [Forthcoming]
Unsworth, J., A. Welsh, J. Nyhan, and J. Salmon. Postmodern Culture and more: an Oral History Conversation between John Unsworth and Anne Welsh. Digital Humanities Quarterly [Forthcoming]
Free and open source, Juxta Commons (juxtacommons.org) is an online workspace for comparing multiple witnesses to a single textual work, privately storing collations, and sharing visualizations.

Originally offered as a downloadable Java-based application developed by the Applied Research in 'Patacriticism group at the University of Virginia in 2005, Juxta was taken up by NINES (http://nines.org) and transformed into a web service. This open-source API modularizes the sequence of steps required for digital collation and offers more options for working with XML documents. In addition, the NINES R&D team created the interface for Juxta Commons, a destination site for collation on the web.

Juxta Commons offers three visualizations of the differences between a group of texts: the heat map (an overlay of the texts with differences highlighted by color), the side-by-side view (two texts visualized with lines connecting the sites of difference) and the histogram (a global view of the text illustrating the portions with the most change across versions). It is also compatible with TEI Parallel Segmentation, so that users can upload their encoded files and make use of Juxta’s visualizations, or those with text or XML files can export their collations as a digital critical apparatus.

The interface streamlines the workflow of the original desktop application, and allows the user to edit their sources, filter the XML content included in a given collation, and share their results in a number of different ways. Even though the tool provides sophisticated options for working with texts (XML and TXT), our goal in designing Juxta Commons was to allow teachers, scholars, programmers and any other users curious about variants between documents the ability to create, collate and share their findings with others without requiring any extra software downloads or logins.

In taking Juxta to the web, NINES has transformed the tool into a rhetorical as well as analytical tool, enabling initial discoveries to be interrogated, explored, and ultimately offered as a new kind of evidence for scholarly arguments. Instead of relying upon footnotes or links in a digital edition, a scholar can embed their collations within the argument itself, targeting sites of interest, and encouraging readers to explore the full visualizations on their own.

Even as it presents some exciting opportunities for students of book history and textual criticism, Juxta Commons also broadens the scope of interest in collation to the many different kinds of texts on the web. Speeches and transcriptions, Wikipedia article versions, news releases, Google Books and HATHI Trust texts: all these require the kind of authentication and analysis that Juxta Commons makes possible.

Please visit the site juxtasoftware.org to learn more, and to find sample sets to spark your creativity.
LEXUS (The Language Archive 2013; Ringersma, et al. 2007) is a flexible web-based lexicon tool that was initially (between 2006 and 2010) developed at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen within the program “documentation of endangered languages” (DOBES), funded by the Volkswagen Foundation (cf. Volkswagen Foundation). It is a tool specifically tailored for linguists whose research involves collecting and documenting a broad range of spoken data; data that is mainly in the form of audio and video recordings and often depicts a language that has never been documented before and is in danger of becoming extinct. Projects that are supported within the DOBES domain have specific requirements to be met by a lexicon tool. In particular the lexicon tool has to provide a high degree of flexibility with respect to lexicon structure to allow all possible structures, even those that might not have been seen in the description of other languages. Also, given the audio-visual nature of the data, there needs to be proper facilities for presenting multimedia within the lexicon. In what follows we will give a brief overview of how LEXUS is fine-tuned to meet most of the demands of this domain and how it is a useful tool for documenting endangered languages while at the same time suitable as a lexicographic tool for any other language.

LEXUS is not the only lexicographic tool with endangered languages as its key area of application. The KirrKirr software (Manning et al, 2001), the IDD (Indiana Dictionary Database, cf. De Korne, et al. 2009), the Toolbox, Lexique Pro, WeSay and FLEx (SIL 2013) programs are other examples, among which the SIL tools are the most comparable to Lexus. Toolbox is a tool for data management and analysis which includes lexical data and a parsing and glossing engine. Still, the outdated data model of toolbox seriously impedes its sustainability and interoperability with other tools. Lexique-pro is suitable for visualizing Toolbox/Shoebox data. FLEx on the other hand is a powerful lexicon tool with advanced parsing and analytical functionalities. Using other SIL tools one has sophisticated options to present and publish FLEx data. In terms of features and functionality for lexical databases by themselves, LEXUS stands somewhere in the middle with its set of features that aim at user-friendliness. Crucially, it offers online and shared access to the lexicon. It also allows for interoperability and customizable visualization for styled HTML views of data without requiring any knowledge of markup languages.

LEXUS makes use of schema structure trees for representing lexical entry elements. However, it does not enforce any pre-described schema structure for the lexicon of a given language. Instead, upon creating a new lexicon, LEXUS provides the user with a small collection of schema templates to choose from. These templates can be further developed into more complex schemas to build a particular lexicon. Some of these proposed templates have been created based on more standard frameworks such as ISO LMF (ISO 14613, 2008) and promote the usage of concept names and conventions that are proposed by the ISO data categories in ISOcat (Kemps-Snijders et al, 2009). There are even some templates that have been suggested and fine-tuned based on the experience of field linguists who have been involved in documenting endangered languages.

Having a flexible structure as a template is expected to be a helpful starting point for the researchers who are in the initial stages of the documentation process; especially when it comes to a language that has never been studied before. LEXUS’ attempt to more fully comply with ISO LMF structure demands a structure that offers circularities of a graph type structure in addition to a simple linear tree structure. LEXUS 3 now makes it possible to create cross-references between corresponding elements of two different lexical entries of a lexicon. The template collection together with cross-reference linking makes LEXUS quite flexible in creating a wide range of structures. This combination makes LEXUS a suitable lexicon tool for not only under-described languages but also for the most studied and well-documented languages such as English and German.

Previous versions of LEXUS have laid the groundwork to enable projects within the DOBES program to create and view multimedia lexica with a team. LEXUS 3 stabilizes these core features and offers new functions which broaden the scope to the wider linguistic community. One such example is making use of the templates to form the basis for flexible import and export functionality as fleshed out in the RELISH project (Aristar-Dry et al, 2012). This in turn provides better support for standardized lexicon formats and makes it, for example, possible to export a LEXUS 3 lexicon to the LEGO repository (LinguistList 2013) and to import a LEGO lexicon. This supporting feature is based on the new RELISH-LMF serialization (Windhouwer, et al. 2013; RELISH 2013), which is extensible using RELAX NG (ISO 19757-2, 2008) and ISO/TEI feature structures (ISO 24610-1 2008). LEXUS 3 is also being integrated into linguistic infrastructures like CLARIN (CLARIN 2013), which opens it up for an expanding user base.

Digital lexicography is most helpful when there is proper visualization of the content, and it gets even more worthwhile when it is integrated with multimedia. One of LEXUS’ distinct features are the possibilities it offers for visualization of the lexicon, which is often enriched with multimedia. The audio-video recordings and images are critical aspects of the semantic knowledge. Data of such nature is often the only available resource to study the kind of languages that LEXUS is designed for. The written form, together with grammatical, morphological and phonological descriptions of words, completes the semantic knowledge. A given lexicon tool should facilitate an unified way of presenting the text and multimedia together to be able to put the form and meaning next to each other in one picture. With version 3, LEXUS introduces a single unified environment, where users can describe how their lexica would look like, for e.g. in an HTML view (Moreira, et al. 2013). In doing so, users are not required to have any HTML knowledge. Instead, LEXUS offers a graphical tree tool, which mimics the hierarchical structure that is behind the markup-based technologies such as HTML, and which specifies the layout and style of the lexical views. The same tool can be used to create a formatted PDF view for the full lexicon, which is extractable and available for export and print. Figure 1 shows an example of a lexical entry, with an image and different styles for various elements of the entry. The style and the content of list of entries shown on the left side are customized with the same tool as those of the selected lexical entry shown on the right side.


Figure 1:
an example of customized list view and lexical entry view using the same styling tool.

Finally and possibly most importantly, LEXUS allows shared access to a given lexicon. Owners can easily share their lexica by dragging and dropping other users from a list of all registered LEXUS users to the list of readers/writers of an individual lexicon. When a lexicon is shared, it becomes available in the target user’s workspace. This feature paves the way for better collaboration among researchers and facilitates simultaneous work on a given language even from different places in the world. Being an online resource, any archived lexicon will in future be available as an addressable resource in the CLARIN infrastructure. Having an online basis LEXUS also allows for annotated multimedia sessions from the relevant language archive (e.g. sessions depicting particular cultural uses or social practices) to be linked to any part of the entry. The web-based accessibility of LEXUS was initially designed so as to allow the speech community members to get involved in the lexical documentation process. Such collaboration would allow for the continuous and faster growth of linguistic information. However, this appealing potential turned out to be more challenging in practice, mainly due to unforeseen obstacles within the social dynamics in the community (Cablitz 2011, 240).

In the future, special focus will be on an expansion of LEXUS’ functionality to match the requirements of a lexicon tool for sign language documentation; a domain for which there doesn’t exist a suitable tool or a unified schema of lexicography.

With its online accessibility, together with its archive-linking capacity, its multimedia visualization features and its interoperability capacities, we offer LEXUS as an advanced resource and research tool for the scientific community.

References
Aristar-Dry, H., S. Drude, J. Gippert, I. Nevskaya, and M. Windhouwer (2012). Rendering Endangered Lexicons Interoperable through Standards Harmonization: the RELISH project. In European Language Resources Association (ed), Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, held 23-25 May 2012 in Istanbul, Turkey.
Cablitz, G. (2011). The Making of a multimedia encyclopedic lexicon for and in endangered speech communities. In Haig, G. L. J., N. Nau, S. Schnell, and C. Wegener (eds.), Documenting endangered languages: Achievements and perspectives. Berlin: De Gruyter, 223-261.
CLARIN (2013). Common Language Resource and Technology Infrastructure. http://www.clarin.eu/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
De Korne, H., and the Burt Lake Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians (2009). The Pedagogical Potential of Multimedia Dictionaries — Lessons from a Community Dictionary Project. In Reyhner, J. and Lockard, L.(eds), Indigenous Language Revitalization: Encouragement, Guidance and Lessons Learned. Flaggstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University, 141-153.
DOBES (2013). Documentation of Endangered Languages. http://www.mpi.nl/dobes/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
ISO 14613. (2008). Language resource management — Lexical markup framework (LMF). International Organization for Standardization. http://www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
ISO 19757-2. (2008). Information technology — Document Schema Definition Language (DSDL) — Part 2: Regular-grammar-based validation — RELAX NG, International Organization for Standardization.
ISO 24610-1.(2008). Language resource management — Feature structures — Part 1: Feature structure representation, International Organization for Standardization.
Kemps-Snijders, M., M. A. Windhouwer, P. Wittenburg, and S. E. Wright. (2009). ISOcat: Remodeling Metadata for Language Resources. In Open Forum on Metadata Registries of the International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies (IJMSO), 4:4: 261-276.
LinguistList. (2013). Lexicon Enhancement via the GOLD Ontology. http://lego.linguistlist.org/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
Manning, C. D., K. Jansz, and N. Indurkhya (2001). Kirrkirr: Software for browsing and visual exploration of a structured Warlpiri dictionary. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 16: 123–139.
Moreira, A., M. Windhouwer, A. König, and S. Shayan (2013). LEXUS 3: Uniform Presentation Methodology for Lexica, International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation' (ICLDC), held 28 February-3 March 2013 in Hawaii.
RELISH.(2013). RELISH-LMF. http://tla.mpi.nl/relish/lmf/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
Ringersma, J., and M. Kemps-Snijders (2007). Creating multimedia dictionaries of endangered languages using LEXUS. In Van Hamme, H. and van Son, R. (eds), Proceedings of Interspeech 2007. Baixas, France: ISCA-Int. Speech Communication Assoc, 65-68.
SIL.(2013). http://www.sil.org/resources/software (accessed 14 March 2013).
TLA.(2013). LEXUS — A web based lexicon tool. http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/lexus/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
Volkswagen Foundation. (2013). http://www.volkswagenstiftung.de/ (accessed 14 March 2013).
Windhouwer, M., J.Petro, I. Nevskaya, S. Drude, H. Aristar-Dry, and J. Gippert (2013). Creating a serialization of LMF: the experience of the RELISH project. In G. Francopoulo (ed.), LMF: Lexical Markup Framework, theory and practice. iSTE/Wiley.
This poster addresses some of the practical problems of working with the underlying digital files prepared by the Early English Books Online-Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) using generalized tools developed for used with files following the recommendations of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI). [1] This conversion work, at the University of Oxford, was initially driven by a desire to experiment with the creation of truly usable ePub editions of the Eighteenth Century Collections Online - Text Creation Partnership (ECCO-TCP) corpus released into the public domain in 2010. It was undertaken at the University of Oxford's IT Services independently of the EEBO-TCP team at the Bodleian Library or in Michigan.

The Text Creation Partnership (TCP) digitization programme is a large and complex operation, with very detailed guidance and standards (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/) worked out over the last decade. When the project started the decision was made to use SGML markup as the archival storage format, and a variation on the TEI Guidelines, version P3, for the encoding vocabulary. Unfortunately, SGML-aware software is increasingly hard to come by, and the advantages of doing this kind of work in XML these day are self-evident. The TEI has also developed significantly since TEI P3, with the current TEI P5 releases making many changes and improvements (some of them owing to proposals arising from work rationalizing the TCP markup). Interchange or comparison with other TEI texts, or use of TEI-aware software, suggests that we should have a way to transform the TCP texts into valid TEI P5 XML. This does not mean that once texts are in TEI that they are inherently interoperable, at least not without some effort, but this should be a vastly simpler task with a converted version of the EEBO-TCP corpus because they have all been created by a single project following a single set of encoding guidelines. These TCP guidelines have been developed over the course of the project and while not always perfect have gradually been increasing in standards of consistency.

The transformation of these EEBO-TCP texts to a basic and conventional web site alongside the facsimile page images is generally a straightforward task. However, if we want to take advantage of some of the tools now commonly used to process digital files, particularly those based on the current TEI P5 recommendations, this is much more problematic. At very least this involves transforming the SGML markup to XML, and then to the latest edition of the TEI (TEI P5). This poster will document these stages in conversion with examples of some of the problems encountered in this sort of conversion. This has sometimes necessitated changes to the TEI Guidelines themselves in order to be able to consistently encode textual phenomena that has been identified by the TCP project which cannot adequately be described using the current TEI recommendations. In other cases, decisions have needed to be made in the appropriate way to map some of the encoding variants adopted by EEBO-TCP back onto the existing and TEI P5 markup guidelines.

As well as the process, this poster presents some of the software that we have developed for converting ECCO-TCP and EEBO-TCP files. The exercise of transformation gives an interesting opportunity to examine the nature of the encoding of TCP texts, analyze the range of textual phenomena which are recorded in the corpus, and predict which structures which will be amenable to discovery by future scholars. The approximately 40000-text corpus of TCP also provides a good testbed for the more generalized TEI tools that we have developed. For this poster we describe some of the tools that we've used for the TCP conversions and the results of analysis of the converted TCP texts. As a case study we examine and demonstrate the generation of ebook editions (ePub format) of the ECCO-TCP and EEBO-TCP texts from the converted TEI. The results of such conversions will be discussed with regard for their usefulness for contemporary readers and any failures in representing the intellectual content of the original text.

Notes
1. Significant thanks are owed to Paul Schaffner for his very patient and understanding help in explaining decisions made by the TCP project. We are also grateful to Martin Mueller, Stephen Ramsay and Brian Pytlik Zillig of the Monk and Abbott projects, who wrestled with some of the same dilemmas before and in parallel with us, for discussions of minutiae of the markup. See http://www.tei-c.org/ for more information about the TEI.
“Making the Digital Humanities More Open”, a NEH ODH Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant Project, is creating a free and easy-to-use tool that enables end-users with a variety of disabilities and abilities to access online humanities resources, allowing digital humanities projects to share the products of their text-based projects with this often-neglected audience of readers. During the year previous to DH 2013, our team will design and deploy a WordPress-based accessibility tool that will create braille content for end-users who are blind or low vision. Specifically, we plan to extend the use of Anthologize — a free and open source plug-in for WordPress that currently translates any RSS text into PDF, ePub, HTML, or TEI — to include the conversion of text to braille. As a result, we will not only make it easy for digital research content creators to convert a text into braille, thereby extending humanities content to hundreds of thousands of visually disabled readers, but we will also experiment with making braille available visually through the WordPress interface. This tool will also make it possible to translate the textual content of an Omeka archive into braille provided the site — like most that use Omeka — publishes an RSS feed; we’ll have conducted initial tests of the tool by translating the existing BrailleSC oral histories into braille, and then we will reach out to other Omeka- and WordPress-based humanities computing projects to ask for their cooperation and collaboration in translating their content.

Over the last several decades, scholars have developed standards for how best to create, organize, present, and preserve digital information so that future generations of teachers, students, scholars, and librarians may still use it. What has remained neglected for the most part, however, are the needs of people with disabilities (Abou-Zahra). As a result, many of the otherwise most valuable digital resources are useless for people who are blind or have low vision; the barriers to participation are varied and include such obstacles as the high price of specialized software and hardware, the advanced expertise that such software and hardware often requires, and design choices that can prevent end-users with sensory disabilities from taking full advantage of online resources (Fox).

For public humanities practitioners, including the many local museums, small organizations, and individual scholars, our project provides an entrance into digital humanities communities that might otherwise be obfuscated by the high costs of technology adoption, customization, and deployment. Accessibility is important because disabled users need to be able to participate fully in humanities research and teaching. In providing accessibility tools to disabled communities, we enrich their individual research and learning efforts beyond the formal educational process. As the insights of scholars working in disability studies in the humanities have shown, creating tools for individuals with disabilities improves digital environments for all users (Williams). Our work aims to increase participation by all people in experiencing and creating scholarly digital projects.

The deliverables of the project, all completed by May 2013, will be a public GitHub repository of the code, a documentation guide, a pilot test of using a local LibLouis library with WordPress, a pilot test of using a remote LibLouis library with WordPress and Anthologize, and a white paper explaining what we’ve learned about various options for creating online braille documents. A demo of the technical components of our work will be part of our poster presentation, but we will emphasize the theoretical takeaways of the project, modeling the ways in which digital humanities projects should be designed and implemented with the needs of disabled users in mind. We will discuss what we have learned about accessibility for both digital humanities projects and digital writing in general, and explore both the direct impact of this tool and the significance of opening digital humanities work to a wider audience of participants. Our poster will be of interest to anyone interested in the theory behind how we code and design digital humanities tools and site, designing for universal and accessible use, and accessing, preserving, and working with the cultural histories of people interacting with the braille form of reading and writing.

References
Abou-Zahra, S. (ed). (2011). Evaluating Web Sites for Accessibility: Overview. Web Accessibility Initiative. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/WAI.
Fox, S. Americans Living with Disability and Their Technology Profile. Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project. http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Disability.aspx. (accessed 21 January 2011).
Williams, G. H. (2012). Disability, Design, and the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 202-212.
Preservation of digital humanities (DH) projects is an emerging problem. As languages, frameworks, platforms, libraries, and databases evolve, the effort required to maintain meaningful access to existing projects is a challenge that competes with efforts to produce new work. Creators of DH projects need to be able to continue to iterate and innovate but also demonstrate good stewardship of digital materials.
The field recognizes this problem, from the 2004 Sustaining Digital Scholarship (SDS) final report and continuing through such projects as Memento, SiteStory, and TAPAS, and is actively researching ways to enable sustainable, long-term stewardship for certain project components, but these efforts do not provide a comprehensive platform for the full DH project. All of these efforts consider a project to be a set of static pages or resources that seldom change. None of them would be sufficient for hosting or describing ongoing projects such as World Shakespeare Bibliography Online.
Many new DH projects build their web presence with open source platforms such as Wordpress, Drupal, or Omeka, extending them through customizations. The long-term sustainability of such projects is an issue, involving the cost of hosting as well as migration of customizations as platforms and languages evolve. SalahEldeen and Nelson show evidence that after only a year, an average of eleven percent of cited on-line resources are lost. It is not surprising then that none of the common systems used to build DH projects allows reliable citation since the same platforms used in DH host a share of the resources lost each year. It is surprising that reliable citation is not seen as a greater problem by the scholarly community. Reliable citation is necessary for long-term preservation and therefore expresses a need for a temporal content and data management system that allows for reliable citation of scholarly narratives and resources.
We might base the value of a scholarly work on its place in the larger scholarly conversation. If it is not part of the conversation, then it has little effect on the field and thus has little value. Scholarly work can only be part of the conversation if it can be referenced. This is well developed for traditional publications (e.g., citing a particular edition of a printed work), but remains a problem for web-based scholarly work, not because particular pages can not be addressed, but because the information presented as part of that page is not stable. Without being able to reference the particular version of the page, scholars can not make reliable arguments about the work. What a reader sees might differ from what the author saw when researching and writing the work referencing the web¬based project. These problems increase when referencing a dynamic, algorithmic project.
We see three fundamental requirements for such a system to enable reliable citation of scholarly works and resources: temporal citation, reproducible citation, and sustainable citation. Any platform meeting these requirements should be able to provide level four preservation as described in the SDS final report (11).
A temporal citation of a web-based scholarly work must be able to address the view within the context of the project’s history. Not only must a scholar be able to point a reader to a particular resource in a project, but the scholar must be able to point to a particular resource at a particular date and time.
A reproducible citation of a web¬based scholarly work must show the same content over time. Fetching the cited resource year after year should show no significant changes in the scholarly content of the resource.
A sustainable citation of a web-based scholarly work allows a scholar to cite a project and know that their readers will be able to see the same information they saw by following the citation, for as long as their citation exists. Sustainability is a social issue as much as a technical one. We are not trying to address the social issues involved in sustainability in this poster.
The poster consists of diagrams and text explaining how reliable citation works with respect to resource versioning and project timelines. In addition, a demonstration of a temporal content and data management system hosted athttp://alpha.ookook.net/ providing reliable citation will accompany the poster so that attendees can interact with the system and see the platform affordances in action. The demonstration will also provide an opportunity for attendees to interact with the developer.
Reliable citation does not require any unique data model or software architecture. The poster outlines both the data model and the architecture as they are developed in the demonstration software, principally by segmenting a project’s history into discrete editions that aggregate changes to the project.
Discussion will quickly muddy if we don’t establish some nomenclature for dates and times. A resource date and time is the date and time for which the resource should be rendered. For example, if I specify a resource date and time of noon on January 1st, 2012, then I expect the see a rendering of the resource as it appeared at noon on January 1st, 2012. A request date and time is the date and time at which the request is made, even if the request is for a resource with a resource date and time different than the request date and time.
The data model partitions the project into two classes of objects: editioned objects, such as a project or theme, and versioned objects, such as pages or stylesheets. Editions are published for a span of time during which no public changes are made to the pages. Any changes made to a page require the creation of a new page version which will be aggregated with other versions when a new edition is created and published. Only one project edition is active for a resource date and time. By tracking the time spans for which an edition is active, we can reproduce the project as it existed at a particular date and time.
The demonstration software separates information into two editioned resources: Projects (web sites) and Themes (collections of style information). Editions of projects and themes are independent of each other, with each managing their own history.
References between different editioned resources are done by naming the referenced resource as well as the referenced resource date and time. This allows a project to select a theme in a reproducible fashion. References to a versioned resource within an editioned resource (e.g., a page within a project) may reference the page without referencing a particular version. The appropriate version will be retrieved based on the edition selected by the resource date and time of the request.
This poster will be of interest to anyone wishing to see how a platform supporting reliable citation might be designed.
References
Drupal. http://www.drupal.org/
Memento. http://www.mementoweb.org/
Omeka. http://www.omeka.org/
SalahEldeen, M. Hany, and M. L. Nelson Losing My Revolution: How Many Resources Shared on Social Media Have Been Lost? (2012). arXiv:1209.3026.
Sustaining Digital Scholarship Final Report. (2004) http://www2.iath.virginia.edu/sds/SDS_AR_2003.pdf
SiteStory. http://mementoweb.github.com/SiteStory/
TEI Archiving Publishing and Access Service (TAPAS) Project. http://www.tapasproject.org/
Wordpress. http://www.wordpress.org/
World Shakespeare Bibliography Online. http://www.worldshakesbib.org/
Objective
Digital Humanities (DH) has been exhaustively defined in the literature (e.g., Rockwell, 2002; Bellamy, 2012; Text Analysis Portal for Research, 2011; Fitzpatrick, 2011). Such definitions are sometimes at odds with each other and often represent differences based upon disciplinary concerns. Despite the assertion that DH is a “term of tactical convenience” (Kirschenbaum, as cited in Gold, 2012), the existence of a DH community seems to be well-established; there are a dizzying array of scholars identifying themselves as digital humanists and there are others doing work that some have categorized as DH. However, a thorough investigation and description of the communicative practices of DH is lacking. We know neither the breadth of methods used, the depth to which they are used, nor the purposes to which they are put. To this end, this paper examines informal and formal communication channels used by members of the DH community to diffuse information and build communities. These communications are negotiated at a variety of levels including students and faculty at the individual level, collaborative teams at the group level, and funding agencies and institutions at the societal level (Svensson, 2010). We analyze the data from these communications to determine how these interactions connect DH community members at the individual, group, and institutional levels and across the DH landscape and helps answer the question: How does the socio-technical ecology connect or partition the landscape of the DH community?

Background
In a discussion of how qualitative research may aid bibliometric analyses of the humanities, Sula (2012, para. 18) claims that “a fuller picture of the humanities will help to clarify the ways in which the humanities and sciences differ, beyond citation patterns and authorship practices”, calling for studies that look to both formal scholarly communication and informal communication from sources deriving from mentoring, peer-to-peer, and other relationships (built on interactions such as conference co-attendance, editorship, and contributorship to anthologies). Sula (2012) concludes by suggesting that these proposed studies based on expanded sets of communications look to apply the methods of network analysis and visualization. Our proposed study answers this call both in terms of the data used and the methods of analysis.

Previous studies outside the realm of formal scholarly communication in the DH domain have begun this expansion of information sources, examining DH Twitter communications (Ross, Terras, Warwick, & Welsh, 2011), syllabi (Terras, 2006; Spiro, 2012), journal citation analysis (View DHQ, 2012), and research centers (Zorich, 2008), exposing the diversity of scholarly communication activities in DH; however such studies have been limited for the most part to single channels of communication. In Terras (2011), an infographic quantifying DH produced by the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities displays DH’s burgeoning internationality as well as its institutionalization. Still another dimension of diversity is addressed by McPherson (2008) via Svensson (2010) — namely, a diversity of topicality, defined as foci in digital humanities upon computing, blogging, and multimodality. The current study addresses the demands of these multiple diversities to investigate divisions in the overall DH landscape, while doing so across multiple communication channels in order to discern how different dimensions of diversity and division may or may not overlap.

Methods
This work will apply multi-dimensional network analysis to data from Twitter, LLC and DHQ journals (data taken from the Web of Knowledge database), NEH grants awarded for DH-related projects, the TEI-L and Humanist listservs, DH syllabi, and a variety of other sources (blogs, centers, and projects), employing a cumulative, normalized database composed of data from these sources to paint a wider view of the connections among people, teams, institutions, and communication channels that make up the DH landscape. Our sources will be validated through consultation with prominent members of the DH community. The resulting normalized database will be rendered as a graph connecting URLs, projects, institutions, people, publications, and grants, which will then be partitioned and analyzed using standard community detection algorithms. We will then compare community overlap over different scholarly media to explore how DH practitioners organize themselves into and across communities, specifically looking at whether certain people, technologies, or publications sit at intersection points in the network, holding communities together.

Significance
This research is innovative in its combination of both formal (syllabi, journals, grant proposals, etc.) and informal (Twitter, blogs, listserv, etc.) communication channels allowing for a broader analysis of the communication network of the DH community. Previous work has focused on single source types and has marginalized community members who communicate in other ways. There is a vacuum of formal DH connectivity and this work addresses ways in which this vacuum is being filled and what that implies about the DH community. The DH community forms a network spanning across the world (Kamada, 2010) and it’s important to understand how this network is connected and how it is establishing itself in traditional academic institutions (Adams & Gunn, 2012). From a broader perspective, the methodology introduced here to study DH is generalizable to the analysis of other fields and will hence make a valuable contribution to scholarship.

Because DH community members are situated in various locales across a wide array of institutions, there are few formalized communication channels that span the DH landscape. The lack of formalized communication channels and instructional structure indicates that multi-dimensional methods are needed to fully comprehend this network; this premise informs our selection of formal and informal data sources. It is important to note that the DH community is an area of research made up of theories, methods, and people spanning multiple domains who publish across a variety of disciplines; that said, we will not be providing an exhaustive analysis of the entire landscape of DH. Examination of a large swath of this landscape allows for a wide-ranging analysis of the various channels used to keep those in the DH community informed. It is important for members of the DH community to be made aware of the various channels of communication that are being used to spread information. As Terras (2010) stated in her plenary speech to the DH2010 conference, “digital presence and digital identity is becoming more important to Digital Humanities as a discipline.” This work addresses this statement with empirical and heterogeneous evidence.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Digging into Data initiative, organized by the National Endowment for the Humanities. Specific funding for this DID project comes from the National Science Foundation in the United States (Grant No. 1208804), JISC in the United Kingdom, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.

References
Adams, J. L. & D.B. Gunn (2012). Digital humanities: Where to start. College & Research Libraries News, 73(9): 536-569. http://crln.acrl.org/content/73/9/536.full
Bellamy, C. (2012). The sound of many hands clapping: Teaching the digital humanities through virtual research environments (VREs). Digital Humanities Quarterly, 6(1): http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000119/000119.html
Fitzpatrick, K. (2011). The humanities, done digitally. The Chronicle of Higher Education. http://chronicle.com/article/The-Humanities-Done-Digitally/127382
Gold, M. K. (ed.) (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press.
Juola, P. (2008). Killer applications in digital humanities. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(1): 73-83.
Kamada, H. (2010). Digital humanities: Roles for libraries. College & Research Libraries News, 71(9): 484-485. http://crln.acrl.org/content/71/9/484.full
Kirschenbaum, M. (2010). What is digital humanities and what’s it doing in English departments? ADE Bulletin, 150: 1-6.
Rockwell, G. (2002). Multimedia: Is it a discipline? The liberal and servile arts in humanities computing. Yearbook of the Seminar for Germanic Philology 4. Paderborn: Mentis Verlag. http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg02/rockwell.html
Ross, C., M. Terras, C. Warwick, and A. Welsh (2011). Enabled backchannel: Conference Twitter use by digital humanists. Journal of Documentation. 67(2): 214–237
Rosenbloom, P. S. (2012). Towards a conceptual framework for the digital humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly 6(2). http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000127/000127.html
Schriebman, S. (2012). Digital humanities: Centres and peripheries. Historical Social Research. 37(3): 46-58.
Spiro, L. (2011). Knowing and doing: Understanding the digital humanities curriculum. (Powerpoint slides) http://digitalscholarship.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/spirodheducationpresentation2011-4.pdf
Spiro, L. (2012). Models for supporting digital humanities at liberal arts colleges. (PowerPoint slides) http://digitalscholarship.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/spirodhsupportstructureswooster2.pdf
Sula, C. A. (2012). Visualizing social connections in the humanities: Beyond bibliometrics. Bulletin 38(4): Retrieved from http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/Apr-12/AprMay12_Sula.html
Svensson, P. (2010). The landscape of digital humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly 4(1). http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html
Svensson, P. (2012). Envisioning the digital humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly 6(1). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000112/000112.html
Text Analysis Portal for Research. (2011). How do you define Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities? http://tinyurl.com/9lw97hm (accessed 7 March 2012)
Terras, M. (2010). DH2010 Plenary: Present, not voting: Digital humanities in the panopticon. http://melissaterras.blogspot.com/2010/07/dh2010-plenary-present-not-voting.html (accessed 10 July 2010).
View DHQ (Data Visualization). (2012). 2012 ACH Microgrant: Citation Network Visualization for Digital Humanities Quarterly. http://digitalliterature.net/viewDHQ/
Wagner, C. S. (2008). The topology of science in the twenty-first century. In The New Invisible College Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. 15-32.
Zoirch, D. M. (2008). A survey of digital humanities centers in the United States. Council on Library and Information Research. (CLIR) held 12 May 2007. http://www.uvasci.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/dhc-survey-final-rept-2008_05_22-for-distribution.pdf, accessed on October 1, 2012.
Introduction
This paper considers what can be gained from enhancing TEIencoded texts with RDF and OAC annotations and transforming to other representations, and how to facilitate their production, editing and storage. Our case study is the Sharing Ancient Wisdoms (SAWS) [1] project, which analyses the tradition of wisdom literatures. Scholarly interest is focused on semantic links within and between specific sections of these texts. SAWS produces TEIbased digital editions with semantic annotations in RDF to allow investigation of these links as Linked Data. This approach has the potential to be used widely to link and describe related sections of a variety of texts. Links can be extracted and transformed for manipulation and searching using alternative methods, illustrated by our TEItoRDF XSLT. In producing, storing and annotating such documents, the TEIediting process may present barriers to information enrichment for nontechnical users. The Islandora repository management software assists in creating and managing collections of documents through more intuitive, GUIdriven interactions with Fedora repositories. Within Islandora, the Digital Humanities Solution Pack provides a WYSIWIG online interface to help create, edit and annotate TEI documents, and simplifies the addition of semantic links. We demonstrate how TEI documents can be developed in diverse directions using Linked Data and RDF, and show how production of LinkedDataenhanced TEI documents can be facilitated using the Digital Humanities Solution Pack within Islandora. [2] RDF triples generated through the Islandora interface are exposed as standalone relationships which may be applicable in other contexts.

The Sharing Ancient Wisdoms (SAWS) use case
SAWS [3] [4] [5] is a key use case for this work, requiring an approach encapsulating various types of information including structural markup and semantic annotation. SAWS enables linking and comparisons within and between anthologies, their source texts, and their recipient texts, acting as a framework through which others can link their own materials via the Semantic Web.

SAWS focuses on gnomologia [6] , collections of sayings that transmitted moral or philosophical ideas. [7] These sayings were selected from earlier manuscripts, reorganised or reordered, and often modified or reattributed. The texts crossed linguistic barriers in the mediaeval period, and in later centuries were translated into western European languages. They form a complex network of interrelated texts, which when analysed can reveal much about the dynamics of the cultures that created and used them.

SAWS enables investigation of the relationships between specific sayings, tracing the links through different textual variants and languages. This has been achieved by enhancing our TEI with RDF: each saying can be linked to other relevant sections of text via a subject-predicate-object relationship defined as part of an ontology. The <relation> element, which has recently been updated with new attributes, allows us to enter RDF directly into the TEI document and combine this with information about scholarly responsibility. [8]

Combining TEI and RDF
TEI allows for extremely granular expression within a context; RDF is often meaningful in the absence of context. The strength of RDF lies in its apparent simplicity and its interoperability: its data is discoverable and reusable. Combining subject-predicate-object assertions can convey considerable metadata and tell complex stories. RDF can also be expressed as OAC annotations, which may have any number of targets of differing types. A target may indicate a section which overlaps another (via spatial or indexing coordinates) without breaking XML validation. SAWS implements the CITE/CTS citation scheme, [9] allowing overlapping sections to be described fully and referenced using anchor points in the TEI structure.

SAWS accommodates TEI and RDFcompatible markup within the same document and workflow, using established RDF syntax for marking up information of semantic interest. For SAWS, it is preferable to keep structural, syntactic and semantic markup in the same documents where possible, and to access the semantic information using standard tools such as XSLT. [10] [11] [12]

Previous approaches to the recording of semantic links within TEI documents have had limitations. The EARMARK ontology [13] provides an RDF model for XML information, but only for structure, so structural information is separated from text, and we cannot add semantic information while editing. RDFTEF [14] [15] requires documents to be edited in a separate environment within which standard XML tools cannot be used. [16] Approaches to incorporating RDF within XML documents do not transfer easily to a TEI representation: RDFa encodes RDF directly within specific XML attributes, but key attributes for RDFa [17] are not included in standard TEI schemas. [18]

While it would not technically be difficult to use RDFa by extending the TEI schema, this would introduce extra work which may not be necessary, and it would mean ignoring suitable alternatives proposed and accepted by the TEI community (discussed below) which require no extra schema work; if considered suitable, adopting such an alternative would enable SAWS to contribute towards establishing conventions within the TEI community for working with RDF within TEI.

Recognising the importance of combining RDF and TEI, a TEI Special Interest Group (SIG) in the use of ontologies [19] is developing XSLTs to transform TEI documents into RDF, using the CIDOC-CRM [20] as a basis. [21] [22] [23] [24] The SIG maps only a subset of elements to CIDOC-CRM, focusing on those that represent very particular entities. [25] SAWS would therefore not be able to retrieve many triples of scholarly interest such as manuscript structure and metadata.

To represent a wider range of data, a recent TEI recommendation [26] has been adopted by SAWS, using the <relation> element to represent links from one object [27] (@active) to another (@passive), using link types (@ref) which can incorporate a domain ontology. [28] [29] This increases the expressiveness of the markup without requiring changes within TEI. <relation> is an established element; the more recent addition of @ref has enabled <relation> to be used for RDF triples, along with the assertion of responsibility using @resp.

An XSLT stylesheet for extracting information from TEI to RDF
Semantic information can be accessed in limited ways via a TEI document, but when extracted, it can be placed in a triple store for access, querying and reasoning. [30] New knowledge can be derived by traversing internal links, and following links to related external Linked Data sources. [31]

We offer an XSLT stylesheet that transforms TEI, rerepresenting the structural, semantic and metadata information as RDF/XML triples. [32] Acknowledging practical difficulties concerning the size of the TEI tagset, we take the minimal required version of TEI, TEIBare. This forms a base for future extension, e.g. to TEILite. [33] [34] Using Dublin Core terms [35] such as dct:creator and dct:title, statements in the TEI header are transformed into corresponding RDF triples, and structural ordering of blocks within the TEI document are encoded using dct:isPartOf and dct:hasPart triples. We have extended the XSLT to include transformation of triples encoded through the <relation> element into RDF syntax, and further extensions can be added.

Transformations from TEI to RDF for the SAWS use case
The SAWS TEI version of the Kitāb alḤaraka (“Book of Happiness”), held at Ankara Üniversitesi, contains various metadata in its header. Applying the XSLT generates the following triples:


The SAWS TEI version of the Corpus Parisinum manuscript, held in the Digby collection in Oxford’s Bodleian library, contains a section <div xml:id="Aristippus01"> which is contained by its parent, <div xml:id="Part01">. From this we can derive the following structural triples:


Feedback on the editing and linking process
SAWS scholars studying documents in ‘right-to-left’ (RTL) languages noted the difficulties in working with standard XML editing software, and also requested more intuitive interfaces for editing documents and adding <relation> links.

Islandora is an open source project allowing users to manage a Fedora repository through PHP using a Drupal front end. Fedora repositories are adept at maintaining and versioning metadata accompanying scholarly objects. Islandora provides an intuitive way to use Fedora to create, access and manage document collections, and is currently being used across a varied number of use cases. [38]

Various “solution packs” within Islandora are available for different types of projects. The Digital Humanities Solution Pack is specifically designed for text editing and annotation, based on Shared Canvas and CWRC (for editing TEI and adding links). These tools are used to access, edit, and retrieve information held in repositories, including TEI transcriptions of texts, OCR tools related images, annotations and metadata. This Digital Humanities project within Islandora is sponsored by EMiC to develop a suite of applications for managing and critically analysing Canadian modernism. As one of the authors of this paper is the lead programmer of both these projects, he can incorporate these transformations into the workflow to expose the data publicly. Of particular interest is the ability to extract data from TEI to build and maintain authority lists.

The Islandora Critical Editions module exposes a GUI allowing the addition and viewing of RDF entities and TEI tags. No knowledge of XML is required. Entities tie textual offsets to objects from authority lists, userentered notes, external links, or date ranges through RDF. Image annotations are OAC RDF annotations.


Concluding remarks
We offer a functional XSLT for converting TEI to RDF, incorporating the recent application of <relation> for encoding RDF within TEI and extracting TEI <relation> elements and selected structural markup as RDF files.

Future SAWS/Islandora collaboration will investigate the enhancement of TEIencoded documents and a more user-friendly environment for editing, managing and linking texts. The DH Solution Pack by Islandora is available by request but has not yet been released in beta version. It is intended that SAWS will have implemented and tested a working version of the DH Solution Pack by June 2013. Any DH project that wants to link TEI files with other sources of information will, we argue, benefit from investigating the DH Solution Pack. It has wide implementation possibilities and will be particularly useful for projects using right-to-left languages.

The outcomes of this SAWS/Islandora collaboration should apply across a wide variety of texts. It is hoped that this paper will stimulate further interest in RDF and Linked Data within TEI, particularly amongst Digital Humanists wishing to work with a broader range of Humanities scholars.

Notes
1. http://www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk. Last accessed October 2012.

2. John Unsworth. (2003). Tool-Time, or 'Haven't We Been Here Already?' Ten Years in Humanities Computing. Delivered as part of "Transforming Disciplines: The Humanities and Computer Science," Washington, DC. Available at: http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~unsworth/carnegieninch.03.html (last accessed 20th July 2012).

3. Anna Jordanous, K. Faith Lawrence, Mark Hedges, and Charlotte Tupman. (2012). Exploring manuscripts: sharing ancient wisdoms across the semantic web. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics (WIMS '12), Craiova, Romania.

4. Tupman, Charlotte; Hedges, Mark; Jordanous, Anna; Lawrence, Faith; Roueche, Charlotte; Wakelnig, Elvira; Dunn, Stuart. (2012). Sharing Ancient Wisdoms: developing structures for tracking cultural dynamics by linking moral and philosophical anthologies with their source and recipient texts. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities (DH2012), Hamburg, Germany.

5. Hedges, Mark; Jordanous, Anna; Dunn, Stuart; Roueche, Charlotte; Kuster, Marc W.; Selig, Thomas; Bittorf, Michael; Artes, Waldemar;(2012). "New models for collaborative textual scholarship,", Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems Technologies (DEST), Campione d’Italia, Italy.

6. F. Rodríguez Adrados, (1981). Greek wisdom literature and the Middle Ages: the lost Greek models and their Arabic and Castilian Translations (2001), English translation by Joyce Greer (2009), pp. 9197 on Greek models; D. Gutas, “Classical Arabic Wisdom Literature: Nature and Scope”, Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 101, No. 1, Oriental Wisdom (Jan. Mar., 1981), pp. 4986

7. M. Richard, (1962). “Florilèges grecs”, Dictionnaire de Spiritualité V, cols. 475512

8. A full discussion of our TEI markup and use of the <relation> element can be found here: Tupman, Charlotte; Hedges, Mark; Jordanous, Anna; Lawrence, Faith; Roueche, Charlotte; Wakelnig, Elvira; Dunn, Stuart. Sharing Ancient Wisdoms: developing structures for tracking cultural dynamics by linking moral and philosophical anthologies with their source and recipient texts. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities (DH2012), Hamburg, Germany. 2012.

9. (http://www.homermultitext.org/hmtdoc/cite/)

10. M. O. Jewell. (2010). Semantic Screenplays: Preparing TEI for Linked Data. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities, London, UK.

11. 11 K. F. Lawrence. (2011). Wherefore Art Thou? Crowdsourcing Linked Data from Shakespeare to Dr Who. In Proceedings of Web Science, Koblenz, Germany.

12. Blanke, Tobias; Bodard, Gabriel; Bryant, Michael; Dunn, Stuart; Hedges, Mark; Jackson, Michael; Scott, David; (2012). "Linked data for humanities research — The SPQR experiment," 6th IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems Technologies (DEST), Campione d’Italia, Italy

13. S. Peroni and F. Vitali. (2009). Annotations with EARMARK for arbitrary, overlapping and outof order markup. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM symposium on Document engineering, pages 171180, Munich, Germany.

14. G. Tummarello, C. Morbidoni, and E. Pierazzo. (2005). Toward textual encoding based on RDF. In Proceeding of the 9th International Conference on Electronic Publishing (ELPUB 2005), Kath. Univ. Leuven, June, pages 5763.

15. RDFTEF sourcecode: http://rdftef.sourceforge.net/ Last maintained 2007.

16. P. Portier, N. Chatti, S. Calabretto, E. Egyed-Zsigmond, and J. Pinon. Modeling, encoding and querying multistructured documents. Information Processing & Management. Forthcoming.

17. e.g. @rel, @rev, @href, @resource, @property, @vocab

18. A more detailed discussion of existing methods for encoding RDF within TEI markup can be found in: A. Jordanous, A. Stanley and C. Tupman. Contemporary transformation of ancient documents for recording and retrieving maximum information: when one form of markup is not enough. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2012. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 8 (2012), Montréal, Canada, August 2012.

19. TEIOntologies Special Interest Group http://www.tei-c.org/SIG/Ontologies/

20. ChristianEmil Ore and Øyvind Eide. (2009). TEI and cultural heritage ontologies: Exchange of information? Literary and Linguistic Computing 24(2): 161172

21. http://www.edd.uio.no/artiklar/tekstkoding/tei_crm_mapping.html, http://www.edd.uio.no/tei/teiontsig/test_crm_model.graphml

22. http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/stylesheet/rdf/

23. http://www.teic.org/SIG/Ontologies/guidelines/guidelinesTeiMappableCrm.xml

24. CIDOCCRM only direct represents textual material through one class (E33 Linguistic Object) and its two subclasses (E34 Inscription, E35 Title), but its selection as a base model is partially influenced by research aims of the SIG members in enhancing cultural heritage and museum documentation (http://www.teic.org/SIG/Ontologies/guidelines/guidelinesTeiMappableCrm.xml). Dicussions (see http://wiki.teic.org/index.php/SIG:Ontologies ) about the use of FRBRoo, a bibliographical records model harmonised with CIDOCCRM (http://www.cidoccrm.org/frbr_inro.html) have not been acted upon, to date. Some mappings from TEI to Dublin Core (a model of metadata information: http://www.dublincore.org) are occasionally present in stylesheets created by the SIG (http://www.teic.org/release/xml/tei/stylesheet/rdf/dc.xsl) but this output has not been highlighted, despite Dublin Core also being a realistic option for more detailed mappings of document metadata, especially from the TEI header.

25. http://wiki.teic.org/index.php/SIG:Ontologies

26. Sourceforge.net discussion: Encoding RDF relationships in TEI ID: 3309894, at http://tinyurl.com/lrbz53b

27. The application of <relation> to express RDF triples has been documented by TEI at http://www.teic.org/release/doc/teip5doc/en/html/refrelation.html with supporting examples.

28. The SAWS ontology (an extension of FRBRoo for representing relations of interest for study of wisdom manuscripts) is available at http://purl.org/saws/ontology.

29. S. Dunn, M. Hedges, A. Jordanous, K. F. Lawrence, C. Roueché, C. Tupman, and E. Wakelnig, Sharing Ancient Wisdoms: developing structures for tracking cultural dynamics by linking moral and philosophical anthologies with their source and recipient texts, Digital Humanities 2012, Hamburg, Germany.

30. For the SAWS use case, a SPARQL endpoint to access the RDF data is available ( http://www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk/sparql )

31. To date, SAWS links to various collections of ancient data interlinked through Pelagios (http://pelagios.blogspot.com ) references to the Pleiades historical gazetteer (http://pleiades.stoa.org/ ). We are also in the process of linking to existing relevant documents such as in the Perseus Digital Library (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/ ) and would like to link to information on people mentioned in the texts, such as through the Prosopography of the Byzantine World resource (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/ ). The facility to traverse links between sets of data and discover related information serendipitously is a major benefit of Linked Data for the SAWS project.

32. XSLT available at http://www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk/media/ontology/tei_to_rdf.xsl , with working versions available through https://github.com/ajstanley/TEI_to_RDF.

33. The Dublin Core Metadata Initiative is the main source model for structural and metadata mappings from TEIBare to RDF: http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmiterms/

34. http://www.teic.org/Guidelines/Customization/

35. The namespace ‘dct’ represents http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmiterms/

36. The manuscript ID is in CITE/CTS format for document citation (see http://www.homermultitext.org/hmtdoc/cite/ )

37. The dct:conformsTo relationship requires the object of the triple to be a string, rather than a resource

38. List of current Islandora installations: http://islandora.ca/current_installations
Virginia Tech Libraries recently created a digital research lab and collaboration space, Port: Research Commons. Experimental and crossing library departments, Port offers geospatial, data visualization, text analysis, data management, and graphic design software. Additionally, Port supports digital research for a variety of disciplines at Virginia Tech through one-to-one consultations with library and campus experts, small workshops, and speakers’ series.

Within a semester Port has become a hub of intellectual inquiry spanning from graphic design and statistics to data management. This poster highlights the dynamic digital humanities activities and collaborations happening in the space and the process of launching Port: Research Commons.

The poster will detail early library efforts to support digital research and highlight how earlier initiatives laid the foundation for the successful beginnings of Port. It will outline current programming and projects, focusing on the collaborations vital to Port’s success.

Situating Port within the growing landscape of library research commons, the poster explores the library, specifically research commons, as hub for the myriad of disciplines working on digital research and scholarship.

In addition to serving as a critical space for a broad range of learning and eResearch related needs, Port is a gathering space for faculty, graduate students, and librarians working within digital humanities. Port has become a space used in unique ways to support digital humanities initiatives stemming from the Library’s new Center for Digital Research and Scholarship, while also serving as a space incubating collaborations between other campus groups and library programs, including the library’s new learning initiatives. Library outreach efforts to departments around campus are supported by software and inviting collaboration space.

The Center for Digital Research and Scholarship, in collaboration with Center for Applied Technologies in the Humanities, CATH, is working on moving the TEI project, Lord Byron and His Times, to the library for hosting. Bringing together the college librarian for humanities and digital humanities, library ITS, and Dr. David Radcliff, Port is the meeting space for assessing the current TEI information architecture and moving it to a more scalable architecture. In this poster, we’ll highlight the important use of this space for technology explorations related to CATH’s Lord Bryon project as well as use of the space for other digital humanities projects where the library is involved as collaborator or project lead.

Our poster provides the history, current projects, such as Lord Bryon and His Times and the DH Working Group, and explores library research commons as vital support for digital research on campus.
Given that the nature of the research work involves computers and a variety of skills and expertise, Digital Humanities (DH) researchers are working in teams with Humanists, Computer Scientists, other academics, undergraduate and graduate students, computer programmers and developers, librarians and others within their institutions and beyond (Williford et al., 2012). These projects’ scope and scale also requires larger budgets than is typically associated with Humanities research (Siemens, 2009, Siemens et al., 2011a). As a result, Digital Humanists must developed meta-methodological skills, including teamwork and project management, to support the important and necessary methodological and technological ones in order to achieve project success. Programs such as the University of Victoria’s Digital Humanities Summer Institute’s Large Project Management Workshop (www.dhsi.org), MITH’s Digital Humanities Winter Institute (MITH 2012), University of Virginia’s Praxis Program (Scholars' Lab, 2011) and internships with libraries and DH centres (Conway et al. 2010) are contributing to the formal skill development in these meta-methodological areas while DH teams themselves are reflecting on the importance and nature of collaboration skills developed directly through experience (Liu, et al. 2007; Ruecker, et al. 2007; Ruecker, et al. 2008; Siemens, et al. 2010).
While McCarty (2005) articulates a “intellectual and disciplinary map” for DH (118), which has become an important and agreed upon description of the discipline, no corresponding framework of these necessary meta-methodological skills exists that can guide the preparation of Digital Humanists to be as “comfortable writing code as they are managing teams and budgets” (Scholars' Lab 2011), either within a traditional academic post or an alternative academic one (The Praxis Program at the Scholars' Lab 2012). By drawing upon exemplary DH projects which exhibit individual components of this framework, this paper contributes to larger discussions by suggesting those important meta-methodological skills, knowledge and tasks, whose absences may impact a digital project’s success and long-term sustainability. It ties together the many discussions about undergraduate and graduate DH training and education happening simultaneously across many various forums.
As can be seen in Figure 1, these meta-methodological skills involve more than collaboration and project management skills and include those typically associated with academic entrepreneurship. In their recent report on DH project sustainability, Maron and Loy (2011b) characterize digital resource projects as “small start-up businesses” (32) and use entrepreneurial language, such as empowered leadership, creation of a strong value proposition, cost management, revenue strategies and others to describe the ways in which case study DH projects have managed the impact of the current economic crisis on them. Further, their definition of sustainability, “the ability to generate or gain access to the resources — financial or otherwise — needed to protect and increase the value of the content or service for those who use it” draws further attention to skills, such as management, leadership, budget management, creation of alternative revenue streams, knowledge about users and their needs, and others (Maron, et al. 2011b, 10; Shane 2004). This view has been reinforced in a recent report that reviewed the Digging into Data program. Using the table metaphor, the authors likened project management expertise as the fourth leg, along side data management, domain, and analytical expertise (Williford, et al. 2012). Many digital projects are incorporating aspects of these skills, knowledge and tasks already.
For example, several projects are taking active steps to identify and understand users and their needs and then to ensure that the digital resources address these and allow the user to do more or do it faster or differently than before, while ensuring that knowledge of these resources reach the users (Warwick, et al. 2006; Siemens, et al. 2011b; Ithaka S&R, 2009; Shane 2004; Cohen, et al. 2005). To this end, the LARIAH report (2006) recommends that digital projects consult users widely, often, in a variety of forms and at the different development stages to ensure that a digital resource is in fact used consistently show “a deep understanding and respect for the value their resource contributes to those who use it” (Maron et al., 2009, pg. 7). One way to approach this is have users directly involved in the resource’s development as is the case with TEI-C (nd-b) and Zotero (nd). In other cases, a digital resource can identified new users and extended its services to them, as can be seen with NINES’ move beyond the 19th century to develop a supporting resource for the 18th (18thConnect; Bromley 2011). Alternatively, the digital resource may broaden offerings with new value added services, such as community websites, discussion lists, book and journal distributions and others, in response to users’ requests (Iter 2011). Social media, such as twitter, youtube, and Wikipedia, can also be used to both gather information about users and promote the resource itself. For example, The Modernist Versions project combined an #yearofulysses, webpage, digital version release of Ulysses, and Ulysses Art Competition as a way to generate knowledge (and perhaps even excitement) about the initiative (The Modernist Versions Project). Alternatively, the TEI-C used a viral marketing experiment to understand the size and geographical distribution of its community of practice as it increased awareness of the guidelines (Siemens, et al. 2011b). Digital resource logos embedded in other projects can be important for generating awareness of a resource and its potential uses (TEI-C, nd-a; Zotero). At a basic level, projects must be pro-active in planning effective ways to promote themselves (Guiliano 2012).
As various granting agencies are increasingly prioritizing funding for project development rather than the maintenance and ongoing operations and resource improvements (National Endowment for the Humanities, 2010, Maron et al., 2009), digital projects must develop alternative revenue and funding models that allow them to move from grant funding to “a longer term plan for ongoing growth and development” and to even survive changes in the funding environment (Maron, et al. 2011a, 4; 2011b). These models might include cooperative advertising and click-through ads (Internet Shakespeare Editions, 2010), subscriptions (Iter 2011) and smart phone apps (iHistory Tours 2010b). In order to ensure appropriate levels of resources can be gathered, digital projects must also understand methods to budget the costs need to “cover the costs of the tasks essential to the development, support, maintenance and growth of their projects” (Maron, et al. 2009, 15; Guthrie, et al. 2008; Scholars' Lab, 2011). The latter becomes particularly important since there are expectations that digital resources will continue and be updated and improved with changes in scholarship and technology (Kretzschmar Jr. 2009; Ithaka S&R 2009). Digital projects can then combine both revenue and cost management into long term sustainability plans, often required by funders (National Endowment for the Humanities 2010).
While financial resources are important, long term sustainability and development of digital projects also relies heavily on leadership (Maron, et al. 2011a; Maron, et al. 2009; Shane 2004; Siemens, 2009). These leaders have “a certain passion and tireless attention to setting and achieving goals” (Maron, et al. 2009, 7). This leadership is multifaceted and includes the supervision of human resources, such as paid staff, volunteers and collaborators, and cost and revenue management as well as strategic planning (Ithaka S&R 2009; Shane 2004; National Endowment for the Humanities Office of Digital Humanities 2010). As an example, Transcribe Bentham publishes regular project updates as motivators to its volunteer transcribers (Transcribe Bentham 2011). In addition, these project leaders need to continue to educate colleagues, administration and granting agencies so that these individuals understand the value of DH and the level of support needed for continued growth and development, including financial, in-kind and human resources, recognition and others (Ithaka S&R 2009; Siemens, 2010). The project leader for the 40-year old Thesaurus Linguae Graecae considers “it her job to ‘educate’ current and incoming administrators about her project” (Ithaka S&R 2009, 2). Finally, a strong leader understands when outside expertise and partnerships are necessary to ensure project success (Maron, et al. 2009). The Niagara 1812 iphone app development team included not only writers, researchers, and software developers, but also the nGen-Niagara Interactive media Generator and Brock Business Consulting Group, providing expertise that is not typically available in a History department (iHistory Tours, 2010a).
 
Figure 1:
Meta-methodological Commons1
Given the nature of digital projects, academics, particularly those from the Humanities, need to adopt these important meta-methodological skills and knowledge in addition to content and methodological ones to ensure project success (Ithaka S&R 2009; Cohen, et al. 2009; Cohen, et al. 2005). By outlining the range of meta-methodological skills, this framework has the potential to strengthen the positive work already ongoing to develop these skills and knowledge and to contribute to the discussion about the important skills that Digital Humanists need to create successful, useful and used projects (LeBlanc 2011; Leon 2011; McCarty 2011; Rovira 2011; Spiro 2011; Cohen, et al. 2005; Scholars' Lab 2011). This paper also contributes to the larger discussion of regarding undergraduate and graduate training and education in Humanities, DH, and beyond and provides a context for thinking about the additional skills needed for both faculty and alternative academic positions (Thaller, et al. 2012; Scholarly Communication Institute 2012; The Praxis Program at the Scholars' Lab 2012; Sample 2012; Pannapacker 2012; Williford, et al. 2012). Finally, it is designed to enable those who work in such teams or who work to support these individuals to recognise and develop the necessary meta-methodological skills and knowledge that lead to project success.
References
18thconnect What Is 18thconnect? http://www.18thconnect.org/18th_about/what_is.html (accessed October 13, 2011).
Bromley, A. (2011). Nines Project Enhances Tools for Digital Research in the Humanities. UVa Today.
Cohen, D. J., N. Fraistat, M. G. Kirschenbaum, and T. Scheinfeldt (2009). Tools for Data-Driven Scholarship: Past, Present and Future, Ellicott City, Maryland.
Cohen, D. J., and R. Rosenzweig (2005). Digital History: A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and Presenting the Past on the Web http://www.chnm.gmu.edu/digitalhistory/audience/index.php (accessed October 28, 2011).
Conway, P., N. Fraistat, P. Galloway, K. Kraus, et al. (2010). Digital Humanities Internships: Creating a Model Ischool-Digital Humanities Center Partnership. Digital Humanities 2010. London, UK.
Guiliano, J. (2012). Neh Project Director’s Meeting: Lessons for Promoting Your Project. http://mith.umd.edu/neh-project-directors-meeting-lessons-for-first-time-pis/ (accessed
Guthrie, K., R. Griffiths, and N. Maron (2008). Sustainability and Revenue Models for Online Academic Resources: An Ithaka Report, New York: Ithaka.
Ihistory Tours (2010a). About the Team. http://www.ihistorytours.com/about/ (accessed October 28, 2011).
Ihistory Tours (2010b). Niagara 1812. http://www.ihistorytours.com/ (accessed October 13, 2011).
Internet Shakespeare Editions (2010). Support the Internet Shakespeare Editions.http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Foyer/donate.html (accessed February 2, 2011).
Iter (2011). Iter: Gateway to the Middle Ages & Renaissance. http://www.itergateway.org/ (accessed October 13, 2011).
Ithaka S&R (2009). Sustaining Digital Resources: A Briefing Paper for Leaders of Projects with Scholarly Content.http://sca.jiscinvolve.org/wp/files/2009/10/sca_bp_projects_scholarly_content_sep09_v1-02.pdf (accessed October 12, 2011).
Kretzschmar Jr., W. A. (2009). Large-Scale Humanities Computing Projects: Snakes Eating Tails, or Every End Is a New Beginning? Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3 (2).
Leblanc, M. (2011). Re: [Humanist] 25.382 Intro Topics and Texts.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/humanist/Archives/Current/Humanist.vol25.txt (accessed October 17, 2011).
Leon, S. M. (2011). Project Management for Humanists: Preparing Future Primary Investigators.http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/pieces/project-management-humanists (accessed June 24, 2011).
Liu, Y., and J. Smith (2007). Aligning the Agendas of Humanities and Computer Science Research: A Risk/Reward Analysis. SDH-SEMI 2007. Saskatoon, SK.
Maron, N., and M. Loy (2011a). Funding for Sustainability: How Funders' Practices Influence the Future of Digital Resources, Ithaca, NY: Ithaka S&R.
Maron, N., and M. Loy (2011b). Revenue, Recession, Reliance: Revisiting the Sca/Ithaka S&R Case Studies in Sustainability. Ithaca, NY: Ithaka S& R.
Maron, N., K. K. Smith, and M. Loy (2009). Sustaining Digital Resources: An on-the-Ground View of Projects Today, Ithaca, NY: Ithaka S&R.
Mccarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing, New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
McCarty, W. (2011). [Humanist] 25.370 Intro Topics and Texts.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/humanist/Archives/Current/Humanist.vol25.txt (accessed October 17, 2011).
Mith (2012). Welcome to Dhwi. http://mith.umd.edu/dhwi/ (accessed
National Endowment for the Humanities (2010). Digital Humanities Implementation Grants.http://www.neh.gov/grants/guidelines/digitalhumanitiesimplementation.html (accessed October 12, 2011).
National Endowment for the Humanities Office of Digital Humanities (2010). Summary Findings of Neh Digital Humanities Start-up Grants (2007-2010). Washington, D.C.: National Endowment for the Humanities.
Pannapacker, W. (2012). No Dh, No Interview. http://chronicle.com/article/No-DH-No-Interview/132959/ (accessed
Rovira, J. (2011). Re: [Humanist] 25.370 Intro Topics and Text.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/humanist/Archives/Current/Humanist.vol25.txt (accessed October 17, 2011).
Ruecker, S., and M. Radzikowska (2007). The Iterative Design of a Project Charter for Interdisciplinary Research.DIS 2008. Cape Town, South Africa.
Ruecker, S., M. Radzikowska, and S. Sinclair (2008). Hackfests, Designfests, and Writingfests: The Role of Intense Periods of Face-to-Face Collaboration in International Research Teams. Digital Humanities 2008. Oulu, Finland.
Sample, M. (2012). Digital Humanities at Mla 2013. http://www.samplereality.com/2012/10/17/digital-humanities-at-mla-2013/ (accessed
Scholarly Communication Institute (2012). Landscape of Alternate-Curriculum Graduate Training Programs.https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NVPiPHeOWbvMBBpFiNXRsqsjzVZ2t2E6mtxb-p89iSQ/edit (accessed
Scholars' Lab (2011). The Praxis Program at the Scholars' Lab. http://praxis.scholarslab.org/ (accessed September 12, 2011).
Shane, S. (2004). Academic Entrepreneurship: University Spinoffs and Wealth Creation, Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar.
Siemens, L. (2009). 'It's a Team If You Use "Reply All": An Exploration of Research Teams in Digital Humanities Environments. Literary & Linguistic Computing. 24(2). 225-233.
Siemens, L. (2010). Developing Academic Capacity in Digital Humanities: Thoughts from the Canadian Community.Digital Humanities 2010. London, UK.
Siemens, L., R. Cunningham, W. Duff, and C. Warwick (2011a). A Tale of Two Cities: Implications of the Similarities and Differences in Collaborative Approaches within the Digital Libraries and Digital Humanities Communities Literary & Linguistic Computing, 26(3). 335-348.
Siemens, L., and Inke Research Group (2010). Understanding Long Term Collaboration: Reflections on Year 1 and Before INKE 2010. The Hague, Netherlands.
Siemens, L., R. G. Siemens, and H. Wen (2011b). "The Apex of Hipster Xml Geekdom: Tei-Encoded Dylan and Understanding the Scope of an Evolving Community of Practice. Journal of the TEI Encoding Initiative, 1(1).
Spiro, L. (2011). Knowing and Doing: Understanding the Digital Humanities Curriculum.http://digitalscholarship.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/spirodheducationpresentation2011-4.pdf (accessed October 17, 2011).
Tei-C (nd-a). Tei Badges. http://www.tei-c.org/About/Badges/ (accessed October 14, 2011).
Tei-C (nd-b). Tei Workgroups. http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Workgroups/index.xml (accessed October 14, 2011).
Thaller, M., P. Sahle, F. Clavaud, T. Clement, et al. (2012). Digital Humanities as a University Degree: The Status Quo and Beyond. Digital Humanities 2012. Hamburg, Germany.
The Modernist Versions Project (nd). It’s All About You(Lysses). http://web.uvic.ca/~mvp1922/you/ (accessed
The Praxis Program at the Scholars' Lab (2012). About Praxis. http://praxis.scholarslab.org/about.html (accessed
Transcribe Bentham (2011). Transcribe Bentham. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/ (accessed October 28, 2011).
Warwick, C., M. Terras, P. Hunginton, N. Pappa, et al. (2006). The Lairah Project: Log Analysis of Digital Resources in the Arts and Humanities, Final Report to the Arts and Humanities Research Council, London: University College.
Williford, C., and C. Henry (2012). One Culture: Computationally Intensive Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences: A Report on the Experiences of First Respondents to the Digging into Data Challenge, Council on Library and Information Resources.
Zotero (nd). Get Involved with Zotero. http://www.zotero.org/getinvolved/ (accessed October 14, 2011).
Notes
1. The meta-methodological commons is centred around McCarty’s (2005) articulation of the Digital Humanities Methodological Commons.
Markup Beyond XML
A review of the limitations of XML is not necessary here, as they have been debated as long as XML, and SGML before it, have been applied to data in the humanities. (For example, see Barnard et al. 1988, Huitfeldt 1994, Barnard et al. 1995.) Nor is it necessarily helpful, inasmuch as dwelling on the difficulties (while ignoring the considerable strengths) of XML is not in itself a constructive activity.
However, even when conceptualizing a markup technology that does not face these particular limitations, we can also learn from XML's strengths. In particular, from the concept of generic and “descriptive” markup (Coombs 1987) we have learned that document markup need not be strongly bound to application semantics, but can be declarative and oriented to the information and problem domain (rather than the particular platform and toolset in use), providing many advantages both for modeling and for long-term application independence. Similarly, XML's fairly clean separation of syntax (the text-based format that constitutes XML formally — angle brackets delimiting markup and distinguishing it from text content) from model(most commonly, but not necessarily, the W3C DOM or the related “tree”-shaped model of a document described by the Xpath/XSLT/XQuery family of specifications) has enabled the development of powerful standards-based tools — for both creating and maintaining XML syntax and for processing it — and helped ensure the platform independence and portability of XML technologies.
LMNL, the Layered Markup and Annotation Language, borrows both of these fundamental concepts. LMNL was first described by Jeni Tennison and myself in 2002 (Tennison and Piez 2002). However, its model differs significantly from XML's in two important respects:
I. Where XML stipulates a complete organization of a data set into discrete containers (elements), LMNL simply identifiesranges over a text. Ranges, as sequences of characters (or more formally, of atoms) may overlap with other ranges. In LMNL syntax, this is legal: [poem}Et [red}l'unique [gold}cordeau{red] des [green}trompettes{gold] marines{green]{poem]
 
Figure 1.
As identified (in the syntax) by start-tag/end-tag pairs, any range may overlap with any other. Indeed, any relations between ranges — whether one may or does “contain” or “overlap” another — are not conditioned by the rules of LMNL, but provided, when needed, by an application in process. (So an application may say “colors must not overlap”, or “red must not overlap with gold”, but LMNL itself does not.) Thus LMNL markup is like a set of crayons or markers (for marking a text) as opposed to a pair of scissors (for segmenting it).
II. LMNL ranges may be annotated, in a way similar to attributes assigned to elements in XML, but also with significant differences. While in XML, attributes are provided as name-value pairs, any LMNL annotation may have structure: [poem [author}Guillaume [surn}Apollinaire{surn]{author]}Et l'unique cordeau des trompettes marines{poem] Here, the author annotation has content that is marked up: Guilliaume [surn}Apollinaire{surn]. Moreover, in LMNL, annotations may have annotations (as if XML attributes could have attributes), and indeed annotations may encapsulate, comprehend or subsume entire documents (perhaps stored out of line, elsewhere on the network).
Draft specifications for the LMNL model and proposed syntax are at http://www.lmnl-markup.org.
The examples here use markup syntax, but the LMNL model by definition (and in this respect like the W3C XDM) requires no particular serialization format or no serialization at all. The LMNL model is defined in such a way that it can be represented using any capable syntax, or modeled directly in a database or object structure. XML may also be used, and indeed any of the documented XML-based approaches to representing overlap (including so-called milestone elements, or via segmentation and alignment, or using standoff; see TEI P5, chapter 20) may be mapped, usually straightforwardly, into the LMNL model. A simple transformation can rewrite any XML document as a LMNL document; by supplementing this with specialized logic for recognizing any XML-based conventions for representing overlap and expressing them directly as LMNL ranges, any XML that currently represents overlap can be rewritten automatically into LMNL and processed in a LMNL processor. (It is also possible to go back the other way.)
The LMNL model itself is fairly simple. A LMNL instance is defined as a text layer (a sequence of characters) with a set ofranges over the text. A text layer is a sequence of atoms: an atom can be represented using markup, but more commonly Unicode characters (each of which indicates a distince atom) are used. As noted, ranges have annotations. Annotations can be anything, from nothing at all (both ranges and annotations can be anonymous in LMNL) to just a name, to entire documents: annotations have their own text layers, so they can marked up. Annotations, like ranges, may be annotated. And their annotations may be marked up (its content marked with ranges), its ranges annotated, etc. While annotations belong to ranges (or annotations), and ranges belong to text layers (in the documents or annotations over which they range), ranges have no necessary relations to one another except as specified in the application. This means that ranges may overlap even other ranges assigned the same (type) name — so single defined sets of tags may be used to indicate ranges in the text for indexing or annotation, even if these ranges sometimes (or often) overlap. Ranges may also be filtered or associated in ways that represent multiple concurrent hierarchies (not single hierarchies alone, one at a time).
Luminescent, in combination with XSLT stylesheets developed to transform its (XML-based) output, is currently capable of all the following:
•        1. Automatically check for LMNL syntax well-formedness, outside an application.
•        2. Extract XML dynamically from documents marked with LMNL, given a list of elements to represent as (in) the XML tree.
•        3. Analyze the content for overlapping ranges.
•        4. Generate formatted output.
•        5. Generate alternative renditions and visualizations (e.g. SVG), showing structures of relations (and/or the lack thereof) in the marked up text.
•        6. Filter and transform.
A few demonstrations of LMNL syntax with outputs from the Luminescent toolchain (implemented as a sequence of XSLT transformations in a pipeline as described in Piez 2012) are offered to supplement this presentation. See: http://www.piez.org/wendell/papers/dh2013/lmnl/ index.html
These experiments demonstrate the potential of a model supporting overlap for the study of narrative structure (in which narrative and dialogic structures commonly overlap with the native structures of verse, prose or drama) and for prosody (in which verse structure and sentence structure overlap in interesting ways). In addition, many other uses for LMNL can be readily envisioned, whether for supporting indexing, arbitrary annotation, data retrieval and filtering across arbitrary semantic boundaries, or others.
Finally, it must be noted that in a model that supports both overlapping structures and structured annotations, there are expressive opportunities for the representation of phenomena in literary texts (and any complex text) that are unavailable in XML. Consequently, it is suggestive of other models of text altogether — which can be more easily optimized, in many cases, for certain kinds of processing that are difficult, at best, in XML.
Source code for Luminescent is maintained here on github: https://github.com/wendellpiez/Luminescent
At DH2013 I will be demonstrating the pipeline; describing its design, operations, methods and capabilities; remarking on issues and work remaining to be done; and answering questions.
Some LMNL source code
[octave}[quatrain}[line}[s}[phr}She is as in a field a silken tent{line]
[line}At midday when the sunny summer breeze{line]
[line}Has dried the dew and all its ropes relent,{phr]{line]
[line}[phr}So that in guys it gently sways at ease,{phr]{line]{quatrain]
[quatrain}[line}[phr}And its supporting central cedar pole,{phr]{line]
[line}[phr}That is its pinnacle to heavenward{line]
[line}And signifies the sureness of the soul,{phr]{line]
[line}[phr}Seems to owe naught to any single cord,{phr]{line]{quatrain]{octave]
[sestet}[quatrain}[line}[phr}But strictly held by none,{phr] [phr}is loosely bound{line]
[line}By countless silken ties of love and thought{line]
[line}To every thing on earth the compass round,{phr]{line]
[line}[phr}And only by one's going slightly taut{line]{quatrain]
[couplet}[line}In the capriciousness of summer air{line]
[line}Is of the slightest bondage made aware.{phr]{s]{line]{couplet]{sestet]
In an application (in which this document is parsed and transformed into an SVG representation), a graphical view shows how cleanly nested the sentence/phrase structure is with the verse structure of this sonnet. The only case of overlap is at the end of line 9 (at the start of the sestet), where it enjambs with line 10 after the only mid-line caesura in the poem:
 
Figure 2:
References
Barnard, D., R. Hayter, M. Karababa, G. Logan, and J. McFadden (1988). SGML-Based Markup for Literary Texts: Two Problems and Some Solutions. Computers and the Humanities. 22(4): 265-276.
Barnard, D., L. Burnard, J. P. Gaspart, L. A. Price, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, and G. B. Varile (1995). Hierarchical Encoding of Text: Technical Problems and SGML Solutions. The Text Encoding Initiative: Background and Context. Computers and the Humanities. 29(3). The Text Encoding Initiative: Background and Context. 211-231.
CATMA: Computer Aided Textual Markup and Analysis. http://www.catma.de/.
Coombs, J. H., A. H. Renear, and S. J. DeRose (1987). Markup Systems and The Future of Scholarly Text Processing. Communications of the ACM. 30(11): 933-947
Huitfeldt, C. (1994). Multi-Dimensional Texts in a One-Dimensional Medium. Computers and the Humanities, 28(4-5).Humanities Computing in Norway. 235-241.
Tennison, J., and W. Piez (2002). The Layered Markup and Annotation Language (LMNL). In Extreme Markup Languages 2002.
Piez, W. (2004). Half-steps toward LMNL. In Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages.http://conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2004/Piez01/EML2004Piez01.html.
Piez, W. (2008). LMNL in Miniature: An introduction. Amsterdam Goddag Workshop held December 2008http://piez.org/wendell/LMNL/Amsterdam2008/presentation-slides.html.
Piez, W. (2010). Towards Hermeneutic Markup: an Architectural Outline. Digital Humanities 2010 held July 2010 at King's College. London http://piez.org/wendell/dh2010/index.html.
Piez, W. (2012). “Luminescent: parsing LMNL by XSLT upconversion.” Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2012 (Montréal, Canada), August 2012. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2012. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, 8. doi:10.4242/BalisageVol8.Piez01.
Schmidt, D. (2010). The inadequacy of embedded markup for cultural heritage texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing 25(3): 337-356. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqq007.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (1991). Text in the Electronic Age: Textual Study and Text Encoding, with Examples from Medieval Texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing 6(1).
Text Encoding Initiative (TEI). P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, chapter 20, “Non-hierarchical Structures”. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/NH.html.
Stührenberg, M., and D. Goecke (2008). SGF — An integrated model for multiple annotations and its application in a linguistic domain. Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008 (Montréal, Canada), August 2008. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2008. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, 1. doi: 10.4242/BalisageVol1.Stuehrenberg01.
Stührenberg, M., and D. Jettka (2009). A toolkit for multi-dimensional markup — The development of SGF to XStandoff. Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009 (Montréal, Canada), August 2009. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, 3. doi: 10.4242/BalisageVol3.Stuhrenberg01.
There is increasing work on and interest in social networks in the digital humanities community (Meeks 2011). Analysis is frequently done on digital content—including images (Akdag Salah et al. 2012); email (Hangal et al. 2012); and citation networks (Visconti 2012) — because the data lend themselves to aggregation, conversion, and analysis. Yet despite this flurry of activity, the possibility exists for an exponential jump in network analysis. After all, the holdings and catalogs of galleries, libraries, archives, and museums (GLAMs) include traces of vast paper-based networks, but the data are locked away in forms that don’t easily lend themselves to analysis. What if we could open up that content? In this poster, we will report on an attempt to provide tools for archivists to expose the information embedded in the descriptions of their collections as well as a test case for analyzing that data: an examination of the networks of the Irish poets collectively known as “the Belfast Group.”
Our goal is to develop software tools and design a workflow to enhance TEI and EAD — documents that are already commonly created and maintained by archivists and text centers — without radically increasing the time and effort involved. The software tools (http://github.com/emory-libraries-disc/name-dropper) consist of a plugin for the Oxygen XML editor and command line scripts that will, first, make use of DBPedia Spotlight to identify and annotate recognized names and other resources within the text and, second, connect to linked-data systems (starting with the Virtual International Authority File [VIAF]) to provide authoritative, scholarly identifiers. [1] The scripts will allow technical users to inspect and tune the results or to automatically tag high-certainty resources, and the plugin will provide a user-friendly interface to review and accept suggested names while editing a document. The enhanced documents should provide significant benefits to GLAMs, allowing them to connect disparate types of content (e.g., digitized texts or photographs from an archival collection) and augment with data from other linked data systems. Furthermore, the enhanced documents will make it possible to expose these data in more machine-readable and research accessible formats. Our tools and workflow could be applied to resources held by different archives (for a different approach, see Blanke et al. 2012). What’s more, enhancing these documents helps GLAMs provide a means for researchers to do non-consumptive, social network research on the metadata of collections that might otherwise be closed or problematic in other ways (e.g., restricted correspondence from living authors).
Although our tools are not yet complete, we have already begun preliminary visualization and analysis of network relationships using data that mirrors what we will generate automatically by Summer 2013. The difficulties of defining “the Belfast Group” make for a compelling test case for our attempt to understand networks via data that are newly machine readable. The Group is a contentious network since the label has been variously applied to a weekly writing workshop that ran from 1963-1972, the most famous poets who attended that workshop — including Seamus Heaney, Michael Longley, and Paul Muldoon — or more loosely applied to all of the writers who “put Belfast on the literary map” (Clark 6). The significance of the writing workshop is debated by critics and often rejected by the poets themselves, sometimes vehemently. In contrast to a more formalized group, some scholars identify “an informal community” of poets evidenced by their letters, promotion of each other, and poems dedicated to each other(Drummond 32), connections which are richly documented by archival materials held at Emory University.
Using preliminary data manually generated from a subset of the correspondence EAD, our data suggests a wider set of connections in the Group than traditional scholarly approaches. The latter selectively emphasize the relationships of the most prominent authors and the role of the writing workshop (see fig. 1). Since our data is based on a much larger set of artifacts, as well as their complete metadata, we find that the locus of poetic activity in Belfast is not so oriented around the workshop (see fig. 2). Once we collect the full dataset via our completed tools and workflow, we will compare it with models generated by traditional scholarly methods, to identify significant gaps and discrepancies in either model.
Providing not only this new analysis of the Belfast Group’s network and a report on the development of our tools, our poster presentation at DH 2013 will also include a hands-on demonstration of the software tools and interactive visualizations of network data.
 
Figure 1.
Graph of relationships inferred from Heather Clark’s Ulster Renaissance. Nodes are sized by degree and colored by hub score. The writing workshop is the strongest hub; the trio of large nodes represent Michael Longley, Derek Mahon, and Seamus Heaney.
 
Figure 2.
Relationship graph based on preliminary correspondence data, sized and colored as in figure 1. Based on this data, the writing workshop does not function as a hub at all, and Paul Muldoon becomes the largest node.
References
Akdag Salah, A. A., et al. (2012). Exploring Originality in User-Generated Content with Network and Image Analysis Tools. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 19 July 2012.
Blanke, T., et al. (2012). Information Extraction on Noisy Texts for Historical Research. Digital Humanities 2012.University of Hamburg. 19 July 2012.
Clark, H. (2006). The Ulster Renaissance: Poetry in Belfast, 1962-1972. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drummond, G. (2005). The Difficulty of We: The Epistolary Poems of Michael Longley and Derek Mahon. The Yearbook of English Studies, Irish Writing since 1950 35: 31-42
Hangal, S. (2012). Processing Email Archives in Special Collections. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 20 July 2012.
Litta Modignani Picozzi, E., J.Norrish, and J. M. Monteiro Vieira (2012). Complex entity management through EATS: the case of the Gascon Rolls Project. Digital Humanities 2012. University of Hamburg. 18 July 2012.
Moretti, Franco et al. (2011). Networks, Literature, Culture. Digital Humanities 2011. Stanford University. 21 June 2011.
Meeks, E. (2011). More Networks in the Humanities or Did books have DNA? Digital Humanities Specialist. 6 December 2011. Web. 1 November 2012. https://dhs.stanford.edu/visualization/more-networks/.
Mendes, P. N., et al. (2011). DBpedia Spotlight: Shedding Light on the Web of Documents. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Semantic Systems (I-Semantics). Graz, Austria. 7–9 September 2011. http://www.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/en/institute/pwo/bizer/research/ publications/Mendes-Jakob-GarciaSilva-Bizer-DBpediaSpotlight-ISEM2011.pdf.
Pitti, D., et al. (2011). The Social Networks and ARchival Context Project. Digital Humanities 2011 Stanford University. 22 June 2011.
Pitti, D., et al. SNAC: The Social Networks and Archival Context Project. http://socialarchive.iath.virginia.edu/.(accessed 29 October 2012.)
Visconti, A. View DHQ: Citation Network Visualization for Digital Humanities Quarterly.http://digitalliterature.net/viewDHQ/. (accessed 1 November 2012.)
Notes
1. It is in the use of existing systems (DBpedia) and vocabularies (VIAF) that distinguishes this project from the Entity Authority Tool Set (EATS), which involves setting up and maintaining one’s own authority server. See Litta Modignani Picozzi, Norrish, and Monteiro Vieira (2012).
Introduction
In this paper we present the preliminary results of the work that is being carried out in the framework of the DARIAH-DE [1] project on the topic of interdisciplinary interoperability. DARIAH-DE is the German branch of the EU-funded Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities (DARIAH) project with 17 institutions belonging to a wide range of disciplines as project partners. This fortunate circumstance compelled us to tackle the problem of how to achieve greater interoperability between the digital collections of institutions coming from different disciplines.

We first present our pragmatic approach to interoperability and then discuss some use cases that were developed to complement a set of recommendations on interdisciplinary interoperability. These recommendations are meant, on the one hand, to help Humanities institutions to integrate their collections into the DARIAH data federation and, on the other hand, to let them benefit fully of the services provided by the infrastructure.

The importance of interoperability when building a research infrastructure becomes evident as soon as one considers, for example, even a basic search mechanism over several collections, also known as federated search. Building such a federated search requires institutions to expose, at least, an end-point that can be harvested using a given protocol (Aschenbrenner, et al. 2010). The Collection Interoperability group in Bamboo — an analogous infrastructure project in the United States — was faced with the same problem of making collections interoperable and decided for developing adapters to make collections compliant with the OASIS Content Management Interoperability Services (CMIS) standard. Let us see now what has been DARIAH's approach to interoperability.

Methodology
If interoperability is difficult, true interoperability across disciplines is perhaps even more so as — particularly when talking about semantic interoperability — the narrower is the application domain the higher are the chances of achieving some results. This is the case, for example, when using ontologies for this purpose as shown by (Marshall and Shipman 2003).

Therefore, given the number of domains and disciplines that DARIAH is trying to cater for, the solution of mapping the meaning of content in different collections onto the same ontology or conceptual model appeared soon to be not a viable one. As Bauman makes clear while discussing the topic of interoperability in relation to the goal and mission of TEI (Bauman 2011), the drawback of adhering to standards for the sake of interoperability is the consequent loss in terms of expressiveness.

Instead,DARIAH position on this respect is of allowing for crosswalks between different schemas: a sort of “crosswalk on demand”. Infrastructure users will be able to use the Schema Registry — a tool which is being developed in DARIAH-DE — to create crosswalks between different metadata schemas so that they are made interoperable.

Our main goal was to devise a set of guidelines that is realistically applicable by partner institutions as part of their policies. Therefore, the first preliminary step was to gather and analyze information about the digital collections of the partners with regard to interoperability. We identified the following key aspects to guide our analysis:

1        Identifiers: two aspects of identifiers were considered: on the hand, their persistence over time, which is a crucial aspect for any infrastructure project, and on the other hand the use of common, shared identifiers(e.g. controlled vocabulary URIs)to express references to the same “things”, that is one of the core ideas of Linked Data.
2        APIs and Protocols: APIs and protocols are essential as they allow for workflows of data access and exchange not necessarily dependent on human agents. This idea is implied in the notion of “blind interchange” discussed by Bauman with the only difference being that, in our own vision, as little human intervention as possible should be required.
3        Standards: using the same standard is in some, if not many cases, not enough to achieve real semantic, not only syntactic, interoperability. Therefore we discuss further aspects of standards in relation to interoperability such as multiple serializations of the same scheme, and the problem of adoption and adaption of schemes to different contexts.
4        Licences: licences, and specifically their machine-readability, play — perhaps not surprisingly — a crucial role within an interoperability scenario: not only should a licence be attached to any collection as soon as it is published online, but such licence should also be readable and understandable, for example, to an automated agent harvesting that collection.
These four aspects define the context for the use cases that are described in the next section and also define the core aspects that will be covered in the recommendations.
Use Cases
The main aim of the use cases was to show how basic, minimal standards, such as the OAI-PMH protocol, can be exploited together with already existing and re-usable tools in order to devise more advanced interoperability scenarios. The requirements of such use cases were that they could be implemented in a limited amount of time, without requiring much programming effort and using openly available tools and data coming from partner institutions.

Static OAI-PMH
The first use case focussed on tools that can be used to create an OAI-PMH end-point for collections without having to set up an own repository as this could be a problem particularly for small institutions or poorly funded disciplines. Since OAI-PMH will be part of the recommendations as the minimal protocol for accessing collections, we wanted to explore ways so to overcome the barriers to adopting it. We used as data collection a sample of Kalonymos [2] , a journal published by the Steinheim-Institut (STI), as it does not provide yet such an interface. The Dublin Core metadata for the articles in Kalonymos, stored in a static file, were then served by an OAI-PMH end-point created out of such static file by using the OAI-PMH Static Repository Gateway [3] , a piece of software written in C and openly available.


Fig. 1
Sample output of RDFizer.

OAI to LOD
The OAI-PMH protocol is central also in the second use case, which seeks to show how the metadata served by an OAI-PMH end-point can be harvested and programmatically transformed into an RDF representation, more suitable for example in a Linked Data scenario.

The data we used come from a document repository of the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Science [4] containing Open Access publications by the academy members. We were able to transform into RDF the Dublin Core metadata served via the OAI-PMH interface of the repository by running the open source OAI-PMH RDFizer [5] .

The so obtained output, see fig. 1, could be enriched by adding links for example to the subject headings contained in the Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND) catalogue of the German National Library (DNB) [6] that are already available as RDF. However possible, this enrichment was not implemented for this use case as it required some extra work to overcome the lack of a lookup API or SPARQL end-point on the DNB side.

Marc21 to SKOS/RDF
The third use case consisted in transforming the thesaurus of the German Archeological Institute, currently encoded in Marc21XML and accessible via an OAI-PMH end-point, into an RDF representation of the same data encoded in SKOS — the W3C standard to publish Knowledge Organization Systems in the Semantic Web [7] .

Such transformation was made possible by the Stellar Console, an open source tool developed by Ceri Binding and Doug Tudhope(Keith et al. 2012) in the framework of the AHRC-funded project “Semantic Technologies Enhancing Links and Linked Data for Archaeological Resources”(STELLAR) [8] . The 80,00 Marc21 records of the thesaurus, after being harvested via the OAI-PMH interface, were transformed into an intermediate CSV file, which is in turn fed into the Stellar Console in order to produce a SKOS/RDF output consisting of slightly less than 1 million triples (Romanello 2012).

TEI to CIDOC-CRM
The last use case is another example of extracting more deeply structured semantic information from legacy data, in this case some letters, encoded in TEI, that are part of the project Carl Maria von Weber — Collected Works (WeGA) [9] .

We ran the TEI documents through an XSLT transformation written by Sebastian Rahtz [10] and included as part of OxGarage [11] , an online toolkit for the conversion of TEI-compliant documents into other formats. What this transformation does is to look for elements of specific types and to transform them into equivalent statements expressed by means of the CIDOC-CRM ontology and encoded in RDF/XML.

Straight out of the box, the tool created the corresponding semantic statements for the elements <date>, <persName> and <placeName>. As we observed also for use case 3, it is technically possible to enrich the RDF output by adding the URIs of the person or place that is being referred to in the document. This could be realized by leveraging the links to authority lists that are often included directly into the TEI elements, but the required effort goes beyond the scope of our current work.


Fig. 2
Sample output of OxGarage

Conclusions
We hope that the use cases above have shown how the use of open standards and protocols combined with open source, thus adaptable and reusable, tools can allow us to achieve some greater interoperability in a cost- and time-effective way.

References
Aschenbrenner, A., W. P. Andreas, T. Blanke, and M. W. Küster Towards an Open Repository Environment. Journal of Digital Information 11:1. http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/viewArticle/758. (accessed 22 März 2010).
Bauman, S. (2011). 'Interchange vs. Interoperability'. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies. held 2011 in Montréal, Canada. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol7/html/Bauman01/BalisageVol7-Bauman01.html.
Marshall, C. C., and F. M. Shipman ‘Which Semantic Web?’ In Proceedings of the Fourteenth ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia. held 2003 in Nottingham, UK. Nottingham, UK: ACM, 57–66. http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=900063.
May, K., C. Binding, D. Tudhope, and S. Jeffrey ‘Semantic Technologies Enhancing Links and Linked Data for Archaeological Resources’. In Zhou, M., I. Romanowska, W. Zhongke, X. Pengfei, and P. Verhagen (eds.), CAA Proceedings 2012. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 261–272.http://dare.uva.nl/aup/nl/record/412958.
Romanello, M. Skosifying an Archaeological Thesaurus. Computers for the Classics. http://c4tc.wordpress.com/2012/10/08/skosifying-an-archaeological-thesaurus/. (accessed 8 October 2012).
Notes
1. http://de.dariah.eu/

2. http://sourceforge.net/projects/srepod/

3. http://d-nb.info/025276212

4. http://edoc.bbaw.de/oai2/oai2.php

5. http://simile.mit.edu/repository/RDFizers/oai2rdf/README.txt

6. http://www.dnb.de/EN/Standardisierung/Normdaten/GND/gnd_node

7. http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/

8. http://hypermedia.research.glam.ac.uk/resources/STELLAR-applications/

9. http://www.weber-gesamtausgabe.de/en/

10. http://www.zde.uni-wuerzburg.de/tei_mm_2011/abstracts/abstracts_papers#c249172

11. http://www.tei-c.org/oxgarage/
Renear (2000) introduces the term "transcriptional markup" with a loose sense of pertaining to the reproduction of an existing text, and he does not attempt to define transcription per se. More recently Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen (2008), and Huitfeldt, Marcoux, and Sperberg-McQueen (2009, 2010) have developed a model of transcription (hereafter the HMS model) that they believe "provides a sort of greatest common denominator for markup systems" (2010, 15). But an awkward gap exists between the HMS model's abstract components and the realities of, for example, the TEI markup language and its typical usage. Here I make the case for a kind of markup — perfectly possible though in practice improbable — which bridges that gap. I call it pure transcriptional markup because it refines the sense of Renear's term and grounds it in an actual, formally specified model of transcription. [1]
Transcription and text encoding are clearly connected, especially where markup replaces the work of presentation. [2] However, not everything that typical scholarly encoding practice might assert regarding the logical domain of a pre-existing text can be considered proper to transcription (if "transcription" is to have any specific meaning of its own). In the initial HMS model Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen (2008) avoid the trap of trying to decide what visible details of an exemplar document E should be reproduced in a transcription T by asking instead what overall relation must hold between the two such that document T is a successful transcription of document E (expressed as t_similar). They say that under a set of reading conditions R, marks of E can be seen as a sequence of tokens each instantiating a type. So, abstractly, a document E is a sequence of types, and if under the same set of reading conditions R a document T can be seen as a token sequence whose corresponding type sequence matches E's type sequence, then E and T are t_similar.
The initial HMS model considers a simple sequence of basic, indivisible tokens at grapheme level; later versions (2009, 2010) introduce components that allow the modeling of a complex structure of token groups (and related types). These groups, known as compound tokens, may have as constituents either compound tokens or basic (atomic) tokens. The resulting view of a document comprising a structured, multi-level token sequence immediately suggests similarities with the well-known 'ordered hierarchy of content objects' (OHCO). As noted above, its creators explicitly connect the HMS model to markup, saying some aspects "serve purposes analogous to the generic identifiers and attribute-value pairs of SGML and related markup languages" (2010, 11), that "element types are types", and "element instances are tokens" (2010, 15).
However, some features of common encoding practice are problematic for the model. I briefly outline two of them here; a single example will illustrate both. [3] Suppose an original printed text contains the sentence "Joe stinks!" Describing this sentence in terms of the HMS model we have:
•        11 basic tokens at character level — 'J', 'o', 'e', ' ', 's', 't', 'i', 'n', 'k', 's','!'
•        2 compound tokens at word level — 'Joe' and 'stinks'
•        1 compound token at sentence level — 'Joe stinks!'
A typical TEI encoding of our example might be:
•        <persName>Joe</persName> <emph rend="italics">stinks</emph>!
For the first of the awkward features, recall that for HMS element types are types and element instances are tokens. In markup theory an instance of an element with #PCDATA content would be start tag + content + end tag. So <persName>Joe</persName> is a single element instance and hence a single token. But what type does it instantiate — type 'persName', or type 'Joe'? The problem here is that the single element instance appears to be two tokens, one wrapped inside another. Furthermore, they appear to be operating at different levels: as a specific lexical item, and as a characterization of the lexical item.
The second awkward feature can be seen in <emph rend="italics">stinks</emph>. If element types are types, then we must assume an <emph> element instantiates an 'emphasis' type. Yet there are strong grounds for arguing that emphasis is not a type in the sense used by the model. Wetzel (2009, xii-xiii), citing arguments from Wollheim 1968, believes that while types may well be considered universals, they differ from other universals such as properties. Speaking of words as types she says "they are objects according to the common sense and scientific theories we have about them—values of the first-order variables and referents of singular terms—rather than properties" (124). The emphasis associated with the token "stinks" by the use of italic typeface is at the type level a property associated with the word type 'stinks', not a type itself. Viewing emphasis as a property does accord with the model, which allows for relations between properties and types.
Commonly in encoding schemes there are elements that certainly seem to be associated with types as per the HMS model; but there are also elements we would associate with properties, a point noted by Dubin (2003). The TEI scheme has many type-like elements, but no constraining principle that elements should be restricted to Peirceian types. Rather the 'targets' seem to be textual features — that may or may not be objects, may or may not be visible properties. Markup is directed at organizational features made manifest by the work of presentation (paragraphs, lists, etc.), and non-organizational features that stand out in the regular text flow by virtue of either visible difference or semantic nature.
The challenge, then, is firstly to describe a general view of encoding that does fit the HMS model, and secondly to see if this view helps account for actual encoding in terms of the model. We noted that in the HMS model transcription is defined by the mediation of a type sequence between E and T. The conceptual movement is not
E_token_structure -> T_token_structure
but rather
E_token_structure -> E_type_structure -> T_token_structure.
The middle part of this progression — establishing the type sequence under a reading — may happen in the transcriber's head, but it is the core of the model nevertheless. It is also fundamental to the HMS model that at any one level, a token instantiates a single type. From these givens, some criteria for pure transcriptional encoding emerge.
* if elements are tokens they must instantiate a single type. We therefore move #PCDATA content into attribute values and make all basic-level elements empty. Our example "Joe stinks!" might be represented as follows:
<sentence> <word designation="persName"> <character type="j" form="majuscule"/> <character type="o"/> <character type="e"/> </word> <whitespace/> <word communicative_intent="emphasis"> <character type="s"/> <character type="t"/> <character type="i"/> <character type="n"/> <character type="k"/> <character type="s"/> </word> <punctuation type="exclamation"/> </sentence>
* elements, attributes, and element structure must either supply overtly or make available through logical inference the information necessary for t_similarity; we must therefore view pure transcriptional encoding as applying to E_type_structure rather than to E_token_structure. [4]
* under a reading R, at whatever level a token is considered basic, so must an element at that level be considered basic and therefore atomic; ie. if character level is considered basic, then "e" and "<character type='e'/>" are equally indivisible.
* the status of elements as tokens must be somewhat unusual. Wetzel (2012), following Wollheim (1968), notes that types usually resemble their tokens. Even if we allow for minor differences of form (eg. token "E" instantiating type 'e'), we cannot claim "<character type='e'/>" resembles 'e'. Pure transcriptional markup represents an intermediary stage not normally intended for human consumption — in effect a kind of precipitation out of the E_type_structure into something half-way towards a normal token sequence.
The elements of pure transcriptional markup are analogous to the posited sentences that Zellig Harris in his mathematical theory of grammar says "go beyond what is normally said in English and are characterized as grammatically possible rather than as actual sentences" (1982, p. 15, my emphasis). The crucial point for Harris is that these sentences, while never encountered 'in the wild', can through a series of rule-governed transformations be reduced to — and so account for — the sentence forms we do encounter in everyday English. These operations "have the common property . . . of reducing high-likelihood, low information entries [or words into sentences]" (p. 8). I suggest a similar relation holds with respect to the difference between pure transcriptional markup and everyday markup, and that we could describe a series of non-random transformations that would reduce the high-likelihood, low-information encoding such as we see in the example above to the kind of markup we normally encounter. In digital humanities we commonly 'zero out' most transcriptional encoding leaving a majority of tokens in #PCDATA form - so "<character type='e'/>" becomes just "e". Where we want to retain information about a type property without using a specific form of #PCDATA token, we apply transformations that zero out the nature of the type (ie. we remove the low-information markup that says "stinks" is a word) leaving just the property to be expressed by the markup — hence TEI's <emph>.
References
Caton, Paul (2004). Text Encoding, Theory, and English: A Critical Relation. Ph.D dissertation. Brown University.
Caton, Paul (2009). Lost in Transcription: Types, Tokens, and Modality in Document Representation. In Digital Humanities held June 2009 at College Park, University of Maryland.
Dubin, D. (2003). Object mapping for markup semantics. In Usdin, B. T. (ed). Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages. Montreal, Quebec.
Harris, Z. (1982). A Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles. New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Huifeldt, C., and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2008). What is transcription? Literary and Linguistic Computing. 23 (3). 295-310. doi:10.1093/llc/fqn013
Huitfeldt, C., Y. Marcoux, and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2009). "What is transcription? (Part 2)." In Digital Humanities held June 2009 at College Park, University of Maryland.
Huitfeldt, Claus, Yves Marcoux and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2010). "Extension of the type/token distinction to document structure." In Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010. held August 3-6, 2010 in Montréal, Canada. InProceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies.5. doi:10.4242/BalisageVol5.Huitfeldt01.
Renear, A. (2000). The descriptive/procedural distinction is flawed. Markup Languages 2 (4). 411-420.
Renear, A., and D. Dubin (2003). Towards identity conditions for digital documents. In S. Sutton (ed.) Proceedings of the 2003 Dublin Core Conference. University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Wetzel, L. (2009). Types and Tokens: On Abstract Objects. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Wollheim, R. (1968). Art and Its Objects. New York: Harper and Row.
Notes
1. This paper presents work from a much larger, ongoing project prompted by ideas first presented in Caton 2009. I no longer defend the conclusions of that earlier work, and the current project represents a substantial rethinking and development of my initial ideas.
2. On the work of presentation see Caton 2004. Another part of the larger project from which this work is drawn examines in detail how presentation mediates transcription and encoding.
3. Necessarily, the outline given here is greatly condensed from an extensive discussion in the larger project, with some consequent loss of continuity and supporting evidence from the argument.
4. Note that we would still have to associate a semantics with the pure transcriptional markup if we wanted to establish formal identity between documents in the manner suggested by Renear and Dubin (2003).
In April 2012, the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln launched version 2.0 of Civil War Washington (civilwardc.org). This poster presentation will document the evolution of Civil War Washington(CWW) from version 1.0 to version 2.0, including the technologies used, the changing aims of the project, and the intellectual rationale underlying these decisions. Changes made for version 2.0 included a revamping of the overall design and underlying framework of the site and the development of three major sections, Texts, Data, and Maps. This poster will emphasize the structure and design of the site, as well as the Texts section.
Although the site maintained a similar but updated visual look from version 1.0 to version 2.0, nearly everything on the back end was rewritten, including the HTML and CSS. The technology in the intervening three years had changed so much that we were able to streamline the HTML and employ CSS3 elements for features such as drop shadows and embedded fonts. At the same time, we chose to abandon a CSS framework used in the first version of the site because the framework made it too easy to accidentally break the layout. We are now using heavily commented descriptive classes on HTML elements.
The Texts section of CWW changed significantly from the first version of the site to the second. Most visibly, the amount of available material expanded. Originally, CWW included six HTML pages of cases from the Medical and Surgical History of the War of the Rebellion and a number of issues of a single hospital newspaper. With the relaunch of the site, we added 200 petitions filed in response to the DC Emancipation Act of 1862 (more petitions are added on a regular basis), separated the medical cases into their own files (more than 1,400 and counting), and posted nearly complete runs of three newspapers. Each of these different types of texts required specific encoding choices that were rooted in our scholarly commitments and were necessarily influenced by more pragmatic concerns.
Throughout the history of the project, all documents represented in the Texts section have been encoded in TEI. Working toward version 2.0 of the site, we determined that the initial encoding for the medical cases—in which all cases from a particular volume of the Medical and Surgical History were represented in a single TEI file, transformed to HTML — did not adequately model our understanding of the cases or how we thought they most usefully told the story of Civil War DC. We used XSLT to separate all of the cases into individual files, drawing on existing metadata to generate new TEI headers and keywords for the cases. We also modified our approach to encoding personal, place, and organization names and references to dates. For the petitions, we recognized that the key features to be encoded were form and handwritten text; personal, place, and organizational names; and the structure of the documents. In addition, part of our editorial work was rejoining documents separated into two record groups at the U.S. National Archives. Therefore, our encoding practices needed to be able to accurately describe and reconstruct this quality of the documents.
One goal of the revamped Texts section was to make use of this new deep encoding. For version 2.0 of the site, we made use of the CSS element @font-face, which allowed for considerable typographic choices. This change required further discussion and raised potential problems, however, as many free fonts support only limited character sets, and many of the project documents included Unicode characters such as ligatures. In addition, the encoding and new site infrastructure allowed us to link cases to one another by drawing on the encoded keywords and utilizing SOLR as the search engine. Likewise, we utilized the encoding to visually mark the handwritten text of petitions in the browser. Users have the option to toggle on the highlighting of handwritten text, thereby calling attention to the parts of documents unique across petitions. These examples illustrate just a few the many problems confronted and decisions made during the redesign.
The poster will include examples of the old code and content and the new code and content, noting the differences between them and providing screenshots that demonstrate the evolution of the site. In addition, the poster will document the technical and humanistic reasons for the changes, as part of the larger rationale of Civil War Washington.
A central concern of digital humanities has been how satisfactorily a digital transcription or facsimile represents its object of study. Dino Buzzetti, noting that “every form of text representation entails the implicit or explicit assumption of a model,” has stressed the importance of a clearly defined digital text model to define a threshold for digital representation and critical study. [1] Sarah Werner, in a related turn, has asked what happens if “we move away from reading text to studying the physical characteristics of text, characteristics that can reveal important information about the content of the text and the cultural and historical creation of the artifact.” [2] Werner is particularly concerned with large-scale digitization projects’ inability to represent works with physical features integral to their interpretation. Andrew Jewell and Amanda Gailey, in their introduction to the journal Scholarly Editing, echo her concern with “quick and dirty automated methods” that “digitize vast quantities of texts” but invariably create “shortcomings in metadata, accuracy, representation of compositional and publication complexities, and annotation.” [3] Integral to all of these interventions is a distinction between the material form and linguistic content of print and manuscript material, and a desire to create digital archives that bring audiences closer to both. [4]
Two prominent initiatives, FRBR and TEI, exemplify efforts to address these kinds of concerns. The first has its origins in the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA), which authored a study in 1990 “to delineate in clearly defined terms the functions performed by the bibliographic record with respect to various media, various applications, and various user needs.” [5] The result of this study was a report on Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR), released in 1997 and updated as recently as 2009. The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) evolved from previous efforts to make texts machine readable through standardized markup practices. TEI states as its “chief deliverable” a set of guidelines “to represent all kinds of textual material for online research and teaching.” [6] Particular communities within TEI such as the Manuscript Description Task Force, the Physical Bibliography Work Group, and the Work group on Genetic Editions have established specialized approaches for the markup of particular bibliographical and book historical data. [7] TEI and FRBR share a vested interest in the responsibility of representation. Whereas TEI markup represents a mix of linguistic representation and bibliographic information, FRBR attempts to create hierarchies to differentiate record-level bibliographical attributes. [8]
I am developing a small-scale mark-up and metadata approach that reflects the strengths of TEI and FRBR. [9] The strength of such an approach would be its applicability to items with noteworthy physical and/or bibliographical features. I have created the structure for a relational database that integrates FRBR-inspired metadata with a collection of digital texts, which will eventually include digital facsimiles and transcriptions. My paper will discuss my continuing project for the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Center for Digital Research in the Humanities to provide users with a dynamic, visually-rich, and critically nuanced history of Willa Cather’s Death Comes for the Archbishop (1927) as a set of different material objects in multiple forms, including but not limited to manuscripts, notable editions, notebooks, translations, and interviews. My project has the particular goal of advancing knowledge about the creation, production, distribution, and reception of Death Comes for the Archbishop. It is also a test case in creating digital representations of print culture artifacts, textual variances, and bibliographical relationships among items. Central to my presentation will be a discussion of questions of form and content a project like this one raises:
•        1. What is the minimum baseline for representing the materiality of digital facsimiles and transcriptions? What is the optimum standard?
•        2. How successfully have efforts such as TEI and FRBR offered digital text models for different kinds of materials?
•        3. Do we need a better understanding of potentially significant bibliographical lines of inquiry in order to make these decisions?
•        4. Is materiality essentially a cataloging/records management problem, a mark-up problem, both, or neither?
•        5. To what extent will advances in interoperability improve book historical and digital humanities scholarship?
•        6. What is the optimum relationship between large-scale digitization efforts and small scale projects of scholarly interest?
My presentation will engage with these questions and report on the challenges I have encountered in this process and explain some of the decisions associated with the project. I will compare and contrast my work with some of the approaches to book historical questions taken by significant digital projects, including but not limited to the Modernist Journal Project, Radical Scatters, The Walt Whitman Archive, and The Digital Scriptorium, and Folger Digital Texts. I will also compare my approach to other experiments in FRBRization.
Notes
1. Buzzetti, D., Digital Representation and the Text Model New Literary History. 33 (1). 61. Buzzetti differentiates between the “form of the information’s expression”—the data representation—and the “form of the information’s content”—the “data model” (pp. 65-66). Markup has aspects of both. His central point rests on the conclusion that “the correct use of markup and the adequacy of digital representation presuppose … recourse to a suitable text model” (p. 84).
2. Werner, S. (2012). Where Material Book Culture Meets Digital Humanities. 'Geographies of Desire Conference'. held 27-28 April 2012 at University of Maryland, College Park. http://sarahwerner.net/blog/index.php/2012/04/where-material-book-culture-meets-digital-humanities/
3. Gailey, A. and Jewell, A.(2012). Editors' Introduction to the First Issue of Scholarly Editing: The Annual of the Association for Documentary Editing. 33. http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/essays/essay.v33intro.html
4. McGann, J. J.(1991). The Textual Condition. Princeton: Princeton University Press). 16. In Jerome J. McGann’s terms, interpreting a textual object requires delineation between its linguistic and bibliographical codes.
5. International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. (1997). Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records, Final Report. As amended and corrected through February 2009, p. 2.
6. TEI: Text Encoding Initiative Home Page, http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml
7. Bibliographical data, manuscripts’ physical layout, and text topography fall under what McGann classifies as bibliographical codes.
8. TEI markup describes linguistic text structure and physical object properties with hierarchizing them per se. The proportion of each category differs from case to case, as TEI offers different guidelines for different types of texts, as well as a range of established customizations and recommended practices for establishing new customizations. See http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/Customization/.
9. FRBR is a bibliographical ontology but does not have a prescribed implementation scheme. Recognizing its potential, several projects have attempted to “FRBRize” their catalogues with varying degrees of success. The Resources Description and Access (RDA) standard is influenced by FRBR groupings. Perseus has a “FRBR-inspired” catalogue. Indiana University has piloted "Variations as a Testbed for the FRBR Conceptual Model" as a digital project. For an initial analysis of compatibilities between TEI and FRBR, see Kevin S. Hawkins, FRBR Group 1 Entities and the TEI Guidelines TEI Annual Members Meeting, held 6–8 November 2008, London http://www.ultraslavonic.info/preprints/20081102.pdf
A systematic bibliography is a thematic collection of references to intellectual works, such as the subject guides produced by academic librarians. Free of the constraints of physical libraries, these metadata representations are able to describe and relate any resource in the bibliographic universe at the will of the bibliographer, to fulfill an endless variety of goals and express any number of associated opinions. A consumer health bibliography might provocatively endorse certain elements of alternative medicine; a guide to anthropology might focus on “scientific” methods as opposed to ethnographic ones, as espoused by the department at a particular institution.
Accordingly, the ultimate collection, comments Roger Chartier, is not one of actual books but of citations, a “library without walls,” as in Conrad Gesner’s monumental sixteenth-century compendium (Chartier, 1994). Instead of shelves, Gesner’s intricate classification scheme endows the bibliography’s contents with form and structure. Although expressed in words, a classification of this sort is meant to establish relationships between abstract concepts, for which the identifying terms are merely replaceable labels. A category labeled “Geometry” indicates the idea of geometry, not the word. Current standards, such as the 2005 NISO standard for controlled vocabularies and the 2010 IFLA recommendations for the representing subjects in the library catalog (FRSAD) continue this mode. (Jonathan Furner [2012] contributes a useful critique of the FRSAD approach.) Even library classifications are designed as abstractions, independent of the material world, to be potentially expressed in any shelving configuration; in these classifications, as well, the concept that designates a class is conceived as a purely mental construct. Its proper identification is a notation or code (e.g., GN 790 in the Library of Congress Classification), for which any label is just a form of convenient documentation.
The interpretive nature of these concepts, of their system of relations in a classification scheme, and of their application to any set of physically or virtually collected works, has been widely accepted within information studies (as in, for example, work by Birger Hjorland, Jens-Erik Mai, and Hope Olson). A subject class like GN 790 (Anthropology — Prehistoric archaeology — Megaliths) embodies a remarkable complex of judgments: that the significance of megaliths has to do with anthropology, that a subject is both an identifiable and important characteristic of documents, that the set of documents assigned to GN 790 are equally about “megaliths,” that “aboutness” is a decision easily and concretely made, as only some examples of the complex of appraisals that GN 790 expresses.
The recognition of classification as a mode of interpretation, and an accompanying sense that a citation collection or bibliography is itself a form of creative expression, is similar to the recognition of textual scholars that the application of markup languages such as TEI to digital texts is equally an interpretive act, and that critical editions expressed as digital collections are interpretive efforts. In textual studies, such realizations have led scholars such as Jerome McGann (2001), Johanna Drucker (2006), and Bonnie Mak (2011) to examine both the ways in which the material qualities of printed documents contribute to meaning and the means in which these material effects are transformed through digitization. Mak, for example, traces the semantic contributions of the page in manuscript, print, and digitized versions of a fifteenth-century Latin text. While the page signifies differently across these versions, the page as a material and conceptual construct always “matters.”
In contrast, due to the longstanding emphasis on the nature of classification as abstraction, the contribution of any material component to the meaning of a systematic bibliography would initially seem quite strange. Classifications are most often studied as self-contained systems of their own, and not as applied to works in practice. Even when classifications have been studied as infrastructural components of document collections, the relation between class and text is seen as a dialectic of ideas, and not as a means of constituting a thing with a specific material presence. The translation of paper-based systems to digital environments has only confirmed this rejection of presentation as having anything at all to do with the meaning of either classification schemes or the systematic bibliographies structured by them.
This paper describes how a user study focused on the authoring of personal digital collections, or personal systematic bibliographies, demonstrated a link between the material instantiation of a bibliography and the expressiveness of its structuring. Findings from this study suggest that meaning making for both writers and readers of personal digital bibliographies inheres to some degree within the abilities of the bibliographic environment to enact framing devices that clarify the system of relations between items as the primary focus of the text. Just as Gesner’s famous bibliography achieved notoriety not merely for its comprehensive selection of works but for its instantiation of relations between its contents, so does the expressiveness of personal digital collections result from the interplay between structure and contents, and not merely from the contents alone. In this paper, I contend that the ability to articulate and perceive this set of relations requires a frame with material presence, and not just mental presence.
The study described here is part of a larger project to investigate personal digital collections, or personal systematic bibliographies, as a form of creative expression. On the Web, social media services that enable users to aggregate content through the creation of personal digital collections have proliferated. Through communities such as Pinterest and GoodReads, users select and share resources linked (or cited) from elsewhere. Personal collections are enabled for retail sites, such as Amazon, and content providers, such as YouTube and Spotify. Cultural heritage institutions, including libraries and museums, have also encouraged users to create personal collections, through services like MyMet from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Marty and Kazmer (2011) contend that such personal bibliographies facilitate the co-construction of knowledge between institutions and their user communities. As opposed to Gesner’s opus, however, most Pinterest boards and YouTube playlists are trivial and bland. The project’s initial investigation identified, out of the masses, a few salient examples that did constitute compelling expression and defined characteristics that contributed to these examples’ expressiveness: an original purpose for creating the bibliography, a distinct authorial voice in the presentation of the bibliography, and a sense of emotional intimacy underpinning the bibliography’s contents (Feinberg 2010, 2011).
The second stage of the project began to consider the design of environments to author such collections: could we encourage writers of personal bibliographies to generate more expressive examples? (One can see this as similar to an investigation focused around describing a markup language to more effectively characterize the poetic nature of texts as opposed to their informative nature, a complaint against TEI articulated by Jerome McGann.) A first experiment examined whether exposure to bibliographies that embodied all three of the identified expressive characteristics would affect the process or product of collection design (Feinberg, et al, 2012). Twelve participants created bibliographies by selecting items from specially constructed digital video libraries of source content. After creating one bibliography, participants interacted with expressive examples that were also created from the that video library. Participants then created a second bibliography using a different library of video source material. This simple intervention did not work; participants’ bibliographies and design processes did not change after experiencing the examples. Participants did, however fluently read and describe the distinctive characteristics of the expressive bibliographies. Participants especially noticed the use of descriptive infrastructure (titles, annotations, and so on) in the examples to convey meaning, yet participants made little use of such descriptive elements themselves.
This paper focuses on a second experiment to encourage descriptive infrastructure as a means of facilitating expressiveness in participant bibliographies. We examined whether a structured task that asked participants to separately consider the mechanisms of resource selection, description (titles, labels, annotations), and arrangement (systems of ordering, or relations between items) would enhance expressiveness. To focus on task, and not interface, we switched from a digital environment to a simple physical one, using small libraries of print books as source materials and bulletin boards as document substrates (with preprinted paper slips for citations, along with index cards and Post-its for descriptive elements). To our surprise, while task structure did not influence designs, all the bibliographies were more expressive, compared to the examples, than the previous experiment, and 19 of 24 participants implemented classificatory structure in their work. Many of these structures were reinforced via complex visual arrangements. This paper describes how what initially appeared to be small, inconsequential changes in the material conditions of our experiment resulted in markedly different authoring processes, as well as significantly more complex products. I discuss what the framing devices illuminated via this experiment signify for the development of digital environments to support the authoring of personal expressive bibliographies. As Johanna Drucker (2005) delineates the areas on a page where graphic elements contribute to its meaning, I will describe how material elements of personal digital bibliographies may contribute to (or detract from) their textuality.
References
American National Standards Institute/National Institute of Standards Organization (ANSI/NISO). (2005).Guidelines for the Construction, Format, and Management of Monolingual Controlled Vocabularies. (ANSI/NISO Z39.19 — 2005). http://www.niso.org/apps/group_public/project/details.php?project_id=46 (accessed 3 March 2013).
Chartier, R. (1994) The Order of Books. trans by Cochrane, L. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Drucker, J. (2006). Graphical Readings and the Visual Aesthetics of Textuality, Text. 16. 267–276.
Feinberg, M. (2011a). Expressive Bibliography: Personal Collections in Public Space. Knowledge Organization. 38 (2). 123–134.
Feinberg, M. (2011b). Personal Expressive Bibliography in the Public Space of Cultural Heritage Institutions. Library Trends. 59 (4). 588–606.
Feinberg, M., G. Geisler, E. Whitworth, and E. Clark (2012). Understanding Personal Digital Collections: an Interdisciplinary Exploration. Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS). 200–209.
Furner, J. (2012). FRSAD and the Ontology of Subjects of Works. Cataloging and Classification Quarterly. 50 (5-7). 494–516.
Hjorland, B. (1992). The Concept of “Subject” in Information Science. Journal of Documentation. 48 (2). 172–200.
International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA). Functional Requirements for Subject Authority Data (FRSAD). http://www.ifla.org/files/assets/classification-and-indexing/functional-requirements-for-subject-authority-data/frsad-final-report.pdf (accessed 3 March 2013).
Mai, J.-E. (2011). The Modernity of Classification. Journal of Documentation. 67 (4). 710–730.
Mak, B. (2011). How the page matters. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Marty, P. and M. Kazmer (2011). Introduction to Understanding Users. Library Trends 59 (4). 563–567.
McGann, J. (2001) Radiant Textuality. New York: Palgrave.
Olson, H. (2001). The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs. Signs 26 (3). 639–668.
The University of Canterbury has recently completed development of New Zealand (and Australasia’s) first digital humanities degree program that is also standards-approved on a national level. The process required the development of document sets that were submitted for review by the University of Canterbury Faculty, Academic Advisory Committee, Academic Board, the New Zealand Vice-Chancellor’s Committee on University Academic Programs (CUAP), the New Zealand Vice-Chancellor’s Committee, and the Tertiary Education Commission. Fourteen national and international reviewers, drawn from technology education, information science, computer science, high performance computing and the digital humanities also provided their opinions. The program represents a significant baseline for future digital humanities programs, and the lessons learned during its development are of importance to the broader digital humanities community. Although New Zealand universities operate with basically the same degree of independence in course and program development as universities elsewhere in the world, the requirement to submit all new programs to a national standards body is unusual, if not unique. It may be that the University of Canterbury digital humanities program is the most closely scrutinised example the digital humanities community have seen. This has resulted in a program that is embedded within both the culture of Canterbury, and the national educational policies of NZ. It therefore comes with a higher degree of legitimacy, but also a complex set of stake holders. Moreover, because of the close policy ties between New Zealand and Australia (in education as well as other areas) the program has implications for the Australasian region as a whole.
The implications of national accreditation
Programs and curriculums have pedagogical, methodological, administrative and indeed philosophical issues embedded in them. Their final form reflects not only the ‘state of the art’ in the discipline in question, but the ‘state of the art’ as parsed through academic staff, informed (and uninformed) reviewers, institutional context (and necessity), national educational politics, and the shifting sands of methodological and critical best practice. The forces are such that it is quite possible for the final program of study to be quite different from that originally intended, although for obvious reasons the applicants tend to press on regardless, making modifications where necessary but attempting to safeguard the core pedagogical principles wherever possible. This is a process that many digital humanities teams should be expected to go through in the coming years as more institutions attempt to establish programs; it is a period in time when the digital humanities are going to begin to be influenced not only by internal pressure, but external ones such as the need to conform to national educational standards.
Teaching applied and critical DH in the context of standards-approved accreditation
The program will be delivered to fourth year students undertaking their ‘Honours’ year, a first year of post-graduate study often taken before embarking on more advanced Masters or Ph.D. study. The program was informed by existing programs at Kings College London, University College London, the Open University (Wilks 2011) and the University of California, but the author drew most heavily on theoretical and pedagogical perspectives raised through DH social media and publishing channels over the past five years. A balance has been struck between the ‘hack’ and ‘yak’ positions (Cecire 2011; Ramsay 2011; Koh 2012 and others), in the light of what Alexander Reid has suggested is a need for the field to equip students with a broad “yet undefined digital literacy” (Reid 2012, 354) encompassing both technical and critical skills. The position taken is similar to that espoused by Alan Liu and Andrew Prescott, who argue that tomorrows students and scholars will need to function in a world in which computers are not only ubiquitous, but knowledge itself is a commodity (Liu, 2004; Prescott, 2012). In this sense, the program assumes an ethical imperative to prepare students for work in the post-industrial society that was envisaged by Daniel Bell in 1973, and now forms the basis of both graduate employment structures (Castells and Aoyama, 1994; Aneesh, 2001; Cohen 2010) and tertiary education systems (Donoghue 2008; Brier 2012). In keeping with the core values of the digital humanities community, emphasis has been placed on the development of technical skills that can enhance and extend humanities research activities, and promote awareness of the engineered nature of the digital world.
The program is structured around two core assessment papers: DIGI 401: Introduction to Digital Humanities and DIGI 402: Humanities and New Media. DIGI 480: Research Essay will also be available, to students interested in exploring a topic in detail via a 10,000 word essay. A variety of other (assessment) papers will be rolled out in future years, including Applied Digital Humanities, Digital Literary Studies, and Digital History. Masters and Ph.D. offerings are expected to follow. DIGI 401: Introduction to Digital Humanities is modelled on courses in historical method that are well known to History students. The course provides a broad and challenging overview of the digital humanities, organised into History, Theory and Applied modules. Topics include technological determinism, systems theory, materiality and digital forensics, the nature of digital texts, and data visualization. Introductory lectures on TEI and GIS will prepare students for further study in Digital Literary Studies and Digital History. In order to provide students with generically useful programming knowledge an applied module will concentrate on teaching TEI, GIS, Python and use of APIs. Lecturers will be drawn from University of Canterbury’s Digital Humanities program, Human Interface Technology Laboratory, Computer Science, Information Systems, and Geography. The aim is to offer the students an overview of tools and methods in the digital humanities, and encourage them to think about how the digital world is engineered. DIGI 402: Humanities and New Media is an overt attempt to blend the ‘hack’ and ‘yak’ sides to DH as a practice. Students will be strongly encouraged to take DIGI 401 before taking 402 so they have a solid understanding of the technical side to new media culture and politics. Topics in this course include digital modernity, technocracy, cybernetics, knowledge economies, the Internet, open and closed data, open and closed ecosystems. Focus will be placed on both the engineered nature of the digital world, and the concepts required to critique it. Assessment will include traditional essay-based assessment, blog posts, forum posts, and quizzes designed to ensure students are capable of analysing the digital world as an engineered phenomenon.
Pedagogical focus will be placed on graduate outcomes across the program as a whole, and students will be offered opportunities for student exchanges, internship and work experience opportunities. The aim is for graduates to have a blend of traditional humanities-related skills and applied computing skills. They should have an understanding of the moral and ethical issues surrounding digital technologies, the ability to write clear, concise prose, and an understanding of the technical constraints and opportunities provided by digital technologies. Students should be well suited to work in all new media and digital industries, but especially ones requiring a blend of analytical and technical skills. Graduates would be suitable for work in research, relationship management, business analysis, digital archiving, project management, and the creative and cultural heritage sectors. They should be particularly suited to policy analysis positions related to technology and culture, and any position that requires communication across technical and non-technical audiences. The aim is to create a ‘porous’ educational environment that encourages interaction both inside and outside the university, equipping students with experiences and relationships that can translate into enhanced employment prospects. Inter-disciplinarily will be encouraged, and it is hoped that a DH Commons can be developed to integrate university service support teams in the library and digital media group into the learning experience.
The accreditation process means that, while reflecting the core aims and values of the digital humanities community, the program is also relevant to the pedagogical and strategic aims of the University of Canterbury and the wider New Zealand tertiary education sector. Although challenging, once successfully negotiated the accreditation process effectively embeds the digital humanities into the New Zealand government’s long-term education strategy, providing significant pedagogical sanction, integration with the secondary education sector, and a strong platform for future growth. All New Zealand, and undoubtedly Australian, universities aiming to develop digital humanities programs will need to reference the University of Canterbury as a baseline. The implications of this for the development of the digital humanities across Australasia are significant, and (as long as the Canterbury program enshrines core DH aims and values) largely positive.
This paper will provide an overview of the program from intellectual, pedagogical and strategic perspectives in an attempt to share lessons learned with the international DH community, and redress some of the “emphasis on research over teaching” prevalent in the field (Brier 2012, 391). Specific focus will be placed on the implications of the program for Australia and the development of the digital humanities across Australasia as a whole. All program documentation will be made available online so that conference participants have full-text access to the issues being discussed.
References
Aneesh, A. (2001). Skill Saturation: Rationalization and Post-Industrial Work. Theory and Society 30(3). 363–396.
Bell, D. (1973). The Coming of Post-industrial Society: a Venture in Social Forecasting. New York: Basic Books.

Brier, S. (2012). Where’s the Pedagogy: The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital Humanities. in Gold, M. K. (ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Castells, M., and Y. Aoyama (1994). Paths towards the informational society: Employment structure in G-7 countries, 1920-90. International Labour Review 133(1). 5.
Cecire, N. (2011). When DH Was in Vogue; or, THATCamp Theory. Works Cited, October 19 2011.http://nataliacecire.blogspot.com/2011/10/when-dh-was-in-vogue-or-thatcamp-theory.html.
Cohen, D. (2008). Three Lectures on Post-industrial Society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smart, B.(2010). Post Industrial Society. Sage.
Donoghue, F. (2008). The Last Professors: The Corporate University and the Fate of the Humanities. 1st edn. New York: Fordham University Press.
Kent, E. F. (2012). What Are You Going to Do with a Degree in That? Arguing for the Humanities in an Era of Efficiency. Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 11 (3). (July 1, 2012) 273–284.
Koh, A. (2012). More Hack, Less Yack?: Modularity, Theory and Habitus in the Digital Humanitieshttp://www.adelinekoh.org/blog/2012/05/21/more-hack-less-yack-modularity-theory-and-habitus-in-the-digital-humanities/. (accessed May 21, 2012).
Liu, A. (2004). The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Prescott, A. (2012). An Electric Current of the Imagination: What the Digital Humanities Are and What They Might Become. Journal of Digital Humanities. http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/an-electric-current-of-the-imagination-by-andrew-prescott/. (accesssed June 26, 2012).
Ramsay, S. (2011). On Building. Stephen Ramsay, http://lenz.unl.edu/papers/2011/01/11/on-building.html. (accessed January 11, 2011).
Reid, A. (2012). Graduate Education and the Ethics of the Digital Humanities. Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew Gold. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Thaller, M. (2012). Controversies Around the Digital Humanities: An Agenda. Historical Social Research 37(3). 7–23.
Wilks, L. (2011). Developing the Digital Humanities at the Open University. Open University, June 2011.
This paper reports on work done in the Interactive Inner Asia (IAIA) and Uyghur Light Verbs (UyLVs) projects [1] on two problems arising in the construction of XML query interfaces for linguistically annotated corpora in Central Asian languages: (1) providing both simple search interfaces for casual users and open-ended interfaces for specialists, without security vulnerabilities; and (2) using XQuery for search patterns involving precedence relations (on sequences of siblings) and not only dominance (containment) relations.
XML query interfaces are not the focus of either project, just means to an end. The immediate purpose of both projects is the study of language contact, language areas, and the development of particular linguistic structures; a broader aim is the creation of annotated corpora useful both for comparative and historical linguistic research and for ethnological, folkloric, literary, historical and other study.
1 Current corpus format and user interfaces
Although the goals of the two projects differ, the IAIA and UyLVs projects share a common corpus format. Transcriptions of audiovisual recordings and transliterations of manuscripts are presented in multiple tiers: one tier holds the text in a practical orthography, one in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA); other tiers contain a morphological segmentation, part-of-speech labels, an interlinear gloss, free translations in English, Russian, German, Chinese, and/or Tibetan, and comments (not all tiers are present for all utterances).
In the current version of our XML corpus format (Sperberg-McQueen 2012), a sample Uyghur sentence takes the following form:
 
Future versions will replace the implicit alignment of the SEG, POS, and ILG tiers with an explicit alignment to simplify validation and searching (Dwyer / Sperberg-McQueen 2013).
2 Sample queries
Simple searches (e.g. for light verbs, coded “LV” in the pos tier) are useful for the project. But linguistically motivated queries easily become complex. Like those of many corpora, our POS tier does not encode grammatical relations (including Subject), so to study the co-occurrence of light and main verbs with the subjects of their sentences, we search for types of noun (tagged N, PN, etc.) in certain positions and with certain predicted inflections, in order to identify subjects. In Uyghur, a subject or agent is likely to be the leftmost uninflected noun (e.g. Bu in the sentence “Bu [Alimdin kelgen xet] PN [Npr-ABL Vi-PST.REL N] 'This is the letter from Alim',”) even when the subject is a relative clause (e.g. xet, in: “[Alimdin kelgen xet] uzun iken. [Npr-ABL V-PST.REL N] AJ COP.indir '[The letter from Alim] seems to be long.')”.
To exclude adjuncts (like after lunch in “After lunch, Mahire took a nap”), which are potentially the leftmost N, we search for the leftmost N (excluding the string "NUM"), and excluding N-*, N(*) POST and then sort the results by the surface form of the matrix verb or light verb.
A third query searches for patterns across different languages in the IAIA project. Both SE Monguor and Baonan have calqued a postposed indefinite article nege~nige ‘one’ from Tibetan zeg ‘one’. We've seen instances of postposed yi-ge (yi ‘one’ (Chinese) + ge ‘classifier’ (Chinese) in the same postnominal position, at least in mjg-se. We might hypothesize that that yige is the Mandarin calque equivalent of the Mongolic nege calque, and that both originate in Tibetan zeg. The presence of yige is thus a good indicator of a strong Mandarin influence on the language. To test the hypothesis, we will want to search the segmentation layer for the morphemes yi and -ge in adjacent positions, or alternatively for adjacent pairs of the POS tags NU-CL.
3 Supporting open-ended queries
The queries above illustrate a common pattern. The first is trivial to express in XPath or XQuery:
 
or alternatively
 
Similar queries will be necessary for other POS tags; the query “Find all sentences containing a morpheme tagged X” (for any POS-tag X) will be useful both to the project team and to casual outside users of the collection.
Not all users will know enough XPath to formulate such queries on the fly, however, so it would be helpful to provide query interfaces for this and similar queries which do not require the use of a query language. The usual solution to this common problem is to make some pre-defined searches available in some fill-in-the-blank or point-and-click interface where users can select a pre-defined query and select its parameters from a list. In our full paper, we will show the search forms in use in the IAIA and UyLVs projects for this kind of canned search.
For intensive use of the collection, however, such fixed-parameter searches will not suffice. As the other queries above illustrate, intensive use of any collection will require new ad-hoc searches, not predefined ones, and arbitrary Boolean combinations of basic searches. How can projects support such open-ended queries?
One easy solution is to allow users to formulate queries in the underlying query language (for these projects, XQuery; in the case of relational data, SQL). Feeding raw user data to a live XQuery interpreter, however, represents a sizable security hole and cannot be advised. [2] We discuss other ways to provide open-ended searches:
•        Define an acceptable ('safe') subset of XQuery. If the user input is in that subset, hand it to the XQuery engine for evaluation; otherwise, hand it back to the user for correction (or conclude that the user is an attacker and shut down).
•        The safe subset can be checked by:
o        a full context-free parser for the subset, or
o        regular expressions which capture 'regular approximations' of the subset; we will generate these automatically from the subset definition and execute them with standard regular-expression evaluators.
•        Define a new open-ended query language for advanced users, using an ad-hoc character-based syntax, then write (a) a parser for the language, and (b) a translator into XQuery, for communication with the underlying XQuery engine.
•        Implement some existing query language (or a subset); candidates include Annis 2 (Zeldes 2012); Arras (Smith 1985); CSS Selectors (); the DynaText query language (EBT 1996), (Silicon Graphics 1995); the ‘extended pointer notation’ of TEI P3 and P4 (ACH/ACL/ALLC 1994), (ACH/ACL/ALLC 2001-2004); the query language of Sara / Xaira (Burnard, n.d.); and subsets of XPath 1.0 or 2.0 (W3C 1999), (W3C 2010).
•        Define a query language using an XML syntax, with a user interface defined in XForms to allow the user to formulate complex queries (roughly analogous to the 'query builder' interfaces familiar from search tools like Xaira [Burnard, n.d.] and EXMARaLDA [Schmidt 2010]).
4 Searching on siblings in XQuery
A second class of challenge is illustrated by the third query described above. In building our corpora we have, like many others before us, focused our attention initially on segment-by-segment annotation of the data. We have not built parse trees for our sentences; we are building corpora, not tree banks. Automatic parse-tree generators are widely available for ‘major’ languages, but for the non-standardized, unwritten, and ‘non-major’ languages at the center of our work, such tools will become possible only as a result of projects like ours. In the absence of XML representations of full parse trees, subjects, agents, etc., our users will need to search for grammatical relations by using surrogates. As illustrated above, a search for a subject will need to be reformulated as a search for a particular pattern in the sequence of anotated morphemes in a sentence.
Sequence searching is a particular challenge for linguistic resources. XQuery engines are typically very good at building indexes for Boolean combinations of context-sensitive searches (find X within Y where Z and (W or V) ...), but sequence searches are much trickier to support. By a 'sequence search' we mean (for example) a search for morphemes M1, M2, M3 in that order, with M1 matching this pattern, M2 matching that pattern, and M3 the other pattern, and M1 adjacent to M2 and M3 anywhere later in the same utterance. Some of our work will focus on whether we can construct indexes manually to help make such queries faster or more convenient. Sequence searches are likely to be of interest for corpus linguists in any area, as well as for people interested in tight control of full-text phrase searches.
In the full paper, we survey some existing work in this area (e.g. in the Prague Markup Language [Pajas 2010] and in corpus search tools like EXAKT [Schmidt 2010] or Sara and Xaira [Burnard, n.d.]), and describe our work on supporting sequence pattern searches in XQuery. In so doing, we also illustrate the balance between the inclusion of syntactic annotation and ease of querying.
References
Association for Computers and the Humanities, Association for Computational Linguistics, and Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing. (1994). Extended Pointers, section 14.2 of Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange (TEI P3). Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (eds), Chicago: Oxford: Text Encoding Initiative.http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/tei/tei-idx?type=pointer&value=SAXR
Association for Computers and the Humanities, Association for Computational Linguistics, and Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing. (2001-2004). Extended Pointers’, section 14.2 of Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange (TEI P4), Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (eds.) XML conversion by Bauman, S., L. Burnard, S. DeRose, and S. Rahtz: Text Encoding Initiative. http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P4/doc/html/SA.html#SAXR.
Burnard, L. All about Xaira. Oxford: OUCS, n.d. http://projects.oucs.ox.ac.uk/xaira/
Dwyer, A. M., and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2013). The Uyghur Light Verbs and Interactive Inner Asia Corpora. Lawrence, KS: Interactive Inner Asia Project: Uyghur Light Verbs Project. http://uyghur.ittc.ku.edu/2013/tsd/UyLVs-IAIA-corpora.xml.
EBT (Electronic Book Technologies). (1996). ‘Searching’ In DynaText Publishing: Document Preparation. Providence: EBT.
Pajas, P. (2006-2010). The Prague Markup Language (Version 1.1). Prague: Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University. http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/jazz/PML/doc/.
Schmidt, T. (2010). EXMARaLDA EXAKT Manual Version 1.0. Hamburg. http://www1.uni-hamburg.de/exmaralda/files/EXAKT_Manual.pdf
Silicon Graphics, Inc. (1995). IRIS InSight DynaWeb User's Guide. Silicon Graphics.http://techpubs.sgi.com/library/dynaweb_docs/0620/SGI_EndUser/books/IIDWeb_UG/sgi_html/index.html
Smith, J. B. (1985). Arras User's Manual. TR 85-036. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Department of Computer Science. http://www.cs.unc.edu/techreports/85-036.pdf
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2012). PixCor 1.1 Tag-set documentation for Project-internal corpus vocabulary The Uyghur Light Verbs and Interactive Inner Asia Corpora. Lawrence, KS: Interactive Inner Asia Project: Uyghur Light Verbs Project. http://uyghur.ittc.ku.edu/2012/tsd/pixcor.v1.1.tsd.xml
van der Vlist, E. (2011) XQuery injection: Easy to exploit, easy to prevent in Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2011, 'The Markup Conference' held 2011 at Prague and Montreal. In Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 7 (2011). doi:10.4242/BalisageVol7.Vlist02. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol7/html/Vlist02/BalisageVol7-Vlist02.html; slides from a presentation of an earlier version of the material XML Prague 2011 athttp://archive.xmlprague.cz/2011/presentations/eric-vdv-xquery-injection/xquery-injection.xhtml
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). (1999). XML Path Language (XPath) Version 1.0. In Clark, J. and DeRose, S. (eds), W3C Recommendation 16 World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath.
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). (2010). XML Path Language (XPath) 2.0 2nd edn. In Berglund, A. (ed), W3C Recommendation. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath20.
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Selectors Level 3, In ed. Çelik, T. et al. W3C Recommendation. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-selectors/, (accessed 29 September 2011).
Zeldes, A. ANNIS: User Guide - Version 2.2.1. Potsdam: SFB 632 Information Structure / D1 Linguistic Database. Potsdam: Humboldt Universität zu Berlin und Universität Potsdamhttps://launchpadlibrarian.net/102488706/ANNIS_User_Guide_2.2.1.pdf (accessed 18 April 2012).
Notes
1. The IAIA and UyLVs projects are supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF-BCS 1065524, 1053152). Much of the data for IAIA stems from earlier work sponsored by a Fulbright-Hays and a Volkswagen Foundation DOBES grant.
2. The problem is that SQL injection is widely known as an attack vector for machines on the open net; XQuery injection is also possible and has been documented (van der Vlist 2011).
Introduction
TEI Boilerplate (http://teiboilerplate.org/) is a lightweight, HTML5 compliant framework for publishing TEI documents. TEI Boilerplate (TEIBP) is designed to bridge the gap between the browser-friendly features of HTML and the semantic richness of native TEI documents (Walsh, Simpson, & Moaddeli, 2012).
Although TEI provides mechanisms for describing the design, presentational, and material features of the source document, projects and individual scholars that use TEI are responsible for developing their own methods, or implementing existing solutions, for converting the TEI to a presentation-ready state for the web or print (Rahtz, 2006). Two potential paths to reach this goal are:
•        1. Transforming TEI to HTML using XSLT and styling the HTML output with CSS.
•        2. Styling the TEI directly with CSS by referencing a CSS stylesheet from within the TEI document.
Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages. Although HTML is the language of the web and is well supported by browsers, HTML’s descriptive capabilities are less expressive than TEI’s. When TEI is transformed to HTML, much of the richness of the TEI is lost in the resulting HTML. However, the browser understands HTML very well and knows, for example, when to initiate retrieval of a document based on certain user events, such as clicking a link. The second option, CSS-styled TEI, delivers the TEI document directly] to the browser. However, while the browser may apply CSS to format and style a TEI document, the browser does not understand the semantics of TEI. For instance, the browser does not understand that TEI’s <ptr> and <ref> elements are linking elements.
TEIBP bridges the gap between these two approaches by making use of the built-in XSLT (1.0) capabilities of browsers to embed the TEI XML, with minimal modifications, within an HTML5 shell document. Features expected of web documents, such as clickable links and display of linked images, are enabled through selective transformation of a very small number of TEI elements and attributes. Both the HTML5 shell and the embedded TEI are styled using CSS.
TEIBP gives HTML/CSS/JavaScript documents direct access to original TEI content, and it gives TEI documents direct access to the substantial capabilities of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript — the dominant document format, styling language, and (client-side) programming language of the web. TEIBP aims for simplicity and elegance, but it also facilitates complexity and innovation by exposing TEI content directly to the capabilities of JavaScript, the many powerful JavaScript frameworks, and CSS.
Theoretical Motivations
The power of TEI lies in the richness of its vocabulary. But much of that richness and expressiveness is lost in the translation to HTML. TEIBP largely preserves the integrity of the TEI document. Because the TEI document is delivered directly to the browser, that source TEI document — unchanged by any XSLT transformation — can be easily accessed and saved.
Scholars labor over the intricate encoding of TEI documents, encoding that may represent sophisticated readings and analysis. But with the typical XSLT publishing solution, much or all of the richness of the TEI content is lost. Furthermore, the presentation of the document is targeted at the HTML surrogate rather than the encoded TEI document. This results in a conceptual disconnect between the design of the document and the original TEI encoding. By exposing the TEI itself to the browser, one may format the TEI directly, applying intentional design to a sophisticated document model.
TEIBP respects the integrity of the TEI document, and keeps the TEI document central throughout the publication process. TEIBP takes advantage of the separation of form and content inherent in XML, XSLT, CSS frameworks. However, like Liu (2004), Galey (2010), and others, the authors of TEIBP view that separation with suspicion. TEIBP attempts to weaken that separation of form and content in the typical TEI-to-web design and delivery model by largely removing the HTML layer, exposing the TEI-encoded text directly to the browser, and providing scholars with more immediate access to the readings, models, and analysis embedded in the TEIencoded document.
Our proposed poster will provide an overview of the TEIBP system and explore in more detail the theoretical motivations behind the project.
References
Galey, A. (2010). The human presence in digital artifacts. In W. McCarty (ed), Text and genre in reconstruction: effects of digitization on ideas, behaviours, products, and institutions 93–117. Oxford: Open Book.
Liu, A. (2004). Transcendental data: Towards a cultural history and aesthetics of the new encoded discourse. Critical Inquiry, 31: 49–84.
Omeka (2012). Omeka: Serious web publishing.http://omeka.org/about/.
Rahtz, S. (2006). Storage, retrieval, and rendering. In Burnard, L., K. O’Brien O’Keeffe, and J. Unsworth (eds.),Electronic textual editing 310–333. New York, NY: Modern Language Association of America.
Walsh, J., G. Simpson, and S. Moaddeli (2012). TEI Boilerplate. http://teiboilerplate.org.
This study combines elements of literary theory, citation theory, and techniques of citation analysis to study paratextual elements in the work of Victorian poets Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837–1909), Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828–1882), and Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809–1892). The study will focus on Swinburne, who provides the largest and richest collection of paratextual elements, but will also look at Rossetti and Tennyson for the sake of comparison. In his Foreword to the English translation of Gérard Gennette’s Seuils (translated as Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation), Richard Macksey defines paratexts as
those liminal devices and conventions, both within the book (peritext) and outside it (epitext), that mediate the book to the reader: titles and subtitles, pseudonyms, forewords, dedications, epigraphs, prefaces, intertitles, notes, epilogues, and afterwords…but also the elements in the public and private history of the book, its “epitext,” that are analyzed in the latter part of this volume: “public epitexts” (from the author or publisher) as well as “private epitexts” (authorial correspondence, oral confidences, diaries, and pre-texts). (Macksey xviii)
In humanities documents, particularly primary source materials, analysis of paratextual elements may provide information about influence, impact, and networks shared by authors, artists, and their works. These networks of intertextual and interpersonal relationships contribute to the production of meaning in the text. Our study will focus on peritexts, that is, the paratexts within the document. We are further limiting our focus to paratexts that in some way or another resemble a citation, i.e., those paratexts that explicitly reference one or more bibliographic elements, such as author, title, date, or a quotation that identifies itself as such (e.g, by the use of quotation marks). We look at a number of specific textual elements, including titles, subtitles, epigraphs, dedications, and notes. Titles may reference specific authors (e.g., Swinburne’s “Song for the Centenary of Walter Savage Landor” and “From Victor Hugo”) and/or works (e.g., Swinburne’s “Grand Chorus of Birds from Aristophanes”). Epigraphs include quoted text, often accompanied by more formal citations indicating author, title, and even line numbers. See the example below, one of the epigraphs to Swinburne’s lyrical drama Erechtheus (1876):
ΑΤ. τίς δὲ ποιμάνωρ ἔπεστι κ πιδεσπόζει στρατοῦϗ;
ΧΟ. οὔτινος δοῦλοι κέκληνται φωτὸς οὐδ’ ὑπηκόοι.
Æsch. Pers. 241 - 2.
By focusing our attention on these “citation-like” paratexts, we are able to apply the techniques of citation analysis to probe these poets’ paratextual gestures. Our analysis is complicated and enriched by the presence of “invented” paratextual citations, such as the fictitious French epigraph to Swinburne’s “Laus Veneris” (1866).
Dedications provide an interesting case in that they typically refer to a person rather than a specific work. But the overwhelming number of Swinburne’s dedication were to men and women of letters and visual artists: Walter Savage Landor, Victor Hugo, Richard Francis Burton, Edward John Trelawny, William Bell Scott, Charles Lamb, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Michael Rossetti, Christina Rossetti, Edward Burne-Jones, and William Morris. The target of the dedication, posited as a bibliographic entity in a bibliographic and literary context, becomes a sort of document, like Suzanne Briet’s antelope, and represents not just the individual but that individual’s body of work.
Swinburne’s notes, like the epigraphs, often include more formal citations. In fact, a number of long odes —to favorite authors Walter Savage Landor and Victor Hugo — may be characterized as bibliographies in verse, accompanied by notes containing formal citations to the works described in the verse. The “Birthday Ode” (1880) to Victor Hugo contains thirty-eight notes, each with a citation to one or more works by Hugo. Harold Nicolson called this poem “a complete rhymed bibliography of the works of Victor Hugo.”
Swinburne is certainly not unique among nineteenth-century poets in buttressing his poems with a rich paratextual framework. Other noteworthy examples include the Preface to Lyrical Ballads, Coleridge’s introductory note to Kubla Kahnand his glosses to The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, Byron’s notes to Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, and Shelley’s notes toQueen Mab. But Swinburne was incredibly widely read, a scholarly poet, and an enthusiastic bibliophile. The paratextual network that surrounds Swinburne’s work is particularly large, diverse, and complex, and in the context of information studies his work provides fertile ground for this sort of bibliometric analysis. Swinburne’s poems and paratexts reference a large number of explicitly identified works by other writers and artists. The six volumes of Swinburne’s collected Poems contain over four hundred poems, large and small. Within these roughly four hundred poems, we have identified over four hundred and fifty paratextual citations, references embedded within Swinburne’s titles, epigraphs, notes, and so on. The works cited by Swinburne cover the range of Western culture from the Old and New Testaments of the Bible to classical antiquity through the middle ages, Renaissance, and Enlightenment to contemporary 19th-century works by figures such as Landor, Hugo, Tennyson, Gautier, Robert Browning, Whitman, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Besides English, languages represented by Swinburne’s paratexts include French, Greek, Italian, and Latin. His paratexts also reference visual art (Rossetti, Whister) and music (Wagner).
The Swinburne documents analyzed in this study have been digitized and are available in TEI/XMLencoded formats through the Algernon Charles Swinburne Project http://www.swinburneproject.org/. The TEI provides markup elements that map fairly neatly to the types of paratexts and bibliographic entities under consideration here:
•        <epigraph>
•        <title>
•        <author>
•        <date>
•        <quote>
•        <div type='dedication'>
•        <ab type='dedication'>
Since these elements were already encoded in the TEI/XML, it was relatively trivial to extract them from the enclosing texts and identify those that contain paratextual references. Swinburne’s references, or “citations,” were entered into a database that was augmented with more detailed bibliographic information about Swinburne’s sources. This bibliographic information was then analyzed to provide different “views” of Swinburne’s paratexts. The analysis provides us with feedback about:
•        frequency of paratextual types (i.e., titles, epigraphs, notes, etc.)
•        frequency of cited authors/artists
•        genres of cited works
•        literary/historical periods of cited works
•        languages of cited works
•        trends in paratextual practice across Swinburne’s career
The text/document sits at the intersection of the humanities and information studies, and a consideration of the paratext brings together theoretical concerns about the material document and intertextuality from literary studies with theories about citation and methodologies of citation analysis from information studies.
In an effort to broaden the study and provide comparison data, we have also gathered information about paratexts in the poetry of Swinburne’s contemporaries, Rossetti and Tennyson. Our paper will provide a comprehensive examination of a large, defined subset of the paratexts found in the work of a three important Victorian poets. Our analysis will provide different views of these poets as seen through their paratexts and the diverse collection of authors, artists, and works referenced by those paratexts. We will present the findings from a thorough analysis of paratextual reference in Swinburne, Rossetti, and Tennyson, and based on those findings, we will make some preliminary observations about Swinburnian Victorian paratextual poetics.
References
Briet, S. (2006). What is Documentation?. Trans. Ronald E. Day and Laurent Martinet. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Genette, G. (1997). Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Macksey, R. (1997). Foreword. Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation. By Gérard Genette. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. xi-xxii.
Nicolson, H. (1926). Swinburne. New York: Macmillan.
Swinburne, A. C. (1904). The Poems of Algernon Charles Swinburne. 6 vols. London: Chatto & Windus.
Walsh, J. A., (ed.) (2011). The Algernon Charles Swinburne Project. Indiana University. 1 Nov. 2011.http://www.swinburneproject.org/.
Introduction: This paper presents the results of the Modernist Versions Project’s (MVP) survey of existing tools for digital collation, comparison, and versioning. The MVP’s primary mission is to enable interpretations of modernist texts that are difficult without computational approaches. We understand versioning as the process through which scholars examine multiple witnesses of a text in order to gain critical insight into its creation and transmission [1] and then make those witnesses available for critical engagement with the work. Collation is the act of identifying different versions of a text and noting changes between texts. Versioning is the editorial practice of presenting a critical apparatus for those changes. To this end, the MVP requires tools that: (1) identify variants in TXT and XML files, (2) export those results in a format or formats conducive to visualization, (3) visualize them in ways that allow readers to identify critically meaningful variations, and (4) aid in the visual presentation of versions.
The MVP surveyed and assessed an array of tools created specifically for aiding scholars in collating texts, versioning them, and visualizing changes between them. These tools include: (1) JuxtaCommons, (2) DV Coll, (3) TEI Comparator, (4) Text::TEI::Collate, (5) Collate2, (6) TUSTEP, (7) TXSTEP, (8) CollateX, (9) SimpleTCT, (10) Versioning Machine, and (11) HRIT Tools (nMerge). We also examined version control systems such as Git and Subversion in order to better understand how they might inform our understanding of collation in textual scholarship. This paper presents the methodologies of the survey and assessment as well as the MVP’s initial findings.
Problem: Part of the MVP’s mandate is to find new ways of harnessing computers to find differences between witnesses and to then identify the differences that make a difference (Bateson). In modernist studies, the most famous example of computer-assisted collation is Hans Walter Gabler’s use of the Tübingen System of Text Processing tools (TUSTEP) to collate and print James Joyce’s Ulysses in the 1970s and 1980s. Yet some constraints, such as those identified by Wilhelm Ott in 2000, still remain in the field of textual scholarship, especially where collation and versioning applications are concerned. Ott writes, “scholars whose profession is not computing but a more or less specialized field in the humanities have to be provided with tools that allow them to solve any problems that occur without having to write programs themselves. This leads to a concept of relatively independent programs for the elementary functions of text handling” (97). Indeed the number of programs available for collation work have proliferated since 2000, including additions to TUSTEP (TXSTEP) as well as the newest web-based collation program, JuxtaCommons.
Accordingly, the MVP has reviewed tools currently available for collation work in order to provide an overview of the field and to identify software that might be further developed in order to create a collating, versioning, and visualization environment. Most of these tools were developed for specific projects, and thus do what they were designed to do quite well. Our question is whether we can modify existing tools to fit the needs of our project or whether a suite of collation and visualization tools needs to be developed from scratch. This survey is thus an attempt to chart the tools that may be useful for the kinds of collation and versioning workflows our team is developing specifically for modernist studies, so we can then test methods based on previous tools and envision future developments to meet emerging needs. Our initial research with Versioning Machine and JuxtaCommons suggests that there is potential for bringing tools together to create a more robust versioning system. Tools such as the Versioning Machine work well if one is working with TEI P5 documents; however, we are equally interested in developing workflows that do not rely upon the TEI, or do not require substantive markup. Finally, we are examining whether the development of version control systems such as Git present viable alternatives to versioning methods now prevalent in textual studies.
Method: Our method adapts the rubric Hans Walter Gabler devised for surveying collation and versioning tools in his 2008 white paper, “Remarks on Collation.” We first assessed the code and algorithms underlying each tool on our list, and we then tested each tool using a literary text. In this particular case, we used two text files and two TEI XML files from chapter three of Joseph Conrad’s Nostromo, which we have in OCR-corrected and TEI-Lite marked-up states from the 1904 serial edition and the 1904 first book edition. During each test, we used a tool assessment rubric (available upon request) to maintain consistent results across each instance. All tests were accompanied by research logs for additional commentary and observations made by our research team.
Preliminary Findings: Our preliminary findings suggest that:
•        Many existing collation tools are anchored in obsolete technologies (e.g., TUSTEP, which was originally written in Fortran, despite having undergone major upgrades, still relies on its own scripting language and front end to operate; also, DV-Coll was written for DOS, but has been updated for use with Windows 7).
•        Many of the tools present accessibility obstacles because they are desktop-only entities, making large-scale collaborative work on shared materials difficult and prone to duplication and/or loss of work. Of the tools that offer web-based options, JuxtaCommons is the most robust.
•        The “commons” approach to scholarly collaboration is among the most promising direction for future development. We suggest the metaphor of the commons is useful for tool development in versioning and collation as well as for building scholarly community (e.g., MLA Commons). We note the particular usefulness in this regard of the Juxta Commons collation tool and the Modernist Commons environment for preparing digital texts for processing. The latter, under development by Editing Modernism in Canada, is currently working to integrate collation and versioning functions into its environment.
•        Version control alternatives to traditional textual studies-based versioning and visualization presents an exciting set of possibilities. Although the use of Git, Github, and Gist for collating, versioning, and visualizing literary texts has not gained much traction, we see great potential in this line of inquiry.
•        Developers and projects should have APIs in mind when designing tools for agility and robustness across time. Web-based frameworks allow for this type of collaborative development, and we are pleased to see that Juxta has released a web service API for its users.
•        During tool development, greater attention must be given to extensibility, interoperability, and flexibility of functionality. Because many projects are purposebuilt, they are often difficult to adapt to non-native corpora and divergent workflows.
References
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine.
Gabler, H. (2013). Remarks on Collation. Academia.edu. Academia.edu, 2008. 14 Mar. 2013.http://www.academia.edu/167070/_Remarks_on_Collation_.
Gabler, H. (2000). “Towards an Electronic Edition of James Joyce’s Ulysses.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 15(1): 115-20.
McGann, J. J. (1991). The Textual Condition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ott, W. (2000). “Strategies and Tools for Textual Scholarship: The Tubingen System of Text Processing Programs (TUSTEP).” Literary and Linguistic Computing 15(1): 93-108.
Reiman, D. H. (1987). “Versioning.” Romantic Texts and Contexts. Columbia: University of Missouri. 167-179.
Notes
1. For a definition of the “social” life of texts, see Jerome McGann’s The Textual Condition. For a definition of “versioning,” see Donald Reiman, who writes, “In those cases where the basic problem facing the scholar or reader involves two or more radically differing versions that exhibit quite distinct ideologies, aesthetic perspectives, or rhetorical strategies, the alternative to ‘editing,’ as conventionally understood, may be what I call ‘versioning”’ (169).
Introduction

The Riddle of Literary Quality is a project funded by the Computational Humanities Program of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW). It runs at Huygens ING in partnership with the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation of the University of Amsterdam, and the Fryske Akademy in Leeuwarden. The aim of the project is to develop a method and the necessary software to analyze low-level and high-level formal features in a corpus of modern Dutch long fiction, to find out whether formal features in the texts play a role in the reception and evaluation of the text by the readers. Can we get more insight into the responses of readers to, for instance, texts with on average longer versus shorter sentences, or using a larger vocabulary, or on average showing a more complex syntactical structure (cf. Jautze et al.)? Is there a difference between those texts that readers consider to be highly literary and those that are experienced as more lowbrow? Can we distinguish texts found good or bad by readers based on formal features in these texts? And how do the opinions of readers correlate with the kind of reader they are?
The project thus aims to correlate formal features with readers’ opinions and readers’ roles. The analysis of the formal features is done through a chain of μServices that we will deal with in the second part of this paper. The first part is addressed to the analysis of readers’ opinions and readers’ roles.
Survey

To gather information about readers and their responses we set up a large online survey in which we asked respondents some personal information (age, gender, postal code, level of education) and sixteen questions to find out what kind of reader they predominantly are: autonomous or ‘distanced’: reading for aesthical pleasure; or heteronomous ‘identifying’: reading for fun, to discover other cultures or places, or to identify with the main characters. We based our distinction and our questions on work done by Von Heydebrand & Winko on sociological aspects of (literary) reading. Next to that, we presented a list of 400 recent novels, Dutch originals or translations into Dutch, and asked them to mark the ones they read. A selection of these novels was presented to them, with the question to evaluate these works on two scales: from ‘not so very literary’ to ‘highly literary’ and from ‘bad’ to ‘good’. The survey ran for six months, and received almost 14000 respondents. Analysis of the results has just started.
The results of the survey will be correlated with the results of the measurements of formal features. We would like to describe the technical set-up we have devised to enable the scholars to analyze the texts in the corpus in a way that is trustworthy and sustainable, using μServices written in Java that can also be used by others to repeat and to verify our analyses.
μServices

Research infrastructure for the Riddle of Literary Quality is designed with three goals in mind: research results must be reproducible; analytical tools must be reusable; the entire workflow must be maintainable and reliable. We aim to provide a toolset that allows for a verifiable system that will focus the discussion on the selected methodology - the procedures and algorithms. This also means that we will make the code behind each μService open source.
To accomplish this goal the digital humanities engineering group at Huygens ING based the research infrastructure both on the results of COST Action IS0704: An Interoperable Supranational Infrastructure for Digital Editions (Interedition) – of which the institute was grant-holder – and the work of Joris van Zundert – chair of the Action. Van Zundert (Huygens ING) specified as an objective of the COST Action the development of lightweight and distributed interoperability solutions. These solutions were implemented through webservices. The CollateX algorithm of Ronald Haentjens Dekker (Huygens ING) and Gregor Middell (University of Würzburg) was among the first and most successful of a series of compact analytical demonstrators called μServices.
The Riddle of Literary Quality does not aim to build a workflow management system. Such a top-down standardization methodology is left to large infrastructural programs like CLARIN, DARIAH or the Dutch Nederlab project. Instead we continue Interedition’s grassroots approach and leave (computational) researchers and PhD students free to experiment with high-level and low-level analytical algorithms in languages that range from Python to Java. These algorithms may or may not grow out to be part of the Riddle’s μService infrastructure and those that are deemed useful are eventually hosted at the institute’s servers. 
The current services fall in three distinct categories: data import and preparation; analysis and visualization and export. In the first group we offer e.g. a series of tools that convert documents to specified standards (such as ePub/PDF to TEI) and set the data in the correct character encoding (such as a conversion from Windows-1252, ISO8859 to UTF-8). To prepare the data for further analysis we have converted parsers like the Dutch Ucto: Unicode Tokenizer (Radboud University of Nijmegen/University of Tilburg) to a μService. The output data of services in this group is a standardized json format that can be read by the analytical services in the second category. Experiments in The Riddle currently focus on this analysis group. μServices in the third category perform output operations. Some create visualizations while others export the data to external environments for further analysis. For stylometric research e.g. we created a μService to export data from The Riddle to R and integrate it with the Stylo() package created at the Universities of Krakow (Macej Eder/Jan Rybicki) and Antwerp (Mike Kestemont).
The entire suite of μServices will remain available for persistent access and may be used in alternate workflows or by external third-party software. Thus the suite does not only allow reproduction of the results of The Riddle but will also support entirely new and original research.
Sample Workflow

As an example of a µServices-driven workflow we present one possible use of gathering statistical data from a corpus of ePubs. First, each ePub is sent to a service that prepares it for analysis by converting the book into a structured TEI document. Character-encoding issues are resolved by a second µService, resulting in a normalized, platform-independent UTF-8 version of the TEI-document. Subsequently, a third service offers extraction operations on the structural level of the file. This service is used to extract all relevant paragraphs. These paragraphs are split into sentences and words by one of a family of (TEI agnostic) tokenizers, such as the Ucto-µService. Statistical analysis of these tokens is possible by sending the resulting list of tokens to the exporter µService, which transforms the extracted tokens into a format suitable for use in R.
Conclusion

To make sure that we are able to answer the main questions of The Riddle of Literary Quality – whether there are any correlations between readers' opinions about certain novels, readers' predominant reading role, and the values for a list of formal low-level and high-level features of the novels – we have chosen to develop a set of µServices that deal with single aspects of the needed analysis. By making these µServices available to other scholars we enable them to repeat and verify our research results. We provide users with tools that can be used to answer different questions than we have in The Riddle, thereby making the tools also useful in a wider sense for new original research. We hope our approach invites others to contribute µServices for further textual humanities research.
References

CollateX. collatex.net
Interedition. www.interedition.eu
>Riddle of Literary Quality.literaryquality.huygens.knaw.nl
Ucto. ilk.uvt.nl/ucto
Eder, M., Kestemont, M. & Rybicki, J., (2013). Stylometry with R: a suite of tools.Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. Lincoln: University of Nebraska-Lincoln, pp. 487-89. dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-136.html
Heydebrand, R. von and Winko, S., (1996), Einfuehrung in die Wertung von Literatur. Systematik – Geschichte – Legitimation. Paderborn etc.: Ferdinand Schoeningh, 1996
Jautze, K., Koolen, C., Cranenburgh, A. van and Jong, H. de, (2013). From high heels to weed attics: a syntactic investigation of chick lit and literature.Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature 2013. aclweb.org/anthology/W/W13/W13-1410.pdf
Zundert, J. van, Middell, G., Hulle, D. Van, Haentjens Dekker, R., et al., (2011). Interedition: Principles, Practice and Products of an Open Collaborative Development Model for Digital Scholarly Editions. Digital Humanities 2011: Conference Abstracts. Stanford: Stanford University. dh2011abstracts.stanford.edu/xtf/view?docId=tei/ab-227.xml
1 Introduction

In distributed systems literature the orthogonal but interdependent characteris- tics of autonomy, distribution and heterogeneity are used to classify distributed systems [1,2]. From a holistic perspective on the arts and humanities, collections have evolved over decades or centuries from highly autonomous disciplines and institutions and are widely spread, which resulted in heterogeneous perspectives and data models [3]. Despite its negative notion as data integration problem, the term heterogeneity also symbolizes the diversity of research methodologies within the disciplines of the arts and humanities. Resolving heterogeneity hence implies an abstraction from the specifics that are valuable for focused disciplinary and interdisciplinary research projects.
Our approach presents a novel concept for data federation in the arts and humanities, which focuses the needs of research projects as well as interdisci- plinary and broad use-cases. We especially address the reusability of explicated knowledge on correlations between schemata and digital collections and show where domain experts are required to bridge semantic gaps.
2 Background

Approaches to data integration often follow the theoretical foundation expressed in [4] by employing the concept of a global view. While being highly distinctive in terms of their underlying concepts, established examples such as ISIDORE [5], OAIster [6] and Europeana [7] share the goal of facilitating access to a wide range of research data through integrated schemata or ontologies. Aside from broad services, an integration need that focuses on a specific topic and related research questions is addressed by the Steinheim Institute, which provides a search in the context of german-jewish history and judaism [8]
Despite usability concerns in having to identify relevant services and accord- ingly collections, the reappearing need to overcome the same aspects of hetero- geneity in reaction to new use-cases is one of the problems we address.
2.1 Use cases 

Our federation concept is primarily focused on the realization of the DARIAH- DE Generic Search (http://dev3.dariah.eu/search), which includes support for queries over large sets of unre- lated collections (broad search) and tightly correlated data (deep search)—with different information needs in mind: 
– Broad search: Due to the quantity and distribution, the relevance of digital collections for particular research questions is not easily assessable. A broad view assists scholars in finding and evaluating possibly relevant data. Figure 1 shows an exemplary, collection-level aggregation of results based on term statistics in the prototype of our search, which will be continuously extended by other relevant visualization techniques (e.g. with respect to spacial and temporal aspects).
– Deep search: If the granularity of local data models can be used to formulate more specific queries targeting structure and content (e.g. in search facets), the deep search utilizes mappings specified in the DARIAH-DE Schema Reg- istry. Broad search continuously fades to deep search with an increasing count and richness of mappings and hence typically smaller sets of selected collections. 

Fig. 1: Result aggregation in the generic search
Despite the focus on the generic search with its virtual integration at query-time, the proposed concept also addresses requirements of a materialized integration of data: 
– Data migration and consolidation: Traditional applications of data integra- tion often do not require a dynamic adaption to selected collections, but de- termine a set of relevant data sources and an appropriate integration schema or ontology [4]. Examples include data migration induced by the introduction of new information systems (e.g. replacement of outdated archive informa- tion software) or the consolidation of selected data sources under a merged schema for the purpose of interdisciplinary analysis and visualization e.g. in the DARIAH-DE GeoBrowser [9]. 
2.2 Problem Definition

The common objective of data integration approaches is to resolve heterogeneity on various levels: Syntactical aspects such as the existence of different access and encoding methods can be solved by technical means, whereas structural and semantic heterogeneity depend on the application of background knowledge [1]. Despite continuing efforts in the fields of schema and ontology matching, the manual intervention of domain experts—especially for large or complex schemata and ontologies often found in the arts and humanities—has shown to be essential to generate high-quality results [10].
The correlation of the used schemata and ontologies is an inherently complex manual task in our context, which depends on the fragmented and distributed knowledge of individual disciplines, collections and scholars. Requiring a common understanding, research projects concentrate knowledge about schemata and semantics used in relevant collections and specify meanings and correlations. In order to integrate the described data and establish technical interoperability, an application of digital methods and tools is required. 
3 Concept

Abstracting from aspects of technical and syntactical heterogeneity concerned with accessing, preprocessing and integrating data in a generic fashion, we aim to enable researchers to focus on those aspects of integration, that depend on their knowledge and expertise: the description and correlation of schemata and ontologies. Despite the immediate benefit for individual integration tasks, the centralized formalization and explication of semantics results in the significant advantage of knowledge reusability.
3.1 Semantic cluster

The logical architecture of our idea is represented by a directed, weighed graph, where the schemata and ontologies are described by vertices, and mappings be- tween them are symbolized by edges. Whereas correlations between structural elements symbolize a relation of the described concepts (e.g. persons, locations) and could be considered undirected, more specific rules that are required for data transformation can be composed of non-reversible functions (e.g. the concate- nation of fields). For that reason, parallel edges are required for the description of both mapping directions. Differences of schemata in terms of their complex- ity and expressiveness reduce the achievable level of accumulated completeness, which is represented by the value of cohesion
Figure 2 indicates how the cohesion between schemata can be utilized to sug- gest semantic clusters: C1, C2 and C3 could be the result of research projects, which needed a high level of mapping completeness between relevant schemata. By interrelating clusters or generically used schemata (S10), the expressed se- mantics can be reused in other contexts.
3.2 Use-case orientation

Our example indicates the difference to the commonly found integration pattern of a global ontology or schema. Despite its theoretical foundation, simplicity and proven applicability for broad integration use-cases [5,6,7], we consider the approach to be impracticable for a holistic context of the arts and humanities because a global structure would either have to be an abstraction from collection or discipline specifics or unmanageably complex.
Narrowing this context to individual domains or research projects, standards could be elected as appropriate integrative structures. As exemplified in figure 2, the schemata S3, S5 and S8 form the integration baseline within our clusters due to their cohesion with other schemata. Considering our deep search and data migration and consolidation use-cases, these schemata can be utilized to generate a fine-grained view over selected collections accessible within the cluster. In order to support interdisciplinary use-cases, clusters can be combined (symbolized by the strong cohesion between S5 and S8) to resolve semantic gaps.
For broad use-cases we rely on the collaborative and continuous emergence of schemata or ontologies (compare S10) within our federation that are used to connect the clusters on the coarse levels sufficient for broad use-cases. 

Fig. 2. Semantic clusters of schemata
3.2 Use-case orientation3.3 Scalability considerations

The simplicity of traditional data integration emerges as new local schemata are added to the system and hence an appropriate mapping target needs to be identified. To ensure extensibility and scalability, our proposed federation concept depends on two strategies:
Cluster globals: The concept of semantic clusters builds on the existence or ad- vancement of standards that are considered as appropriate common perspectives by research communities. Although clusters are not predetermined but expected to evolve, established standards such as the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC CRM) or the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guildelines could be iden- tified as initial cluster schemata, which can be mapped in a generic fashion [11]. As new schemata need to be added, the standard which promises to achieve the highest completeness is selected to be mapped.
Model inheritance: Our proposal includes an approach to specify the actual usage of schemata more precisely than it is possible at the level of generic cross- walks. Figure 3 shows the exemplary derivation of the Dublin Core element dc:coverage to resolve an encapsulated substructure. Mappings are inherited to correlate the refined elements or to specify detailed data transformation rules. As derived schemata are related to their parent, generic mappings remain valid and can be utilized if specific rules are missing.

Fig. 3: Exemplary derived version of Dublin Core
4 Conclusion

As we abstract from technical aspects of heterogeneity and reuse the valuable disciplinary knowledge explicated in terms of correlations, processing and trans- formation rules, the efforts required for integrating research data can be sig- nificantly reduced. Another important aspect that is currently being evaluatedconsists in appropriate techniques for the visualization of our federation concept and system. After all, domain experts need to be able to recognize clusters, im- portant schemata and ontologies as well as their correlations in order to identify semantic gaps and to collaboratively fill them.
References

1. Sheth, A.P., Kashyap, V. (1993): So Far (Schematically) yet So Near (Semantically). In: Proceedings of the IFIP WG 2.6 Database Semantics Conference on Interoperable Database Systems (DS-5), Amsterdam and The Netherlands and The Netherlands, North-Holland Publishing Co 283–31
2. Busse, S., Kutsche, R.D., Leser, U., Weber, H. (1999): Federated Information Systems: Concepts, Terminology and Architectures 
3. Henrich,A.,Gradl,T.:DARIAH(-DE) (2013): DigitalResearchInfrastructurefortheArts and Humanities — Concepts and Perspectives. International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 7(supplement) 47–5
4. Lenzerini, M. (2002): Data Integration: A Theoretical Perspective. In Abiteboul, S., ed.: Proceedings of the twenty-first ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, New York and NY, ACM 23
5. Pouyllau, S. (2011): ISIDORE : acces to open data of arts & humanities
6. Hagedorn, K. (2003): OAIster: a ”no dead ends” OAI service provider. Library Hi Tech 21(2) 170–181
7. Peroni, S., Tomasi, F., Vitali, F. (2013) : Reflecting on the Europeana Data Model. IAgosti, M., Esposito, F., Ferilli, S., Ferro, N., eds.: Digital Libraries and Archives. Volume 354 of Communications in Computer and Information Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin and Heidelberg 228–24
8. Lordick, H. (2013): Vieles finden – die Suchmaschine im Steinheim-Institut
9. Romanello, M.  (2013). DARIAH Geo-browser: Exploring Data through Time and Space
10. Rahm, E. (2011): Towards Large-Scale Schema and Ontology Matching. In BellahseneZ., Bonifati, A., Rahm, E., eds.: Schema Matching and Mapping. Springer BerlinHeidelberg, Berlin and Heidelberg 3–27
11. Baca, M., Harpring, P., Ward, J., Beecroft, A.:Metadata Standards Crosswalk

1. Introduction

Reading comprehension of historical materials is one of important elements in historical study. The results of the reading comprehension should be encoded as texts; however, in Japanese historical study amount of the texts is a few rather than of digital images. Almost encoded texts are not shared and there are no rules for text structuring. 
In the study due to structuring encoded texts automatically and sharing the texts among researchers, we developed a text encoding support system for pre-modern Japanese historical materials, especially Japanese medieval period. The features of our system are follows: web-based system, automatic text structuring, text editing, text sharing and support for reading the characters in the materials. Our system doesn’t have and manage any material’s catalogues. We suppose that the system uses a ready-made system to search catalogue. Particularly, we use “Catalogue database of holding materials”1 (called “HICAT”) in Historiographical Institute the University of Tokyo.
2. Our System

2.1. Basic Methods

Our system has 2 methods; search method and authoring method. The search method allows a user to search for images, texts and annotations. An annotation assignment is one of important work in encoding for research of Japanese history. Our system can deal with following 2 annotation types: marginal note and format note. In the study we defined that a marginal note is a description of “a result of reading comprehension or research” and disappear in the material. Examples of marginal note are personal name, location name, correction and so on. Format note indicates descriptive pattern for strings (e.g. erasure, divide note,…) or lines (address, title, subject,…).
Editing the texts and the annotations can be supported by the authoring method. Using the authoring method, the system starts text structuring automatically as soon as a user edit a text. If the text editing is finished and the text is committed, then new version of the text is created. A version is identified by a user ID, modified time and image ID (as URI). A user can use the previous version and the versions of other users. If the user edits other user’s version, the new version will be created. The new version takes over all annotations in original version and can be edited freely. Therefore, the method of text reuse never violates other user’s text.
2.2. Attempt of converting into TEI

The system can output XML document as the result of text encoding. The structure is useful only in our system, because the structure is specialized in the system. We think an encoded text should be outputted in a general format when the text is used outside our system. Because TEI P52 is “de facto standard” of text encoding in Humanities, we attempted convert our text into TEI P5. We carefully treat the expression of the line and the annotation in the conversion, because in our system text is represented as a set of lines and annotations. For the expression of the marginal notes as personal name, place name, and correction, we use <persName>, <placeName>, and <choice> respectively.
Moreover, we consider automatical assignment of opener and closer in the text. We analyze a form pattern of Japanese historical materials, and the assignment is realized by the basis of the results.
2.3. Reading Support Method

Since the encoding a historical material is very hard, the researcher of Japanese history is needed training or practice for a long time. In order to support the encoding, we provide a suggestion method for support of inputting character. When a user input string in a text field on our system, the suggestion method presents a candidate character which appears after current inputted string. The method is realized by character n-gram model. A learning data of the n-gram is constructed by texts extracted from fulltext database of Historiographical Institute. In order to improve the precision of the suggestion method, we use Modified Kneser-Ney Smoothing method3. We experiment for the confirming the performance of the suggestion method. As the experimental result, the hit ratio whether a set of candidate character in top 20 includes a correct is 0.72. The ratio might seem to low, but it can be effectively used in the actual work.
3. Conclusion

Our system has been developed for managing texts which are represented as results of reading comprehension. We believe that the most important element of the study is to provide an environment in which researchers of Japanese history can encode texts pleasantly and comfortably. In order to achieve it, we'd like to improve the expressiveness of texts and performance of methods in the system.
References

1. Databases of HI. wwwap.hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ships/.
2. TEI guidelines. www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
3. F. James (2000), Modified Kneser-Ney Smoothing of n-gram Models, Technical report, RIACS Technical Report 00.07, www.riacs.edu/navroot/Research/TRpdf/.
The Berlin Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities (BBAW) is home to multiple long term research projects which encompass various fields of study. The research group TELOTA (The Electronic Life of the Academy) supports the digital humanities aspects of these projects, including developing software solutions for the daily work of their researchers.
Experience shows that although using TEI-XML encoding1 for the digital transcription and annotation of manuscripts can improve research in edition projects, the readiness to implement it greatly relies on the user-friendliness of the entry interface. From the perspective of a researcher, working directly in XML simply doesn't compare to the ease of programs like MS Word. A new software solution must therefore at least offer the same amount of editorial comfort as such programs. Ideally, it would also encompass the complete life-cycle of an edition: from the first phases of transcription to the final publication.
TELOTA developed such a software solution “ediarum”2, which can be adapted to the needs of different research projects. The solution consists of various software components that allow the researchers to construct and edit transcriptions of manuscripts and manuscript descriptions into XML following the TEI guidelines. Through editing and tagging manuscripts, a large quantity of digital data can be generated and is prepared for further research and presentation. The solution includes the possibility to create apparatuses of different kinds, as well as to create without much additional effort both a print and web publication.
The central software component of the new digital work environment “ediarum” is Oxygen XML Author3. The researcher does not edit the XML code directly, but instead works in a user-friendly Author mode, which is designed through Cascading Stylesheets (CSS). The researcher is able to choose more than one perspective within the Author view, and thus can select per mouse click the appropriate perspective for the current task. Additionally, a toolbar is provided with which the researcher can enter markup with the push of a button. In this way text phenomena such as deletions or additions, or editorial commentary, are easily inserted. Person and place names can also be recorded with their appropriate TEI markup, and in addition they can be simultaneously linked to the corresponding index. This is done through selecting the name from a convenient drop down list. The entire manuscript text can thus be quickly and simply marked up with TEI conform XML. All documents are stored in the open source database "existdb".4
Besides creating a digital work environment for “ediarum” in Oxygen XML Author, a website can also be built based on eXistdb, XQuery, and XSLT. Through the website the researchers can easily page through or search the current data inventory.
Through the intergration of ConTeXt5 into “ediarum” a further publication type, a print edition, can automatically be generated as a PDF from the TEI XML document. The layout and format imitates previously printed volumes of critical editions. Each TEI element must be given a specific formatting command through a configuration file. In this way the different apparatuses appear as footnotes that refer to the main text with the help of line numbers and lemmata. The print edition can also provide the suitable index for each transcription and solves any occurring cross references between manuscripts.
This work environment has been in use since 2012 by the staff of different research projects for their daily work. When asked their opinion, the researchers were in agreement that the new work environment greatly eased their editorial work and saved them significant time. The possibility to directly check the results of their work in a web presentation or as a printed edition was seen as an additional positive aspect.
Presently “ediarum” is used by the edition of letters, lectures and diaries of the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher6; the description of medieval manuscripts of Aristoteles or the regesta of emperor Friedrich III. For each project the TEI XML schemata and main functions were customized to the different manuscript types and needs. In the future, “ediarum” will be implemented for further projects of the academy or other institutions, e.g. the edition of Jeremias Gotthelfs prints and manuscripts at the University of Bern (Suisse).
Screenshots


Fig. 1: Workflow of ediarum

Fig. 2: Customized TEI toolbar in Oxygen XML Author for the digital edition of Friedrich Schleiermachers letters, lectures and diaries

Fig. 3: Transcription of a letter in Oxygen XML Author
References

1. Burnard, Lou; Bauman, Syd (Hg.): TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Charlottesville, Virginia, USA 2007. URL: www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/Guidelines.pdf
2. www.bbaw.de/en/telota/software/ediarum
3. User Manual Oxygen XML Author 14. URL: www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/
4. eXist Main Documentation. URL: www.exist-db.org/exist/documentation.xml
5. ConTeXt Dokumentation. URL: wiki.contextgarden.net/Main_Page
6. Dumont, Stefan; Fechner, Martin: Digitale Arbeitsumgebung für das Editionsvorhaben »Schleiermacher in Berlin 1808—1834 In: di giversity — Webmagazin für Informationstechnologie in den Geisteswissenschaften. URL: digiversity.net/2012/digitale-arbeitsumgebung-fur-das-editionsvorhaben-schleiermacher-in-berlin-1808-1834
This contribution presents an XML schema for annotating a high level narratological category: speech, thought and writing representation (ST&WR). It focusses on two aspects: Firstly, the original schema is presented as an example for the challenge to encode a narrative feature in a structured and flexible way and secondly, ways of adapting this schema to TEI are considered, in order to make it usable for other, TEI-based projects.
The phenomenon ST&WR

ST&WR refers to the way the voice of a character is embedded in the narrator's text and is a feature that is present in most works of fiction. It has been widely studied in narratology, as it contributes to the construction of a fictional character, the narrator-character relationship and fictional world-building in general. Though ST&WR is partly defined by formal features like punctuation, verb mode, and sentence structure, narrative function is what is of interest in literary studies (cf. 1 for an overview). The challenge is to develop an annotation schema which is sufficiently structured to allow consistent annotation (especially with multiple annotators) and still captures nuances that are relevant for literary scholars.
The schema presented here – called ST&WR schema (ST&WR-S) – ties into literature studies as it uses categories agreed upon by most scholars and is similar to categorial systems proposed by narratologists Genette and Leech/Short (cf. 2, 3). The main influence was a project of Semino and Short, who annotated a corpus of English fictional, newspaper and (auto)biographical texts for ST&WR with an SGML-conformant schema (cf. 4).
ST&WR schema

ST&WR-S was developed for manual annotation of a corpus of 13 German narrative texts written between 1786 and 1917 (about 57 000 tokens). This corpus was then used as a reference for the development and evaluation of automatic methods for ST&WR recognition (cf. 5). The purpose of ST&WR-S was twofold: It allows for a very fine-grained classification of ST&WR instances which is helpful in order to study the phenomenon and to do statistical studies on manually annotated data, like in Semino/Short's project. On the other hand it was designed to be modular and easily simplified to accommodate for the rougher classifications of automatic recognizers. Experiences during corpus annotation strongly influenced the design of the annotation schema.
ST&WR-S has three levels of specificity: Main categories, attributes and in some cases different values for further specifications of certain attributes. These are modelled as XML tags with attributes and values.
The manual annotation was done in the GATE framework for natural language processing (cf. 6, http://gate.ac.uk). ST&WR-S is specified in XML schema files used by the plugin Schema_Annotation_Editor. Primarily, it is designed for inline XML, but GATE internally manages annotations as nodes and can convert them to a standoff XML format.
The main categories can be described with two axes: One axis represents the medium – speech, thought or written text (e.g. a quote from a character's letter). The second axis represents the four most common techniques of ST&WR: direct representation ("He said 'I am hungry.'"), free indirect representation ("Well, where would he get something to eat now?"), indirect representation ("He said that he was hungry."), and reported representation, which can be a mere mentioning of a speech, thought or writing act ("They talked about lunch."). This results in twelve main categories which are modelled as XML tags (direct_speech, direct_thought, etc.).
However, such a set of categories is necessarily rigid. When annotating a narrative phenomenon in a real corpus you will find many instances which are not clear-cut realisations of a predefined category. To deal with this fact, rather than just adding a confidence marker to the annotation, attributes are used to classify the type of deviation, so that the cases may be further studied and contrasted. As all attributes are optional and can be added to any main category, ST&WR-S allows for different levels of detail very easily. It is also possible to filter your annotation results afterwards by ignoring instances that carry a certain attribute.
Structurally, there is one numerical attribute (level), three attributes which are binary and just indicating whether the feature is present or not (narr, prag, metaph), two with optional further specification (border, non-fact) and one with mandatory further specification (ambig). All lists of attribute values are closed sets. Table 1 gives an overview.
 Attribute name  Description Values
 level  level of embedment  numeric (default: 1)
 ambig  ambiguity of the main category  Name of an alternative main category
 non-fact  non-factual (eg. negated or hypothetical ST&WR) ("He did not admit that he loved her.")  neg, hyp, fut, ques, imp, plan, unspec (default: unspec)
 border  borderline case of ST&WR("He knew that he had lost.")  percept, feel, state, unspec(default: unspec)
 narr  Ambiguity between ST&WR and non-verbal action("She greeted her friends.")  binary (dummy value: yes)
 prag  ST&WR, but with non-representional intent (e.g. politeness("I suggest you leave now.")  binary (dummy value: yes)
 metaph  metaphorical use("His conscience told him to go.")  binary (dummy value: yes)
Functionally,level stands alone in the group as it does not mark a non-prototypical instance but is rather a 'monitor attribute'. It captures the level of embedment of a ST&WR instance, e.g. an instance of indirect thought that appears as part of an instance of direct speech would be tagged as level=”2”. This marker can then be used to study the behaviour of such embedded instances and compare their behaviour to non-embedded ones.
All other attributes deal with instances that deviate from the prototypical idea of ST&WR in relation to the definition of the main categories.
Ambig and narr both mark ambiguity. While ambig indicates that there is uncertainty as to which main category should be applied, narr signals that it is uncertain whether the instance is a case of ST&WR at all.
Border deals with uncertainty in regard to what is considered speech, thought and writing respectively. Especially thought representation is extremely tricky, as you have to decide what constitutes a thought. For example, the sentence “He knew he had lost.” would be marked as <indirect_thought border=”state”>, as “to know” expresses a state of knowledge rather than a clear-cut thought. Border can also be applied to speech representation, e.g. if it is unclear whether there is a true verbalization like in the sentence “He screamed bloody murder.”
Non-fact deals with instances where the ST&WR is non-factual and thus not a real 'representation' in the story world. Similarly, prag marks instances where ST&WR forms are used for non-representational purposes, especially politeness, and metaph represents metaphorical use of ST&WR.
In addition to that, the ST&WR-S contains two special categories modelled as XML tags. One is frame, which marks the framing clause of a direct representation which is not part of the representation itself but still interesting in the context of ST&WR. The other is called embedded. It can be used to mark embedded narratives which appear in direct representation (usually direct speech), e.g. if a character tells a story. Marking such cases with embedded essentially shifts the whole annotation level into a new narrative frame and gives it a different status than direct_speech. The use of embedded is optional and the tag can be easily transformed to direct_speech if this effect is not desired. 
Adaptation to TEI Guidelines

ST&WR-S is a valid XML schema but not compliant to TEI Guidelines. For sustainability it would be desirable to adapt it, as this would allow its usage in TEI-conformant documents without compromising their validity.
However, such an adaptation is not straightforward. The logical starting point is <said>, a tag from the quotation context which is defined for passages thought or spoken by real people or fictional characters (cf. 7). Though <said> is clearly intended to capture instances of ST&WR, its scope is narrower than the instances covered by ST&WR-S. In its core form, it only carries the attributes aloudand direct, both specified by truth values. Aloud is designed to distinguish between silent thought and passages spoken aloud (speech), but does not accomodate writing representation. Direct does not allow for any distinction between the ST&WR categories free indirect, indirect and reported. Of course, the rich attribute system of ST&WR-S does not have a predefined equivalent in TEI, either.
Several possibilities are considered how to adapt ST&WR-S while conserving its power as well as its modularity as much as possible. Ideas include use of standoff markup, possibly via the <span> tag, modelling of the complex categorizations via feature structures, referenced by the @ana attribute, or extentions of exisiting TEI-tags (most likely <said>).
References

1. McHale, B (2013). Speech Representation, in: Hühn, Peter et al. (eds.): The living handbook of narratology, Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, 2013 URL: www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/speech-representation (last checked 17.10.2013).
2. Genette, G.(1980). Narrative discourse. An Essay in Method, Oxford: Blackwell.
3. Leech, G. and Short, M. (2007). Style in fiction. A Linguistic Introduction to English Fictional Prose 2. ed., London: Pearson Education Limited.
4. Semino, E. and Short, M. (2004). Corpus stylistics. Speech, writing and thought presentation in a corpus of English writing, London/New York: Routledge.
5. Brunner, A (2013). Automatic recognition of speech, thought, and writing representation in German narrative texts. Literary and Linguistic Computing 2013; doi: 10.1093/llc/fqt024
6. Cunningham, H. et al. (2011). Text Processing with GATE (Version 6): www.tinyurl/gatebook (last checked 01.11.2013).
7. Text Encoding Initiative (2013). P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, URL: www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5 (last checked 31.10.2013)
Collective Biographies of Women, is an open-access project supported by the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, Scholars’ Lab, and the English Department at the University of Virginia, as well as an ACLS Digital Innovation Fellowship. In recent years it has grown from an online bibliography of all English- language books that collect three or more short biographies of women into a digital prosopography that interrelates women, printed books, and narratives in what we call documentary social networks (introduced at DH 2013). CBW stands out as a literary study of prosopographies in the print era, and primarily the transatlantic nineteenth century (see the bibliography, http://womensbios.lib.virginia.edu). Most research that employs the term prosopography allies itself with history or classical and medieval studies, and today, relies on databases and websites. We work with the concept as it is often defined, as collective biography, that is, printed prose collections of short biographies (see the selective bibliography for a context on prosopography, nonfiction narrative, and our method of mid-range reading).
The CBW database associates some 8700 persons, 13,000 chapters (biographies), and more than 1200 books of various types published in English 1830-1940 (see developing database at http://cbw.iath.virginia.edu/cbw_db). Our project, however, is neither a textual archive nor a biographical database but an experiment in interpretation using the tools of DH to recognize the conventions of a genre, biography, and the history of gender conventions in a certain social context. Specifically, we want to get at the conditions of nonfiction, which generate multiple versions and cut and paste with relatively little respect for authorship. Could narrative theory of nonfiction be developed through a technique of digital markup that allows us to compare multiple versions of one life and interrelated types of person and text? With Daniel Pitti, Suzanne Keen, postdoctoral Project Manager Rennie Mapp, and teams of graduate assistants, we have developed and deployed a stand-aside XML schema, Biographical Elements and Structure Schema (BESS), in sample archives of digitized collective biographies that include designated individuals (e.g. all collections in our bibliography that include Caroline Herschel, the astronomer).
Briefly, BESS is an XML schema with a controlled vocabulary for narrative elements that appear in a given text:
StageofLife: before, beginning, middle, culmination, end, after, relative to the lifetimeofthebiography’ssubject
EventType e.g. illness, persona’s
AgentType e.g. mother, unnamed
 Setting:
Location, e.g. city
Structure, e.g. school
Time: Dates, TimeofDay, Season
PersonaDescription e.g. physically daring
Discourse: e.g. retrospective, figureOrImage flower
Topos: e.g. influence, disgrace
Each editor in a trained team creates a separate XML file that in effect is an annotated outline, tagging types of elements identified in numbered paragraphs of a TEI file of the biographical narrative (from 3-100+ paragraphs).

BESS analysis enables us to compare versions of the same person’s life. When we have analyzed all versions in our corpus, we give unique ID numbers to the essential events in all versions (kernels) and the more or less common optional events (satellites, common or rare), and can compare the placement of these in the versions, much as folklorists have charted the variations on the main events of a tale. (Narrative theorists have developed analyses of events in these terms, but not for nonfiction.) BESS analysis reveals differences in narrative technique in books that take different perspectives on women’s roles and that select persons of different types. Thus, beyond the literal level of actions (events), we can measurably correlate, for example, the instances of direct address, use of ‘we’ alongside not only the topos (i.e. situation; underlying scenario) work as social service but also the topos temptation of status or goods. The conjunction of different elements in these biographies often challenges our own later assumptions about historical women and gender norms. As BESS work is completed, we expand a body of data that for the first time documents the distinctive characteristics of third-person narratives about real people.

Fig. 1:
Currently working with a web designer, we have a sustainable, accessible database that functions well for team workflow, with parallel display of text and BESS analyses. We plan to develop the visualizations of BESS beyond current designs of tables and graphs.

Fig. 2:
The CBW project’s BESS “reading” of many narratives is time-consuming and detailed, as in many literary digital projects. As in all DH, we encounter challenges when visualizing quantities of variable data, an issue that this paper merely touches upon. Our aim, instead, is to introduce and make a case for the mid-range approach of BESS, with some reference to other possible approaches.
Many methods of text “reading” en masse might be useful with the CBW books. Broadly, options range from word strings and topic clusters across a large corpus of digitized texts to systematic encoding of all textual features and variants in an onlineß edition of an archive (e.g. Online Froissart; the Rossetti Archive). On the vast end of the scale, we recognize the astounding range of a Google N-gram kind of data capture as well as the precision of some text-mining projects. On the closer focus of the scale, we think human curation is best suited for patterns of narration and ideology, and we begin with books and place them in a context of genre and publishing history. Thus we try to benefit from the precedents of literary editions, and yet CBW is not a project in textual editing. We have no wish to fine-tune exact digital surrogates of these books. The BESS schema and approach to many-versioned biographies within social and historical contexts is designed to moderate between distant and close reading—a comprehensive digital model of variations within a genre and fine textual details.
Many in DH have addressed the question of what to do with a million books. Franco Moretti has espoused distant reading, a term applicable to many kinds of directed and unsupervised queries in big archives. This is understood as opposed to "close reading," the usual literary method (without computational mediation), one text, one person. The findings of singular textual analysis are less appropriate when describing patterns across a genre, especially of nonfiction where there are many versions of the “same” narrative and the author is less important than the protagonist, the representation of a real person. Thus, our method has some affinity for Sharon Marcus and Stephen Best’s concept of “surface reading,” as advocated in their manifesto to put a stop to the required "critique" or theoretical digging into a text for what it does not say for ideological purposes. Yet we retain a framing conceptual commitment to ideological critique, as we want to know about the changing gender ideology and historical contexts for women’s lives. More directly, we are pursuing the kind of "social reading" promoted by Alan Liu, as we hope to extend BESS as a tool available for other projects in digital interpretation of biographical narratives. BESS, interlinked with a database that reveals networks among historical persons and books about them, recruits computation to aggregate the interpretations of readers to parse a genre.
We call for a new metaphor or spatial model for hybrid methods of mid-range digital interpretation, whether using a stand-aside markup like BESS or other approaches. Our editing teams “hover," not at satellite level, but like balloon aerial digital cameras scanning a neighborhood, producing images that can zoom in and out. Such records do much less harm to the person, the individual record, than surveillance or drones. Our schema functions, alternatively, like GPR, "ground-penetrating radar," used to detect buried structures two or three feet into the ground. Although such metaphors for our mid-range reading method with BESS have the inherent comedy of balloons and robot- like go-carts, we can seriously enhance what we know above or beneath the surface without destroying it—without murdering to dissect. I remind the BESS team that the texts are always still awaiting any method of interpretation, unmangled after we have subjected them to our skewed adaptation for prosopographical purposes. We’re not pretending to let machines discover without distortion. Nor are we clinging to the requirement that reading is an individual act—on the contrary. Like reading, biographies trope toward the collective and typological, the mid-range, even in monographic form. Inviting open-access play, we expect to be surprised by the details in the mosaic or wave- like picture from above or below.
References

Booth, A. (2004). How to Make It as a Woman: Collective Biographical History from Victoria to the Present. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Booth, A. (2005). “Fighting for Lives in the ODNB, or Taking Prosopography Personally,” Journal of Victorian Culture, 10: 267-79.
Booth, A."Prosopography." The Encyclopedia of Victorian Literature, ed. Dino Felluga, Pamela Gilbert, and Linda Hughes (Wiley Blackwell), forthcoming.
Bradley, J. and H. Short. (2002). “Using Formal Structures to Create Complex Relationships: The Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire—A Case Study.” In K. S. B. Keats-Rohan (ed.), Resourcing Sources Prosopographica et Genealogica, vol. 7. http://prosopography.modhist.ox.ac.uk/publications.htm.
Cameron, A., ed. (2003). Fifty Years of Prosopography. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oldfield, S. (1999). Collective Biography of Women in Britain, 1550-1900. London: Mansell.
Keats-Rohan, K. S. B. (2007). “Biography, Identity and Names: Understanding the Pursuit of the Individual in Prosopography.” Prosopography Approaches and Applications A Handbook. Oxford: Occasional Publications UPR. 139–81. Prosopographica et Genealogica 13.
Stone, L. (1971). “Prosopography.” Daedalus 100: 57-9.
Bauer, J. Project Quincy. http://projectquincy.rubyforge.org/
Brown, S., with Clements, Grundy, et al.Orlando: Women’s Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to the Present. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006. http://orlando.cambridge.org/
Clergy of the Church of England Database. http://www.theclergydatabase.org.uk/index.html
Liu, A. Research Oriented Social Environment (RoSE) http://rose.english.ucsb.edu/
Perdue, S. People of the Founding Era. http://documentscompass.org/projects/pfe/
Pitti, D.Social Networks and Archival Context Project (SNAC). http://socialarchive.iath.virginia.edu/
Prosopography of the Byzantine World. http://www.pbw.kcl.ac.uk/
The Prosopography of the Neo-Assyrian Empire http://www.helsinki.fi/science/saa/pna.html
This panel presents theoretical and technical approaches in digital scholarly music editions focusing on different forms of annotations, data enrichment and data visualization.
Annotating is one of the central techniques in humanities to gather, analyse, discuss and present information about works, sources and their interpretation. In traditional scholarly music edition this means to create extensive catalogues of verbal critical comments on findings (critical apparatus) in one or more corresponding music and text sources. The critical report in print editions, containing the critical apparatus and also general further information about the work and its sources, is usually stored separately from the music editions. Considering the discrepancy between the verbal description of a finding and its representation in notated music, using such linear structured catalogues often requires an intensive effort to read.
The introduction of digital techniques in recent scholarly music editions not only allows an extension of the amount of considered material (editions, digitized images of music and text sources, contextual information), but also facilitates the presentation and immediate contextualization of the edition and its sources within the critical report1.
At first this can be realised as a transformation of traditional critical commentary into a digital form by visualizing it on and linking it to digital representations (images) of editions and sources. With current developments of specialized encoding formats, more elaborate concepts of annotations come into consideration, moving away from commenting on music and text verbally to an encoding of variants, readings or interrelations with the help of markup techniques2.
The Music Encoding Initiative (MEI)3 as an XML-based markup standard provides possibilities to encode data of musical works such as the content itself (music notation and text), bibliographical metadata, structural data of a work and its sources (for instance acts, scenes, sections, parts, bars), and data on corresponding representations like performances. This opens possibilities to embed different types of annotations and/or to link MEI-data to other structured data like texts encoded according to the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)4.
Over the last decade, various research and music editing projects have been exploring the application of digital technologies for their purposes, and conclusively it can be said that “There is no doubt that digital media already have influenced, and in the future will in some ways fundamentally change our conception of modern editions and editorial practices”5.
For example the Edirom-Project6 at the Musikwissenschaftliches Seminar Detmold/Paderborn (Musicology Seminar Detmold /Paderborn) has developed a set of software tools, the so-called Edirom Tools, to support music edition projects in all work stages from data compilation (Edirom Editor) to publication (Edirom Viewer or Edirom Online)7. Four edition projects currently using the Edirom Tools and additional technologies, will present themselves in the following, covering editions of musical works from different eras and multiple genres. They share in common several approaches to examine and analyse opportunities and changes in the edition process derived from the application of digital techniques. Exploring the process and an extended concept of annotating is thereby of particular interest.
4. Presentations

4.1 Understanding and encoding musical variants and readings as annotations

As an introduction to this panel, MEI principles for in-line data enrichments will be presented, allowing to encode information on variants and readings as musical text. It will be also discussed in which way such encodings could be understood as annotations and how they could be revisualized in music notation software tools for reuse in different contexts of musicological research.
The MEI Score Editor (MEISE)8, developed as part of the infrastructure project DARIAH-DE9 and designed to facilitate editing and visualization of MEI encodings and data enrichments, will be presented as an example application. Considering one of DARIAH's main research topics – techniques of scholarly annotating and annotation – MEISE's key feature is the possibility to handle encoding and visualization of variants in MEI. MEISE will enable edition projects to maintain digital research methods.
4.2 Hybrid Edition Max Reger-Werkausgabe

One of the first projects using digital techniques and the Edirom Tools is the Hybrid Edition Max Reger-Werkausgabe (RWA)10 at the Max-Reger-Institute, Karlsruhe, which is published both as printed and digital edition. Focusing on the organ works in the first module, the two striking features of the edition’s digital part are the prioritised linked-in annotations and its complex encyclopedia as an extensive collection of references to Max Reger’s life and œuvre11.
Several considerations had to be made about organizing the collaborative edition process and the two-way publication model, like centralised capture of annotations in a database for further semi-automated publication processing. This allows for the editor to postpone publication based decisions to later stages in the edition process.
Already when entering the annotations into the database, the editor assigns a priority level according to their respective importance. The lowest priority (= priority level 3) comprises remarks which are relevant only because of philological reasons (such as differing warning accidentals in the various musical sources), while the higher categories (= priority levels 1 and 2) concentrate on important matters concerning either the works themselves or their tonal realization. According to these priorities the remarks are guided either into both the digital and printed editions (levels 1 and 2) or, if of lower importance (level 3), only into the digital version.
Similar collaborative solutions as for the annotations had to be found for the preparation of the digital encyclopedia, containing texts (encoded in TEI) and images, to allow for linking to and between all edition parts and contents.
4.3 OPERA – Spektrum des europäischen Musiktheaters in Einzeleditionen

In the OPERA12 research and edition project, 21 musical dramatic compositions, drawn from different periods and different genres such as opera, Singspiel, drama with incidental music, melodrama, or ballet are being edited. A collaborative team of internal and external editors publishes its editions in a hybrid form: the score is published in traditional book format; the critical report, including images of the Music Edition and sources, and the Text Edition are presented in an electronic Edirom-based form.
The Edirom software has been modified in order to integrate the TEI-based Text Edition into the Edirom environment and to interlink it with other digital resources (digitized score and source images) through synchronization of specific structural units/data of music and text (bars, lines, numbers, etc.). The modification is compatible with future tasks such as the integration of audio and video resources. Both, music and text edition share one common critical apparatus, whose annotations are strictly categorized as Music (M), Text (T), and Stage (S), and reflect the peculiarities of musical theatre13. In addition to the annotations, which are mostly limited to report variant readings, OPERA uses a comment window for historical informations and contextualization.
4.4 Freischütz Digital – Paradigmatische Umsetzung eines genuin digitalen Editionskonzepts

Inspired by Wiering’s multidimensional Model14, the approach of Freischütz Digital15 is a genuine digital edition of the opera Der Freischütz by Carl Maria von Weber, considering all current theoretical and technical possibilities for the edition process. The principal part of this edition is the encoding and interlinking of music sources, libretto sources, and further material. The transcriptions of all music texts are encoded according to MEI whereas the transcriptions of the libretto texts and their stages of development are encoded according to TEI. For the first time, acoustic elements (several sound files of recorded performances), are analysed and visualized in the digital edition in a way that they are synchronized with and set in context to the music and text sources, their transcriptions and annotations16. This opens new possibilities for processing, enriching and reusing the edition’s data.
Annotations for the music sources will be based on the print edition currently under preparation at the Carl-Maria-von-Weber-Gesamtausgabe (WeGA)17 and be transferred to XML-based encoding. For the purpose of annotating the libretto sources the project develops a stand-off encoding model and a corresponding tool (the so-called CoreBuilder) facilitating the generation of associations18.
4.5 A Cosmopolitan Composer in Pre-Revolutionary Europe – Giuseppe Sarti

In the research project A Cosmopolitan Composer in Pre-Revolutionary Europe – Giuseppe Sarti19 two MEI based Edirom editions of Sarti’s operas Fra i due litiganti il terzo gode and Giulio Sabino are prepared, aiming to consider appropriately the fact that Italian opera as a genre does not intend to provide stable works with an “authentic” text. Instead, the operas were always adapted to the conditions of new performances.
Our edition presents the sources and their readings in a non-hierarchical way, with the intention to show a wide range of variants and arrangements20. Therefore, we distinguish between different types of annotations: We do not only document pure errors in the musical text, but also explain the textual variants and establish – according to the FRBR (Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records) model21 – the relationships of the sources. This approach seems to have clear advantages compared to the typical entries in common critical reports.
References

1. Joachim Veit (2010): Es bleibt nichts, wie es war – Wechselwirkungen zwischen digitalen und 'analogen' Editionen. In: editio, vol. 24, Berlin/Boston, pp. 37–52.
2. Johannes Kepper (2011): Musikedition im Zeichen neuer Medien – Historische Entwicklung und gegenwärtige Perspektiven musikalischer Gesamtausgaben, Norderstedt.
3. The Music Encoding Initiative (MEI) provides extensive guidelines and corresponding schemata for XML-based encoding of music. Its special features for academic and scholarly purpose make it unique among other encoding formats for music. Available online at www.music-encoding.org (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
4. The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) maintains comprehensive guidelines and corresponding schemata for XML-based text encoding, available online at www.tei-c.org (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
5. Bjarke Moe, Axel Teich Geertinger (2008): Digital Editions of Music. Perspectives for Editors and Users. Proceedings, p. 7. Online at: www.bjarkemoe.dk/digitaleditions2008.pdf (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
6. See the project’s website at www.edirom.de (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
7. Benjamin Bohl, Johannes Kepper, Daniel Röwenstrunk (2011): Perspektiven digitaler Musikeditionen aus der Sicht des Edirom-Projekts. In: Die Tonkunst 5, pp. 270-276.
8. See the project’s website at de.dariah.eu/web/guest/mei-score-editor (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
9. See the online portal of DARIAH-DE at de.dariah.eu (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
10. See the project’s website at www.max-reger-institut.de/de/rwa.php (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
11. Alexander Becker, Christopher Grafschmidt, Stefan König, Stefanie Steiner (2013): Möglichkeiten und Konsequenzen der Digitalen Musikedition am Beispiel der Reger-Werkausgabe (RWA). In: Medienwandel/Medienwechsel in der Editionswissenschaft, ed. Anne Bohnenkamp (= Beihefte zu editio 35), Berlin/Boston, pp. 159-166.
12. See the project’s website at www.opera.adwmainz.de (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
13. Janine Droese, Norbert Dubowy, Andreas Münzmay, Janette Seuffert (2013): Musik – Theater – Text. Grundfragen der Musiktheaterphilologie im Spiegel der OPERA-Hybridausgaben. In: editio, vol. 27, Berlin/Boston, pp. 72-95.
14. Frans Wiering (2009): Digital Critical Editions of Music: A multidimensional Model. In: Gibson Crawford: Modern Methods for Musicology, Ashgate, pp. 23-45.
15. See the project’s website at www.freischuetz-digital.de (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
16. Meinard Müller, Thomas Prätzlich, Benjamin Bohl, Joachim Veit (2013): Freischütz Digital: A Multimodal Scenario for Informed Music Processing (conference paper), WIAMIS 2013 - 14th International Workshop on Image and Audio Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services, Paris, July 3.
17. For further details on the Carl-Maria-von-Weber-Gesamtausgabe see the project’s website at www.weber-gesamtausgabe.de (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
18. Raffaele Viglianti, Solveig Schreiter, Benjamin Bohl: A stand-off critical apparatus for the libretto of Der Freischütz (conference paper), TEI Conference and Members Meeting 2013, Rome, October 5, 2013.
19. See the project’s website at www.udk-berlin.de/musikwissenschaft/sarti (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
20. For a paradigmatic encoding of one aria see Johannes Kepper, Christine Siegert: Oper multimedial. Zur Edirom-Ausgabe von Haydns Arienbearbeitungen. In: Medienwandel/Medienwechsel in der Editionswissenschaft, ed. Anne Bohnenkamp (= Beihefte zu editio 35), Berlin/Boston 2013, pp. 141-150.
21. Kristina Richts (2013): Die FRBR customization im Datenformat der Music Encoding Initiative (MEI), Köln. Online available at publiscologne.fh-koeln.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/144 (last accessed: March 6, 2014).
1. Introduction

1.1. Overview

Geolat - geography for latin literature aim is to annotate every placename in the latin literature using a geographical ontology for the ancient world which must be built from scratch. This will allow scholars but also students and citizens to start reading texts choosing a specific area or place they are interested to. The starting point is the Latin literature because of its founding meaning for the European culture 1.
But this same model can be applied to every other literature because nothing in it is language-dependent. Should a scholar be able to browse a map of Europe (or of the world) to choose a specific place and start examining which authors in which works wrote about it is a completely new way or conceiving the study of literature.
But this model can be expanded from place names to persons and events, allowing to browse texts by the names of people they contain or by types and subtypes of events. That is texts are meant as collections of information. Not always and not necessarily  factual information because literary texts can speak of mental, fictional representation of places or people. Nevertheless what texts  say often constitutes the canvas of what real places and people and events actually are or were.
Concurrent 'sayings' about the same place, person, or event, can be managed strictly connecting the annotation to the textual object containing the statement(s). So an ontology of textual objects is needed.
1.2. Methodology

The main methodology is that of starting from a prototype where a geographical ontology is used to annotate place names in latin texts. At this level a startup funding is sufficient to build a prototype showing and example of what could be obtained.
Then the prototype can be expanded:
adding more literatures;
and/or adding more ontologies.
In both cases a great effort is needed to accomplish the task and adequate funding is indispensable.
As the ontology is the core of the project something must be said about it. Conceptually, the annotation mechanism is based on EARMARK 2. EARMARK is an OWL 2 DL ontology that defines document meta-markup (elements, attributes, comments and text nodes), and it can be used to express facts about the inherent semantics of the markup elements and of the content of a text 3 according to a precise semiotic model 4. Thus, using EARMARK it is possible to create annotations on (plain or marked up) documents and document fragments  according to a multilayer architecture (that can be aligned, in principle, with the Open Annotation Data Model 5) and allows one not only to specify by an annotation the referent of a geographic place name, but also to provide a set of data describing such referent.  All of the entities involved in an annotation are identified by an IRI and both the annotation, its metadata and its content are specified according to the RDF data model. In this way, all these pieces of information can be published on the Web of Data following the Linked Data principles 6. The semantics of these data are explicitly expressed by means of formal ontologies, thus allowing the Geolat system itself as well as external applications to capture (at least partially) the data, to draw inferences on them and facilitating data integration. Given the specificity of the domain and of the task, a Geolat ontology has been built: We will discuss it and its relationship with other geographical ontologies widely used in the Linked Data world, such as Geonames 7.
2. Getting Started

What is here described is a running project - geolat - with some possible extensions.
2.1 The Geolat Project

Geolat project is intended to build a complete digital library of classical and late latin texts, to annotate them in every place name and then to offer a double interface to browse the texts: a cartographic one, and a mixed one (textual + cartographic). The first one allow users to choose a region on a map and to obtain a list of authors, and works, and place names pertaining to that region; the second one allows to search for a specific place whose name is written in a text field; the search will show a list of passages, a display of places onto a map, histograms of presence of place names in various sections of the related works, list of other cooccurent place names.
2.2 The Geolat Prototype

A prototype of geolat system will be built for the first months of year 2014 and will be avaliable online at the address http://www.geolat.eu. It will offer a small digital library with some ten latin texts. The placenames contained in these texts will be manually annotated using a geographical ontology specifically conceived for the classical (latin) world and literature. A cartographic interface will allow to browse the texts clicking regions or places showed onto a map.
2.3 Building the Digital Library

As it was said, the first step is having a digital library of texts. The texts in the library will be annotated using a mixed approach: the in-line annotation is based on the TEI standard, and links to an external ontology which describes geographical entities how the ancient Romans did: a forest is the home of a nymph, a river is sacred to a goddess, a city can have more than one founder, and so on. 
2.5 Browsing the Texts through a Map-based Interface

The map-based interface is the more complex part of this project because of its novelty and because of some technical problems which must be solved (e.g. finding geographical places in a given radius from another one).
3. Going further

Project geolat can go further in two non mutually exclusive ways:
adding literatures
adding ontologies (that is, types of entities).
3.1 More Literatures

Adding more literatures to the initial latin one would allow to build distinct layers of literary interpretation and to extend the scope of analysis and queries. For instance we could ask in which texts (and inside them in which passages) of Latin and French literature we find contextual references to the city of Appida and to the person of Caesar.
From the technical point of view different literatures mean different digital libraries which must define a formal protocol for interoperability. There are some basic conditions to assure this interoperability (use of UTF-8 characters encoding; adoption of at least a basic markup - preferably in XML - describing and identifying its structure: title, sections, subsections, but also paragraphs, sentences, words;  adoption of open software systems).
But the only way to assure the level of interoperability we envisage to heterogeneous collections is agian based on sharing conceptual and ontological assumption.
3.2 More Ontologies

Adding more ontologies, that is more types of categories, would offer a more complex access to the texts and the knowledge they contain.
3.2.1 Persons

Recognizing and semantically annotating geographical entities in only a first step to the goal of providing an innovative access to literary works. As witnessed by the work of Francesca Tomasi 8, persons and characters play a central role in many literary productions. In particular, we will describe how the system support the identification and the formal representation of semantic relationships between texts and persons (or characters), among persons themselves and, in general, between persons and other resources and how the EAC-CPF Ontology 9 can be exploited to this aim. The analysis of the context, as conceived in the archival domain, is a fundamental approach to connect people to documents on the basis of the role or function covered. Roles are the key tool to manage self-explanatory relationships. For this reason the Pro Ontology 10 will be also considered. We will also describe how the integration of the geographical and the personal perspectives in a homogeneous framework enhances the benefits provided by both.
3.2.3 Events

Since people participate to events and many relevant events take place in the real world (meetings, battles, travels, etc.), we believe that the notion of event is a sort of conceptual glue between geographical places and people that should be captured within our system. We will discuss this issue.
Events are of different types and are bound to time, to a specific point or duration in time.
Good examples of ontologies for events are the "Simple Event Model":
lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/details/vocabulary_sem.html11 or the "Linking Open Descriptions of Events": linkedevents.org/ontology
3.2.4 Textual Objects

Moreover, the work of Peroni and Vitali on semantic publishing 12 13 proved how the semantic technologies can be exploited in order to enrich the meaning of documents published on the Web by specify meaningful relationships between them 14.  We will discuss how this approach can be applied in to the digital library provided within the discussed  system, in order to complement it with a rich network of semantically linked resources connecting both the productions by themselves and their contents (places, persons, characters and events) in a coherent semantic graph.
References

1. M. Lana, Geolat: Geography for Latin Literature, in (forthcoming) ISAW papers 7, Current Practice in Linked Open Data for the Ancient World Editors: Thomas Elliott, Sebastian Heath, John Muccigrosso, sfsheath.github.io/lawdi-publication/isaw-papers-7.xhtml
2. Di Iorio, A., Peroni, S., Vitali, F. (2011). Using Semantic Web technologies for analysis and validation of structural markup. In International Journal of Web Engineering and Technologies, 6 (4): 375-398. Olney, Buckinghamshire, UK: Inderscience Publisher. DOI: 10.1504/IJWET.2011.043439
3. Peroni, S., Gangemi, A., & Vitali, F. (2011). Dealing with markup semantics. In Proceedings the 7th International Conference on Semantic Systems (I-SEMANTICS 2011): 111–118. New York, New York, US: ACM Press. DOI: 10.1145/2063518.2063533
4. Picca, D., Gliozzo, A. M., & Gangemi, A. (2008). LMM: an OWL-DL MetaModel to Represent Heterogeneous Lexical Knowledge. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 08). Marrakech, Morocco: European Language Resources Association (ELRA). ISBN: 2-9517408-4-0
5. Open Annotation Data Model, W3C Open Annotation Community Group 2013, www.openannotation.org/spec/core
6. Tom Heath and Christian Bizer, Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space. Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic Web: Theory and Technology, Morgan & Claypool 2011
7. Geonames Ontology, www.geonames.org/ontology/documentation.html
8. ] Tomasi, Francesca. (2013). Digital editions as a new model of conceptual authority data, JLIS.it 4.2 21-44
9. ] Mazzini, Silvia, and Francesca Ricci. (2011). EAC-CPF Ontology and Linked Archival Data. In Semantic Digital Archives (SDA) Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Semantic Digital Archives. ceur-ws.org/Vol-801/
10. Shotton David, Peroni Silvio. (2010). Pro - The Publishing Roles Ontologypurl.org/spar/pro/ (last modified 2013-05-15)
11. Willem Robert van Hage, Véronique Malaisé, Roxane Segers, Laura Hollink, Guus Schreiber.Design and use of the Simple Event Model (SEM)- Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, Volume 9, Issue 2, July 2011, Pages 128–136 dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2011.03.003 Postprint at: www.cs.vu.nl/~guus/papers/Hage11b.pdf
12. Peroni, S., Shotton, D., Vitali, F. (2012). Scholarly publishing and the Linked Data: describing roles, statuses, temporal and contextual extents. In Presutti, V., Pinto, H. S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Semantic Systems (i-Semantics 2012): 9-16. DOI: 10.1145/2362499.2362502
13. Peroni, S., Shotton, D., Vitali, F. (2012). Scholarly publishing and the Linked Data: describing roles, statuses, temporal and contextual extents. In Presutti, V., Pinto, H. S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Semantic Systems (i-Semantics 2012): 9-16. DOI: 10.1145/2362499.2362502
14. Semantic Publishing and Referencing Ontologies: purl.org/spar

1. Introduction

The project of the BFM collection of digital edition was born as a result of over 20 years of developing a large corpus of medieval French texts for research purposes. This corpus called Base de français médiéval (BFM, http://txm.bfm-corpus.org) currently includes over 130 texts, totalling approximately 4.7 million of words. The essential part of the corpus is composed of digitized paper scholarly editions selected for their philological quality. Digitizing paper editions was the only way to build a substantial corpus in a relatively short time and with limited funding. However there are serious copyright issues related to printed editions, as publishers tend to require exclusive rights on the books they print, and they are often reluctant to authorize digitization and re-use of the data in text corpora. Before 2000, publishing contracts rarely included explicit clause on digital distribution, so it can be argued that scholarly editors (or their heirs) still hold copyright for this medium, but more recent contracts include long lists of digital products and distribution modes. Even though possibilities for open-licensed publishing on the web exist, scholars have to give up all their rights if they want to publish their works in a prestigious collection recognized by the academic community. The BFM team aims at providing scholars with a possibility to publish medieval French texts under an open license (like CC BY-SA) in a collection with editorial quality guaranteed by the expertise of the reading committee including leading specialists in medieval French language and literature, in text editing techniques and in digital philology.
2. Editing principles

In addition to the open licensing, the BFM collection marks itself out by innovative editing principles. These principles have been elaborated in the project of the Queste del saint Graal digital edition1 and include a multi-layer transcription of primary sources (at least normalized and diplomatic), particular attention to punctuation and word segmentation, careful and clearly marked correction of scribal errors, linguistic annotation (part-of-speech and direct speech tagging). The "bedierist" method of the "best witness" is generally applied, but transcriptions of additional aligned witnesses are encouraged.  Whenever possible, an edition should include a digital facsimile of the primary source which allows verifying the quality of the transcription. The presence of a modern French translation is optional but may be very useful to increase the range of potential readers and uses. All these principles are described in detail in the Introduction to the Queste del saint Graal edition and most of them were presented and discussed at the International Congress of Romance Linguistics and Philology (CILPR) in 20132.
3. Workflow and publication platform

At the first stages of the editing process text editors like Microsoft Word or Libre Office Writer may be used for the convenience of scholarly editors. A small number of special characters and character or paragraph styles are defined to facilitate future processing. For instance, a hash symbol before a letter indicates that a small letter from the primary source should be capitalized in the normalized transcription. Once the primary editing complete, the text is converted to XML-TEI, which is the pivot format for all markup and editorial products in the BFM collection.The BFM corpus preparation chain automatic tools for tokenization, morphosyntactic annotation and direct speech markup. Whenever possible, the morphosyntactic annotation is verified by experts, as the automatic tagging of Old French produces inevitably a certain number of errors due to the high level of orthographic and morphological variation.
The BFM web portal built on the TXM platform3 will be used to publish the collection on the web. The advantage of this portal is that it combines the possibility to render the edition in a convenient form for reading (including parallel browsing of multiple transcription layers, digital facsimile and translation) with powerful tools for qualitative and quantitative text analysis (including frequency lists, KWIC concordances, specificity, factorial analysis, etc.). The editions of the BFM collection will be included in the BFM main corpus, and the BFM registered users will benefit from additional services, such as creating a subcorpus or recording queries. However, the possibility to read the text and to download XML-TEI source files or a PDF printable version will be provided without registration requirement.
4. Current state of the project

The edition of the Queste del saint Graal is currently complete from the philological point of view (although additional manuscript transcriptions will probably be produced in the future). All the major components of this edition (multiple layer transcriptions, modern French translation, manuscript images, introduction, proper name index and glossary) are available on the BFM portal (http://txm.bfm-corpus.org) through a special "GRAAL" corpus. However, a more convenient interface for browsing the edition and for direct access to its components is still under development.
More editions are being prepared at a more or less advanced stage. These include the Psautier d'Arundel (edited by C. Pignatelli and A. Lavrentiev)4, the Vie de saint Alexis (edited by C. Marchello-Nizia and T. Rainsford) and the first French texts, Serments de Strasbourg and Séquence de sainte Eulalie (edited by C. Guillot, A. Lavrentiev, C. Marchello-Nizia and T. Rainsford). All these editions should be published in 2014.
References

1. Marchello-Nizia, Ch. and Lavrentiev, A. (ed.) (2009-2013). La queste del saint Graal. Édition numérique interactive du manuscrit Lyon (BM P.A. 77). Lyon: ENS de Lyon. txm.bfm-corpus.org/txm (accessed 31 October 2013).
2. Guillot, C., Lavrentiev, A., Rainsford, T., Marchello-Nizia, C., Heiden, S. (2013). La "philologie numérique": tentative de définition d'un nouvel objet éditorial. Lemaréchal, A., Koch, P., Swiggers, P. (ed.). Actes du XXVIIe Congrès international de linguistique et de philologie romanes (Nancy, 15-20 juillet 2013). Section 13: Philologie textuelle et éditoriale. Nancy: ATILF. halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00846767
3. Serge Heiden, (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. Proceedings of the 24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, Institute for Digital Enhancement of Co
4. Pignatelli, C., Lavrentiev, A. (2013). Le Psautier d'Arundel : une nouvelle édition. Lemaréchal, A., Koch, P., Swiggers, P. (ed.). Actes du XXVIIe Congrès international de linguistique et de philologie romanes (Nancy, 15-20 juillet 2013). Section 13: Philologie textuelle et éditoriale. Nancy: ATILF. halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00846770
As the term “Digital Humanities” has been gradually gaining
attention around the world, with researchers in Englishspeaking
countries gathering under this banner in increasing
numbers. Among these, there are the earlier scholars who had
previously known the field as Humanities Computing; and there
are also scholars who have become involved more recently,
directly under the rubric of Digital Humanities. Yet another
new trend is that where scholars from non-English-speaking
and non-Western countries have also been gradually getting
involved in the international DH community. One of these recent
entrants to the international DH community is the Japanese
Association for Digital Humanities (JADH). The presence of this
new organization constitutes one piece of evidence to show that
the international community is gradually broadening the scope
of its membership. This trend has been actively supported by
the Multi-lingualism and Multi-culturalism Committee of the
ADHO, as well as by individual scholars who believe forming
a global community can only enrich DH and the humanities.
In view of this fact, it seems that it will become worthwhile to
release the CFP of the DH conference in many languages.
Additionally, recently several non-English Western
communities have been established. For example, Hispanic,
Italian, and German DH were discussed during the DH2012
conference at Hamburg. Each language area has long and
deep history to engage in the research and practice of DH.
Moreover, Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH) has
started to cover a wider area, such as Latin America, China,
Africa, and so on, especially focusing on communication and
collaboration across and between High, Mid, and Low Income
Economies. It is remarkable that the first pilot project of the
GO::DH, “AroundDH in 80 Days” could immediately fill the list of
DH projects around the world (Gil) with the help of international
volunteers. In the context of the humanities, globalization is not
always intrinsically good, but international communication would
be significant for DH and the humanities.
While there have been efforts focused actual local
development, in some cases, such as of the Japan, most DH
activities hadn’t been known in the global community and
most of global DH activities hadn’t been known in Japan until
several years ago. This is in spite of the fact that the number
of identified Japanese DH-related researchers is over 200 and
recently the domestic annual DH conferences have gathered
40-60 papers every year, with 800 papers being presented
since 1989 from many universities, museums, libraries, and
other institutions in a DH-related quarterly workshop (A. Charles
Muller). As the case might be similar in other non-English and
non-Western countries, it might be useful to report our recent
attempts to bridge between the DH research being carried out
by non-English-speaking scholars and those in the international
community.
First, the establishment of the JADH has proved itself to be
one of the most effective solutions for closing this kind of gap.
Since around 80 researchers participated in the first conference
in 2011 in Osaka, 80-90 Japanese researchers have attended
the annual conference and communicated with international
researchers. Then, several germs of international collaboration
have come into being there and Japanese researchers
who paid attention to the results of research activities of the
international DH community have gradually increased as a
“methodological commons”—although most of the research is
still focused on Japanese or Eastern materials.
Secondly, an e-newsletter titled “Digital Humanities
Monthly” (DHII and ARG) has been published by the
International Institute for Digital Humanities since July 2011. It
is has 390 subscribers and is also published on the Web. The
e-newsletter written in Japanese consists of an invited essay,
brief news of international activities of DH and Digital History,
DH-event calendar, and reports of DH events held in Japan and
foreign countries collaborating with some local and international
voluntary DH researchers. The event reports are plotted on
a time-space map of the Neatline.(fig.1) The total number of
the access to the Web pages was over 5,000 this October.
According to comments of the readers, it seems to have gained
the attention of not only DH researchers, but also librarians,
curators, archivists, publishers, and general public, enabling
them to see the picture of the entire situation of the domestic
and the international DH.
Thirdly, we plan to make it easier to treat Japanese and
Eastern materials compliant with kinds of international
standards. So far, we are working to propose the encoding
of Han characters that occur in our research materials in the
Universal Character Set as a group of researchers (rather than
as a national body, as has been the policy heretofore) so that
researchers can not only treat the characters but also propose
the inclusion of new characters more easily. Moreover, we
are planning to form an appropriate guideline of text encoding
of Japanese and Eastern materials in the framework of the
Text Encoding Initiative P5 guidelines (Bauman) collaborating
with related researchers around the world. As a preparation
for this, we’ve held full-day TEI workshop by the participation
of international TEI researchers over 10 times and taught the
framework of the TEI to 50 researchers in total.
While it has up to now been difficult to bridge the local
and the global, we hope our attempts will be useful for an
Digital Humanities 2014
278
appropriate mode of globalization. We would like to discuss
various possibilities with participants in the conference.
Fig. 1:
References
A. Charles Muller, Kozaburo Hachimura, Shoichiro Hara,
Toshinobu Ogiso, Mitsuru Aida, Koichi Yasuoka, Ryo
Akama, Masahiro Shimoda, Tomoji Tabata, and Kiyonori
Nagasaki (2010). "The Origins and Current State of Digitization
of Humanities in Japan." Digital Humanities 2010 : 68-70.
Bauman, Lou Burnard and Syd (2007). TEI P5: Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. http://www.teic.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html.
DHII and ARG. Ed. Kiyonori Nagasaki et al. 7 (2011). 
www.dhii.jp/DHM .
Gil, Alex ed. AroundDH | Global List. (2013). http://
goo.gl/4ov5nR.
Active Authentication through
Psychometrics
Noecker Jr, John
Juola & Associates, United States of America
What can your computer habits reveal about you?  The
answer might surprise you.  Previous work (Juola, et al., 2013)
has shown that just a few minutes of computer usage can be
used to identify who is at the keyboard and their demographic
and psychological attributes with a fairly high degree of
accuracy.  We expand upon this to show that the same usage
data can be used to thoroughly profile a previously-unknown
user to obtain valuable psychological information about the
user.
Authorship attribution, the analysis of a document’s writing
style to infer the author’s identity, is a well-established problem
in text classification.  Previously, we used classical authorship
attribution techniques to identify “who was at the keyboard”
using the DARPA Active Authentication Corpus (Juola et al,
2013).  Researchers have successfully applied the analysis
of language usage to infer authorship of written documents
(Juola, 2006. Koppel et al, 2009. Stamatatos, 2009. Jockers &
Witten, 2010), and stylometric analysis has also been applied
to things like gender (Argamon et al, 2006), personality (Luyckx
& Daelemans, 2008), and even psychological disorders like
depression (Rude et al, 2004).
Here, we attempt to perform the same technique with groups
composed of individuals who share common psychological
traits.  Previous work (Luyckx & Daelemans, 2008. Noecker
& Juola, 2013) on personality profiling has so far focused
on analyzing previously-written documents.  In contrast, our
system provides a method for real-time psychological profiling
of a user based on his or her interactions with a computer over
a relatively short period of time (approximately 30 minutes).
  The ultimate goal is two-fold: to learn something about a
previously-unobserved user (traditional stylometric identification
techniques require us to have training data on a user before
we can identify him) and to use psychological traits as an
enhancement to current user authentication methods.
Currently, exact accuracy on the user-based authentication
is approximately 90%.  This task becomes more difficult
(and the accuracy becomes correspondingly lower) as the
pool of potential author models grows.  In order to improve
overall accuracy of the user authentication task, we propose to
include these psychological profiling tools in the authentication
system.  If a given user can be identified as the most likely
candidate with 90% probability, and several facets of that user’s
personality can be confirmed with similarly high confidence,
this will increase the overall robustness of the authentication
system.
For our purposes, we used two personality/intelligence
measurement systems to profile users: Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator (MBTI) and Multiple Intelligences Developmental
Assessment Scales (MIDAS).
The Myers-Briggs type indicator (MBTI) assigns four binary
classifications to define personality (Myers & Myers, 1980)
–  Extroversion vs Introversion
–  iNtuition vs Sensing
–  Thinking vs Feeling
–  Judgement vs Perception
The Multiple Intelligences Developmental Assessment Scales
(MIDAS) were developed by Dr. Howard Gardner in his 1983
book “Frames of Mind” (Gardner, 1983).  He used a unique
definition of intelligence: “The ability to solve a problem or
create a product that is valued within one or more cultures” (MI
Research and Consulting).  He identified 8 primary intelligent
scales, each of which have several subscales (MI Research
and Consulting):
–   Musical
–   Vocal Ability
–   Instrumental Skill
–   Composer
–   Appreciation
–   Kinesthetic
–   Athletics
–   Dexterity
–   Logical-Mathematical
–   Everyday Math
–   School Math
–   Everyday Problem Solving
–   Strategy Games
–   Spatial
–   Space Awareness
–   Working with Objects
–   Artistic Design
–   Linguistic
–   Expressive Sensitivity
–   Rhetorical Skill
–   Written-academic
–   Interpersonal
–   Social Sensitivity
–   Social Persuasion
–   Interpersonal Work
–   Intrapersonal
–   Personal Knowledge / Efficacy
–   Effectiveness
–   Calculations
–   Spatial Problem Solving
–   Naturalist
–   Animal Care
–   Plant Care 
We also include a 9th main scale, Leadership, with its own
subscales: Communication, Management, and Social.
Materials and Methods
Lausanne, Switzerland
279
Corpus
In order to create the most accurate corpus possible, we
set up a simulated office environment and hired 80 temporary
workers for one week each.  Workers were tasked to perform a
long-term blogging project (research and write blog articles on
topics “related to Pittsburgh in some way”) over the course of a
normal workweek.  For this study, we use the Free Key Logger
output, which provides the exact text typed by each user.  We
do not include any information about the applications being
used or any data the user pastes from the clipboard.
Feature Extraction
For our analysis, we used the Java Graphical Authorship
Attribution Program (JGAAP) (Juola et al, 2009).  JGAAP
is a Java-based, modular program for textual analysis, text
categorization, and authorship attribution.  It provides a
comprehensive framework, allowing us to rapidly test the
effectiveness of different analysis techniques on the recorded
data.
JGAAP divides analysis into several steps: Canonicization
(Preprocessing), Event Set (Feature) Generation, and Analysis.
  In Canonicization, preprocessors are used to standardize
the text.  For this step, we converted all input letters to lower
case (“Unify Case”) and converted all strings of whitespace
characters into a single space character (“Normalize
Whitespace”).  At this stage, we also processed a variety of
special keyboard characters, converting these non-printable
characters into a printable placeholder (e.g. “backspace” was
replaced with “β”).  Finally, we divided the input data into blocks
of 1,000 characters, representing about 30 minutes of computer
usage.
For the event set generation, we tested character N-grams
for all N from 1 to 15, and word N-grams for N from 1 to 5.
  We then applied a number of analysis methods for each
experiment: Cosine Distance, Intersection Distance, Manhattan
Distance, and Matusita Distance.  For each method, we used
a centroid-based nearest neighbor classifier.  We performed
leave-one-out cross-validation to reach our final conclusion.
Models
For the MBTI classifiers, we built four binary classifiers (i.e. E
vs I, N vs S, T vs F, and J vs P).  For the MIDAS classifiers, we
first built a single 9-way classifier to identify a user’s principle
main scale.  This was the scale along which the user scored
highest (i.e. the scale for which the user showed the highest
preference).  For example, a user might have a preference
for “Musical” or “Linguistic”.  We also developed subscale
classifiers, which identify a user’s preference within each major
scale.  For instance, a user might be identified as “(Musical)
Vocal Ability” and “(Kinesthetic) Dexterity”, etc.  Thus, each user
was identified by a single main scale preference as well as nine
subscale preferences.
Results
MBTI
For the MBTI classifiers, we averaged an accuracy of 81.5%.
  The expected baseline average (assuming we pick the most
prevalent personality type for each category) is 55%. 
MIDAS
For the MIDAS main category identification, our best
performing classifier had accuracy of 70.7%.  This was using
character 15 grams with Intersection Distance.  The expected
baseline accuracy (achieved by choosing the most common
main scale, “Linguistic”) was 22.1%.
For the MIDAS subscale identification, the best performing
classifiers used a variety of Character n-grams, again with
Intersection Distance as the top performing analysis method. 
The average subscale accuracy was 81%.
Conclusion
We have shown here a method to reliably psychologically
profile a computer user based on only a short period (about
30 minutes) of usage time.  In addition to providing valuable
information about the user in question, this method can also
be used to provide additional layers of security for the active
authentication system we have described previously.  Even
in an adversarial situation, the difficulty of imitating both an
individual user’s style, as well as mimicking the psychological
profile of the user, will provide additional security to the
authentication system.
Also interesting to note is the limited usage data required to
perform these analyses.  The initial user psychological testing
period took approximately 3 hours, but accurate results were
obtained for only 30 minutes of computer usage.  In addition,
the three hours of testing were completely lost time – the
users were able to work only on the tests during this time.  In
contrast, the 30 minutes of analysis can be done on whatever
the user is working on at the time.  No downtime is required
to perform these analyses.  We believe this system could be
useful anywhere a non-intrusive analysis of a user might be
beneficial (e.g. determining whether a potential employee would
be a good fit).
For future work, we intend to focus on reducing the amount
of data needed even further.  Preliminary results on as little as
500 characters (about 15 minutes of usage time) have been
promising.  Additional work is also being done to integrate these
methods into the broader active authentication system in order
to bolster the overall reliability of the system.
References
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J., Shimoni, A. R (2006).
“Gender, Genre, and Writing Style in Formal Written Texts”.
Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse. Volume 23.
Issue 3. pp. 321-346.
“Broad Agency Announcement: Active Authentication”.
(2012). DARPA. Solicitation No. DARPA-BAA-12-06. 12
Jan. 2012. <http://www.fbo.gov/index?tab=documents&t
abmode=form&subtab=core&tabid=494b6b2c612c4
fd3db6cb018d4467e21>.
Gardner, Howard (1983). “Frames of Mind: The Theory of
Multiple Intelligences”.  Basic Books.
Jockers, M. L., Witten, D. (2010) “A Comparative Study of
Machine Learning Methods for Authorship Attribution”.Literary
and Linguistic Computing, vol. 25, no. 2. pp. 215–23.
Juola, P. (2006) “Authorship Attribution”.Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, vol. 1, no. 3.  pp. 233–334.
Juola, Patrick, Noecker Jr., John, Ryan, Mike, Speer,
Sandy (2009). “JGAAP 4.0 – A Revised Authorship Attribution
Tool”. Proc. Digital Humanities 2009. pp. 357–359. Maryland
Insitute. for Technology in the Humanities. University of
Maryland.
Juola, Patrick, Noecker Jr., John, Stolerman, Ariel,
Ryan, Michael, Brennan, Patrick, Greenstadt, Rachel
(2013). "Keyboard Behavior Based Authentication for
Security". IT Professional. 18 June 2013. IEEE computer
Society Digital Library. IEEE Computer Society. <http://
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MITP.2013.49>.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., Argamon, S. (2009)“Computational
Methods in Authorship Attribution”. J. Amer. Soc. Information
Science and Technology, vol. 60, no. 1. pp. 9–26.
Luyckx, K., Daelemans, W. (2008) “Personae, a Corpus for
Author and Personality Prediction from Text”.Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation. Marrakech, Morroco.
MI Research and Consulting, Inc. “Multiple Intelligences
Theory”. <www.miresearch.org/mi_theory.html>.
Digital Humanities 2014
280
Myers I B, Myers P. (1980)“Gifts Differing: Understanding
Personality Type”. Palo Alto, CA. Consulting Psychologists
Press.
Noecker Jr., J. Juola, P. (2013) “Psychological Profiling
Through Textual Analysis”. Literary and Linguist Computing.
Rude, S., Gortner, E., Pennebaker, J. (2004) “Language
Use of Depressed and Depression-Vulnerable College
Students”.Cognition and Emotion.
Stamatatos, E. (2009) “A Survey of Modern Authorship
Attribution Methods”. J. Amer. Soc. Information Science and
Technology, vol. 60, no. 3. pp. 538–556.
Zheng, N., Paloski, A., Wang, H. (2011) “An Efficient User
Verification System via Mouse Movements,”Proc. 18th ACM
Conf. Computer and Communications Security (CCS 11). ACM.
pp. 139–150.

1. Introduction

1.1. Overview

The technology of semantic web seems to be a suitable environment to offer solutions for linking poetic repertoires that belong to different European traditions and literatures (González-Blanco & Sélaf 2013)1. The problem of linking poetic repertoires is not simple, as there are not only technical issues involved, but also conceptual and terminological problems: each repertoire belongs to its own poetical tradition and each tradition has developed its own analytical terminology for years in a different and independent way. The result of this uncoordinated evolution is a bunch of varied terminologies to explain analogous metrical phenomena through the different poetic systems whose correspondences have been hardly studied.
1.2. Methodology

The aim of this paper is to present a model able to serve as a uniform solution for terminological issues in order to build a solid semantic structure as a basis to link the different poetic systems. This structure will be used to publish repertoires on the web in a structured format and using open standards in order to build an open-source and collaborative platform based on a poetic ontology which lets interoperability among the different European metrical repertoires with different applications, such as faceted searches based on SPARQL or different kinds of visualizations, very helpful for comparative analysis.
The first step to organize and manage repertoires and database systems was the construction of conceptual schema to define their basic entities and relationships. The ER (Entity-Relationship) data model is the most commonly used for this purpose, together with the data model based on records for the logical implementation (Elmasri & Navathe 2011, 27-ss)2, which is also widely accepted.
To implement this conceptual model, the project ReMetCa (Digital Repertoire on Medieval Spanish Poetry: www.uned.es/remetca) has tested different systems (commercial, free, open-source, and proprietary). The final decision, after experimenting with Oracle Express Edition (González-Blanco & Rodríguez 2013)3, has been MySQL combined with a XML tagging using the TEI-verse module. The relationship between ontological models and TEI is being taken into consideration very seriously in the last years, as it is shown by the activity of the SIG ontologies group wiki.tei-c.org/index.php/SIG:Ontologies and the specific papers published on this topic (Eide & Ore 2007)4. There are also projects that have applied these techniques to the study and analysis of medieval documents (Ciula, Spence & Vieira 2008)5.
2. Getting Started

From the three levels described (conceptual, logical and physical), this paper will focus on the first layer: the semantic description with the design of the semantic ontology, whose elements will be extensible and reusable for its application to other poetic repertoires. The conceptual model, designed on the basis of ReMetCa, will be transferred to the semantic Web as Linked Open Data. The abstraction of this initial model is prepared to be amplified with the necessary fields and terms to define metrical phenomena which are not shown in the Spanish poetic system or in the other repertoires which have been taken into account to design this first version of the semantic prototype. In order to enlarge its horizons, structure, description and contents, datasets of the following corpora have also been taken into account:
The Cantigas de Santa Maria Database: csm.mml.ox.ac.uk
Analecta Hymnica Digitalia: database on Medieval Latin poetry: webserver.erwin-rauner.de/crophius/Analecta_conspectus.htm
Bibliografia Elettronica dei Trovatori: w3.uniroma1.it/bedt/BEdT_03_20
Le Nouveau Naetebus: database on French narrative Medieval poetry : www.nouveaunaetebus.elte.hu
Répertoire de la Poésie Hongroise Ancienne (RPHA) : Repertoire on Medieval Hungarian poetry: rpha.elte.hu
MedDB: Lírica Profana Galego-Portuguesa www.cirp.es/pls/bdo2/f?p=MEDDB2
Corpus rhythmorum musicum (IV-IX secolo): database on Latin Medieval poetry accompanied with music www.corimu.unisi.it
Skaldic poetry of Scandinavian Middle Ages: https://www.abdn.ac.uk/skaldic/db.php
English Broadside Ballad: ebba.english.ucsb.edu/
Dimev: Digital index of medieval English verse: www.cddc.vt.edu/host/imev/record.php?recID=6768
To implement the conceptual model, the project uses one of the most recognized standards for semantic Web description: the Ontology Web Language (OWL), developed by W3C as an extension of RDFS. OWL is used to define the different classes, their properties and the instances of classes. It integrates sets of predefined metadata using namespaces. The set joins not only traditional well-known initiatives, such as Dublin Core, MARC or TEI, but also local proposals such as those used by some of the digital poetic repertoires that serve as a basis for this project. The TEI-Verse module6plays also an important role, due to the use that several repertoires have made of it, such as Henrik Ibsens (http://www.ibsen.uio.no) or the project of Lyrik des Hohen Mittelalters, (whose web access is not public yet), or ReMetCa itself by the addition of a XMLType field to its relational database.

Fig. 1: ReMetCa database screen with XML-type field
The software used to build the collaborative ontology is Webprotege (Tudorache et al. 2011)7, initially combined with Poolparty to create and organize vocabularies. It has been installed at ReMetCa server and opened via web in order to let participation of researchers with similar projects in the field of metrical repertoires. This system presents a light and intuitive interface but solid enough to develop a complex ontology with OWL. An important advantage is that it offers multilingual edition, which is very important for the development of such an international proposal. Once the model had been set, a metadata system has been designed to link the conceptual and logical levels based on a global abstract classification (schema), in which the different particular embodiments of each poetical tradition will be progressively included. This proposal shows both the consistency of this general language purpose and the benefits that can be obtained from the application of this model to the different local projects using a collaborative and open work system, which is essential for this new paradigm.
There are a few studies which deal obliquely with some of the above mentioned aspects (Bootz & Szoniecky 20088and Zöllner-Weber 2009)9, but there is not yet a conceptual model of ontology referred to metrics and poetry. The closest related works to this topic are probably the conceptual model of CIDOC (www.cidoc-crm.org), the vocabularies of the Getty Museum, as they are designed to express relations and artistic manifestations in the field of humanities (http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/), the controlled vocabularies of English Broadside Ballad Project http://ebba.english.ucsb.edu/ and the linked data relations offered by the Library of Congress (http://id.loc.gov/), which do not offer a deep information on metrics vocabulary.
To sum up, this project of a poetic and metrical ontology intends be much more than a repository of datasets, thesauri or controlled vocabularies. It aims to create a semantic standardized structure to describe, analyze and develop logical operations through the different poetic digital repertories and their related resources. Its final objective is to interconnect, reuse and locate the data disseminated through poetic databases in order to get interoperability among projects, to perform complex searches and to make the different resources “talk” to each other following a unique but adaptive model.
References

1. González-Blanco, E. & L. Seláf (2013), Megarep: A comprehensive research tool in Medieval and Renaissance poetic and metrical repertoires, Humanitats a la xarxa: món medieval / Humanities on the web: the medieval world, edited by L. Soriano, M. Coderch, H. Rovira, G. Sabaté & X. Espluga., Oxford, Bern, Berlin, Bruxelles, Frankfurt am Main, New York, Wien, Peter Lang (forthcoming).
2. Elmarsi, R. & S. B. Navathe (2011), Fundamentos de Sistemas de Bases de Datos, Madrid, Pearson, Addison Wesley.
3. González-Blanco, E. & J. L. Rodríguez (2013), ReMetCa: a TEI based digital repertory on Medieval Spanish poetry, at The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web, Book of Abstracts - electronic edition. Abstracts of the TEI Conference and Members Meeting 2013: October 2-5, Rome edited by Fabio Ciotti & Arianna Ciula, DIGILAB Sapienza University & TEI Consortium, Rome, 178-185. digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/teiconf2013/abstracts/. Accessed 30-10-2013.
4. Eide, Ø. & C.-E. Ore (2007), From TEI to a CIDOC-CRM Conforming Model: Towards a Better Integration between Text Collections and Other Sources of Cultural Historical Documentation, paper presented at the DH conference 2007. Abstract available at: www.edd.uio.no/artiklar/tekstkoding/poster_156_eide.html
5. Ciula, A., P. Spence & J. M. Vieira (2008), Expressing complex associations in medieval historical documents: the Henry III Fine Rolls Project, Literary and Linguist Computing, 23 (3): 311-325.
6. Burnard, L. & S. Bauman, eds., TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Ver. 2.5.0. Accessed 30-10-2013. www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/
7. Tudorache, T., C. I. Nyulas, N.F. Noy & M.A. Musen (2011), WebProtégé: A Collaborative Ontology Editor and Knowledge Acquisition Tool for the Web, Semantic Web Journal, IOS Press. www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/webprot%C3%A9g%C3%A9-distributed-ontology-editor-and-knowledge-acquisition-tool-web. Accessed: 30/10/2013.
8. Bootz, P. & S. Szoniecky (2008), Towards an ontology of the field of digital poetry, paper presented at Electronic Literature in Europe. Full text available at elmcip.net/node/415 9. Zöllner-Weber, A., “Ontologies and Logic Reasoning as Tools in Humanities?”, DHQ 2009, 3: 4. www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/000068/000068.html Accessed: 30/10/2013.
9. Zöllner-Weber, A. (2009), Ontologies and Logic Reasoning as Tools in Humanities?, DHQ, 3: 4. www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/000068/000068.html Accessed: 30/10/2013.

Goal of the project

The European Union (EU) is a “union of law”: it is created by law; it enacts laws which confer rights upon EU citizens and impose duties; it acts in accordance with its law and under the legal review of the Court of Justice. The EU has, by its own, neither peoples nor territories. Its existence is entirely enclosed in its ability to bring closer its members states as well as the Europeans through the law. Thus, the knowledge (and the understanding) of the EU law is an essential part of an ongoing democratic process. In practice, pure and perfect knowledge of the law has always faced many difficulties. This is particularly true for the EU constitutional law. It is an economic and technical law faced with significant several changes in recent years and published in all official languages of the Union (24).
The goal of the project is to create a tool for assisting the researchers in European Integration Studies in the analysis of the EU treaties. The system should allow the user to navigate through the treaties along with different axes of inquiry: access to a particular unit inside a treaty (part, section, chapter, article, etc.); multilingual alignment; modifications operated upon or by a treaty and the history of its different (consolidated) versions; status (entered into forced, repealed); possibility to add and retrieve user’s comments. The tool aims also to provide the EU citizens with the consolidated and the original versions of EU treaties enriched with additional materials (i.e. contextual resources, legal & economic doctrine, case law, …). The documents under study are part of the CVCE’s Lisbon research corpus, including founding treaties of the European Union and the treaties modifying them.
Although Web-based services allowing the navigation (EUR-Lex 1, LegiFrance 2, DOCLEG 3,the versioning (Progilex 4, MetaLex 5) and/or annotation (AT4AM for All 6) of legal documents already exists, there is no integrated solution addressing all the questions entailed by our research. So far, our experiments have been dealing with the identification of the documents structure and their relations, and the construction of small prototypes using XML-TEI as an encoding format. As the project is still in an exploratory phase, the paper will focus on the theoretical bases of the project, first experimental results and further development.
Overview of the process of creating/modifying European Integration Treaties

The EU – formerly the European Communities – was established by the Rome Treaty concluded in March 1957. Since then, this treaty was modified more than 20 times, either in application of the general revision procedure or by simplified revision procedures. Every revision is enacted in the form of a legal act – be it a new treaty such as the Maastricht treaty (1992) or a secondary law like a Council decision. The act which introduces changes exists by itself, in addition to the act which is modified. However, nowhere the consolidated versions of the treaties and all their modifications are provided, even by Eur-Lex – the web service maintained by the Publications Office of the EU. This makes any analysis of EU legal texts highly tricky as any user looking for an updated version of a specific text has to compare its original version with all its subsequent revisions. Due to their complexity and their multi-linguistic nature, EU legal texts require also corrections which are legally binding. The rule relating to the allocation of seats in the European Parliament among the EU Member States since 1951 is illustrative of the complexity of the EU law. The modifications are laid down either in primary law or in secondary law; they insert, repeal, include either a whole Article or a part of it. The dates of adoption, of publication, of entry into force, of effective implementation vary from one modification to another. Some modifications were published but never entered into force applied, some other were changed before they become effective.

Fig. 1: Complexity of the EU treaties revision process: the example of the provisions on the allocation of seats in the European Parliament from 1951 to 2013.
Documents structure. Relationships

Structure of the documents

The text of a treaty can include the following elements:
preamble;
main body of the treaty;
annexes;
protocols;
declarations;
final acts;
corrections.
The corresponding TEI document may contain, apart from the metadata encoded in the TEI Header7, a text element 8with the following constituents: front(title, preamble); body (main body of the treaty); back (protocols, declarations, final act, corrections). Except from the title and the main body of the treaty, the other elements are optional. Imbrication between some of these components is possible. For instance, protocols or declarations can appear independently or be included in a final act. The main body of a treaty is structured in Fig. 2. Other components, like protocols or annexes, may have a similar configuration. 

Fig. 2: Structure of the main body of a treaty
Smaller items can be further identified but the lowest unit considered in the study is the alinea (it corresponds to a paragraph in the non-legal writing) 9.
Relations

The relations to be modeled operate either between treaties (Fig. 3) or at the fragment level, for example, an article from a treaty is modifying another article from a different treaty (Fig. 4). The relations between treaties (see also 10) are represented below and correspondingly in Fig.3.
amended_by / amends (oblique arrows pair);
previous /next versions (other than linguistic) (horizontal arrows);
linguistic_version (oblique arrow).

Fig. 3: Inter-treaties relations
The figure shows, along with the Modification and Time/Status axes, how the Treaty establishing European Economic Community (EEC, 1957) is amended by the Single European Act (SEA, 1986) and by the Treaty on the European Union (TEU, 1992), two subsequent consolidated versions being produced accordingly (EEC, 1986; EEC, 1992) (numeric codes are inspired by 11). The Language axis adds another dimension to the representation of the different linguistic versions of the treaties. Since the relations actually produce a multi-dimensional space, we can imagine the representation as functioning by parallel plans, rather than in a single three dimensional reference system. Moreover, the Time/Status axes are used to define three different timelines, for the creation/signature, entered into force and end of validity dates and places.
The relations at the fragment level can be of the following types:
modified_by / modifies;
cited_by / cites;
previous / next.

Fig. 4: Relations at the fragment level
Fig. 4 illustrates the previous/next relations (horizontal arrows) between fragments (dispositions) from a version to the other and how a disposition from TEU (1992) repeals another from EEC (1986) (vertical arrows).
Experiments

The experiments conducted so far dealt with encoding the structure of the treaties main body (Fig. 2) and the multilingual alignment. The production of XML-TEI documents involved a transformation chain represented in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5: XML-TEI transformation chain
First, the styled Microsoft Word documents, with styles corresponding to the structural components down to the level of Article (Fig. 2), were converted into XML-TEI (P5) using the OxGarage converter 12. The components were encoded using div elements. An XSL 13 file was created in order to enrich the encoding produced by the first conversion with attributes (@typeaccepting as values the components names, @xml:id, @n) for every div element. The transformation performed via Saxon 14also included procedures for the delimitation and identification of paragraphs and alineas (not marked by Microsoft Word styles). The resulted XML-TEI files were stored in an eXist-db 15database and HTML, CSS and XQuery 16 scenarios were added for visualization and queries. Fig. 6 shows the result of a search at the level of alinea and its multilingual alignment.

Fig. 6: Search by alinea. Multilingual alignment
Further work

The complexity of the relations modeling involved in our study mainly resides, on one hand, in their temporal dimension (the modifications, the generation of new versions, their validity, and implicitly their relations, query and retrieval should operate in terms of time points and time frames) and, on the other hand, in the linguistic diversity of their expression (multilingual nature but also different ways of expressing, inside the same language, how a given fragment from a treaty modifies another). Our current inquiry is therefore related to the expression of the: types of amendment (e.g. repeal, insertion, substitution) 17; nature of the reference (document/fragment, internal/external, simple/multiple, contextual/non-contextual) 18; active/inactive time intervals 19. Other elements under study and experimentation are the relations encoding (TEI linking specifications 20; xLink, xPointer 21, 22), as well as the potential use of TEI extensions for legal texts 23. Aspects related to the balance between manual versus automatic processing, the corresponding workflow, and the maintenance strategies allowing the incorporation of new data or the integration of user’s intervention are also to be considered.
The presentation will focus on the theoretical bases of the project and the experimental results.
References

1. EUR-Lex Access to European Union, eur-lex.europa.eu/en/index.htm.
2. Legifrance, le service public de la diffusion du droit, www.legifrance.gouv.fr/.
3. Documents DOCLEG, www.riziv.fgov.be/webprd/docleg/cgi-bin/cgint.exe?9&ulang=fr.
4. Progilex, legal publisher in Luxembourg, www.legitech.lu/fr/progilex/presentation.
5. CEN MetaLex, Open XML Interchange Format for Legal and Legislative Resources, www.metalex.eu/.
6. AT4AM for all, the web-based amendment authoring tool used at the European Parliament, www.at4am.org/.
7. Text Encoding Initiative, P5, TEI Header, www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/HD.html.
8. Text Encoding Initiative, P5, Default Text Structure, www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/DS.html.
9. Mencia, Eneldo Loza (2009), Segmentation of legal documents, Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, Barcelona, Spain, p. 88–97.
10. Treaty on European Union, 11992M/TXT, Eur_Lex, eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:11992M/TXT:EN:NOT#top.
11. HOW CELEX NUMBERS ARE COMPOSED, EUR-Lex, 2011, 2013, eur-lex.europa.eu/en/tools/HowCelexNumbersAreComposed.pdf.
12. OxGarage Conversion, www.tei-c.org/oxgarage.
13. The Extensible Stylesheet Language Family (XSL), www.w3.org/Style/XSL.
14. Saxon, The XSLT and XQuery Processor, saxon.sourceforge.net.
15. eXist-db Open Source Native XML Database, exist-db.org.
16. W3C XML Query (XQuery), www.w3.org/XML/Query/.
17. Spinosa, P., Giardiello, G., Cherubini, M. (2009), NLP-based metadata extraction for legal text consolidation, ICAIL '09 Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pp. 40-49
18. Martinez Gonzalez et al. (1997), Electronic Manipulation of European Texts about Conflicts of Jurisdiction : a Semantic Web Tool, Paper delivered at the Text Encoding Initiative Tenth Anniversary User Conference, November 1997, www.lefis.org/images/documents/outcomes/lefis_series/ lefis_series_2/capitulo4.pdf.
19. Boer, A., Hoekstra, R., Winkels, R. (2002), METALex: Legislation in XML, in T. Bench-Capon, A. Daskalopulu and R. Winkels (eds.), Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, Jurix 2002: The Fifteenth Annual Conference, Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp. 1-10, citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.12.3189&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
20. Text Encoding Initiative, P5, Linking, Segmentation, and Alignment, www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/SA.html.
21. W3C XML Pointer, XML Base and XML Linking, www.w3.org/XML/Linking.
22. Martínez M.M, De La Fuente, P., Derniame, J-C., Pedrero, A. (2003), Relationship-based dynamic versioning of evolving legal documents, INAP'01, Proceedings of the Applications of prolog 14th international conference on Web knowledge management and decision support, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 290-305.
23. Finke, N.D. (1997), TEI Extensions for Legal Text, Text Encoding Initiative Tenth Anniversary User Conference, www.stg.brown.edu/conferences/tei10/tei10.papers/finke.html#fn0.

CatCor: Correspondence of Catherine the Great

Introduction

The CatCor pilot project has produced a searchable online text collection of the letters of Catherine the Great. This poster examines the technical background to the project and specifically how the document analysis and subsequent creation of a TEI P5 customization that tightly controlled the more general TEI P5 Guidelines produced a number of significant benefits for the project. These mainly relate both to the ease of checking of the letters and also the subsequent development of a website extracting data from this text collection. This digital humanities project is used as a case study to demonstrate how, with only very minimal funding, a research project may be empowered to produce resources that are of clear and immediate benefit to socio-cultural historians and literary scholars interested in these materials.  
About Catherine the Great's letters

Catherine the Great used her correspondence, the primary knowledge-transfer medium of the Age of Enlightenment, to shape her nation's and her own role in the political, cultural, and social arenas of Europe. The collection includes epistolary exchanges with such major figures as Voltaire, Frederick the Great, Friedrich Melchior Grimm, and Catherine’s charismatic lover Grigory Potemkin. Catherine ruled Russia for 34 years in the second half of the 18th century (from 1762-1796) and her correspondence was the essential medium through which she governed her court and empire, and established her own and her nation’s formidable presence in the political life of Europe and in the intellectual life of the European Enlightenment. Catherine saw herself as the model Enlightenment monarch, ruling over a nation that had fully opened itself to European influence and entered the European consciousness barely 50 years earlier. The primary aim of her reign was to demonstrate, through both policy initiatives and public relations efforts, that Russia was a European state.
The digital collection

Creating a digital collection of this unique set of letters allows scholars to discover unexpected links between letters that have previously been difficult, if not almost impossible, to juxtapose. The use of digital humanities methodologies has meant this project has been able not only to bring together these disparate and difficult to access texts, but also enabled new ways of searching, browsing, and comparing them. While the pilot project only uses 100 letters these were written by Catherine during two key periods in her transformative reign, 1774 and 1790-91. Later funding bids will aim to expand the collection and the project's scope to encompass a complete collection of Catherine's few thousand extant letters and also include those sent to her.
The text of the letters used for the pilot project are encoded in TEI P5 XML and translations to English are provided to facilitate use by a wider range of researchers. This markup also allows the letters to be classified according to a controlled vocabulary of project-specific themes which are then exposed to users as facets in the web interface. The project supplements the letters with a new apparatus of editorial notes and metadata concerning every single person, place, event, and work mentioned in the correspondence. The ease of extraction and aggregation of these named entity instances is one example of the benefits of using a well-known open international standard and having undertaken the necessary document analysis to significantly constrain this schema. Once extracted the instances along with accompanying metadata are able to be displayed, browsed, and filtered with common technologies such as jQuery DataTables. Similarly the use of schematron constraints in the TEI ODD Customization, and the development of straightforward mechanisms for simplifying proofing of common aspects of textual collections is documented in this poster.
Conclusion

The digital humanities aspects of this project are used as a case study into the re-usability of the general purpose tools developed for processing, displaying, and checking basic named entities as well as other common features of such letters. All of the relevant digital technologies, including the TEI P5 XML files of the letters, metadata files, TEI ODD Customization, and XSLT2 functions used for creation and proofing of the underlying data files are available from a public github repository under an open license. It is hoped that this will encourage re-use and empowerment for other digital humanists wishing to make similar text collections available. The open source development work on this project demonstrates the kinds of sophisticated results, immediately beneficial to the scholars working on these materials, that can be achieved with limited resources.

1. Introduction (1)

Digital Humanities (hereafter DH) is surely a field in rapid evolution, where open questions (2) are numerous and self-reflexivity is not new. This paper aims to contribute to the discussion around general and somehow obvious questions -  debated globally, often daily, by scholars - by reformulating the issues at stake in the following terms: other scholarship in the humanities and techno-sciences (McCarty 2013b1) has passed/passes via the experimental and the formal; in what way is the experimental and the formal done in DH different and similar? To address this question the argument will circle around two interrelated concepts:
that of ‘text’, intended in its processuality (Meister 20072) and in a wide sense from linear to discontinuous narrative, from manuscripts to printed editions, encompassing hybrid modalities such as maps (Eide 2013a3) and ‘narrative drawings’ (Groensteen 20124);
that of 'modelling', intended as DH-specific research and teaching activity (modelling rather than models; see McCarty 2005, Jannidis and Flanders 20136), but also connected to multifaceted conceptualisations of modelling (in particular Kralemann and Lattmann 20137) as used and seen by other disciplines and practices.
Firstly, ways in which new technologies and languages influence approaches to texts and the consequences for research will be discussed by recalling the results of some research projects (e.g. AGORA8, Marras and Lamarra 20139, Marras 2013b10) and by referring to the literature that reflected at large on the influence the creation and use of, for example, standard markup languages have on the relation between scholars and texts (e.g. Buzzetti 200211).
This has an important epistemological consequence that in the paper will connect directly the reflection on one of, or possibly the privileged object/s of humanities research - text – to the second focus of the argument: by modelling knowledge we somehow provide for an abstract way of looking at the world. Is DH research prone to privilege a symbolic analysis of texts in opposition to a pragmatic one?
Despite being informed by modelling as rooted in computing and therefore in mathematical reasoning, modelling in DH is directly interconnected to the work on texts, but is not only a way to see patterns of similarity across texts (e.g. Eide 2013b12). Beyond what is branded as DH research, other imaginative practices of assembling 'toolkits' to find patterns in human production exist (e.g. Hockney 200613). Can we sustain the unicity of the lens of computing, of modelling through computing? While being a rather theoretical exercise, a comparative perspective on modelling would need to be experimental in its nature: is modelling in computing going to lift our way of seeing and therefore thinking to another level of analysis?
While keeping these questions in mind, we note that significant things are happening. DH or humanities computing in its former vest (Schreibman et al. 200414) is being institutionalized and is an example of how cross-border fertilisation, namely interdisciplinarity, is possible (e.g. McCarty 2013a15, Marras 201216, Ciula 201317). We acknowledge that DH scholars and professionals are making use of a ‘blended’ style (intended as in McCarty 200918) reflected both in their language, by adopting expressions to account for a new scenario, and in their research and teaching approaches, often integrating computational methods and terminologies with modes of discourse associated to more established scholarship in the humanities (Marras 2013a19, Flanders 200920).
DH opened the stage to doing and talking about research recurring to innovative and diverse knowledge as well as to an innovative and diverse way of organising and conceptualising it. Software has also been developed to explore and represent current networked knowledge configurations (e.g. Lima's 'Knowledge Atlas', Quagiotto’s ‘Knowledge Cartography’21).
However, a (cultural) change to inform the sharing of practices and results is possibly still lacking behind (Ciula 201322). Specific modelling practices in DH could be lead to combine theoria cum praxis, anchoring innovative approaches to a solid theoretical framework. 
2. Pragmatic Modelling

In this paper we claim that language as mediation in designing and contextualising models is crucial. We do so by focusing on the concept of pragmatic modeling (4) intended as research strategy, framed within the complex cognitive, social, and cultural functioning of DH practices affected by cross-linguistic and interdisciplinary dimensions. Pragmatic modelling is understood as being anchored to theory and language, while at the same time claiming some freedom from both (e.g. in digital textual editing one might adopt the OHCO model while at the same time questioning it deeply). It operates within the relational and dynamic aspects of modeling.(5)
Middle out method and metaphoric reasoning/language

Metaphors as meta-models (Kralemann and Lattmann 201323) and linguistic tools are called to explore the creative power of pragmatic modelling (Getachew 200624 and Mazzocchi-Fedeli 201325) and to move forward the theoretical reflection as framed so far. With this respect, metaphorical reasoning exemplifies a specific strategy to guide modelling in DH: pragmatic modelling can be understood as facilitating a middle-out approach based on metaphorical language. In general terms, this translates into a move away from the dichotomy at interplay between bottom-up (models emerging from particulars or 'artifacts of study') and top-down (models imposed on particulars) approaches to what we propose to call a middle-out method; a method that acts at the crossing point of data and models adapting itself to specific “textual contexts”. Three interrelated properties (adapted from Verschueren, 1995) can be associated with this method:
Variability - the range of choices in the use of language cannot be seen as static in any respect.
Negotiability - such choices are not made mechanically or according to strict rules or fixed form-function relationships, but on the basis of highly flexible principles and strategies, thus also implying the indeterminacy and unexclusiveness of the choices made.
Adaptability - such negotiable choices can be adapted based on specific needs and contexts according to the variable range of possibilities. 
DH Practices

We will narrow down our approach with selected case studies that show how in DH (in comparison to other contexts) choices are not made mechanically or according to fixed theories, but on the basis of flexible principles and strategies potentially open to creative reasoning. Indeed, with respect to modelling theorised in computer sciences, the challenge in DH is to shift the lens of computing up the scale, to embrace the experimental nature of modelling at the lower level of the scale (e.g. in computing coding) and see indeed how it can scale up (e.g. to do critical scholarship with/via it).
The opportunities enabled by modelling (e.g. emergence of patterns of relation, behaviour, and shape) are rooted not only in a ‘demonstrative’ and ‘literal language’ but also in the metaphorical one (Marras 201327, McCarty 200628). Some modelling attempts in DH and cultural heritage formalisations more in general have embarked in dedicated efforts to problematise terminology (e.g. CIDOC-CRM29; Pundit30); some prominent DH scholarship is reflecting on the limits of adopting uncritically the language of computer sciences (e.g. Eide et al. 201331 on spatio-temporal concepts in humanities and arts; Simpson et al. 201332 on what a ‘person’ is in ontological models for the humanities; Renear 201333 on what ‘datasets’ are for libraries, publishing, data curation, and DH); some other DH scholarship has ventured in creative attempts at establishing neologisms (e.g. “factoid” as described in Short and Bradley 200534): is there a trade-off in projecting historical lexicons in new contexts of use?
3. Conclusions

In conclusion, departing from open and interdisciplinary conceptualisations of objects of analysis – such as texts – and of certain explorative and epistemological strategies of analysis – such as modelling – the authors will show how the spectrum of research in DH is indeed expanding our boundaries of knowledge. However, modelling practices are more than often constrained by the language they are embedded in, either because terminology is not problematised enough or because language is not used imaginatively.
Notes

(1) This paper is the result of an intense discussion carried out between the two authors in the last years on the nature of DH research practices and strategies. This discussion took place in different contexts, in particular during the work on DH infrastructures carried out at ESF (Moulin et al. 201135), but also as part of informal exchanges stemming from diverse teaching experiences and works within collaborative research projects in the broad area of DH. Recently a discussion focused on modelling within the forum of Humanist (see references36) triggered some further reflections partially formalised in this paper.
(2) “Is there such thing as DH? Is DH unique in its practice and research strategy?” See Gold 201237 for a rich overview on this discussion.
(4) We subscribe to a functional perspective on the study of language. By focusing on use, a pragmatic perspective is also integrative in that it aims at encompassing the full complexity of the cognitive, social, and cultural functioning of language (Verschueren 199538).
(5) We mean both the interplay between the object of analysis and the model (usually referred as mapping; e.g. Kralemann and Lattmann 2013, 341739), as well as across different levels of the interpretative process (e.g. close and distant reading, symbolic/sintagmatic and semantic/paradigmatic levels of text analysis).
References

1. McCarty, W. (2013b). DH Conference 2013, Busa Award lecture 2013, Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations: www.youtube.com/watch?v=nTHa1rDR680 (accessed 3 March 2014)
2. Meister, J. Ch. (2007). Events are Us, Amsterdam International Electronic Journal for Cultural Narratology, (AJCN) 4/Autumn 2007: cf.hum.uva.nl/narratology/a07_meister.htm (accessed 3 March 2014)
3. Eide, Ø. (2013a). Why Maps Are Silent When Texts Can Speak. Detecting Media Differences through Conceptual Modelling. Buchroithner M. F. et al. (eds), Proceedings of the 26th International Cartographic Conference, Dresden 2013: www.icc2013.org/_contxt/_medien/_upload/_proceeding/31_proceeding.pdf (accessed 3 March 2014)
4. Groensteen, T. (2012). Définitions. L’Art de la bande dessinée, Citadelles & Mazenod: 17-75.
5. McCarty, W. (2005). Humanities computing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
6. Jannidis, F. and Flanders, J. (2013). A concept of data modelling for the humanities. DH Conference 2013: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/author.html?q=author:%22jannidis%2C%20fotis%7C%7CJannidis%2C%20Fotis%22 (accessed 3 March 2014)
7. Kralemann, B. and Lattmann C. (2013). Models as icons: modeling models in the semiotic framework of Peirce’s theory of signs, Synthese, November 2013, Volume 190, Issue 16: 3397-3420.
8. AGORA, Scholarly Open Access Research in European Philosophy, CIP-Pilot Action (CIP-ICT-PSP-2010-4, n. 270904: www.project-agora.org
9. Marras, C. and Lamarra, A. (2013). Scholarly Open Access Research in Philosophy: Limits and Horizons of a European Innovative Project. DH Conference 2013: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-316.html (accessed 3 March 2014)
10. Marras, C. (2013b). AGORA-Scholarly Open Access Research in Philosophy. An overview’. Beiträge zur Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft, Projektberichte, 23.2: 295-301.
11. Buzzetti, D. (2002). Digital Representation and the Text Model, New Literary History, 33, 1, Winter 2002: 61-88 | 10.1353/nlh.2002.0003
12. Eide, Ø. (2013b). Ontologies, data modelling, and TEI. TEI Conference 2013: digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/teiconf2013/program/papers/abstracts-paper#C107 (accessed 3 March 2014)
13. Hockney, D. (2006). Secret knowledge: rediscovering the lost techniques of the old masters. London: Thames & Hudson.
14. Schreibman, S.; Siemens, R.; Unsworth, J. (eds.) (2004). Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell, www.digitalhumanities.org/companion (accessed 3 March 2014)
15. McCarty, W. (2009). Being reborn: the humanities, computing and styles of scientific reasoning. New Technology in Medieval and Renaissance Studies 1: 1-23. Invited paper originally delivered at the Renaissance Society of America conference, Clare College, Cambridge, 7 April 2005.
16. Marras, C. (2012). Pragmatica e comunicazione: orizzonti interdisciplinari. Gensini, S. and Forgione L. (eds.) Filosofia della comunicazione. Roma: Carocci.
17. Ciula, A. (2013). Which Changes are Currently Taking Place in our Research and Academic Culture?, International colloquium: Research Conditions and Digital Humanities: What are the Prospects for the Next Generation?, German Historical Institute in Paris, June 2013: www.slideshare.net/arimare/presentation-ciulaparis2013 (accessed 3 March 2014)
18. McCarty, W. (2009). Being reborn: the humanities, computing and styles of scientific reasoning. New Technology in Medieval and Renaissance Studies 1: 1-23. Invited paper originally delivered at the Renaissance Society of America conference, Clare College, Cambridge, 7 April 2005.
19. Marras, C. (2013a). Structuring multidisciplinary knowledge: Aquatic and terrestrial metaphors. Knowledge Organization, Mazzocchi, F. and Fedeli, G. (eds.), special issue, Fall 2013: 392-399.
20. Flanders, J. (2009). The Productive Unease of 21st-century Digital Scholarship, Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol.3, 3, 2009: www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000055/000055.html (accessed 3 March 2014)
21. Knowledge cartography: www.knowledgecartography.org (accessed 3 March 2014)
22. Ciula, A. (2013). Which Changes are Currently Taking Place in our Research and Academic Culture?, International colloquium: Research Conditions and Digital Humanities: What are the Prospects for the Next Generation?, German Historical Institute in Paris, June 2013: www.slideshare.net/arimare/presentation-ciulaparis2013 (accessed 3 March 2014)
23. Marras, C. (2013b). AGORA-Scholarly Open Access Research in Philosophy. An overview’. Beiträge zur Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft, Projektberichte, 23.2: 295-301.
24. Getachew, M-T. (2006). Metaphor. Continuum Encyclopedia of British Philosophy. Goulder, N., Grayling A.C., Pyle, A. (eds). London: Thoemmes Continuum.
25. Mazzocchi, F. and Fedeli, G. (eds.) (2013). Special Issue: ‘Paradigms of Knowledge and its Organization: The Tree, the Net and Beyond’, Knowledge Organization, vol. 40, n.6.
26. Verschueren, J. (1995, revised 2012). The pragmatic perspective. Handbook of Pragmatics, Östman J-O. & Verschueren J. (eds.), John Benjamins: Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
27. Marras, C. (2013a). Structuring multidisciplinary knowledge: Aquatic and terrestrial metaphors. Knowledge Organization, Mazzocchi, F. and Fedeli, G. (eds.), special issue, Fall 2013: 392-399
28. McCarty, W. (2006). Tree, Turf, Centre, Archipelago or Wild Acre? Metaphors and Stories for Humanities Computing. Literary and Linguist Computing, April 2006, 21, 1: 1-13.
29. CIDOC-CRM, Conceptual Reference Model: www.cidoc-crm.org (accessed 3 March 2014)
30. Pundit: www.thepund.it (accessed 3 March 2014)
31. Eide, Ø; Grossner, K.; Berman, Merrick L.; Ore, C.-E. (2013). Issues in Spatio -Temporal Technologies for the Humanities and Arts. Panel at DH Conference 2013: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-319.html (accessed 3 March 2014)
32. Simpson, J.E.; Brown, S.; Goddard, L. (2013). A Humanist Perspective on Building Ontologies in Theory and Practice, DH Conference 2013: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-413.html (accessed 3 March 2014)
33. Reaner, A. (2013). Text encoding, ontologies, and the future. Keynote at TEI Conference 2013: digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/teiconf2013/program/keynotes/ (accessed 3 March 2014)
34. Short, H. and John B. (2005). Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of New-style Prosopography, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 2005, 19.5: 3-24
35. Moulin, C.; Nyhan, J.; Ciula, A; et al. (2011). Research Infrastructures for the Digital Humanities, ESF Science Policy Briefing 42, Sept. 2011: www.esf.org/publications (accessed 3 March 2014)
36. Humanist Discussion Group, vol. 27, n. 471: 27.471 models of computation: www.digitalhumanities.org/humanist (accessed 3 March 2014)
37. Gold, M.K., ed. (2012). Debates in Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press: dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/ (accessed 3 March 2014)
38. Verschueren, J. (1995, revised 2012). The pragmatic perspective. Handbook of Pragmatics, Östman J-O. & Verschueren J. (eds.), John Benjamins: Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
39. Kralemann, B. and Lattmann C. (2013). Models as icons: modeling models in the semiotic framework of Peirce’s theory of signs, Synthese, November 2013, Volume 190, Issue 16: 3397-3420.
GAMS: A Fedora Commons instance

Since 2003 the Centre for Information Modeling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities at the University of Graz (Austria) provides an infrastructure for a variety of DH projects. After years of building insular solutions, the Centre introduced a powerful yet flexible new infrastructure, called GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System, AMS for the Humanities). It is based on the Fedora Commons architecture. Thus, the infrastructure inherits all features already provided by Fedora: full OAIS-compliance, strict separation of data and metadata, and predefined interfaces like OAI-PMH. A central advantage of the Fedora architecture is its object model: An asset consists of a primary source, some metadata and virtual representations derived from the primary source. The object is completely self-descriptive: It knows about all changes that have been made to it, its version history, datastreams and assigned context objects. Finally, it also knows about all possible representation forms. Each object contains all the necessary information to store, preserve, retrieve and view it.
Cirilo Client: Mass operations in Fedora made easy

Although Fedora is a powerful tool, front-end object management is not always easy, especially with regard to mass operations. The Centre has developed a tool for this use case, complementing Fedora’s built-in Admin Client. Cirilo is a java application developed for data curation and content preservation in Fedora-based repository systems. Content preservation and data curation in our sense include object management and creation, versioning, normalization and standards, and choice of data formats.
Cirilo makes use of Fedora’s management-API (API-M). It offers applications which are particularly prone to being used as tools for mass operations on Fedora repository objects, such as ingest or replacement processes: With Cirilo ingest processes can be performed from the file system, from an eXist database or an Excel spreadsheet. During the ingest metadata is automatically extracted from the source document and written to the newly created object (for instance in DC format).
  The client operates on a collection of predefined content models which can be used without further adjustments for standard workflow scenarios like the management of collections of TEI objects. The content models, which are based on the Fedora object model, are class definitions: On the one hand they define the (MIME-)type of the contained data streams, on the other hand they designate dissemination methods operating on these data streams. Every object in the repository is an instance of one of these class definitions. The advantage of this concept lies in the fact that very complex data sources and workflows can be handled easily.
Currently, the client offers various content models for specific purposes, special emphasis lies on the TEI model. The TEI ingest processes can be flexibly costumized: during ingest policies for the extraction of semantic information can be applied, referenced images can be uploaded simultaneously and ontology concepts can be resolved. A new content model currently in development creates the appropriate ontology objects, especially SKOS objects. A designated query object makes it possible to pose queries with parameters to the Mulgara triplestore. With the help of these ontology and query objects dynamic indices can be created. There is a container object for the creation of collections available, which makes it easy to organize your resources. Finally, there are some models optimized for specified primary sources like METS/MODS, HTML, PDF, BibTeX or external resources accessible via an URL. A content model for linguistic resources is in development (in cooperation with ICLTT, Vienna). Currently, we are testing how controlled vocabularies and thesauri (for instance geonames.org), can be sensibly integrated in the system.
The user can assign numerous virtual representations via the client. The METS/MODS object is designed to be viewed in the DFG-Viewer. TEI objects can be directly used as the input for the Voyant Tools or the Versioning Machine. The members of a context object can be projected on a map using Google Maps. Basically any web-based service can be integrated into the infrastructure. Of course, user- and project-specific stylesheets are often employed.
The Cirilo Client will be made available as an open source software project, including documentation, as a contribution of the Centre for Information Modeling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities to DARIAH-AT in 2014.
References

DARIAH-EU: www.dariah.eu [2013-10-28]
DFG-Viewer: dfg-viewer.de/ueber-das-projekt [2013-10-28]
Fedora Commons: www.fedora-commons.org [2013-10-28]
Google Maps: maps.google.at [2013-10-28]
Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System, AMS for the Humanities: gams.uni-graz.at [2013-10-28]
Carl Lagoze, Sandy Payette, Edwin Shin, Chris Wilper, Fedora (2005). An Architecture for Complex Objects and their Relationships. arxiv.org/ftp/cs/papers/0501/0501012.pdf [2013-10-28]
Versioning Machine: v-machine.org [2013-10-28]
Voyant Tools: voyant-tools.org [2013-10-28]

1. Introduction

CLARIN is the short name for the Common Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure. It aims at providing easy and sustainable access for scholars in the Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS) to digital language data and advanced tools to discover, explore, exploit, annotate, analyse or combine them, independent of where they are located. CLARIN is one of the research infrastructures that were selected for the European Research Infrastructures Roadmap by ESFRI, the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures. The CLARIN Governance and Coordination body at the European level is CLARIN ERIC. An ERIC is a new type of international legal entity, established by the European Commission in 2009. Its members are governments or intergovernmental organisations. 
CLARIN is in the process of building a networked federation of European data repositories, service centres and centres of expertise, with single sign-on access for all members of the academic community in all participating countries. Tools and data from different centres will be interoperable, so that data collections can be combined and tools from different sources can be chained to perform complex operations to support researchers in their work. The CLARIN infrastructure is still under construction, but a number of participating centres are already offering access services to data, tools and expertise. The purpose of the present paper is to give an overview of language resources, tools, and services that CLARIN presently offers.
2. Reference Data Sets

The federation of CLARIN centers offers a high number of reference data sets that are well-known and widely used in the scientific community. The CLARIN Center in Vienna offers the Austrian Academy Corpus, a very large collection of German texts and German literature covering the period of 1848 to 1989. The German reference corpus DeReKo, the  largest linguistically motivated collection of contemporary German texts with more than 4.0 billion word tokens, is hosted by the CLARIN Center in Mannheim. The CLARIN Center in Berlin provides access to the German Text Archive, a digital collection of German-language printed works from around 1650 to 1900 as full text and as digital facsimile. The CLARIN Center in Sofia offers the Bulgarian Reference Corpus. CLARIN Center in Warsaw hosts the National Corpus of Polish, a reference corpus with more than fifteen hundred million words.
CLARIN centers offer extensive collections of spoken language. The CLARIN Center in Amsterdam is home to thousands of hours of audio material for Dutch, including more than 1000 hours of dialect recordings. The CLARIN Center in Munich specializes in digital corpora for contemporary German. The CLARIN Center in Sofia offers the Bulgarian Political and Journalistic Speech corpus. 
CLARIN language resources are not restricted to the languages spoken in CLARIN member countries. The CLARIN Center in Nijmegen offers easy access to the DOBES Archive, which documents endangered languages around the world.
Another key language resource are high-quality lexica. The CLARIN Center in Tartu provides on-line access to a variety of lexica for Estonian http://www.keeleveeb.ee/. The CLARIN center in Berlin is home to the Digitale Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache (DWDS). The DWDS lexicon uses extensive digital corpus collections to document the actual usage of German words and offers on-line access to all materials at www.dwds.de/. Apart from traditional lexica, CLARIN also offers access to lexical resources that model word meanings in terms of a network of lexical and conceptual relations. The CLARIN center federation currently hosts such word nets for Czech, Danish, Dutch, Estonian, Finnish, German, and Norwegian. 
In addition to reference data sets, CLARIN provides access to an extensive set of metadata records. The Virtual Language Observatory (www.clarin.eu/vlo) currently contains more than 500.000 metadata records to language resources and tool. Facetted search and a visual map provide easy-to-use interfaces for HSS scholars to locate language resources and tools that match the needs in a  particular research project.
2.2. Creation of New Resources

For new digital data sets, special care must be taken that such data creation efforts adhere to best practises or standards for text encoding whenever possible and follow a data management plan. HSS scholars often lack the necessary experience or access to data repositories to meet these expectations. The CLARIN-D User Guide [1] provides practical information on the use of standards for language resources and on following good practises in data creation.
3. Data Mining and Data Analysis

3.1. Query Tools and Federated Content Search

Since data sets available in electronic form are typically very large, CLARIN centers support HSS scholars by providing powerful and easy-to-use query tools for many of the resources described above. Access is greatly facilitated if such query tools are realized as web applications and thus available in any web browser. Two good examples of this kind are the web application for querying the German Text Archive and the MIMORE (http://www.meertens.knaw.nl/mimore/search/tool) tool, which enables researchers to investigate morphosyntactic variation in the Dutch dialects by searching three related databases with a common on-line search engine. The search results can be visualized on geographic maps and exported for statistical analysis.
In addition to query interfaces for individual resources, CLARIN offers a Federated Content Search (FCS) functionality that enables HSS scholars to construct a virtual corpus collection hosted by different CLARIN centers and to query this virtual corpus via a common search interface. Currently, nine CLARIN centers in Germany and in the Netherlands make more than 20 resources available to the linguistic researches via the common interface of the CLARIN-D Federated Content Search ( weblicht.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/Aggregator), and this number is growing. The CLARIN Center at the University of Oslo also provides FCS functionality via the GLOSSA corpus query tool.[5]
3.2. Workflows for Data Annotations

Language data that are annotated with linguistic information can be searched with high accuracy for specific data patterns. The CLARIN Centers in Oslo, Prague, Tübingen and at the Dutch Language Union offer linguistically annotated corpora, so-called treebanks, for Czech, Dutch, German, and Norwegian with accompanying query tools.
If a collection of language resources does not contain sufficient linguistic information, for example if the word forms in a corpus have not been lemmatized, it is impossible to obtain meaningful word frequency distributions. Likewise, if an HSS scholar wants to search for all person names in a very large newspaper corpus in order obtain an overview of who is currently in the news, then the person names in such a corpus needs to be marked up. CLARIN offers support for HSS scholars who need to add annotations of this kind. The web application WebLicht [2], hosted by the CLARIN Center in Tübingen, is a tool-suite for automatic annotation of text corpora. Linguistic tools such as tokenizers, part of speech taggers can be combined into custom processing chains. The resulting annotations can then be visualized in an appropriate way, such as in a table or tree format. Recently the WebLicht tool suite has been extended to spoken language. This can be achieved with the integration of the WebMaus tool provided by the CLARIN center in Munich. WebMaus takes as input an audio file and its transcription  and automatically aligns the speech signal with its transcriptions. The WebLicht tool can then further annotate the transcriptions so that via the automatic alignment, a user can find the relevant portions of the speech signal for particular data patterns.
4. Data Visualization

Visualization tools that render the data analysis results in an easy-to-grasp fashion are particularly important if the data sets involved a very large. While CLARIN cannot provide a comprehensive suite of eHumanities visualization tools, it can already support HSS scholars with a number of helpful applications. [3] The CLARIN Center at the University of Copenhagen has developed a visualization tool for parallel inspection of word nets. CinaViz[6] is web application provided that offers geo-visualizations for tracking city names with particular linguistic features.
5. Data Sharing and Data Archiving

CLARIN also provides support for the sharing, publishing and archiving of the data sets. SimpleStore and OwnCloud solutions are available for collaborative work on the same data set. Many CLARIN data repositories offer archiving services for external resources and for finished data sets. For quality assurance, all CLARIN Centers are assessed by the CLARIN Assessment Committeee, according to strictly defined technical requirements (see: http://hdl.handle.net/1839/00-DOCS.CLARIN.EU-78) and have to obtain the Data Seal of Approval[7] for their services.
6. Conclusion

Interoperability of language resources and tools in the federation of CLARIN Centers is ensured by adherence to TEI and ISO standards for text encoding, by the use of persistent identifiers as long-lasting references to digital language data as well as by the observance of common protocols: Shibboleth for user authentication and authorization, SRU/CQL for Federated Contents Search, and OAI-PMH for metadata harvesting.
Here we could describe only a subset of all CLARIN resources and tools. For comprehensive and up-to-date information we refer interested readers to the CLARIN homepage: www.clarin.eu
References

Herold, A. and L. Lemnitzer, eds. (2012). CLARIN-D User Guide. Available at: de.clarin.eu/en/language-resources/userguide.html.
Hinrichs, E., M. Hinrichs & T. Zastrow (2010). WebLicht: Web-Based LRT Services for German. In: Proceedings of the Systems Demonstrations at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2010). Uppsala, Schweden. pp. 25-29.
Zastrow, T., E. Hinrichs, M. Hinrichs, and K. Beck (2013). Scientific Visualization for the Digital Humanities as CLARIN-D Web Applications. Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2013, University of Nebraska.
The ESFRI Roadmap contains five research infrastructures in the area of Social Sciences (CESSDA, European Social Survey, and SHARE) and Humanities (CLARIN and DARIAH).
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_Reference_Corpus.
nkjp.pl/index.php?page=0&lang=1
www.mpi.nl/dobes
github.com/textlab
weblicht.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/weblichtwiki/index.php/CiNaViz_-_Visualization_of_European_City_Names
datasealofapproval.org/en

1. Introduction

The English Scientific Text Corpus (SciTex) consists of about 5000 scientific papers with about 34 Mio tokens in two time slots, 1970/80s and 2000s 1, 2. It has been compiled to investigate the construal of scientific disciplinarity, in particular, how interdisciplinary contact disciplines emerge from their seed disciplines. Both time slots consist of nine disciplines: Computer Science (A) as one seed discipline, Linguistics (C1), Biology (C2), Mechanical Engineering (C3), Electrical Engineering (C4) as the other seed disciplines, and Computational Linguistics (B1), Bioinformatics (B2), Digital Construction (B3), and Microelectronics (B4) as the corresponding contact disciplines between A and C1-C4. The individual articles are subdivided into Abstract, Introduction, Main, and Conclusion.
The orthogonal dimensions time, discipline, and logical structure provide for many, potentially interesting setups of variational analysis: We can explore the diachronic evolution of contact disciplines in comparison to their seed disciplines, variation between contact disciplines and their seed disciplines, and genre variation between abstracts and text bodies in individual disciplines. In this paper we present an approach that combines a macroanalytic perspective 3 with the more traditional microanalytic perspective served by concordance search to explore variation along these dimensions.
2. Approach

2.1. Macroanalysis

For supporting explorative macroanalysis, we use well understood visualization techniques – heatmaps and wordclouds – and combine them with intuitive exploration paradigms – drill down and side by side comparison (see Figure 1). The heatmaps and wordclouds are interactive, allowing for a closer inspection at various levels. The leftmost heatmap visualizes the highest level contrast between abstracts and text bodies in the two time slots (1970s/80s and 2000s). The middle and right heatmaps serve for inspecting a chosen contrast at a lower level at the level of individual disciplines. A particular contrast can be chosen by clicking on the respective square, numbers indicating which contrast is displayed in the middle (Selection 1) and right heatmap (Selection 2). In this example, the middle heatmap visualizes the distances between abstracts and text bodies, and the right heatmap visualizes the distances between text bodies and abstracts.
The wordclouds underneath the heatmaps display the most typical words for a chosen contrast. In Figure 1 the wordcloud to the left visualizes the most typical words for abstracts as opposed to text bodies in the 2000s. Unlike in the common use of wordclouds, the size of words is proportional to their contribution to the distance (as defined in Section 2.2), whereas relative frequency is visualized by color, ranging from purple to red.

Fig. 1: Contrast between Abstracts and Text Bodies
Having a closer look at Figure 1, we can observe that the distance between abstracts is generally larger than the distance between text bodies, and that it has increased in the 30 years period. This general trend is mirrored in the individual disciplines (not shown here). Looking at the middle and right heatmaps, we can see that - not surprisingly - the distance between particular disciplines are at a minimum (squares forming the main diagonal), and the distances among the seed disciplines (A and C corpora), are generally larger than the distances among contract disciplines.
The corresponding wordclouds visualize the most typical words for abstracts (middle heatmap) and for text bodies (right heatmap) in the discipline B1 (Computational Linguistics). In this particular contrast, words typical for abstracts are clearly centered around constructions of exposition (we propose, describe, investigate), main topics of B1 (natural, language (generation), machine translation), words describing the methodology (method, statistical, computational, system) and function words (and, of, on). Words typical for text bodies are markedly different: they comprise B1's main entities of topic elaboration (tokens, nouns, object, vp, john, probability), references (see figure, table, section), conjunctions (when, since, because, if), auxiliary and modal verbs (be, is, was, were, do, will, would, may), and prominently, the determiner the. In summary, abstracts exhibit characteristics of an informationally dense text (e.g., omission of determiners) with topic oriented content. In contrast, text bodies are less dense (determiners, references, modality) and more elaborated.
Other contrastive pairs, such as the synchronic comparison between disciplines or the diachronic comparison of the two time slots, corroborate the results derived by means of computationally much more demanding techniques from machine learning [1], [2].
2.2. Corpus Representation and Distance Measures

The individual corpora are tokenized, and tokens are transformed to lower case. Stopwords are deliberately not excluded to inspect all levels of variation: style, lexico-grammar, and theme. On this basis, corpora are represented by means of unigram language models smoothed with Jelinek-Mercer smoothing, which is a linear interpolation between the relative frequency of a word in a subcorpus and its relative frequency in the entire corpus 4. The distance between two corpora P and Q is measured by relative entropy D, also known as Kullback-Leibler Divergence:
D(P||Q)>=Sum_w p(w)*log_2(p(w)/q(w))
Here p(w) is the probability of a word w in P, and q(w) is its probability in Q. Relative entropy thus measures the average amount of additional bits per word needed to encode words distributed according to P by using an encoding optimized for Q. Note that this measure is asymmetric, i.e., D(P||Q) != D(Q||P), and has its minimum at 0 for P = Q5.
The individual word weights are calculated by the pointwise Kullback-Leibler Divergence 6:
D_w(P||Q) = p(w)*log_2(p(w)/q(w))
For all words the statistical significance of a difference is calculated based on an unpaired Welch t-test on the observed word probabilities in the individual documents of a corpus. This is used for discarding words below a given level of significance (p-value). A more detailed comparison with other measures for comparing corpora 7 is beyond the scope of this paper and will appear in another venue.
2.3. Microanalysis

Wordclouds serve as a bridge between the big distance picture of macroanalysis and microanalyis. To this end, they are seamlessly integrated with the IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CQPWeb: http://cwb.sourceforge.net/index.php), which provides for an expressive corpus query language and several summarization tools, such as collocations and comparative word frequency lists. A click on a word sends a query to CQPWeb, which returns the word in the chosen context. For example, clicking on “do” in the right heatmap (B1 (Txt00) vs. B1 (Abs00)) generates the following query shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2: Concordance for “do” in B1, text bodies, 2000s
This query returns a concordance for “do” in the 2000s slot of SciTex constrained to subcorpus B1 and to the divisions Introduction, Main, and Conclusion. Based on this list one can inspect the larger context of individual hits and get a ranked list of collocations to distinguish the uses of “do” as an auxiliary vs. main verb.
3. Related Work

The need for combining macroanalysis with microanalysis is well recognized in the DH community 8, 9, and there does exist a variety of frameworks with similar goals. Due to space restrictions, we can only give an exemplary selection; for a comprehensive overview see TAPoR 2.0 (http://tapor.ca/). The MONK workbench 10 allows to compare pairs of corpora using Dunning's log-likelihood ratio 11 for word weighting. Apart from the different distance measure, the main difference of our approach is that we combine the macro perspective of overall distance with the micro perspective of individual word weights to allow for an explorative analysis of variation. The Voyant Tools 12 provide a plethora of text visualizations, including word clouds, cooccurrences, and word trends based on frequencies. The focus of these tools, however, lies on summarizing and visualizing one text or corpus, rather than on exploring variation among corpora. Finally, the TXM platform 13 integrates the IMS Corpus Workbench with some macroanalysis R packages such as factorial correspondence analysis, contrastive word specificity, and cooccurrence analysis. While this integration certainly provides a broader set of analysis techniques, it is arguably more complicated to use than the system presented in this paper.
4. Summary and Future Work

We have presented a system that combines macroanalysis with microanalysis to explore language variation, and briefly illustrated its use for analyzing differences along the dimensions time, discipline, and genre in a corpus of scientific text. Future work will be devoted both to technical as well as methodological enhancements. A useful technical extension is the facility to interactively group subcorpora to larger units, maybe with the help of hierarchical clustering based on the distance matrix to form meaningful groups. More generally, the support for importing external corpora and exporting distance matrices and word weights for analysis with other tools is desirable – the presented system has been evaluated based on a number of corpora, but the underlying processing pipeline certainly needs to be generalized and improved. On the methodological side the main challenge lies in supporting a broader variety of feature sets beyond simple unigram language models. This includes latent language models such as topic models 14 and hidden markov models 15, but also enriched representations such as part-of-speech tagging, and other extensions of unigram models. Such richer feature sets allow to focus analysis by means of feature selection, but also bear new challenges in measuring and visualizing the contribution of features to a contrast at hand, and translating features into meaningful queries against the underlying corpus.
References

1. Elke Teich and Peter Fankhauser (2010). Exploring a Corpus of Scientific Texts using Data Mining. In S. Gries, S. Wulff, and M. Davies, editors, Corpus-linguistic applications: Current studies, new directions, pp. 233–247. Rodopi, Amsterdam and New York.
2. Stefania Degaetano-Ortlieb, Hannah Kermes, Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski, and Elke Teich (2013). SciTex: A diachronic corpus for analyzing the development of scientific registers. In Paul Bennett, Martin Durrell, Silke Scheible, and Richard J. Whitt, editors, New Methods in Historical Corpus Linguistics, Corpus Linguistics and Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Language (CLIP), Volume 3, Narr, Tübingen.
3. Matthew L. Jockers (2013). Macroanalysis: Digital Methods & Literary History. University of Illinois Press, Urbana, Chicago, and Springfield.
4. Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty (2004). A study of smoothing methods for language models applied to information retrieval. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 22(2):179–214.
5. David J. C. MacKay (2002). Information Theory, Inference & Learning Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA.
6. Takashi Tomokiyo and Matthew Hurst (2003). A language model approach to keyphrase extraction. Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment (MWE '03), Vol. 18, Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pp. 33–40. DOI=10.3115/1119282.1119287 dx.doi.org/10.3115/1119282.1119287
7. Adam Kilgarriff (2001). Comparing Corpora. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 6(1):97–133.
8. Michael Correll and Michael Gleicher (2012). What Shakespeare Taught Us About Text Visualization. IEEE Visualization Workshop Proceedings, 2nd Workshop on Interactive Visual Text Analytics: Task-Driven Analysis of Social Media Content, Seattle, Washington, USA, Oct 2012.
9. Matthew L. Jockers and Julia Flanders (2013). A Matter of Scale. Staged debate at the Boston Area Days of Digital Humanities Conference at Northeastern University, March 18, 2013. digitalcommons.unl.edu/englishfacpubs/106/
10. John Unsworth and Martin Mueller (2009). The MONK Project Final Report. Sep 2009. www.monkproject.org/MONKProjectFinalReport.pdf
11. Ted Dunning (1993). Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics 19(1):61–74.
12. Stéfan Sinclair, Geoffrey Rockwell and the Voyant Tools Team (2012). Voyant Tools (web application). http://voyant-tools.org/
13. Serge Heiden (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. Proceedings of the 24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, Japan, Nov 2010, pp. 389-398.
14. David. M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.
15. Sharon Goldwater and Tom Griffiths (2007). A fully Bayesian approach to unsupervised part-of-speech tagging. Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL'07). Association for Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007, pp. 744–751. www.aclweb.org/anthology/P07-1094

The use of topological graphs, or networks, to represent and analyze the semantic contents of source materials, such as texts and images, has become a signature contribution by the digital humanities to the humanities in general. Specific techniques, such as topic modeling and network analysis, and general approaches, such as macroanalysis and distant reading, exemplify the popularity and effectiveness of methods based on the graph theoretical representation and statistical modeling of cultural materials. However, because of their mathematical complexity and their focus on very large corpora of texts, these methods are beyond the reach of many humanists interested in the interpretation of smaller sets of source materials for cultural meaning. They are also suspect since they introduce ontological commitments that both elide traditional notions of human agency and reframe culture as a set of abstract, metrical dimensions. In this talk, I introduce “common container correlation” (C3) as a relatively simple and transparent interpretive method for the graph theoretical analysis of source materials that may be practiced by both students and more advanced researchers to excavate and make sense of cultural models implicit in textual materials.
C3 may be described as a variation of co-occurrence analysis designed to take advantage of the abundance of encoded cultural materials available to the digital humanist and to allow for the analysis of small sample sizes, such as individual texts. Formally, a common container correlation is just a link, or edge, that is asserted between any two items, regarded as nodes or vertices, that are contained within the same structural container. The set of all such links produces a graph of nodes and links based on their co-occurrence in a common container. In some cases these graphs will have meaning—that is, they will exhibit patterns that lend themselves to structuralist and other forms of interpretive analysis. These patterns may sometimes be correlated with psychological, sociological, or material causes that will be of interest to the humanist.
For example, in a novel marked up with TEI-based schema, we may choose to define the paragraphs of the text as container elements and tagged references to proper names as contained elements. We then assert that all named agents in a given paragraph are related to each other (in the special sense of co-occurring). The set of all of these assertions for all paragraphs will produce a kind of social graph that may then be visualized and analyzed in structural terms. In such a case, it may emerge that two characters consistently appear on opposite sides in multiple instances of a force-directed representation of the graph. This may be evidence of a structural opposition that will have emerged from the statistical distribution of the selected elements. Other approaches may use other container elements, such as scenes, and combinations of contained elements, such as places and people.
The C3 method is easy to implement using available tools. Container and contained elements in XML encoded materials may be extracted using simple XPath statements (by means of a variety of tools) and dumped into tables with columns for container IDs and contained IDs. Such tables may then be transformed using simple SQL queries into various graph data formats for visualization and analysis in tools such as Gephi, GraphViz, SHIVA, and D3. Depending on the intention of the user, the resultant graph may or may not reflect the frequency of edges and vertices in the source data.
In this talk I will describe the C3 method using examples taken from three digital humanities projects with which I have been associated. First, I will describe the application of the method to rhetorical figures (containers) and characters (contained elements) using data from the Princeton Charrette Project. Second, I will describe how undergraduates in an introductory digital humanities course at the University of Virginia created a database relating characters and paragraphs in Austen’s Persuasion. Third, I will describe the use of the method in Stephen Railton’s Digital Yoknapatawpha Project, drawing on data correlating scene containers to people and places as contained elements in William Faulkner’s corpus of fiction. In each case, I will explore the interpretive implications of the algorithms used to visualize the data, taking particular care to describe the specific steps involved in going from markup to data representation to visualization to interpretation. In this way, I hope to connect the discourse on data-driven textual analysis to traditional interpretive methods, such as close reading and structural analysis, in order to produce a genuinely humanistic use of quantitative methods that does not alienate the researcher from the tools of interpretation.

1 Introduction
More and more historical documents are digitised. In their raw form, however, digitised sources are usually unstructured texts, on which only keyword search is possible. This limits their usefulness, even when searching for entities, because a person may be referred to in a variety of ways, e.g. by name (Henry VIII), by title (Lord of Ireland), by ancestry (son of Henry VII) or by role (The undersigner). Furthermore, spellings of proper names vary frequently in historical documents (Greiffenclau, Griffenclae), and persons can also be referred to by pronouns. Searching for all variants is not a perfect solution either, since noun phrases such as the King of England can, of course, refer to different entities in different contexts. Finding a particular entity is thus a laborious and error-prone task. If one is interested in certain types of events, for instance all SELLING events [Fertmann, 2013], it becomes even more difficult to locate the desired information. Hence, digitised sources should ideally be enhanced with a semantic-structural annotation layer. Unfortunately, doing this manually is time-consuming, sometimes prohibitively so [Schäfer et al., 2012].

We describe our work of automatically converting a manually compiled collection of historical manuscripts, first into XML-annotated (structured) text and then into a searchable database with a web-based front end. In the conversion process, we exploit typographic and structural cues as well as heuristics based on domain knowledge. The methods we describe are not in themselves entirely novel. Detecting structure in superficially un- or semistructured texts has been the topic of various research projects. The aim of this paper is thus not so much to introduce novel techniques but to show how relatively simple techniques can be applied to a particular type of collection and thereby make it much more accessible and useful.

2 The Data
The data are a collection of regesta, i.e. summaries of medieval charters, pertaining to the City of Saarbrücken and covering a period of 950 years from 601 to 1545 AD [Eder-Stein, 2012]. Compiling this collection, originally on file cards and later electronically in a Microsoft Word document, started in the late 1950s and ended in 2011. Initially, only an open access book publication was intended, hence the use of a Word document to collect the data, which is, of course, suboptimal from a processing point of view.

Since the manuscript was intended for off-line reading rather than electronic processing, the structure of each regest remained largely implicit, being signalled mainly by typographical means. Figure 1 shows an example. The first line is printed in bold face and contains the year and sometimes also the place of issue as well as additional information, e.g. regarding the reliability of the dating. This line is also used as a unique identifier for the regest in the collection. Then follows the modern German summary of the manuscript. Some passages, often names, are left in their original form and printed in italics, e.g. Sarebrugka debellatur. Various types of metadata follow, including the original dating, signatories, and archival information. Not all metadata are available for each regest but if they occur, their order is fixed and they are usually preceded by keywords such as Druck (print).


Fig. 1: Regest

The book also contains an extensive index, which not only lists named entities (NEs) referred to in the texts but also provides valuable additional information, e.g. about alternative spellings, family relationships (Metze, Witwe des Schultheiß Nikolaus “Metze, widow of ...”), relationships between locations and person (Einwohner “residents”), titles and roles of persons (Ritter “knight”, herrschaftlicher Schneider “stately taylor”), localisation of place names (Kelz, Dorf (Dep. Haute- Saˆone, F.)), and contexts in which an entity was mentioned in the text (Besuch in Saarbrücken “visit to Saarbrücken”). Figure 2 shows three index entries.

3 Related Work
Several projects are dedicated to digitising medieval charters and making them available via sophisticated web interfaces. The most well-known is Regesta Imperii, 1 which provides electronic access to a collection of charters from the period of the Holy Roman Empire [Kuczera, 2005]. Another project is the Charters Encoding Initiative, which has been running since 2004.2 However, as far as we know, in all of these projects, the underlying database is built manually rather than by extracting information from existing texts.

On the other hand, there is a large body of work concerned with determining structure in texts using supervised [Borkar and Sarawagi, 2001, Viola and Narasimhand, 2005] or unsupervised [Grenager et al., 2005] machine learning as well as bootstrapping from existing resources [Canisius and Sporleder, 2007]. Our methods are not as sophisticated nor do they have to be since we can infer a lot of information from typographic cues and domain knowledge. Also related are studies which aim at identifying structure in published papers [Schäfer et al., 2012]. Typically, these, too, employ heuristics [Schäfer and Weitz, 2012].


Fig. 2: Index Entries

4 From Unstructured Text To Searchable Database
The structure of regest texts and index entries is only implicitly encoded by formatting (type face, level of indentation) and ordering of elements. Many of these devices are ambiguous, e.g. italics are predominantly used to indicate original passages but metadata information is also sometimes set in italics (e.g. vgl. “cf.”). We implemented heuristics to determine the function of a piece of text depending on its typographical properties and position relative to other text elements. We also made use of a limited set of manually supplied keywords, such as titles, honorifics and words for groups of persons, mainly for parsing the index entries. This procedure should be relatively easily adaptable for other, similar collections. Once the main structural blocks had been identified, index and regest entries could be linked. Because the index lists NEs and links them to the regesta, we could also relatively easily identify and disambiguate the entities referred to in the regesta themselves, thus avoiding a separate NE recognition step.


Fig. 3: XML Mark-Up in the Index

An XML-schema was designed for representing the collection. We tried to comply with the TEI guidelines [Burnard and Bauman, 2013] whenever possible, however, since TEI does not explicitly cover medieval charters we had to deviate from it occasionally. In general, we designed the schema in such a way that it is extensible. In particular, all automatically inferable information types should be encodable, even if we do not extract them immediately. For example, we refrained from automatically identifying the issuer of a document. However, this can normally be identified relatively reliably as it is typically the first person named in the text. Figure 3 shows part of an (instantiated) example of an index entry of type LOCATION. We encode the type of settlement (Dorf “village”), whether it is abandoned or not, the name and alternative names, and the area, district and region, if provided.

Using the heuristics, an XML marked-up version of the summaries and index was automatically generated from the original Word document. Additionally, the extracted information was stored in a database. We consider the XML file the primary format. However, a database is useful because it can be employed as a straightforward backend for a web application. Furthermore, if the collection is extended at a later stage, a database offers a simple interface for data entry. Additions to the collection can be entered directly in the database, thus rendering the automatic conversion from unstructured text to structured XML unnecessary.The updated database can easily be exported to XML and the proofs for future editions of the book can be generated directly from the XML file. Finally, we created a web interface3 for searching and browsing the collection, which also implements additional features, such as a time line, allowing users to see all regesta from a pre-selected period.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
Where originally only keyword search could be performed on the collection, automatic processing greatly enhanced its utility. Linking of NEs to index entries now allows entity-based search. Furthermore, users can search explicitly for certain information types, e.g. archival information. The explicit mark-up of the documents makes it trivial to implement more complex, logical search options such as searching for co-occurring entities.It is also possible to link to external resources such as maps or show family trees based on the index information. Finally, the database makes the data more easily extensible and allows for error and consistency checking.

With the basic structure in place, one can go further and identify co-reference chains, semantic argument structures or document topics, or extract information, e.g. about all financial transaction in which a given monastery was involved or about the contexts in which certain groups of people are mentioned.

The enhanced collection is not only useful for historians. It is also a valuable resource for students and pupils studying medieval or local history. Historical linguists also have expressed an interest in using it to study historical place names. Moreover, we expect a significant demand from historically inclined laypersons, especially those living in the region covered by the collection.

References
Kaustubh Deshmukh Borkar and Sunita Sarawagi (2001). Automatic segmentation of text into structured records. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pages 175–186.

Lou Burnard and Syd Bauman (2013), editors. TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium Charlotesville, Virginia.

Sander Canisius and Caroline Sporleder (2007). Bootstrapping information extraction from field books. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 827–836, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Irmtraud Eder-Stein, editor (2012). Regesten zur Geschichte der Stadt Saarbrücken (bis 1545). Publikationen der Saarländischen Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek. universaar: Universitätsverlag des Saarlandes. Bearbeitet unter Verwendung von Vorarbeiten von Hanns Klein.Susanne Fertmann (2013). Extraction of selling events from historical documents. Bachelor Thesis, Saarland University.Trond Grenager, Dan Klein, and Christopher Manning. Unsupervised learning of field segmentation models for information extraction. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’05), pages 371–378, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Andreas Kuczera (2005). Die Regesta Imperii Online. In Deutsche Kommission für die Bearbeitung der Regesta Imperii e.V. bei der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur in Verbindung mit der Bayerischen Staatsbibliothek in München, editor, Workshop Buch und Internet - Aufbereitung historischer Quellen im digitalen Zeitalter, pages 3–4.

Ulrich Schäfer and Benjamin Weitz (2012). Combining OCR outputs for logical document structure markup. Technical background to the ACL 2012 contributed task. In Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries, pages 104–109, Jeju Island, Korea, July 2012. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ulrich Schäfer, Jonathon Read, and Stephan Oepen (2012). Towards an ACL Anthology Corpus with logical document structure. An overview of the ACL 2012 contributed task. In Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Special Workshop on Rediscovering 50 Years of Discoveries, pages 88–97, Jeju Island, Korea, July 2012. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Paul Viola and Mukund Narasimhand (2005). Learning to extract information from semistructured text using a discriminative context free grammar. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pages 330–337.
In the "Afterword" to his 1984 edition of James Joyce's "Ulysses", Hans Walter Gabler gives a short outline of how he collected the variant readings contained in the different sources, how he used them for establishing, in two steps, the critical text, leaving most of the mechanical work (even the automatic insertion of the diacritic marks for the genetic variants) to the computer, and checking, by subsequent machine collation, the manual work which was carried out interactively at the computer console. According to Gabler, "the systematic and comprehensive reliance on computer aid ... has drastically reformed the editing process... Without it, this edition would neither be as accurate as we hope it is ... nor so rich in recorded facts" (p. 1909).
The TUSTEP tools Gabler had used more than 30 years ago have constantly been adapted in close collaboration with many editorial projects to their respective requirements and to changing technologies like PostScript and PDF for output or encoding standards like SGML, XML, TEI and Unicode. They have successfully been used for the preparation of many other critical editions; www.tustep.uni-tuebingen.de/ed3.html lists more than 750 volumes of printed editions published between 1972 and 2013 prepared and/or typeset with TUSTEP. They include works written in languages using non-latin alphabets, like greek (e.g. the 28th edition of Nestle-Aland, Novum Testamentum Graece, published in 2012), hebrew (e.g. the Mishna edition published by Michael Krupp) and arabic (Kitab al-Adad al-musamma..., ed. 2012 by Gunhild Graf). Current editorial projects relying on these tools include the works of Marx and Engels, the letters of Philipp Melanchthon, the works of Christoph Martin Wieland, of Albertus Magnus, the philosophical works of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and many others.
The TEI wiki judges the use of TUSTEP for the preparation of critical editions as follows:
Advantage: does the job
Drawback: very difficult to learn.
According to Willard McCarty (Humanities Computing 2005, p. 217), main reasons for these difficulties are the language of documentation and the complexity of the interface.
This mentioned drawback has in the meantime lost much of its impact:
At DH 2012, we presented the prototype of a modern XML-based interface to these tools, called TXSTEP. It both removes the language barrier and provides an user interface which an up-to-date established syntax. It allows the user to take advantage of the typical benefits of working with an XML editor, like content completion, highlighting, showing annotations, and verifying the code. The underlying XML schema contains extensive annotations and documentation on the purpose and syntax of the single functional elements available for building a TXSTEP script. When using a modern XML editor like oXygen, these annotations are shown automatically in a popup window while developing a TXSTEP script, so offering to a considerable degree a self teaching environment.
The poster session demonstrates how to use these tools for supporting the single steps required for the preparation of a critical edition:
Collating witnesses / collecting variant readings
Evaluating the collation results
Constitution of edition text
Compilation of apparatuses
Preparation of indexes
Preparation of printer's copy
Publishing the text with appartus(ses) in print and/or for the web
As text basis for this demonstration, we chose a freely invented scenario: in order to have available a short example showing the whole spectrum of different types of variant readings, we copied a passage from vol. 4 of the edition of the works of Friedrich Schelling, a German philosopher, which had been typeset with TUSTEP in 1988, and labelled it as „version A“. In addition, we invented two other witnesses B and C for this same passage by copying it to separate files, there carrying out systematic replacements of single characters (so, the initial upper case Umlauts which in the 1988 edition have been written as Ae, Oe, Ue, have been converted to Ä, Ö, Ü) and other orthographic corrections (e.g., replacing th by t, y by i, c by k), changed the punctuation (inserting or deleting a comma etc.) and, in addition, made other modifications by inserting / omitting / replacing / transposing whole words or sentences. Starting from this material, the demo will show how the preparation and publication of a critical edition, be it in print or on the web, can profit from the power of TXSTEP – which provides powerful tools not only for editing but also for text analysis, for indexing, for lexicographic or bibliographic work and for publishing the results.  
As a first step of the editorial work, we have to collect the variant readings by comparing the text of the sources, using the TXSTEP module COMPARE and specifying the details needed for our purpose (word-by-word collation; full references for the lemma location; abbreviate lemmata  comprising  more than 5 words; add 1 word of context for insertions; include a version-id for version B), as shown in fig. 1.

Fig. 1: COMPARE script
COMPARE compares  two files only and produces two different kinds of output: a "comparison protocol" or listing which may be displayed on screen or printed on paper, showing the text of version A and below that the text of version B. Differences between the two versions are marked between the two lines. This listing (see fig. 2) is useful for checking the results of a correcting step or of automatic transformation of a text.

Fig. 2: COMPARE protocol
For the preparation of critical editions, a different kind of output is more useful (see fig. 3): the differences found by comparison are written to a text file in a syntax which contains all the information necessary for further processing and merging into them the differences found by comparing the same version A to the text of other witnesses.

Fig. 3: differences file with TEI compatible tags
A listing generated from the difference files produced by comparing the text of more than two witnesses is shown in fig. 4.

Fig. 4: Listing showing differerences of more than two witnesses
As the next step, shown in fig. 5, we try to classify the variants found. We try to differentiate between the various types of variants mentioned above when describing our text basis:  we write variants concerning initial umlauts only to a separate file which we decide that its content will not be part of the apparatus, but will be handled in the preface. The merely orthographic variants and the variants concerning different punctuation only will get a respective attribute which allows to either also omit them from the apparatus, or to list them in a separate apparatus level. The remaining variants are those which should be listed in the main apparatus.

Fig. 5: classifying variant readings
The result of this step are two files: one containing the variants concerning (in our case) the initial umlauts only, and a second file  containing the raw material to be used for building the apparatus entries. Fig. 5 shows the procedure for the differences between version A and B only (lines 17-122). There follows the same <transform> for the differences between version A and C, and a further module for sorting and merging the variants found in version B and version C in ascending order of lemma location, of type of variant, and of witness ID.   
When we transform these sorted and merged records of variant readings automatically, without philological inspection and revision, into apparatus entries for a printed critical edition and insert them into our edition text (for which, in this demo, the unaltered text of version A will serve), we get a file of which a detail is shown in fig. 6.

Fig. 6: edition text (version A) with inserted apparatus entries
With a further script (not shown here), making use of the powerful typesetting engine of TUSTEP, this file is transformed to a PostScript or PDF file (see fig. 7),  showing at page bottom the apparatus entries linked to the text by means of line numbers printed in the margin of the edition text. As stated above, in this example, we omitted only the variants concerning the writing of the initial upper case Umlaut only; for the other variants, three apparatus levels have been provided, the first one showing the variant readings which may affect the meaning or interpretation of the text; merely orthographic variants are listed in the second apparatus, the third apparatus contains variants regarding punctuation only.

Fig. 7: typeset Edition with 3 apparatus levels at page bottom
Of course, without investing further philological effort, the results are less than satisfying, as shown in fig. 7 for lines 13-14: the text has "kleine engherzige", versions B and C each showing "engherzige kleine". The apparatus says that, in line 13, version B and C omit "kleine" and insert, after "engherzige" ending in line 14, the word "kleine". The reason is that the word-by-word comparison has produced this result. In the apparatus, the two entries should however be transformed into a single one, showing an inversion of the two words "kleine engherzige" to "engherzige kleine".
This means: the procedures shown in the demo can only make available a reliable material basis for the philological work indispensable for responsible critical work on an edition.  At the same time, the scope of work of these procedures can in every detail be specified according to the needs of an actual editorial project, thus saving time for manual work and at the same time providing a reliable material basis for controlled work.
Fig. 8 shows an example of the same text presented as an online edition (also generated automatically, without critical intervention) in html form. In the left column, we have the edition text (version A in our case), highlighting the words where one of the other versions (B and C in our case) show differences. A click at one of the highlighted words makes visible the respective location in the apparatus frame below the text, where a click at the witness code opens, in the right hand frame, the text of the selected version and shows it from the location containing the respective variant reading.

Fig. 8: edition in html frames
Also the right-hand frame, in this case presenting version B, shows an apparatus frame containing however the differences to version A only and not to the other witnesses. Also here, the above mentioned inversion "kleine engherzige" vs. "engherzige kleine" is not marked as an inversion: "um" - though identical to the text in version A - is highlighted because version A has inserted "kleine" after "um", and "kleine" is highlighted because it is missing after "engherzige" in version A.  
Of course, editorial work cannot rely on the steps only which are shown in this demo. Alphabetic lists of word forms occurring in the single witnesses, e.g., or sorting the lemma-variant-pairs alphabetically could help to reveal e.g. spelling variants typical for certain geographical regions where a witness has been transcribed and e.g. help to build gropups of witnesses for texts with a great number of witnesses. Also for these and similar task, TXSTEP provides not ready-made solutions but a set of tools for relatively elementary steps of text data processing – tools whose scope of work can be specified in detail according to the needs of each step, and which can be combined in (almost) arbitrary ways to provide solutions also for complex tasks. A list of the basic modules is shown in fig. 9, showing the popup window if you put the cursor in the root tag of a TXSTEP script (in this case, I did this using the script shown in fig. 1).

Fig. 9: showing, as popup, the modules provided by TXSTEP
Both TXSTEP and TUSTEP, the TUebingen System of TExt Processing tools, are open source under the Revised BSD License and can be downloaded from the TUSTEP homepage[6]. The TXSTEP installation package contains in addition a set of 80 exercises, covering tasks like file transformation and extraction of information, collation of different versions of the same text, evaluation of collation results, index generation and sorting.      
References

http://www.bbaw.de/forschung/mega/
http://www.haw.uni-heidelberg.de/forschung/forschungsstellen/melanchthon/edition.de.html
http://www.wieland-edition.uni-jena.de/
http://institut.albertus-magnus-web.de/643_0/editiocoloniensis.html
http://www.uni-muenster.de/Leibniz/seite2.html
www.tustep.org
Teaching material on medieval German literature adequate to present-day educational standards is insufficiently available. Additionally, the subject tends to be marginalized in current curricula for teacher training. Consequently, schoolteachers often lack the impetus and time to prepare and arrange medieval texts for their students. 

The objective of the publicly funded "Sparkling Science" project “Arbeitskoffer zu den Steirischen Literaturpfaden des Mittelalters” (Toolbox for the Styrian literature paths of the Middle Ages) is to develop an openly accessible, virtual didactic environment (the “Text portal”) which enables teachers to address the topic of medieval literature in class and familiarize their students with older German texts. For that purpose a corpus comprising regional medieval literature is made available on the Text portal by providing the transcription, translation and facsimiles of the respective texts. Furthermore, glossarial information and additional teaching material adapted to the requirements of students on secondary educational level are featured.

This poster introduces the online resource outlined above which is developed at the University of Graz in a collaboration between the Department of German Studies and the Centre for Information Modelling. The main focus is set on the following two aspects which are fundamental for the realization, progress and sustainability of the project:

1. The inclusion of prospective users 
The project primarily targets two disparate groups: Teachers in secondary education on the one hand and their students on the other hand. In order to provide an efficient and effective resource, the requirements of both user groups were considered the guiding principles for the development of the portal and its underlying data, from the very beginning.

The initiators of the project are scholars of German Studies involved in the education of both teachers and younger students. In addition to their individual views on the issue, the requirements to this resource were elaborated in the context of university courses for teacher training in concert with actual teachers and teacher trainees.

To investigate the demands of the younger students, a multilayered empirical analysis was conducted amongst several hundred pupils to survey the acceptance and comprehension of Middle High German and Early New High German texts. The outcome of this survey directly influenced later decisions concerning the selection and edition of the texts provided.

Taking account of the diversity of the prospective user groups, an intuitive, user-friendly and dependable interface will be realized. With this goal in mind, the development of the portal is subject to continuous evaluation within the project team. Further evaluations and test runs in a real-life environment with students and teachers are scheduled as the project progresses.

2. The involvement of Digital Humanities competence
The literary texts provided on the text portal are chosen with regards to their supraregional importance or their interest within the medieval literary canon, with the majority not yet being available in a standardized digital format. Enrichment and annotation methods common in Digital Humanities and the usage of trusted digital infrastructures serve to produce digital resources in this particular project which are later reusable in other contexts and sustainably preserved.

All textual sources used within the project are encoded conforming to the guidelines of TEI P5, annotated and documented in a way that makes an adaption to further editorial works or other projects as unproblematic as possible. The TEI representations as well as the pictorial representations and the metadata of the original sources are openly available via the FEDORA based asset management system GAMS.

References
Hockey, S. (2012). Digital Humanities in the Age of the Internet: Reaching Out to Other Communities. In Deegan, M. and McCarty, W. (eds), Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities. Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 81-92.

Kümper, H.(2011). Mittelalter und Mittelalterunterricht im neumedialen Zeitalter. In Kümper, H. (ed.), eLearning & Mediävistik. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 7-65.

Schmidt, S. (2004). Neue Medien und alte Themen: Internet & Co als Vermittlungshilfen in der Schule, im Museum und an der Universität. In van Eickels, K., Weichselbaumer, R. and Bennewitz, I. (eds), Mediaevistik und Neue Medien. Ostfildern: Thorbecke, pp. 243-259.

TEI Consortium (2013). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Version 2.5.0. Virginia: Text Encoding Initiative Consortium Charlottesville.

Warwick, C. (2012). Studying Users in Digital Humanities. In Warwick, C., Terras, M. and Nyhan, J. (eds), Digital Humanities in Practice. London: Facet Publishing, pp. 1-22.
The Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR) and the Library of Congress (LoC) issued a 2010 report that suggests that if we do not use sound archives, our cultural heritage institutions will not preserve them. Nancy Davenport, previous president of CLIR, concludes that users want unfettered access and better discovery tools for what she calls “deep listening” (what Charles Bernstein calls “close listening”) or “listening for content, in note, performance, mood, texture, and technology.”  It is a typical digital humanities problem: Without a better understanding of what such listening entails, we cannot build tools that afford such listening; and, because we lack the tools, humanists struggle to imagine how to describe the access they want -- what Jerome McGann calls “imagining what you don’t know.” In an attempt to imagine how to facilitate distant listening with computation, this paper positions user requirements for critical listening software within the context of critical listening theories.
Critical Listening Theories

Walter J. Ong once announced that recording technologies have heralded a new age in the study of the “voice, muted by script and print.” Humanists hold a range of theories and perspectives on how to study music or sound aesthetics in experimental poetry or how to contextualize sounds of the recording space (such as the whir of an old air conditioning or babies crying in the background) or the recording machine (such as the clicks and pops and pauses).
In particular, theoretical perspectives on “the voice” are useful in identifying the role sonic features that are discoverable by computation can play while close listening. Most such theories, for example, position sonic vocal traits as meaningful only within the context of a structural code for meaning such as language. Roland Barthes identifies two aspects of the voice in vocal music, for instance, that contribute to meaning making: the pheno-song, which refers to the structured elements of a piece such as speech or melody (or language codes) and the geno-song, which is the material or corporal aspect of the voice, the “volume of the singing and speaking voice, the space where significations germinate” (or sonic features). 5Privileging the pheno-song as more productive for communicating meaning, Barthes maintains that the geno-song –having “nothing to do with communication, representation (of feelings), expression”—is a system for transmitting that meaning.
Similarly, Michael Chion asserts that sonic features have meaning but that it is our lack of a descriptive system or hermeneutics that precludes our ability to make sense of these features. Chion approaches sound study by parsing listening into causal (for the source of the sound), semantic (to interpret a message), and reduced (to identify sonic traits) listening. Chion argues that reduced listening precludes meaning making for two reasons: (1) the “fixity” of sonic features required for close listening to sonic traits makes sound “physical data” that do not represent what was actually spoken or actually heard in real time “presence”; and (2) our language for describing how we make meaning with such traits is “totally inadequate.” Consequently, because of issues of fixity and inadequate identifiers, reduced listening is “an enterprise that is new, fruitful, and hardly natural.”
This argument, however, that the voice is only meaningful in the context of speech that transmits a message is a logocentric theoretical stance that has been readily contested. Adriana Cavarero who seeks to “understand speech from the perspective of the voice instead of from the perspective of language” wants to “pull speech itself from the deadly grip of logocentrism.” Caravero critiques the viewpoint of scholars such as Walter Ong and Marshall MacLuhan who at once essentialize the voice as “presence” and disembody and mythicize orality. Similarly, Mladen Dolar considers a “linguistics of non-voices” including coughing, hiccups, babbling, screaming, laughing, and singing, placing these sounds outside of the phonemic structure yet not outside of the linguistic structure. He argues that “It is not that our vocabulary is scanty and its deficiency should be remedied: faced with the voice, words structurally fail.” Finding possibilities for study in aspects of the voice such as accent, intonation, and timbre, Dolar asks the question at the heart of all of these queries: “how can we pursue this dimension of the voice?”
User Needs

User perspectives on the kinds of access and analysis advanced technologies with sound can facilitate were gathered by Clement as part of the HiPSTAS (High Performance Sound Technologies for Access and Scholarship) project. HiPSTAS is an NEH-funded, year-long Institute for Advanced Topics in the Humanities for librarians, information scientists, and humanities scholars who work with spoken word collections. Such collections include PennSound’s poetry archive, the American Folklife Center of the Library of Congress, oral histories in StoryCorps, and recordings from more than 50 tribes across Native America in the American Philosophical Society’s Native American Collection among other collections of interest to the participants. User perspectives were gathered from the 20 participants in three ways: (1) through Institute applications; (2) through pre-Institute interviews; and (3) through post-Institute surveys and project reports.
This data shows that defining the sonic features that map to specific cultural characteristics of “the voice” in spoken word recordings was not how participants phrased their research interests. One participant, for example, who was interested in working with the PennSound archive, wanted to consider “media ecologies” by analyzing “sounded affinities between poets” or “concepts of community poetics through sound;” this participant wanted “to look at groups of poets who have a common locale in terms of their community formation” and to use these clusterings to investigate how software “may or may not track affinities across gender lines.” Another participant analyzing PennSound was interested in “identifying, exploring, and categorizing performance variants of the same texts” such as “an aural/visual equivalent to the Versioning Machine)” and enabling “a kind of distant listening, flagging and visualizing generic features of poetry performance traditions (Is there, for example, a New York School style of oral delivery?” Other concerns were focused on reorienting how the archive is discoverable by enabling a “batch analysis of an audio corpus to mark the aural/perceptual relationships of poetry performance and extra-poetic ‘asides’ (which often provide significant contextualization of the poems but which may be ‘invisible’ in the Pennsound archive).”
Another participant interested in the APS recordings wanted to discover what it meant to think through “how a digital archive can recover intangible and ephemeral yet deeply powerful social experiences of sound” including “[w]hat themes of identity, gendered relations, and intercultural relations, may be heard in the Native speakers’ and singers’ expressions and performances of the recorded stories and songs in the collections;” this participant wondered, “how might we thematize and index sounds to address issues of indigenous sonic embodiment in files from which we can hear but not necessarily see the speakers and singers? What are the [sonic] differences and similarities among performers of similar source material? How do these performative differences/similarities map or not map onto other factors (race, gender, region, class, age, etc.)?” Also interested in the APS Native American collections, another participant wanted to analyze these holdings in order to classify Navajo speakers against a map of origin in order to illustrate the location of a speaker. With the ultimate goal of “develop[ing] a cultural map to show spheres of influence of those language-speaking approaches on the stories and motifs across time and in proximity to historical centers of tribal trauma,” this participant wanted to use software “to determine whether dialectical region or if proximity to historical centers of tribal trauma (e.g. boarding school experiences or Navajo Long Walk) influence that speaker’s . . . Beauty Way and Protection Way approaches to speaking the Diné language”.
Conclusion

Ultimately, can a computer be taught to distinguish between paralinguistic commentaries and formal (or informal) poetry readings or a Beauty Way speaker and a Protection Way speaker within a large collection of sound files? This paper attempts to imagine these possibilities by positioning what users want to do with sound within a critical framework of listening theories that understand “the voice” as a cultural phenomenon that reflects the resonance between linguistic and non-linguistic features of sound. This paper will primarily frame user requirements gathered as part of HiPSTAS within listening theories in the humanities. However, this paper will also briefly mention possible ways forward including a use case in which PennSound poets and scholars use TEI speech tags for tagging tempo, rhythm, loudness, pitch, tension, and voice across PennSound poetry files in order to enable machine learning with ARLO (Adaptive Recognition with Layered Optimization) software, a machine learning application for analyzing sound on Stampede, an NSF petascale HPC system at the Texas Advanced Computing Center. Finally, we need to understand what users want to do with sound and the theories behind critical listening in the humanities before we can design distant listening tools that afford sound scholarship.
References

Council on Library and Information Resources and the Library of Congress, The State of Recorded Sound Preservation in the United States: A National Legacy at Risk in the Digital Age. Washington DC: National Recording Preservation Board of the Library of Congress, 2010, 157.
Jerome McGann (2008), Radiant Textuality: Literature After the World Wide Web (New York: Palgrave).
Walter J. Ong (1967), The Presence of the Word: Some Prolegomena for Cultural and Religious History (New Haven: Yale University Press), 88.
Marjorie Perloff and Craig Douglas Dworkin (2012), The Sound of Poetry, the Poetry of Sound, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009; Adalaide Morris, ed., Sound States: Innovative Poetics and Acoustical Technologies, Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press, 1998; Jonathan Sterne, ed., The Sound Studies Reader (New York: Routledge).
Roland Barthes (1978), Image-Music-Text. (New York: Hill and Wang), 182.
Barthes, Image, 182.
This seems related to Roland Barthes’s three distinct types of listening in his essay “Listening”: the first represents a listener on “alert” as prey or predator, as mother or child, as lover on the lookout; the second represents "deciphering" or "what the ear tries to intercept are certain signs"; the third is the “intersubjective” listening of the psychoanalyst. Roland Barthes, The Responsibility of Form, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill and Wang, 1985), 245; Michael Chion, “Three Listening Modes,” in The Sound Studies Reader, ed. Jonathan Sterne, 48-53 (New York: Routledge, 2012), 50 - 51.
Chion, “Three Listening Modes,” 51.
Chion, “Three Listening Modes,” 50; emphasis added.
Adriana Caravero (2012) “Multiple Voices,” in The Sound Studies Reader, ed. Jonathan Sterne, 520- 532 (New York: Routledge), 530, 531.
Mladen Dolar (2012), “The Linguistics of the Voice,” in The Sound Studies Reader, ed. Jonathan Sterne, 539-554 (New York: Routledge), 552.
Dolar, “Linguistics,” 539.
Dolar, “Linguistics ,” 544.
Please see the project site at http://blogs.ischool.utexas.edu/hipstas/.
Please see the participant list and links to their project interests at http://blogs.ischool.utexas.edu/hipstas/participants/.
Project reports are publically available at https://sites.google.com/site/nehhipstas/project-pages.
In the early modern period, rather than having access to a full-text play, actors learned their lines using “Actors’ parts,” hastily handwritten documents that provided them with only their cues and lines. Traditionally, today’s actors learn their lines from full-text plays, without any computer assistance. Digital Actors’ Parts (DAP) is an online environment that both mimics and enhances the early modern acting experience in order to facilitate actors learning their lines. DAP is the first project to give users an interactive experience with an early-modern-inspired “actor’s part,” which encourages both active reading and memorization, in turn leading to a better understanding of the texts themselves.

In Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, Walter Ong theorized that we were in a “second orality” based on the “use of writing and print” and considered how memorization worked in oral and written circumstances;Digital Actor’s Parts allows us to consider memory as it relates to online technologies. In Shakespeare studies, the function of memory has been an important area of study for years, as scholars debate whether certain texts are “memorially reconstructed,” that is, printed from actors’ memories rather than a playwright’s written text. Our tool argues for the importance of understanding memorization when it comes to cognition and the comprehension of literary and theatrical works. DAP will not only provide expert scholars with a platform for reconsidering memory specifically as it relates to Shakespeare, it will also offer a tool that will be of use for beginners and professionals both in the classroom and the theatre.

As the most prominent figure in English theatre, Shakespeare’s plays have been encoded multiple times; digital Shakespeare projects abound. Unlike most single-source projects, Digital Actors’ Parts brings together open-access data from multiple sources, including the encoded texts from the MLA Committee on the New Variorum Edition of Shakespeare, the Folger Shakespeare Library’s Digital Texts, the Internet Shakespeare Editions, and Open Source Shakespeare. Our project is designed to incorporate new data from these sources, because, forinstance, the MLA and Folger Digital Texts are still encoding Shakespeare’s works and have not yet released their complete data-set. These online Shakespearean texts are as diverse as the original printed editions. By building on existing Shakespearean projects, DAP is not limited to a single copy-text, so an actor or director could choose either the folio or quarto version of, for instance, King Lear.

Digital Actors’ Parts helps students, researchers, and theatre practitioners learn lines by allowing them to select a Shakespearean play, edition, and character from a pre-populated dropdown menu. The users are then presented with their first cue and the ability to type in their line(s). Users will also be able to ask for prompts: their first word, first line, or entire speech. By entering the text of their speeches and checking what they have typed, users receive a score depending on their accuracy. This feature makes Shakespeare’s text interactive in a way beyond most digital editions. The accuracy score allows for the potential gamification of becoming a Shakespearean actor, which will especially promote student learning. In the classroom, DAP encourages students and teachers to memorize and perform Shakespeare’s language, that is, to engage with it beyond simply reading. This online tool makes it easy to transition from, as the saying goes, the page to the stage.

Although Shakespeare’s plays continue to be popular both online and in the theatre, most digital tools for the study of Shakespeare are aimed at literary scholars, teachers, and K-12 students. The intended audience of Digital Actors’ Parts also includes theatre professionals (actors, directors, dramaturgs): indeed, this is not simply a digital humanities project, but also a digital fine arts endeavor.

Digital Actor’s Parts is currently a work in progress. The prototype for DAP runs on an instance of the Web.py framework. Web.py is a Python web framework that is both simple and powerful. We chose to use this framework because it allows rapid prototyping allowing us to concentrate on the specific features that we need to implement. On the other hand, the plays that we are utilizing are encoded and distributed in different formats. For example: The plays from Folger Digital Texts are encoded in TEI-compliant XML, MLA’s are encoded only in XML, and the materials from Open Source Shakespeare are bundled in a Microsoft Access database. Therefore, before being displayed through the interface, the plays must be harvested from their original institutional repositories, parsed, transformed using XSL Transformations and stored into a database. The accuracy scores and metadata for the individual user records are maintained and stored in a using a separate table structure. Figure 1 shows a prototype of the user interface.


Fig. 1: Prototype of the user interface for Digital Actors’ Parts.

Unlike other online memorization tools such as Memorizer and Memorize Now, this project does not require users to first input the text they memorize—which could be a particularly fraught process for texts as complicated as Shakespeare.Digital Actors’ Parts, furthermore, is ideal to help users memorizing all of a character’s lines (and not just a single speech) as it delivers the appropriate cues, unlike existing tools. The automatically-generated accuracy score, another feature other programs lack, can add elements of fun and competition as users strive for mastery of Shakespeare’s text.

In its first iteration, Digital Actors’ Parts relies on a modern web browser to deliver its content and experience. For future releases, we hope to implement an application for mobile devices. This app will allow users to expand the possibilities of interaction by taking DAP to the rehearsal space, theater, or experimenting with entirely new locations. Having this tool in hand will encourage earlier inclusion of blocking and business in the rehearsal process and will also be useful for active classroom learning.

In 2014, Shakespeare 450 will mark the anniversary of Shakespeare’s birth with performances, workshops, and lectures. We envision Digital Actors’ Parts participating in this global celebration by making it easier for performance troupes from amateur to professional to take part in staging Shakespeare’s plays around the world. In “To the Memory of my Beloved the Author, Mr. William Shakespeare,” Ben Jonson famously declared that Shakespeare was “not of an age, but for all time”:DAP is part of the larger movement bringing Shakespeare into the twenty-first century with new digital resources and tool. DAP will help us understand how we engage with Shakespeare’s works in the most fundamental ways and will allow us to theorize memory as it relates not simply to orality or written texts, but also to innovative, interactive, digital tools.

Ultimately, Digital Actors’ Parts capitalizes on the proliferation of open-source Shakespeare texts, offering one answer to the question of “where do we go from here?” with digital projects. This project goes beyond aggregation by suggesting one way these texts can be fruitfully combined. While offering a valuable rehearsal tool in itself, DAP also encourages further research on Shakespeare’s works, the digital practice of combining multiple corpora, and interactive online learning methods.

References
Simon Palfrey and Tiffany Stern, Shakespeare in Parts, Oxford: OUP, 2007.

Walter J. Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, London & New York: Methuen, 1982, 136. See also esp. 57-68.

On “memorial reconstruction” and the function of memory in Shakespearean texts, see Laurie Maguire, Shakespeare’s Suspect Texts: The ‘Bad’ Quartos and their Contexts, Cambridge: CUP, 1996 and Paul Werstine’s work, especially “A Century of ‘Bad’ Shakespeare Quartos” Shakespeare Quarterly 50 (1999): 310-33.

MLA New Variorium Shakespeare encoding: https://github.com/mlaa/nvs-challenge Folger Digital Texts: www.folgerdigitaltexts.org The Internet Shakespeare Editions: ise.uvic.ca Open-Source Shakespeare: www.opensourceshakespeare.org

Web.py: webpy.org

Memorizer: www.memorizer.me Memorize Now: www.memorizenow.com

Shakespeare 450: www.shakespeareanniversary.org

Ben Jonson, “To the Memory of my Beloved, the Author, Mr. William Shakespeare,” in Shakespeare’s first folio (1623). Facsimile: internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Library/facsimile/book/SLNSW_F1/9
In this paper, we will present a case study of how an ongoing, multi-faculty, interdisciplinary DH project focused on the Susquehanna Valley in Pennsylvania has created, and continues to explore, ways in which students can excel both inside the classroom and outside.  These DH projects involve undergraduates working with faculty on an unfolding expansive research project that affords otherwise unachievable opportunities for undergraduate student engagement, the development of new skills, and meaningful ongoing interaction between the institution and community that have, in turn, furthered the scope and scale of the project.
While it is recognized that the most compelling pedagogical experiences bridge the divide between semesters, and even years, of study at the undergraduate level, there has been little examination to date of how digital pedagogy affords particularly effective forms of promoting long term student engagement, challenging students and instructor to consider and reconsider course matter from new and provocative vantage points. In early digital humanities programs, considerations of ensuring that “the acculturation and professionalization that takes place in the learning community is relevant to the students” has been largely situated in graduate programs, leaving undergraduates in learning environments where digital engagement focuses on tool training rather than one in which they learn digital “habits of mind” that involve participation in nuanced humanistic discourse with their professors.
In small liberal arts colleges, where close faculty/student interaction is at the core of high impact practices, opportunities to advance prolonged faculty-student collaboration can produce exceptional results. The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation has identified the importance of these opportunities for curricular digital engagement at liberal arts education through strategic multi-year digital initiative grants at an increasing number of liberal arts institutions.
A particularly valuable area for ongoing pedagogical engagement is in developing place-based projects that also enlist local communities in the digital, conceptual mapping of historical and cultural resources.  And yet, such rich and nuanced considerations of local place, culture, and environment call for extended student engagement over time and even across years of undergraduate study.  Thus, the traditional classroom model for the execution of such DH place based projects is inadequate. Extending the classroom outside (both spatially and temporally) allows for the development of rich deep local knowledge in both digital learning tools and content. Indeed, extending the faculty-student collaboration to include students from outside traditional humanities departments also reifies the value of interdisciplinary research at an early level and reflects the professional digital humanities research model employed by larger scale projects. Also, undergraduates engaged in digital humanities work can perform a sort of outreach, demonstrating that “the humanities [belong] to everyone, not just trained professionals” and thereby help “bridge the widening gap between academic humanities and broader American culture.”
At Bucknell University, beginning in 2011, faculty in Comparative Humanities, English, Geography, and Environmental Studies have developed and taught a slate of courses relating to issues vital to the interpretation and conservation of the environmentally impaired Susquehanna River. These courses form a de facto core curriculum designed around the region and consider questions of the environmental effects on regional resources, the eradication of the traces of Native American history and culture as a result of European immigration and settlement, and economic under-investment in post-industrial rural towns. To this point, DH engagement has focused on the collection and analysis of GIS-related materials, work that has been instrumental in the garnering of Federal recognition of the cultural importance of the Susquehanna River through its designation as a National Historic Trail under the umbrella of the National Parks Service.  Students and faculty continue to work with non-profit agencies and the NPS in the development of digital layers of scientific and economic data that will expand the reach of this originally DH project.
 A new phase of this project that will begins this summer with the digitization, transcription, and critical analysis of the collected correspondence, journals, records, and incidental papers of James Merrill Linn (1833-1897), held in the Archives of Bucknell University.  This phase will involve Bucknell faculty, staff, and students in a research project that will develop within and beyond the classroom.  The Linn Papers project is ambitious and represents a new model for collaborative digital humanities research and teaching at Bucknell. Because of Linn’s relationship with “place” (Bucknell, Lewisburg, and the sites of battles and campaigns in the Middle Atlantic and Southern states during the Civil War) this project offers an important opportunity to expand and reconsider Bucknell’s commitment to considerations of “spatial thinking.” The Linn Papers archive includes documents in several media forms: manuscripts, drawings and sketches, printed records, archival newspaper clippings, and hand-drawn maps. Because of the multiple forms of inter-reliant media, the collection encourages analysis of people and places across document types. This form of analysis is best-suited to digital forms of curation and publication.
 The Linn Papers project will a) make available in digital form a wealth of information about a historically under-resourced area of the Susquehanna Valley; b) leach students the principles and techniques of DH, and in particular, TEI-compliant XML; c) enable students to be active and engaged participants in the reframing of humanistic pedagogy and relevance in an age that sees almost daily public media questioning of the value of the humanities.   This phase of the project will begin with a pilot undertaken in summer 2014 with the digitization of a selection of the papers.  The Linn project will  become a central facet of newly designed HUMN 100 courses offered in 2014-15 through the Comparative Humanities program, that are open to first and second year students only. Student engagement with the materials will also serve as a test case to determine best practices for incorporating TEI, GIS and network analysis skill development in a variety of courses, effectively creating a DH training stream at the university.
References

Rockwell, Geoffrey and Stéfan Sinclair (2012). Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Brett D. Hirsch, ed. Cambridge: UK, Open Book Publishers. 177
Clement, Tanya. Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills, Principles, and Habits of Mind. Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Brett D. Hirsch, ed. Cambridge: UK, Open Book Publishers, 2012. 371, 384
In its 2012 annual report, Mellon identifies digital technology and pedagogy as key components in its commitment to assist liberal arts colleges find “a way for a limited number of faculty to teach the breadth and depth of a 21st-century curriculum and simultaneously help students develop their critical, creative, and intellectual capacities.” Bucknell is one of eighteen liberal arts colleges to receive one of these multi-year digital scholarship grants, and is working with its grant-funded peers to identify and implement learning-centric courses and projects. The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Annual Report. 2012. 15. www.mellon.org/news_publications/annual-reports-essays/annual-reports/content2012.pdf
To develop the What Jane Saw project at the University of Texas at Austin Janine Barchas involved a number of undergraduate student technology assistants, summer research apprentices from Architecture as well as English, as well as undergraduates in her Austin course. Barchas, Janine. “Digitally Reconstructing the Reynolds Retrospective Attended by Jane Austen in 1813: A Report on e-Work-in-progress.” ABO Interactive Journal. March 1, 2012. www.aphrabehn.org/ABO/?p=1245#more-1245
Alexander, Bryan and Rebecca Frost Davis (2012). Should Liberal Arts Campuses Do Digital Humanities? Process and Products in the Small College World. Debates in the Digital Humanities. Matthew K. Gold, ed. University of Minnesota Press.
Bucknell Helps Susquehanna River Secure Historic Designation. Bucknell University website. June 11, 2012. www.bucknell.edu/x77947.xml
The production of digital multi-text editions requires a wide range of preparatory steps. In the case of texts transmitted in (medieval) manuscripts, the witnesses have to be transcribed according to specific encoding rules. The transcriptions then are collated following certain ideas and concepts of how the transmission process could have developed (phylogenetic analysis can help in this concern, cf. Howe et al. 2004 and 2012, Stolz 2013). The transcriptions and collations finally have to be transferred to a digital edition that allows the users to explore the characteristics of single witnesses as well as the history of a text, which is delivered in variants and in different versions. A dynamically organized database offering various components and adapted to the needs of diverse user-profiles is nowadays the right tool for this purpose.

The poster demonstrates the steps described above that are abstracted from the experiences made in the Swiss Parzival Project, based at the university of Bern (cf. http://www.parzival.unibe.ch). The electronic edition of Wolfram von Eschenbach’s German Grail novel, written shortly after 1200 and transmitted during several centuries in ca. hundred witnesses (complete manuscripts as well as fragments), has now been completed by more than a half of the textual corpus (cf. Stolz 2003 and 2011, Viehhauser 2008). During the last years, transcription rules have been established that consider particular manuscript features as well as the compatibility with international standards such as TEI (cf. Stolz et al. 2007). Following these rules, the manuscript transcriptions are made.

The next step after transcription is the collation of the manuscript texts. In the editing process of Wolfram’s Parzival this decisive stage has to cope with the existence of different textual versions (‘Fassungen’) created in the author’s context (caused by the oral delivery of texts in the Middle Ages). Due to this fact not only different manuscript texts (on a first level), but also the textual versions (founded on different manuscripts groups, on a second level) have to be collated to each other. The poster shows the problems resulting from this two-level collation (performed in the Parzival project so far by electronic, but not automatized procedures), and discloses options for resolving them in a future semi-automatic process of electronic text comparison.

At an early stage of the project, program packages such as Collate (cf. Robinson 1994) seemed to be an adequate tool for producing an electronic edition right from the transcription up to the final product including collations, variant apparatuses and digital images. In a later period of the project the editors switched to modules supported by components of TuStep (Tübinger System von Textverarbeitungs- programmen), which, due to its flexible character, fitted in better with their requests. An electronic mask created with TuStep allows the editors to handle the complexity featured in the Parzival text. However, by using this tool, the collations concentrate more on the editor’s handwork than they would have to with the semi-automatic, yet imperfect techniques offered by Collate. Nowadays, program packages such as CollateX (cf. http://collatex.net/, accessed 05/03/14) offer alternative tools, but still don’t fully satisfy the project’s needs. The examples given in the poster show some basic requirements occurring in the collation of a text transmitted in multiple versions. They result in a plea for enhancing the ingenious potential contained in currently obsolescent programs such as Collate and TuStep.

The poster also demonstrates the concept of the project database that is currently under construction. This tool will enable the users to find their way through a complex textual tradition. They can browse through both single manuscripts and different versions, and they can edit the text in different encodings, both in electronic and printed form.

The readers can, in fact, access synoptic listings of single verses in the variant wordings of the different manuscripts, e.g. verse 249.27:


They can compare the transcriptions and digitized images of singular manuscripts, e.g., V and V’ representing an exemplar and its copy (with V’ omitting a substantial passage before 799.1):


And the readers can explore the textual varieties of a critical electronic edition presenting the Parzival text in four versions. Links to the relevant manuscripts on which the versions are based on are provided (with an example of ms. D in the second image).



The poster concludes with perspectives on the current endeavour of developing sustainable formats for the Parzival database and other textual databases in Switzerland, which are performed by a recently established national “Daten- und Dienstleistungszentrum für geisteswissenschaftliche Forschungsdaten” (DDZ), funded by the Swiss Academy of Humanities and Social Sciences.

References
Howe, Christopher J./ Barbrook, Adrian C. / Mooney, Linne R. / Robinson, Peter (2004): Parallels between Stemmatology and Phylogenetics, in: Studies in Stemmatology II, ed. by Pieter van Reenen/ August den Hollander/ Margot van Mulken, Amsterdam/ Philadelphia 2004, pp. 3–11

Howe, Christopher J./ Conolly, Ruth / Windram, Heather F (2012): Responding to Criticisms of Phylogenetic Methods in Stemmatology, in: Studies in English Literature 1500–1900 52, pp. 51–67

Robinson, Peter: Collate (1991). A Program for Interactive Collation of Large Textual Traditions, in: Research in Humanities Computing 3. Selected Papers from the ALLC/ACH Conference, Tempe (Arizona), March 1991, ed. by Don Ross/ Dan Brink, Oxford 1994, pp. 32–45

Stolz, Michael (2003): New Philology and New Phylogeny. Aspects of a Critical Electronic Edition of Wolfram’s Parzival, in: Literary and Linguistic Computing 18,2, pp. 139–150

Stolz, Michael/ Schöller, Robert/ Viehhauser, Gabriel (2005): Transkriptionsrichtlinien des Parzival-Projekts, in: Edition und Sprachgeschichte. Baseler Fachtagung 2005, ed. by Michael Stolz/ Robert Schöller/ Gabriel Viehhauser, Tübingen 2007 (Beihefte zu editio 26), pp. 295–328

Stolz, Michael (2011): Benutzerführung in digitalen Editionen. Erfahrungen aus dem Parzival-Projekt, in: Digitale Edition und Forschungsbibliothek. Beiträge der Fachtagung im Philosophicum der Universität Mainz am 13. und 14. Januar 2011, ed. by Christiane Fritze et al., Wiesbaden 2011 (Bibliothek und Wissenschaft 44), pp. 49–80

Stolz, Michael (2013): Early versions in medieval textual traditions. Wolfram’s Parzival as a test case, in: Dating Egyptian Literary Texts, vol. 1, ed. by Gerald Moers et al., Hamburg (Lingua Aegyptia – Studia monographica 11), pp. 561–587

Viehhauser, Gabriel (2008): On the Margins of the Canon – Editions, the ‘Whole’ Text and the ‘Whole’ Codex, in: Variants 7 (2008 [recte 2010]), pp. 57–74
A remote religious community, called Ee Nbee Mee Noo (Ib Npis Mis Nus), in northern Thailand has recently shared their extensive collection of hand-written religious manuscripts with researchers following extensive collaboration and community work. Interested in making these foundational sacred texts more accessible across the global Hmong diaspora, the community leaders sought the cooperation of scholars to digitize the texts in preparation for eventual publication. Rich in historical and religious content, these nine 200-page volumes are written in the community’s own sacred and obscure Puaj Txwm alphabet of the Hmong language.

The scope of our project includes the development of a set of digital tools that will perform OCR (built on the Tesseract engine), error-check based on phonological rules of the Hmong language, and encode the text (according to TEI guidelines) to make the text searchable and indexable for future distribution as electronic texts. In addition, the project will create a transliteration tool that will enable Hmong texts to be transliterated across the dozen or more orthographies used throughout the diaspora, thus facilitating the exchange and investigation of Hmong language texts across diasporic histories and geographies.

This poster will feature the project’s tools and process, emphasizing the solutions to obstacles including a hand-written manuscript and the complicated politics of ethnic minority religious movements in Thailand. The poster will provide context for these sacred texts and their obscure alphabet, overview the digitization process, and provide examples of the work and the innovative solutions developed by our research team.
The Digital Vercelli Book project1 aims at creating a digital edition of the Vercelli Book manuscript (MS CXVII, Biblioteca Capitolare di Vercelli, Italy), a fundamental document for the Old English language and literature area of studies. After the transcription of all the texts was completed using the TEI schemas2, the researchers lacked a tool that would allow to publish a diplomatic edition of the former together with the digitized manuscript images.

Many tools have been created in order to publish digital editions based on XML-encoded texts and meet the various needs of users. Some software tools (such as TEI Boilerplate) allow to publish TEI XML files directly in modern browsers. Even though this method is very light and user friendly, it is both unsuitable for publishing very large files and limited to XSLT 1.0; the typical output is a single web page for each XML document, which is not appropriate for the publication of image-based editions.

This led us to the design and implementation of EVT (Edition Visualization Technology), a lightweight software for that specific purpose. What started as a project, whose goal was the digital edition of a specific manuscript, has grown well beyond that, to the point of being available and usable as a general purpose publishing tool.

EVT can be used to create image-based web editions with different edition levels starting from a multi level encoded text. It is built on open and standard web technologies, such as HTML, CSS and Javascript, to ensure that it will be working on all the most recent web browsers. During the development of the software we have constantly tested it on different cases of study (for instance the NZTEC corpus), in order to verify that the code was actually compatible with the different kinds of TEI P5 encoding.

The general architecture of the software is modular, so that any component can be easily upgraded or replaced. To overcome the limitations hinted above the data processing is carried out by means of a static transformations with XSLT 2.0. EVT's processing system uses a collection of stylesheets to divide the XML file into smaller portions (each corresponding to individual pages of the manuscript), and for each of these parts it creates as many output files as requested by the file settings (for instance, diplomatic and diplomatic-interpretative). On the image side, the system offers a ready-to-use set of instruments (such as a magnifying lens, a general zoom, hot spots) to fully take advantage of manuscripts’ scans. One of the most important tools available in EVT is the image-text link: if the XML files make use of the <facsimile> element and provide the coordinates that identify the lines in manuscript scans, the EVT building system will automatically create clickable areas on the image, which will be handled thanks to CSS and Javascript interaction.


Fig. 1: Main view

The most important feature is that the code is working as a client-only infrastructure, so that the user may immediately make use of it, without requiring any server software installation. This is apparently a limitation, since a client-server architecture would offer many more features, but thanks to the processing done with the XSLT 2.0 processor in the initial phase of the building process the system is also ready to perform complex operations (such as textual searches) which generally rely on interpreted languages and a server back-end.

What has been described up to this point constitutes the core of our project, that is a complex and modular collection of XSLT scripts coupled with text and image browsing tools. The modules are designed in such a way that the scholar will be able to add his own stylesheets to manage the different levels of the edition, and this will not influence the other parts of the system, f.i. HTML generation. Applying the XSLT scripts usually requires the use of specific editors (such as Oxygen), which may be not the user’s favorite tool and add one more step to the process. This is why we decided to create EVT Interface: a Java user interface that allows to avoid loading the XML files in an editor and makes directly use of the open source versions of the Saxon processor to apply XSLT modules to the TEI XML files.

Our main objective is to create a flexible, modular, stand-alone package which is also freely redistributable.

We are now facing several research questions (UI evolution, search engine, embedded transcription, critical edition) that we hope to address during the next few months.

References
1. Vercelli Book Digitale. vbd.humnet.unipi.it/ (accessed on March 2014).

2. Burnard, L., and S. Bauman (eds.) TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.6.0.www.tei-c.org/P5/.
Proposal
Culture, Liberal Arts, and Society Scholars (CLASS) is an undergraduate research and fellowship program in the digital humanities awarded to student scholars at Hamilton College’s Digital Humanities Initiative (DHi). Basic literacies for the digital age are critical skills sets for students entering the professional world in the twenty-first century. The Digital Humanities Initiative provides new opportunities for students in the humanities to become fully engaged citizens in this ongoing digital revolution.

CLASS is based on three-broad areas of scholarly inquiry and their intersection with new and emerging digital technologies: 1) Culture, 2) Liberal Arts, and 3) Society. CLASS provides a unique partnership between departments, programs, and units across the liberal arts and humanities at Hamilton in partnership with the College’s Career Center. It begins with course connections in our Cinema and New Media Studies (CNMS) program but then removes the confines of the semester to promote deep understanding of digital humanities research within a specific field of interest. In these experiences, students and their faculty advisor become part of a collaborative working team of experts in DHi.

CLASS provides students with skills training in digital literacies through intensive research and scholarship coupled with two unique internship experiences. In the summer between sophomore and junior years CLASS offers undergraduate students an intensive professional development experience and provides a comprehensive overview of work in their respective field of interest. In the summer immediately after their junior year students enter their second internship off campus leading to employment and/or graduate study as a result of the eighteen-month program. Assistance with job placement, in a professional field, based on their CLASS internship placement, and/or graduate studies occurs in their final year at Hamilton. 


Fig. 1: Fig. 1. CLASS Program 18-month Structure

The coursework for the program begins in the fall of their sophomore year with CNMS 120 or 125 (Fig 1). In the spring semester students can enroll in courses offered in the CNMS minor. Students enroll in either CNMS 200W/Introduction to Digital Humanities or CNMS300/Interdisciplinary Research Methods that provide experiences writing grant proposals in the digital humanities.

The goals for CLASS include:

Collaboration with potential faculty and/or staff mentors to define and develop an interdisciplinary project
Writing a research proposal for their projects.
DHi committee reviews the proposals and recommend possible award opportunities.
Students begin work over a 10-week period in the summer, mid-June to late August.
A two-week intensive training program takes place in June of the first summer. Students survey mature digital humanities projects, participate in discussions of digital humanities readings, interact with invited speakers brought into the program, and explore technologies related to their research project goals. During the academic year following the first summer, students work with their mentor between 4-6 hours a week on their collaborative research project. In the summer between junior and senior years, CLASS offers undergraduate students an intensive professional development experience and provides a comprehensive overview of work in new digital technologies.

CLASS will:

Develop understanding of digital humanities methods
Develop technological expertise for careers and digital scholarship
Through their participation in an undergraduate research project, students will be able to:

Develop a research question, problem, or design;
Apply basic principles and knowledge found in the literature related to the research question;
Develop a research proposal to address or resolve a specific research question or problem;
Apply and evaluate interdisciplinary methodologies throughout the project;
Collect, interpret, and critique data in order to resolve a research question or evaluate a design;
Utilize digital skills (TEI, digital collection development, media object creation, geospatial visualization, etc.) necessary for robust digital scholarship in the humanities
Communicate research findings through oral presentations and digital publications.
Students in research collaborations with Faculty and members of the DHi, develop deep understanding of a specific long-term research agenda. They are expected to conduct collaborative investigation of a specific aspect of the research that is of great interest to them and integrate digital humanities research methods in their process. Deliverables include public presentation and/or publication at milestones in this process.

Accomplishments:
Cohort 2011

Sarah Bither and Melissa Yang worked with Professor Kyoko Omori to develop an understanding of Benshi performance art for contemporary audiences. The outcome of this work is a website, http://courses.hamilton.edu/dhi-class-1/sarah with components that will ultimately be incorporated into Professor Omori’s Japanese Comparative Literature Archive. Bither continued her study of Japanese culture and language by going abroad to Japan in the spring and summer of 2012. Randall Telfer worked with Professor Thomas Wilson to explore Confucian rituals and connections to contemporary religious practices in China. The outcomes of this work were additional edits to two of Professor Wilson’s websites http://academics.hamilton.edu/asian_studies/home/asc_test/index.html and The Cult of Confucius website: http://academics.hamilton.edu/asian_studies/home/coc_test/index.html. Brynna Tomassone worked with Professor Angel David Nieves to explore cultural connections between South Africa and the United States during the time period leading up to the events in 1976 Soweto. The outcome of this work is a series of book chapters currently in forthcoming publications including The Heritage of Iconic Planned Communities: The Challenges of Change (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2014). Tomassone is now a Ph.D. student in Hispanic/Spanish Studies at Syracuse University. 

 

Cohort 2012

Maxwell Lopez (’14) mentored by Professor Nathan Goodale. Continuing aspects of research on the history and culture of the Sinixt Nation in British Columbia, Lopez proposed to work for the 2012 -2013 year creating, “an accurate three dimensional digital representation of the British Columbia site along with some models of artifacts excavated” using the Unity game engine. He believes the project will create a “new way for people to experience and interact with history” and have great capacity for connecting with research with the public. By the end of the two- week CLASS session in June 2012, Lopez had already made several models in Blender (a 3D modeling software) and site maps in Unity (a virtual world platform for models to reside). The following is a screenshot of his initial construction of a pit house in Blender. Please see the folder on CLASS 2012 for screenshots of his work to date and his complete proposal. 


Fig. 2: Figure 2. Sinixt Ritual Pit House model (created in Blender).

Lopez continued work with Professor Nathan Goodale in GIS mapping and archeological data collection for continued development of Sinixt Ritual Pit (Fig. 2) houses at an archeology Field School in British Columbia summer 2013. Lopez has presented aspects of his work with Professor Goodale at several forums on campus in Fall 2012 and also at the 2013 Re:Humanities symposium April, 5, 2013.

Continuing aspects of O’Neill’s development of Beloved Witness: Agha Shahid Ali Archive, Ujjwal Pradham (’14) will explore the use of text analysis tools and TEI in developing aspects of the Agha Shahid Ali Archive. Pradham is also interested in establishing a connection between the archive and current communities of interest in Kashmir. 

Pradham explored the uses of social software to make connections between contemporary Kashmir communities and the developing Beloved Witness archive. The following is a screen shot of the Voyant Tools (Fig. 3) text analysis Ujjwal did to compare theme words (home, waiting, never, Spring, Kashmir) in multiple manuscripts over the development of a poem written by Ali. 


Fig. 3: Figure 3. Voyant Tools.

Cohort 2013

Working with Religious Studies Professor Abhishek Amar on aspects of his Sacred Centers in India Project, students Kenneth Ratliff (’16) and Alex Gioia (’14), embarked on a study of Indian sacred centers -- Buddhist Bodhgaya and Hindu Gaya. The students expanded their understanding of the Indian sacred cities of Gaya and Bodhgaya. They assisted Professor Amar in organizing his research data for these two cities (images, videos, and GPS coordinates) into the metadata schema for his digital research archive. This work of organizing and processing the over 418 data objects from Gaya into survey forms conducive to further analysis is necessary for long term sustainability of the digital archive. It is also the first step in the creation of interactive models of important artifacts and their locations within these religious sites. Appendix “A” is an example of one of the individual data survey forms used in this project and is based on those used by the K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute, with whom Professor Amar collaborates. Ratliff and Gioia have already begun creating an interactive two-dimensional line map of the Vishnupada complex (Fig 4). 


Fig. 4: Figure 4. Interactive line map of Vishnupada Complex with Mahadeva site highlighted (created in Blender).

This interactive map will link to images of the sites (Fig. 5) and 3D models of the artifacts in situ (Fig. 6). They hope that these virtual 3D and geographically correct models will foster greater interest in these religious sites due to the accessibility and interactivity of the maps, photographs, models, and videos.

Ultimately, the plans are to place the models that they produce into an online viewing space, developed from a game engine (Unity), that will make the models easily viewable and web accessible to the public. 


Fig. 5: Figure 5. Image of Mahadeva site and Tablet artifact on far wall.


Fig. 6: Figure 6. Image of Mahadeva Tablet being modeled in Blender (Free Download at Blender.org).

Working with Patricia O'Neill on aspects of her Beloved Witness archive, Kerri Grimaldi (’16) examined the significance of Emily Dickinson’s poetry to Agha Shahid Ali, a poet from Kashmir, whose work is the focus of the archive. Grimaldi’s project traces the depth of Emily Dickinson’s influence in Shahid’s poem, “A Nostalgist’s Map of America,” by placing Shahid’s poem side-by-side with Dickinson’s “A Route of Evanescence” in four stages of analysis, each increasing in level of explication. By analyzing Shahid’s poem, it is possible to read Dickinson’s in a completely different light, while also witnessing the resonating power of her poetry. Grimaldi has started to create a website to present her analysis of the relationship between the work of Shahid and Dickinson. Ultimately, this website will show not only that Dickinson influenced Shahid’s work, but that his work responded to and interpreted hers, such that their works are in conversation with each other. Please review the current status of this project, including the descriptive first layer of the website, the storyboards exploring intertextuality in the second layer and third layers and a draft of Grimaldi’s own creative video interpretation of the two poems in conversation. This project was submitted in September 2013 to the Dickinson Electronic Archives 2.0: CALL FOR PROPOSALS for volume 3 -- Emily Dickinson’s Reading Culture to be published in 2014. Part One of Kerri's website can be found at http://dhinitiative.org/demos/grimaldi/ 

Challenges
Initial Challenges for DHi in developing CLASS included answering, how do we publish in the digital Humanities? Much of collaborative research includes the use of copyrighted material and/or faculty research that is still in early development. These characteristics of the work in CLASS required that we reconsider the amount and type of information (public or not) conveyed to illustrate the progress of the students. We achieved our goal of facilitating discussion with other scholars in the field by including experts from across disciplines in the two-week intensive training program and through the natural association of collaborators on the faculty research projects. CLASS scholars biographies and research descriptions are announced on the DHi website. CLASS scholars give project prospectus presentations and/or example research projects at the end of their two-week training program in the first summer. These presentations and examples are given to an invited audience for feedback on the projects. Ultimately, each student presents or publishes their work off-campus. Several students have presented at Re:Humanities. 

CLASS Program Summary and Future Plans
Students in research collaborations with Faculty and members of the DHi, have been successful in developing deep understanding of a specific long-term research agenda. DHi provides the immersive experiences and ongoing continuity with faculty research necessary to support this engagement. Most of our CLASS scholars have conducted collaborative investigation of a specific aspect of a long-term research agenda, determined their specific interests and contributions to that agenda, and publicly presented their scholarship “in progress” at Hamilton events and professional conferences.

Our future plans are to continue the CLASS program and to collaborate on its development with other liberal arts schools. Several schools have asked us about building similar models at their schools. This would require thinking more about scaling-up the program. One option we are considering is a form of “Summer Institute” for undergraduates in which we bring them together with their mentors and a larger DH community for a two-week program. 

Appendix A: Proof of Concept for a Sustainable Digital Humanities Faculty Collection Infrastructure in the Liberal Arts. 


DHi’s technology infrastructure and research support model is designed to be sustainable. That is, our approach will reduce the need for regular revamping of static faculty research web pages by creating infrastructure and processes that maintain research outcomes as “living” web presences accessible for faculty and student collaborative scholarship over time. To this end we researched best practices in digital collection development and preservation in collaboration with members of our library and decided to develop an institutional warehouse (repository) for digital collections (Fedora Commons). Fedora was chosen for its scalability and ability to be extremely flexible in the way objects can be accessed. Fedora has built-in flexibility to allow creation and maintenance of relationships among objects and across digital collections over time.

After researching open source collaborative tools to interface with collections in Fedora Commons we decided to make use of Islandora. Islandora can be used to create customized themes for faculty collections and projects. Our DHi Collection Development Team is working with the Islandora and Fedora Commons consultants (at Discovery Garden to create our digital scholarship infrastructure. By using experts to help with development we are making efficient use of the Mellon Grant to move this complex project forward. 

2013 Appendix B: KPJR Form Vishnupada Complex Mahadeva Temple 
DOCUMENTATION SHEET OF BUILD HERITAGE/SITE N.M.M.A., ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVERY OF INDIA

COMPILED AT K.P. JAYASWAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PATNA

Sl.No.	 Documentation Parameters 	 
 	 State/Dist./Block 	Gaya
 1	 Name of the monument/built heritage/site	 Mahdava Temple
 2	 Date/Period	 Early Medieval/Medieval?
 3	 Location 	To east and north of 16 Vedis/Padas in Vishnupada Complex 
 	 Geo-coordinate	 
 4	 Approach	East of the Vishnupada Temple, in the Vishnupada Complex 
 	 Airport	Gaya 
 	 Railway Station	Gaya 
 	 Bus Stand	Gaya 
 5	 Topographical features	Slope of the Mundaprishta hill on the western bank of the Phalgu 
 6	 Brief History	 
Temple seems to have origins in early medieval or medieval period. The exact date of the construction of the temple is difficult to determine because of lack of historical sources. It has images and inscriptions, but they may have been moved. 

 7	Local tradition associated with building/structure/site	Gaya Shraddha, place of Pinda-dana as well as Darshana 
 8	 Architectural style	 Inner sanctum, which has a Linga, and there are 20 pillars, which constitute the Mandapa
 9	 Description of the building/structure/site	 
Mahadeva temple: Inner sanctum with a Shiva Linga and a twenty pillared Mandapa. Narasimha Temple (east of Mahadeva): Small rock temple Sarasvati Temple (east of Narasimha): Small rock temple Facing Narasimha are two single chamber shrines. All five are treated as one unit in the Vishnupada complex. 

 10	 Building/Structural material and other	Stone and brick; pillars are stone 
11 	Usage(s) 	Active worship, Darshana 
12 	Ownership 	Same as Vishnupada Main Temple 
13 	Protection status 	Good 
14 	Present condition 	Maintained 
15 	Conservation assessment 	Alright 
16 	Photographs 	See attached 
17 	Plan/elevation, if available 	 
18 	Published references 	 
19 	General Remarks 	There is an inscription 
20 	Name and address of compiler with date elements used 	Abhishek Singh Amar Matthew Sayers 
Images: 

Mahadeva Temple (129):

By opening

1. Vishnu, 16'' (122)

2. Camunda, 16'' (120, 121)

There's no logic to the temple - they have plastered images all over the place; normally, you would not see Bishnu and Camunda next to each other, but in this case we do, in a disorganized fashion. For instance, they are in the same niche, but Camunda is platered higher than Vishnu, which speaks to the disorganization of the collection process. 
South wall

3. Ganesha, 16'' (122)

4. Inscription (123-125)

Appears to be painted more recently. 
5. Eroded Uma-Maheshvaga, 14'' (126)

Inner sanctum (127)

6. Huge Shiva Linga (127)

North wall

7. Uma-Maheshvara, 16'' (128)

By opening, on the north, west-facing niche; left

8. Durga, 36'' (130)

9. New inscription (130)

Outside, left

10. Dasavatara (131)
The proposed paper reports on the development of a new digital resource: EGO | European History Online(EGO) is a transcultural history of early modern and modern Europeconcentrating on processes of communication, interaction and interdependency (www.ieg-ego.eu). It is being published by the Leibniz Institute of European History (IEG) in Mainz in cooperation with the University of Trier’s Centre for Digital Humanities. At its heart are transfer processes that extended across individual, familial and local realms and had a long-term impact. EGO traces these transfer processes in and between, amongst others, the realms of religion, law, politics, art, music, literature, economics, technology and the military, science and medicine. One can speak of a "transfer" when people, objects and ideas move between different cultures (interpretative systems) and as a result undergo transformation.

European History Online is the first history of Europe that links the medium's relevance to the subject matter. The format of an online system of publication is the ideal medium for representing the complexity and dynamics of European communicative and transfer processes. The more than 200 articles are organised into ten thematic threads. These threads group the separate articles into a modular structure arranged thematically and methodologically. These threads are transdisciplinary and multi-thematic; they bring together the perspectives of different historical disciplines and their international authors. At the same time, they are organised diachronically, i.e. they deal with phenomena that – with specific periods of development and significance – are primarily evident throughout modern European history.

This organisation offers flexible means of accessing the contributions: in contrast to a printed book, European History Online does not have a beginning and an end. EGO accommodates the dynamics of intensifying communication and the continuously shifting intersections in European history by assigning many articles to more than one section. Within these multiple classifications, one can see how the topics interconnect. The different forms of presentation – surveys, basic elements and focus elements – and their organisation into a modular structure enable nuanced contextualisation.

In addition to this multi-layered structure, EGO articles are directly connected via hyperlinks. The aim of these connections is to expose the so far unknown concentrations of communication in European history, inspire new transcultural research in the various disciplines and thereby promote a more dynamic understanding of European history. The versatile search function allows users to put together their own "history of Europe" which corresponds to their individual interests.

Moreover, EGO pursues a multilingual approachthat acknowledges the need for a workable meta-language / lingua franca in the Humanities but at the same time does justice to the linguistic variety of national academic cultures in Europe: EGO-articles are accepted in English and German. All major contributions are translated by native speakers and published in both languages. In addition, authors may publish their article in their native language. Users are invited to consult both the original and the translation in order to trace differing argumentative patterns and conceptual peculiarities of the respective languages.

From the technical point of view EGO is based on a sophisticated infrastructure which on the on hand supports the editorial board (backend of the system), and on the other hand is used to build the frontend of the system for the publication of the EGO articles in the internet. For these purposes the open source enterprise content management system Plone is used, which is a very powerful environment developed for professional use in organisations and companies. Especially its sophisticated and safe user access management as well as its workflow driven content management makes it one of the outstanding web management systems.

In Plone it is possible to handle very different content types as for example texts, images, PDF-files, audio and video data. For EGO all these project specific media types are modelled by a corresponding Plone article type, such that they can be configured by the editor himself within the Plone configuration layer. Here the editors can specify all relevant visual and layout attributes for each object according to the underlying web design of EGO and thereby prepare the article for the final publication. This step is integrated in the whole publication workflow which is modelled within the content management system. The participating roles are the authors, the editors, the copy editors and the publishers. Every member of this team has its own role and permissions to work with the documents, which run through different stages from ‘private’ (i.e. newly provided by the author) over ‘review/revision’ (redacted by at least one editor and/or copy editor) and ‘internal preview’ until it is ‘externally published’ on the EGO platform (c.f. figure 1).


Fig. 1: EGO article ‘Mental Maps: The Cognitive Mapping of the Continent as an Object of research of European History’

All information about the documents, the media types, the interlinking between documents and external resources and especially about the people involved is managed in an object database, which serves as storage for the backend as well as for the frontend. This guarantees that all changes to a document are logged in one consistent pool of data. Moreover, on this database the search engine for EGO is installed. In addition to a conventional full text retrieval the engine supports the query for specific categories of EGO articles as for example authors, time ranges, themes/threads, geographical regions of Europe and for media types (image, audio, video etc.).

To address aspects of long term availability of the project results the EGO documents are encoded according to international standards (XML/TEI, METS/MODS). The implementation of an open access interface to our Plone system allows a standardized export of the data, which is on the one hand used for long term storage in form of a dark archive. On the other hand it provides possibilities for the reuse of the EGO documents (e.g. linguistic analysis, visualization of the semantic network, compilation of bibliographic information, etc.). 

The consequent use of a technical research and publication infrastructure leads to a highly dynamical publication process, to a very dense network of information and thereby to a very flexible presentation with additional benefits compared to traditional printed editions.

This change in media undertaken by European History Online challenges the concept of multi-volume published surveys, which, as a rule, must wait 20 to 50 years for a new edition. This dynamic form of publication corresponds to the dynamic understanding of Europe: the articles can be updated regularly, and the system can be extended by new articles in order to keep up with new developments in the research. Older versions of an article will remain accessible.

European History Online primarily uses linear, textual presentations of narrative and analysis in order to portray transfer processes in European history. However, EGO enhances spatial perspectives as well. All place names in the articles are georeferenced. They are retrievable in an alphabetical index and being visualized on a dynamic map (via Open Street Map). Thus authors are encouraged reflect their coverage of geographic areas in their resesarch, whereas users, via the general index (and map) of place names, may discern spatial clusters with regard to their topic of interest. EGO thus strives to enhances a spatially-oriented approach in transnational and transcultural history.

In addition, European History Onlinecombines different types of media in a – new – interpretative context. Images and audio and visual clips illustrate not only the topic being described, but also narrate their own histories of transfer and enable new interconnections. EGO's transdisciplinary approach is also to a large degree a product of the images, graphics, maps, tables, film clips and audio samples linked to the different textual contributions. This network exists, on the one hand, via internal links to elements published within EGO and, on the other, via links to external images, textual sources and biographical data digitalised or published elsewhere, as well as – in the notes – scholarly literature and other academic resources online. While these external resources represent all national traditions relevant to the history of Europe, EGO makes them accessible to a transnational academic community via a bilingual user interface. The dynamic EGO system thereby brings together and groups thematically the range of international online resources on European history.
Historical legal charters can provide an important window into the workings of a society, and because of their legal significance they often survive as evidence of a society when there is little other documentary evidence available. Of course, original medieval charters have always been difficult to access, and for this reason work was undertaken even in the 19th century to prepare printed editions of them. Nowadays they are published over the WWW, since space is unlimited and access for potential users is quick and easy. See, for example, the efforts of the Institute of Historical Research in its British History Online project which has been transcribing printed editions of collections and making them available over the WWW (e.g. Marwick 1894), and the monasterium.net (Mom 2013) from which, as its website says, "Original documents [are] available world wide 24 hours a day, independent of the researcher’s physical location."

Once the texts have been digitised, the question arises about what can be done with them. One strand for this is exemplified in the work of the ChartEx project (CharteEx 2013) which has been funded by the Digging into Data Challenge and is developing "new ways of exploring the full text content of digital historical records" through the use of natural language processing and data mining techniques to extract automatically information about people, events and places and find relationships between them. ChartEx, then, by its use of advanced text processing and analysis techniques follows one of the long traditions of the digital humanities. The other long standing approach to dealing with text – markup – is also active with the work of the Charters Encoding Initiative project (CEI 2009) which has developed a TEI-derived markup scheme suitable for charter texts. CEI takes, perhaps not surprisingly, primarily a diplomatic approach. Georg Vogeler, writing about the CEI, claims that medieval European charters "reflect contemporary attitudes and mindsets as regards legal and representation issues" and "are tools of diplomatic criticism" (Vogeler 2005, p 276). He further claims that through CEI markup one has a "platform for seeing the European Middle Ages as they are reflected in their charters" (Vogeler 2005, p 279).

DDH at King's College London has been involved in several projects that have used charters as their subject matter, but these projects have not taken either the text analysis or markup approaches. Charters were a substantial component of the Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (PASE 2010). Two other more recent projects have made charters their primary focus, even more than PASE. The Paradox of Medieval Scotland project (PoMS 2010) (extended more recently in the People of Medieval Scotland (PoMS 2013)) represents more than 6000 charters and claims to be "the first online prosopographical database to comprise exclusively and exhaustively the corpus of administrative documents of a European kingdom in the central middle ages." (Hammond 2013, p 7). More recently, and still in development, the Making of Charlemagne's Europe project (Charlemagne 2013) is "a database of prosopographical and socio-economic data found in the more than four thousand legal documents surviving from Charlemagne’s reign." An important difference between these projects and the methodologies implied by projects such as Chartex or CEI is that none of PASE, PoMS or Charlemagne actually represent the texts themselves. Instead all three projects take a structured data approach – developing a formal model in highly structured data that aims to express some aspects of what the charters are talking about. The very nature of charter texts is that they provide what their creators thought of as a formal approach to the dealing with their property. The models used for these three projects try to capture explicitly formal structures that the charter's creators seemingly had in their mind when they created them. Although studies of the charter documents such as that carried out in diplomatics provides one of the bases for the work here, as Hammond says about PoMS: "A clear distinction has been dawn [in PoMS] between the form of the document, based on its diplomatic, and the events which are transactions ... in the document" (Hammond 2013, p 11). What can be said about the charters in these projects when the charter text itself is not present? It turns out that the absence of the text enables a representation of the material about a charter that somehow liberates it from being grounded too exclusively in the words of the text itself.

All three of these projects grew out of the thinking about structure that is represented by DDH's factoid approach to prosopography, described in Bradley and Short 2005 and extended into the world of the Semantic Web in Pasin and Bradley 2013. The virtue of the factoid approach is that it provides a source-grounded place for our researchers to say many different kinds of things about their documents. It allowed researchers to record not only the main things the charter was created to talk about – the arrangements about property – but also the wealth of further information that they capture: relationships between people (kinship and otherwise), the titles they held, other events they were involved in, etc. The factoid model also allows for the roles of people and associated other objects mentioned in the charters to be specified and for the way in which their name was recorded in a particular spot in the charter text to be recorded as well. Furthermore – and most relevant here – it supported a richer understanding of a charter's complex set of associated events. In PASE, for example, we were able to formally separate the event of the charter signing, with its perhaps specific historical significance, from the activities – usually transactions on property – that the charter talked about. Multiple exchanges in a single charter could be captured as separate transaction-like event factoids.

In the end the factoid approach to the charters encouraged us to also think about how to formalise other aspects of what our charters represented. People, for example, turn up not only as agents in the charters but sometimes as possessions. Possessions are complex entities in charters: often they are pieces of land or institutions sitting on land, but charters also show people possessing rights of many kinds, such as the right to run a fair, to collect taxes, to move away from a piece of property, to celebrate divine service, etc. Furthermore, what was actually being given in relationship to a possession could be complex too. PoMS researcher John Reuben Davies developed a scheme to clarify and enrich the classification of transactions presented in charters, going beyond simple classifications such as 'grants' and 'confirmations' to include 'renewals' and 'successions', among many others. Charlemagne has been exploring the terms and conditions attached to the exchange of possessions as described in their charters, and has also been exploring the complex way in which historical places are presented in their charter documents – not only mapping them, where possible, to modern places, but attempting to represent the complex and often obscure connections between place and historical region that their charters describe. In the end, the rich formal structure that underpins PoMS and Charlemagne represents some of the subtlety of the legal understanding that was emerging in Charlemagne's time and in the days of Medieval Scotland. It exposes some part of what the charter creators were trying to achieve in their efforts to formalise their agreements between themselves about their possessions.

In this presentation we will introduce some of the structure that extends the factoid model and represents several of the complex processes that these charter documents were attempting to formalise. The resultant models attempt to structure aspects of these documents than have not been tackled before and tries to find a point that both enriches our understanding through formalising them, and avoids ignoring, through excessive formalisation, the ambiguity and vagueness of the emerging legal process that happened both in the time of Charlemagne and Medieval Scotland. By developing a formal model for our understanding of the framework in which the charters operated, we believe that we complement the text based approaches of both Chartex and the CEI.

Finally, our work is, as the famous historian E.H. Carr said, an attempt to recognise "History [as] a process". With its extension of the charter documents into the historical world of people, places and possessions, it attempts to recognise that "you cannot isolate a bit of the process and study it on its own" (Evans 2001). Our models make explicit a set of views and assumptions by our researchers about these medieval worlds, and in their formality and clarity make it more possible to, in the words of the historian Richard J. Evans, "subordinate them to the intractabilities of the material with which they are working, and enable readers to study [our] work critically by making these views and assumptions explicit". In this presentation we hope to encourage this kind of dialogue.

References
Bradley, John and Harold Short (2005). “Texts into databases: the Evolving Field of New-style Prosopography” in Literary and Linguistic Computing Vol. 20 Suppl. 1:3-24.

CEI (2009). CEI – Charters Encoding Initiative. Online at http://www.cei.lmu.de/index.php (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Charlemagne (2013). The Making of Charlemagne's Europe. Online at http://www.charlemagneseurope.ac.uk/ (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

ChartEx (2013). ChartEx. Online at http://www.chartex.org/index.html (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Evans, Richard J. (2001). "The Two Faces of E.H. Carr". In What is History?. Website published by Institute of Historical Research. Online at http://www.history.ac.uk/ihr/Focus/Whatishistory/article.html (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Hammond, Matthew (2013). "Introduction: The Paradox of Medieval Scotland". In Matthew Hammond (ed). New Perspectives on Medieval Scotland 1093-1286. Woodbridge UK: The Boydell Press.

Marwick, J.D. (1894). Charters and Documents relating to the City of Glasgow 1175-1649. In British History Online. Online at http://www.british-history.ac.uk/report.aspx?compid=47934 (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Mom (2013). Mom: Europe's virtual documents online. Online at http://monasterium.net/pages/en/home.php (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

PASE (2010). PASE: Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England. Online at http://www.pase.ac.uk/index.html (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Pasin, Michele and John Bradley (2013). "Factoid-based prosopography and computer ontologies: Towards an integrated approach". In Literary and Linguistic Computing. published online June 29, 2013 doi:10.1093/llc/fqt037, and soon to be in print.

PoMS (2010). Paradox of Medieval Scotland. Online at http://paradox.poms.ac.uk/ (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

PoMS (2013). People of Medieval Scotland. Online at http://www.poms.ac.uk/ (Accessed 30 October, 2013).

Vogeler, Georg (2005). "Towards a Standard of Encoding Medieval Charters with XML". In Literary and Linguistic Computing. Vol 20 No 3. pp 269-280
From lighthouse to framework: visualising digital scholarly editions with pathways and histories
The Woolf Online project (1), now in its second phase of development at Loyola University Chicago’s Center for Textual Studies and Digitial Humanities, continues to address the following fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature:

­ how does a literary text come into being?
­ what kinds of influence are at work upon the writer during the process of initial composition, and thereafter?
The project has continued to investigate the various ways in which different recoverable histories of a particular text can be used to illuminate the process of its composition. By recording the history of a particular text, its cultural, political, and autobiographical contexts and their interaction, we can visually begin to answer some of the following important questions:

how is textual history related to other histories of a text?
­ what use does literary criticism make of textual and contextual histories?
With these goals in mind, we have developed and implemented digital tools and methods that allow the dynamic rendering of a literary text, which is then embedded within a contextual environment relevant to its known, original period of composition. For example, a user can view each day's writing for the Initial Holograph Draft within the context of Woolf's own diary entries and letters, newspapers of the day, and other historical data appropriate to the period. A user can compare different stages of the genetic edition of 'Time Passes', for example, and view earlier and later material that may have impacted upon or been influenced by the composition of 'Time Passes'. This material currently includes extracts from 'Sketch of the Past' and her 1905 journal. We have also delved in to the history of the Stephen Family, and the impact St Ives in Cornwall, and in particular Talland House, may have had upon the composition of this text.

As part of this onging development within the Center for Textual Studies and Digital Humanites, we have developed an extensible development and publication framework, called ‘Mojulem’  (2), for editing, publication, and visualisation of digital scholarly editions. Mojulem now allows us to build on the concept of ‘knowledge sites’, as suggested by Peter Shillingsburg (3) , supplementing a core publication framework with modules/plugins such as editors and image viewers. It is also able to host multiple projects within one installed framework, thereby enabling cross­project research and the option to aggregate specified data. Development of Mojulem, with the Woolf Online project as one of the ongoing working environments, has followed the need for four underlying core structures. These structures include CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm, which are detailed as follows.

CorPix
Manuscripts and printed texts materially unite the iconic and lexical, the autographic and allographic (4), whereas all digital representations separate these constituent elements into images and transcriptions. With Mojulem projects, the common default display reunites the image and transcription by mapping the one to the other at the pixel level. CorPix software currently includes eHinman (5) , Transparent (6) , TransparentOCR, Magnify, and Zoom. For example, pixel­level positioning and coordinate fixing is an inherent feature of both Transparent and TransparentOCR, within both editor and visualisation tools. eHinman is a digital adaptation of the original Hinman collator, and enables fade from the image of a page from one copy to another, thereby enabling a visual collation of multiple copies. Transparent is used within both the visualisation and editing stages of a project’s development, enabling an editor and user alike to view the image as the primary entry consideration for the project.

CorTex
The CorTex is the stable resource containing the merged or compacted plain text transcriptions of the variant expressions of a work. It stores all information about text and variations, ready to be extracted for display of variation amongst versions; it is not necessary to recompute them. The CorTex is the entity to which all standoff properties (markup, annotations, links, etc.) points and on whose stability the system depends. It is as the source of each version’s text and variation from other texts. The stability and endurance of the CorTex is protected by multiplying duplicate copies locked with a digital signature, which verifies for each user that a CorTex copy is viable.

CorCode
CorCode is the add­on value of analysis, argument, and explanation. Mojulem stores markup separately, as standoff properties, applying it as the user invokes it for the rendering of a specific item’s image or text within a given visualisation, such as a transparent view of a page of the Initial Holograph Draft of ‘To the Lighthouse’ (7) . To do this, Mojulem includes an editor which saves text and encoding separately, and filters for converting legacy, code­embedded transcriptions, including TEI encoded documents, into separate forms with markup analysed into properties, and filters for reversing this process.

CorForm
A CorForm is a CSS stylesheet, containing special formatting rules, used to transform the overlapping properties of the CorCode into HTML. Each CorCode has a default CorForm, but other Corforms can be used in combination or as alternatives. Since a CorTex may have many CorCodes, and each CorCode many CorForms, structuring or formatting of the text can be attained by specifying some combination of already available resources, or by supplying new ones.

The CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm are aggregated for a project within the Mojulem framework. Each such item is identified by a unique key, which is used as an index into the repository or database.

The development and combination of these four cores, within the modular and adaptable framework Mojulem, has allowed the second phase of the Woolf Online project to begin to approach the fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature, as outlined above. As such, this paper and presentation will outline and demonstrate visual methods and considerations for implementing such perceived networked histories. It will also discuss the different aspects of Mojulem, as outlined above, and ground such a discussion within the example of the ongoing Woolf Online project.

Notes
1 Project site is available at the following URL: http://www.woolfonline.com 2 Our current test framework for the Woolf Online project, as of 6th March 2014, can be viewed at the following URL: http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/projects/edfu/ 

3 Shillingsburg, P. L. (2006). From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts: Cambridge University Press. 4 Nelson Goodman noted this distinction to separate art forms with a unique authentic form, for example painting and sculpture, from art forms which are performative with multiple copies, including writing and music.

5 An earlier stand­alone example can be viewed at the following URL: http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/testing/imaging/ehinman­dep/v6/

6 A test example page of the Initial Holograph Draft can be viewed at the following URLs: Image =

http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/projects/edfu/?node=content/image/gallery&project=1&parent=2&taxa=6&content =353&pos=21 and transcription = http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/projects/edfu/?node=content/text/transcriptions&project=1&parent=2&taxa=6&co ntent=5136&pos=21 

7 For example, Image =

http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/projects/edfu/?node=content/image/gallery&project=1&parent=6&taxa=24&conte nt=385&pos=49 and transcription = http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/projects/edfu/?node=content/text/transcriptions&project=1&parent=2&taxa=6&co ntent=5164&pos=49

8 An earlier TEI derived stand­alone example of this concept, using material from the Malory project, can be viewed at the following URL: http://dhdev.ctsdh.luc.edu/testing/tei/teiparser_full/
Following the lead offered in the "Text Encoding Meets Text Analysis" panel session at DH2012 in Hamburg,1 and also in the 2013 debate between Matthew Jockers and Julia Flanders on "A Matter of Scale",2 the research value of basic modeling for text analysis seems comparatively clear, even if it is as yet unrealized in practice. However, the payoff from the more complex forms of modeling that are evident in typical TEI-encoded thematic research collections has been less clearly demonstrated. The usefulness of such modeling is evident insofar as it supports the publication of these collections: information about document structures is used to produce display formatting and navigation, and information about content features such as named entities and genre is commonly used in searching. But the larger claims made for digital resources—that they "allow new questions to be asked"3—require us to distinguish between these kinds of functional value and what we might call "real research value." The real research value of the modeling is reflected in the ability of the data to support complex inferences, at scale, that materially contribute to humanities research arguments. Huitfeldt et al. in "Meaning and Interpretation of Markup"4 offers a foundational demonstration of how markup "licenses inferences" in formal terms. But projects developing TEI-encoded archival collections have not yet articulated in detail how that markup might lead researchers from comparatively simple inferences ("this paragraph contains a reference to such-and-such a person") to more complex ones ("if the name of a person classified in our personography as a war hero appears inside an advertisement within a magazine published after the date of the war in question, the advertiser may be using that person's identity to promote the goods being advertised"; "people whose names appear in both advertisements and poetic dedications command greater social capital than those whose names appear in either genre alone"). And the conceptual leap from complex statements of this kind to larger conclusions is greater still.

This paper seeks to explore how the modeling of textual data for humanities research connects to the high-level research questions humanities scholars address in their scholarly writing. It offers a detailed description of the modeling (transcription, text encoding, metadata) and the high-level research goals for two closely related digital collections: the Early Caribbean Digital Archive and the Women Writers Project. It then traces critically the inferential steps by which we seek to get from the data being captured to the theoretical concepts ("culture", "geography", "influence", etc.) that animate the research. The goal of the paper is to provide a much more exacting and thorough understanding of the complexity of data modeling required to support the argumentative nuance and conceptual subtlety of real-world, high-quality humanities research.

In particular, our focus is on the possibilities and challenges of knowledge production afforded by modeling and encoding archives of materials that concern marginalized persons and non-canonical texts and histories. The two projects under discussion here are engaged in bringing to visibility texts and narratives that had previously been submerged beneath (or concealed within) more culturally promiment discursive forms. The Women Writers Project is currently engaged in a grant-funded collaborative research project funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities titled "Cultures of Reception" (http://www.wwp.brown.edu/research/projects/reception/) which gathers and digitizes periodical reviews of late 18th- and early 19th-century women's writing, to support the study of patterns of reception in an emerging transatlantic literary culture. The Early Caribbean Digital Archive (http://www.northeastern.edu/nulab/the-early-caribbean-digital-archive/) is digitizing a variety of Caribbean textual sources from the same period, with special emphasis on the study of the emerging culture of commodity circulation and its relation to the transatlantic slave trade and submerged narratives of race and gender. Both projects involve detailed TEI encoding of textual sources animated by research goals such as these:

trace and map the relations between texts as a function of time, human agency, and geography
bring into visibility relations between locations of print activity across the Caribbean archipelago
show relations among individuals, such as printers, consumers, merchants, runaway slaves, missionaries, plantation owners, abolitionists, military figures, and colonial political figures
map relations between legislation, commodity prices, geography
map the geographic circulation of literary tropes
trace changes in the culture of reviewing over time with respect to the emergence of a transatlantic literary culture
bring to visibility the evaluative frames of reference within which women's writing is read
trace the cultural frame of reference for reviewers in England and in North America
In both cases, the projects must make conceptual and inferential bridges between the specific assertions constituted in the markup (observations about genre, named entities, time and location, textual structure, references to circulating cultural objects such as commodities and texts) and concepts operating a much more abstract level: "culture", "geography", "influence", "relations", "frames of reference." Humanities scholars are comfortable using terms like these in their writing, as the currency of methodologies from cultural studies to cultural geography indicates, but what forms of evidence and inferential reasoning do they entail at the level of textual markup?

We can unpack here, in a preliminary way, the kinds of reasoning through which these bridges might be built, and the final paper will explore these in more detail. First, there is a set of direct modeling activities (transcription and markup) through which the texts are constituted as research evidence. The activities of transcription produce from the source document assertions about the existence of strings of characters, and markup allows the transcriber and editor to identify areas where this evidence is ambiguous or missing. Through markup the editors can also identify specific strings as references to certain types of named entities (persons, places, books, publishing houses, ships, shipping companies, legislative bodies, etc.) and can associate these references with their target to provide unambiguous entity identification via linked data authority records. At a structural level, the markup can also be used to identify the genre and format of texts and parts of texts, and to associate metadata (author, date and place of production, etc.) with these. Following these activities, we must venture to make inferences based on our modeling. For example, the markup allows us to give greater precision to inferences common in text analysis: instead of judging collocation based on raw word proximity, we can identify word pairs or groups as being within the same textual feature (paragraph, poem, letter, advertisement, heading). In specific cases, we may be able to infer something more from such collocation, such as a connection between two authors mentioned in the same paragraph of a review. Genre and format information may enable us to sharpen these inferences further: mentioning an author in a review means something different from mentioning an author in a dedication; a commodity carries a different cultural freight when listed in an advertisement, a bill of lading, a receipt, a letter, a legislative document. The name of an enslaved person means something different when it appears in a bill of sale, a runaway slave notice, a poem. Taking metadata into account, we can also localize documents in space and time, which gives us the possibility of (cautiously) identifying trends, causation, cultural significance.

In building these bridges, we need to be attentive to the gaps or weak inferential points as we move from the modeling to the research. For example, what does it mean to infer relationships between entities from their proximity within documents? Where are these inferences strongly grounded (for instance, co-authorship reflected in metadata records) and where are they weak (for instance, two names appearing in the same paragraph of a historical account)? Or, in another vein, is the model of geography that emerges from textual attestation (i.e. the inventory of place names and location references) adequate for the kinds of geographical analysis we want to do? Or again, what does "circulation" (whether of physical objects or of ideas) look like as attested in data of this kind and how do we discover it? Finally, what is the relation between the encoding categories we have identified here and our knowledge production with respect to marginalized texts, persons, and narratives? How will our modelling decisions erase or repeat historical occlusions in the archive, not only by determining what aspects of the text are marked but also by imposing existing frames of knowledge on the archive?

References
1. Bauman, Syd, David Hoover, Karina Van Dalen-Oskam, and Wendell Piez (2012). Text Analysis Meets Text Encoding. Panel session, DH2012, University of Hamburg, July 2012. www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/text-analysis-meets-text-encoding

2. Flanders, Julia and Matthew L. Jockers. (2013). A Matter of Scale. Keynote Lecture from the Boston Area Days of Digital Humanities Conference. Northeastern University, Boston, MA. March 18, 2013. digitalcommons.unl.edu/englishfacpubs/106.

3. Our Cultural Commonwealth (2006). The report of the American Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and Social Sciences. ACLS.

4. Huitfeldt, Claus, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, and Allen Renear (2001). Meaning and Interpretation of Markup. Markup Languages: Theory & Practice 2.3: 215-234.
The paper will present the digital genetic edition of the notebooks of the Austrian conceptual artist Hartmut Skerbisch (1945-2009). The edition is currently emerging as part of a PhD project which explores the use and advantages of applying semantic technologies to art historical source materials. Therefore, the central research question is how a digital genetic and semantically enriched edition can support the appreciation of an artist’s concepts and associations during the process of a work’s creation. Such insights should facilitate the interpretation and comprehension of his work.

Hartmut Skerbisch dealt conceptually with an extended notion of sculpture and space and applied these ideas to his works. He explored the relation between these entities, especially how space in general is generated or changed through the interaction of sculpture with audience and setting (e.g. how can electricity generate or compress space) and how electronic media change our perception of space.12 In his notes, he mentioned different authors, philosophers and novelists like James Joyce, Franz Kafka, Kathy Acker or Rudolf Steiner, as well as musicians and bands, ranging from classical to rock to blues music. He frequently cited passages from their works, commented on their ideas and theories, and consequently reflected them in his artistic expressions.

  The 35 notebooks originated between 1969 and 2008 and have a scope of around 2100 pages. They include handwritten texts, calculations, formulas and sketches. The major editorial challenge regarding this source material is dealing with painted over or torn out passages, deletions and corrections. Skerbisch’s notes do not follow a linear construction, they are often fragmentary and lacking formal notation. Additionally, the interconnection between text, graphics, annotations and references to other text passages itself generates an artistic composition in the two-dimensional medium of the notebook. At first glance, texts and sketches seem to be randomly arranged on the surface: Closer inspection, however, reveals an underlying principle of the different building blocks, whose form, shape, size and placement give the entire text additional meaning. This feature of the notebooks calls for special attention to a document-oriented view in addition to a work-oriented view.3

Consequently, the paper will discuss three key issues: 

The need for editions of (hand)written sources in art historical research is evident. The recent editions of the sketchbooks by Max Beckmann4 as well as the class notes on form and design theory by Paul Klee5 show that traditional philological edition methods are not entirely sufficient for art historical needs. Issues of text-image relationships - especially for these types of sources, where images are of equal value as texts or text passages themselves become graphic elements – have not been adequately resolved.
Writing a notebook is a process manifested in time and space, therefore the evolution of a text over time is an important aspect. A genetic edition focuses on the document aspect and attempts to trace the origination process with a view on corrections, deletions and additions of the text to envision the author’s original intentions.  Especially modern manuscripts, with fragmentary and cursory notes, often exist as unfinished drafts and put different demands on the editors.678 The difficulties with digitally encoding such handwritten sources of visual artists with TEI are addressed: The paper will report on the benefits and drawbacks of the already implemented elements and attributes for genetic editions in the TEI guidelines and demonstrate their application on the material at hand.
Finally, the paper focuses on how semantic technologies could help to uncover the cultural and intellectual background of Hartmut Skerbisch’s creative work, through relating textual references to concepts. Recent research projects like the Theodor Fontane’s notebooks 9 pursue a similar approach and emphasize the importance of linking concepts for semantic analysis of the source material.
Thus, in addition to the content-related and formal structure of the text, recurring concepts like people, places, works of literature, music and film are annotated. For uniquely referencing such entities, controlled vocabularies as well as authority files such as VIAF, GND and GeoNames are used. Beyond that, the aforementioned concepts are further classified. The identified concepts are extracted from the TEI document, mapped to a RDF model and stored in a triple store to facilitate reasoning.10 In this manner, implicit relationships between these concepts are established which are not explicitly present in the texts. For example, a quotation from a novel is linked to that novel’s author and other works of the same author. Thus, it is possible to compare and juxtapose the concepts used which allows for a variety of different analyses of the content.

The advantages of these methods are a) bringing the fragmentary entries of the notebook into a content-related sequence, b) visualizing unexpected combinations and associative chains of concepts to show the many-faceted influences on the artist’s work, c) establishing a relation between the notebook entries and Skerbisch’s realized works of art and finally d) tracing the creative process to promote the understanding of his work. The insights gained in the process will provide a basis for further research questions and analysis in art history and digital edition.

References
1. Fiedler, E. (2005). Hartmut Skerbisch. Sphäre 315. www.museum-joanneum.at/de/skulpturenpark/skulpturen/hartmut-skerbisch-1?overlay=true (accessed 7 March 2014).

2. Fenz, W. (1994). Hartmut Skerbisch. Werkauswahl 1969-1994. Graz: Neue Galerie.

3. Robinson, P. (2013). Towards a Theory of Digital Editions, Variants – Journal of the European Society for Textual Scholarship, 10: 105-131.

4. Zeiller, C. (2010). Max Beckmann. Die Skizzenbücher. Ein kritischer Katalog. München: Hatje Cantz.

5. Zentrum Paul Klee (2011). Paul Klee – Bildnerische Form- und Gestaltungslehre. www.kleegestaltungslehre.zpk.org (accessed 7 March 2014).

6. Brüning, G., Henzel, K. and Pravida, D. (2013). Multiple Encoding in Genetic Editions: The Case of ‘Faust’, Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative. jtei.revues.org/697 (accessed 7 March 2014).

7. Burnard, L., Jannidis F., Pierazzo, E. and Rehbein, M. (2008-2013), An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions.www.tei-c.org/Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html (accessed 7 March 2014).

8. Pierazzo, E. (2009). Digital Genetic Editions. The Encoding of Time in Manuscript Transcription. In: Deegan, M. and Sutherland, K. (eds.), Text Editing, Print and the Digital World. Farnham: Ashgate, 169-186.

9. de la Iglesia, M. and Göbel, M. (2013). From entity description to semantic analysis: The case of Theodor Fontane’s notebooks. In: Ciotti, F. and Ciula, A. (eds.), The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web. TEI Conference and Members Meeting 2013, Rome: UniversItalia, 24-29.

10. Allemang, D. and Hendler, J. (2011). Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist. Effective Modeling in RDFS and OWL. Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann.
1. Introduction
While sound studies is experiencing a resurgence in literary criticism, academic arguments involving sound are nearly impossible to make in traditional print media.  An article could include an excerpt of a score, but only scholars who can read music would be able to understand it.  Likewise, articles or books could include audio files externally, as did Nicholas Temperley’s special edition of Victorian Studies, which included a cassette tape with the songs discussed in the articles. 1  However, these solutions do not address the central problem:  readers will have difficulty finding the exact musical phrases mentioned in articles, and those with less musical expertise will be left out of the conversation entirely.  Newer options for incorporating music in academic articles include SoundCite (soundcite.knightlab.com), a tool that lets users embed sound clips in websites, Scalar (scalar.usc.edu/scalar), a publishing framework that lets users annotate media, and the strategy of assigning a QR code to each audio excerpt and inserting these into a print article, as Jennifer Wood suggests. 2  None of these options integrates the audio with the score:  SoundCite will only let users hear the audio, Scalar only supports textual annotations of media files, and QR codes require readers to have smart phones, which vastly limits the audience for the article.  To address these problems, I have built two tools:  "Songs of the Victorians" (www.songsofthevictorians.com), an archive and analysis of musical settings of Victorian poems with an interactive framework that highlights each measure of a score in time with its music, and "Augmented Notes" (www.augmentednotes.com), a public humanities tool that allows users who do not know how to program to build their own sites like "Songs of the Victorians."

2. Overview of "Songs of the Victorians"
"Songs of the Victorians" melds the archive and the scholarly article.  It examines both high- and low-brow Victorian settings of contemporaneous poetry by integrating scores, audio files, and scholarly analytical commentary in an interactive environment to help users understand both the literary and musical elements of the argument.  As an archive, it provides audio files of each song and archival-quality scans of first-edition printings of each score.  For every song, the user can listen to the audio while each measure of the score is highlighted in time with the music, as the archive page for William Balfe’s "Come into the Garden Maud" demonstrates (www.songsofthevictorians.com/balfe/archive.html).  The project also functions as a collection of scholarly articles in which each song includes an analysis of the song’s interpretation of the text.  When the commentary discusses a particular measure, the users can click on an icon of a speaker, which will play the relevant excerpt of the audio file and highlight the score so they can hear for themselves the effect the commentary describes, as in the analysis page for Caroline Norton's "Juanita" (www.songsofthevictorians.com/norton/analysis.html).


Fig. 1: Musical excerpt from the analysis page of Caroline Norton’s “Juanita”

"Songs of the Victorians" includes Caroline Norton’s "Juanita," Sir Arthur Sullivan’s setting of "The Lost Chord," and two settings of Tennyson's Maud:  a parlor song by Michael William Balfe and an art song by Sir Arthur Somervell.  The site furthers scholarship for bibliographers, musicologists, Victorianists, and cultural studies scholars alike.  More generally, this new framework, which enables critics to describe musical arguments to non-musicians, facilitates this interdisciplinary approach of bringing music and literature together.  It also preserves the musical and cultural afterlives of well-known poems, as many of these scores have either disintegrated and been lost to time or are only available in select libraries.  "Songs of the Victorians" empowers users regardless of musical training:  those who cannot read music can overcome their feelings of intimidation at a musical score and can better understand the ideas described in the analysis, whereas those who can read music will still benefit, since few people can hear in their mind the music on the page.

3. Overview of "Augmented Notes"
After the success of "Songs of the Victorians," I used its framework to produce "Augmented Notes" (http://www.augmentednotes.com), a generalized, public humanities tool to allow anyone to develop similar websites.  "Augmented Notes" eliminates the need for users to understand programming by creating archive pages, like those from "Songs of the Victorians," which users can tweak and redesign.  It is simple to use, as the site only requires audio files and images of the score to produce an archive page.  After the audio and image files are uploaded, users are taken to a page where they click and drag to draw boxes around each measure (they can also edit the sizes and order of these boxes), indicating what portion of the score should be highlighted when that measure plays.  


Fig. 2: Box-drawing page of “Augmented Notes”

Users can also optionally upload an MEI file--the TEI-based scholarly standard for music--for the score if they already have measure positions recorded in MEI. Users then set the times at which the highlighting box changes position through a "time editing" page.


Fig. 3: Time editing page of “Augmented Notes”

The site brings together the measure and time information, saving them in a JSON file, which enables each measure of the song to be highlighted in time with the music.  Users then click "Download Zip" to download a zip file with the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files necessary for a complete archive page, which they can then restyle themselves.  

"Augmented Notes" also has a sandbox (www.augmentednotes.com/example) through which users who would like to experiment with the technology but do not themselves have the requisite files can try it out.  "Augmented Notes" is already being used by scholars, both for archival purposes (such as the "Performing Romantic Lyrics" project from the University of South Carolina) and for pedagogical purposes such as generating interactive scores for use in music classrooms.  Since this tool produces websites with integrated audio and scores, it empowers users to preserve cultural archives, whether their materials include classical music, unpublished manuscripts, popular music, or folk music and traditional tunes from around the globe.

4. Implications
This presentation will discuss the projects in greater detail, complete with live demonstrations and an explanation of the underlying technology to show their digital as well as scholarly innovations.  I will explain the rationale for my choice of poems, settings, sound files, and editions for "Songs of the Victorians," as well as my plans for future collaboration and expansion for both projects.  The presentation will illustrate the sorts of arguments that this framework can enable: for example, my examination of Sir Arthur Sullivan’s setting of Adelaide Procter’s "A Lost Chord" challenges the received interpretation that the poem merely describes a domestic, uncomplicated religious moment of transcendence.  Likewise, Caroline Norton’s "Juanita" has been considered a conventional song that preserves the traditional rules of courtship and parlor propriety, but my analysis of the music helps us see that it critiques the Victorian institution of marriage as imprisoning.  I will conclude by exploring the ways in which "Songs of the Victorians" is itself a Victorian endeavor, as it uses new technology to collect, analyze, and bring together Victorian music and poetry, thereby giving voice to the silent page.

5. Funding
This project was made possible by fellowships from NINES and the Scholars’ Lab.

References
1. Temperley, Nicholas (1986). Music in Victorian Society and Culture: A Special Issue of Victorian Studies. 30.1.

2. Wood, J. (2013). Noisy Texts: How to Embed Soundbytes in Your Writing. Burnable Books. Ed. Bruce Holsinger. burnablebooks.com/noisy-texts-how-to-embed-soundbytes-in-your-writing-a-guest-post/ (Accessed 30 October 2013).
Introduction
During the last 15 to 20 years, a considerable amount of premodern Chinese texts have been made available electronically, both for free and unhindered use and commercially in dedicated and locked down applications. Examples for the first type include projects such as the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (www.cbeta.org) and Wikisource (zh.wikisource.org) and the Internet Archive (www.archive.org), while examples for the latter includes products like the Siku quansshu electronic edition (四庫全書 電子版) by Digital Heritage Publishing or Zhongguo jiben guji ku 中国 基本古籍庫 by Airusheng.

For scholars wanting to make use of these ressources for their research, there are a few obstacles, including:

different formats and ways to access the texts
in many cases, texts do not confirm to philological standards
researchers can not annotate the texts and share their notes
Now, the projects described here attempt to develop an infrastructure for enabling scholars to work with repositories of freely available texts using a rapid prototyping approach with an expanding group of scholars for testing and early adoption. Technically, the main idea is to develop this as a network of repositories of texts, where each node a network consists of a set of git repositories, that can represent multiple editions of texts.

Kanripo: A repository of premodern Chinese texts
First experiments for one node of such a network have been started at Kyoto University's Institute for Research in Humanities and its associated Center for Informatics in East-Asian Studies, CIEAS. In this experiment, the distributed version control system (DVCS) git is used as a basic transportation layer. Every text in the repository is represented by one DVCS node; different editions of the text can be represented by different versions or "branches" within this node; digital facsimiles can be associated with such versions. Users can also "fork" public projects and create new branches with their own annotations and comments and share these with other researchers, either in closed groups or with the general public.

The interaction with Kanripo occurs mainly through the web interface, but can also occur directly from the desktop tool Mandoku. However, as the experience so far has shown, it seems necessary to further develop the web interface, to enable it to become not just a hub for interaction between the users, but also a full-fledged client for editing texts in the repository or add comments and annotations. For this purpose, a system similar to the popular Github site (github.com) is envisioned, starting from a open source clone of github called gitlab. This is in a very early stage of development and any feedback from the audience will be much appreciated.

Mandoku: A tool for interacting with the repository
Development has also started aiming at a convenient desktop based tool for interacting with the repositories; a preliminary development version of this tool called Mandoku will also be demonstrated during the presentation.

Mandoku tries to meet researchers of premodern Chinese texts where they spent most of their time, that is reading, annotating and translating texts. This is why the current prototype is build on the powerful and extensible editor Emacs, while as a future implementation a interface for more casual users is also planned. To incite users to overcome the initial hurdle of adopting to a new and unusual editing program, a number of tools have been implemented, that enhance the usefulness of the system, among them a keyword in context (KWIC) index is generated on each text in every repository node, which can then be queried through Mandoku and the aggregated results will be displayed, a cumulative index for the query of dictionaries and specialized reference works; further text-analytic tools are planned.

Repository for digital publications
Another problem this system tries to adress is a serious problem with the current mainstream form of digital publication: Currently a website serves usually as the main and in many cases as the sole venue of publication, thus usually hiding a complex textual resources between one browser-mediated interface (For a further discussion of this problem and a model for overcoming it see1, {6}, {7} and {8}). This topic has been discussed for some time and valid suggestions and a discussion of the requirements can be found in 2, 3, 4 and 5. Here, this proposal is taken up and expanded, namely by adding the requirement that the text will not only be made available to the scholarly community, but that it also be able to annotate it in a way that can be owned by the scholar adding the annotation and still be shared with interested colleagues.

In the framework presented here, fulfilling these requirements on a technical level is constructed as follows:

A text available from the repository (which can be edited only by the editors) is "forked" into a private text repository on this or any other node in the network.
The researcher can now edit and annotate the text to its hearts content, if so desired making the annotations available to others through pushing them to the forked repository.
Occasionally, the researcher might come across errors in the text or has material he would like to offer for inclusion in the authorative published text. He now issues a "merge request", which alerts the editors of the published texts to the existence of this piece of information, which usually is already visible on the private repository.
The editor will consider the merit of the correction and can then incorporate it into the published text. When doing so, the origin of this information and any communication concerning the reason and argument for this correction will retain their relationship to this piece of text and is available as part of the scholarly record for this text.
If used correctly, this mechanism could provide a solution to the above mentioned problems with online digital publications. First experiments with scholars connected to the Kanripo research project showed that the technical protocol is not easily transparent to the scholars who are supposed to use it and does require more fine-tuning and better tool support in order to become more widely acceptable.

Conclusion
In an attempt to provide a stable, extensible platform for the curation of the textual heritage of China, a blueprint for text repositories that can form a network of related, but independent repositories for critically edited texts has been provided and a prototype of this implemented as the Kanseki Repository of texts (Kanripo), which can be accessed through one prototype client Mandoku. Further development will occur in collaborative form with scholars using this framework by attending to their emerging needs and thus hopefully developing into sustainable resources that can provide a solid base for all kinds of scholarly inquiry that relates to premodern Chinese texts.

References
1. Wittern, Christian (2013) "Beyond TEI: Returning the Text to the Reader". In: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [jtei.revues.org/691], 2013, 4.

2. Robinson, P. (2009). “Towards a Scholarly Editing System for the Next Decades”. In: Sanskrit Computational Linguistics: First and Second International Symposia Rocquencourt, France, October 29-31, 2007 Providence, RI, USA, May 15-17, 2008 Revised Selected Papers. Springer London, Limited, pp. 346–357.

3. Schmidt, Desmond and Robert Colomb (June 2009). “A data structure for representing multi-version texts online”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 67.6, pp. 497–514.

4. Shillingsburg, Peter (2010). “How Literary Works Exist: Implied, Represented, and Interpreted”. In: Text and Genre in Reconstruction: Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions. Ed. by Willard Mc- Carty. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers.

5. Siemens, Ray et al. (2009). “It May Change My Understanding of the Field: Understanding Reading Tools for Scholars and Professional Readers”. In: DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.4.

Christian Wittern"Towards an Architecture for Active Reading", in: Scholarly and Research Communication (www.src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/59), 2013, volume 3 / issue 4 p.1-11.

Christian Wittern, "The Digital Daozang Jiyao – How to get the edition into the Scholar's labs", in: digital humanities 2012. Conference Abstracts, Hamburg, 2012, p.422-424.

Christian Wittern, "Text Representation and Interchange in the Digital Age", at Annual conference of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities 2012 at University of Tokyo, Sep. 15-17, 2012.
Getting an XML-based website up and running can be a repetitive, time consuming and tedious task. It usually also requires someone with good technical knowledge to bring all of the pieces together into a complete package. Kiln is a tool that allows a non-technical user to quickly and easily create a working web application that provides base functionality for publishing, indexing and searching XML source content.

The user is free to focus on developing the content, and can easily assess the way in which content is used and review changes to see how they are reflected in the published output. Importantly this ease of use does not preclude the customisation of the existing functionality, nor the addition of new tools, processes and outputs.

Kiln, previously known as xMod, is an open source multi-platform framework for building and deploying complex websites whose source content is primarily in TEI/XML. It brings together various independent software components into an integrated whole that provides the infrastructure and base functionality for such sites.

Kiln is developed and maintained by a team at the Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London. Over the past years and over several versions, Kiln has been used to generate more than 50 websites for digital humanities research projects which have very different source materials and customised functionality.

The main Kiln components are:

Apache Cocoon web development framework for XML processing.
Jetty web application server.
Apache Solr, a searching platform for indexing, searching and browsing of contents.
Sesame, a framework for processing RDF data.
In a production web server context, Kiln integrates with other web publishing tools to support images, maps and other data sources, like relational databases. It can equally easily be used to provide a full web application solution, or as a backend providing content to be surfaced by some other technology, such as Django or WordPress.

Kiln has been developed around the concept of the separation of roles, allowing people with different backgrounds, knowledge and skills to work simultaneously on the same project without interfering with one another’s work. The parts of the system used by developers, designers and content editors are distinct. For example, the templating engine handles the general structure of an output document in individual files, with reference to separate sources which supply the individual content elements. Templating is also achieved using a lightweight syntax that allows frontend development to take place without any knowledge of XSLT.Kiln has two competing design goals: to support the development of unique, complex web applications; and to provide an out-of-the-box system suitable for a single non-technical person to publish a TEI-based site. The former demands not only the customisability of every component, but also the avoidance of any technical magic that makes one way easier at the cost of another way being harder. The latter requires a large amount of built-in behaviour that can be easily tweaked in isolation, and excellent documentation. Kiln’s documentation includes a tutorial showing how to customise each of the major elements of a site, as required beyond the provided defaults.

In comparison with other publishing tools, such as XTF, SADE and TE- ICHI, Kiln offers some advantages. It is mature and flexible, as it has been in active development for 10 years since its initial version, and has been used in many research projects. It is standalone (beyond an installation of the Java language), requiring no other software for any of its functionality, and it provides a working site, including a faceted search, with no more than placing TEI files in a particular directory.

The proposed poster will provide a diagrammatic overview of a Kiln project structure, and an accompanying interactive demo will show the system in action, from creating a new project through to displaying content as a website.

References
1. kcl-ddh.github.io/kiln/

2. A list of some of these projects is available at kiln.readthedocs.org/en/latest/ projects.html.

3. cocoon.apache.org/2.1/

4. www.eclipse.org/jetty/

5. lucene.apache.org/solr/

6. www.openrdf.org/

7. xtf.cdlib.org/

8. www.bbaw.de/telota/software/sade/sade-1

9. www.teichi.org/
This poster will offer an interactive demonstration of the second module of the Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project (BDMP) – an international collaboration between the Centre for Manuscript Genetics at the University of Antwerp, the Beckett International Foundation at the University of Reading, and the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Austin, Texas, with the kind permission of the Estate of Samuel Beckett. As its name implies, the BDMP aims to reunite and make publicly accessible all manuscripts of Samuel Beckett’s works, the physical documents of which are located in different holding libraries around the world. This goal will be realized in the form of a hybrid genetic edition that combines a digital archive of the manuscripts organized in twenty-six research modules (one published each year) with a series of twenty-six accompanying volumes analysing the geneses of the texts contained in the corresponding modules. Each of the modules comprises digital facsimiles and transcriptions of all extant manuscripts pertaining to an individual text – or to a collection of shorter texts. The digital archive can be accessed online at www.beckettarchive.org, where you can currently find the project’s first module, which combines the manuscripts of the late short prose text Stirrings Still / Soubresautswith those of Beckett’s last poem Comment dire / what is the word1. The project’s second module, which will present the bilingual genetic dossier of Beckett’s novel L’Innommable / The Unnamable edited by Dirk Van Hulle, Shane Weller and Vincent Neyt, will be made available online towards the end of 20132.

As a hybrid genetic edition, the BDMP combines digital scholarly editing with genetic criticism – a form of literary criticism that studies the dynamics of the writing process. As such, the edition does not aim to support a new reading text of Beckett’s works, but rather to highlight the creative process that brought those works about. Traces of this process can be found in the extant manuscripts, more specifically in their many deletions, additions, paralipomena, doodles, etc. According to Pierre-Marc de Biasi, the objective of genetic criticism is twofold (42)3: first (1) to locate, collate, and transcribe all of the work’s extant versions in order to make them analysable, and then (2) to reconstruct the logic of the work’s genesis (also called the ‘avant texte’) from a chosen perspective. Therefore, rather than focussing solely on an analysis of the works’ geneses – which can be found in the interpretative, printed component of our edition – we also want to make these geneses analysable, by offering fully transcribed (in TEI-compliant XML) and searchable facsimiles in the edition’s digital component. Hence, the BDMP complies with Patrick Sahle’s recent definition of scholarly hybrid editions, stipulating that such editions should not only be published in different media, but that their different components should complement one another, and that each component should take the possibilities and limitations of its medium into account (64)4.

Because the modern manuscripts we exhibit are still under copyright and therefore do not yet belong to the public domain, the BDMP still requires its users (either individuals or institutions) to pay a subscription fee to gain access to its materials. Therefore, this poster will be a great opportunity for potential users to receive a personal, hands-on introduction to the project. The poster’s main focus will be on the project’s newest module, and on the differences between both modules. Because the genesis of every work is different, even within the oeuvre of a single author, we try to determine what the specific needs of the texts in each subsequent module are, and to re-evaluate the tools and functionalities the module will provide to satisfy those needs accordingly. For the BDMP’s second module, for example, this resulted in changes to the Synoptic Sentence View (which allows the user to grab any sentence in our corpus, and generate a chronological list of its different versions), to the image-text linking tool, etc. Furthermore, this poster will also demonstrate the BDMP’s improved integration of CollateX5 – the interoperable collation tool that is part of the Interedition project6. 

References
1. Beckett, Samuel (2011). Stirrings Still / Soubresauts and Comment Dire / what is the word: an electronic genetic edition (Series ‘The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’ module 1), edited by Dirk Van Hulle and Vincent Neyt. Brussels: University Press Antwerp (ASP/UPA). www.beckettarchive.org (accessed 30 October 2013).

2. Beckett, Samuel (2011). Stirrings Still / Soubresauts and Comment Dire / what is the word: an electronic genetic edition (Series ‘The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’ module 1), edited by Dirk Van Hulle and Vincent Neyt. Brussels: University Press Antwerp (ASP/UPA). www.beckettarchive.org (accessed 30 October 2013).

3. de Biasi, Pierre-Marc (2004) Toward a Science of Literature: Manuscript Analysis and the Genesis of the Work. Genetic Criticism. Texts and Avant-textes. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press: 36-68.

4. Sahle, Patrick (2013) Digitale Editionsformen, Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 2: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik. Nordstedt: Books on Demand.

5. CollateX (2013) Home. CollateX. www.collatex.net (accessed 30 October 2013).

6. Interedition (2013) Home. Interedition. www.interedition.eu (accessed 30 October 2013).
Open access to digital research data for historical linguistics enables a fruitful exchange of resources and  methods. To achieve this goal the LAUDATIO-Repository provides long-term storage and open access to historical corpus linguistic data. We build a research data repository that on the one hand serves a set of well-defined scholarly communities’ needs, but is on the other hand flexible enough to be used and extended to serve other communities not considered beforehand. In order to consider the scholar's needs, a clear understanding of the research data usage and research practice is required.

Digitalization and annotation of historical texts for linguistic purposes is a methodologically and technologically challenging task that consumes a lot of time and resources. Linguistic analysis uses various annotations and methods such as multiple segmentations¹ 1, normalizations 2, constituent syntax trees, dependency annotations and (semi-) automatic consistency checks 3. Having the chance to either look up these methods and their results, the corpus itself, or to re-use existing corpora for further research may facilitate and enrich the research methods and possibilities of the linguistic community. An extensive documentation of the whole corpus preparation phase including annotation, tools and the resulting data allows a uniform and structured access to such a heterogeneous field of research data and thereby a first establishment of best practice standards.

There are many tools and formats that are used to annotate and process historical corpora, e.g. for token based annotations and parses. g. 4, 5). Thus the repository is open to all formats. The repository is based on the Open-Source Software Fedora 3.6 6 and a custom web interface that uses its API. A single corpus can be stored and downloaded in multiple formats. A specific corpus version therefore comprises any number of data streams that capture the same dataset at a certain point in time. This mechanism is flexible enough to deal with annotation format diversity deriving from existing annotation tools such as EXMARaLDA, @nnotate or ELAN and as well as new formats (that have not been invented yet).

We have also developed a unified meta-model for (historical) text corpora that is used to describe heterogeneous corpus linguistic data and that can be modified according to future developments in the research field. Our repository will support all existing metadata versions for compatibility reasons. For each corpus in the repository a metadata documentation using this meta-model exists. Each corpus’ metadata is automatically validated against the scheme while being imported into the repository. To enable a flexible metadata modeling we chose a customization of TEI XML with the help of an ODD 7 specification. The meta-model indirectly refers to basic concepts of corpora.2 Each corpus has a structured and uniform documentation which comprises information about the corpus creation, the documents and every kind of annotation. For instance the authorship of each annotation layer is reported for citation and copyright reasons. Furthermore the whole corpus preparation process is covered as well.

In order to support re-use of existing corpora and to reduce duplicate work, researchers can search, download and import new corpora. Additionally, new annotations or documents can be added as new versions of existing corpora. The detailed metadata documentation helps researchers to understand the corpus and its context. Moreover LAUDATIO provides a faceted and free-text search for certain annotation methods, tools or annotation values (see  8 for an extensive discussion of faceted search). ElasticSearch³ is used as a technical backend.

The flexible technical infrastructure and the extensive corpus documentation of LAUDATIO will be presented in the demo session.

Footnotes
1 Multiple segmentations or tokenizations are used to represent different, possible conflicting, interpretations of the smallest units in a corpus.

2 The current documentation of the metadata can be accessed under korpling.german.hu-berlin.de/schemata/laudatio/doc/S6/corpus

3 ElasticSearch website, www.elasticsearch.org, accessed 29 Oct. 2013

References
1. Krause, Thomas, Lüdeling, Anke, Odebrecht, Carolin, Zeldes, Amir (2012) Multiple Tokenization in a Diachronic Corpus. Exploring Ancient Languages through Corpora Conference (EALC), 14.-16.Juni 2012.

2. Bollmann, Marcel, Petran, Florian, Dipper, Stefanie (2011) Rule-Based Normalization of Historical Texts. Proceedings of Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Workshop Hissar, Bulgaria, 16 September 2011. pp. 34–42.

3. Dickinson, Markus, and W. Detmar Meurers. . Detecting errors in part-of-speech annotation. Proceedings of the tenth conference on European chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics-Volume 1. Association for Computational Linguistics.

4. Schmidt, Thomas (2009) Creating and Working with Spoken Language Corpora in EXMARaLDA. In: Lyding, V. (ed.) LULCL II: Lesser Used Languages & Computer Linguistics II. pp. 151-164.

5. Brugman, Hennie, Russel, Albert (2004). Annotating Multimedia/ Multi-modal resources with ELAN. In: Proceedings of LREC 2004, Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.

6. Lagoze, Carl, et al. (2006) Fedora: an architecture for complex objects and their relationships. International Journal on Digital Libraries 6.2: 124-138.

7. Burnard, Lou, Rahtz, Sebastian (2004) RelaxNG with Son of ODD. Extreme Markup Languages Proceedings 2004. Montréal, Québec.

8. Tunkelang, Daniel (2009) Faceted search. Synthesis Lectures on Information Concepts, Retrieval, and Services 1.1. pp. 1-80.
Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass is one of the most famous and often-studied works of American literature. In the century since Van Wyck Brooks declared Whitman the originator of “the sense of something organic in American life”—the first to combine high art and rude experience—Whitman’s masterwork has been thoroughly digested into a series of critical truisms that gives even new readers of the poems a sense of familiarity. Whether we have his poems committed to memory or have never actually read one of them, we “all know” that Whitman eschewed traditionally poetic diction, that his is a poetry of inclusiveness, that the first edition of his text in 1855 is more daring, lively, and experimental than later editions, etc. 

Such axioms are comforting in the face of what is on many levels a difficult text (actually, a set of texts) to assimilate. Because Whitman applied the title “Leaves of Grass” to more than ten distinctly different volumes over the course of three and a half decades—not only adding poems but also retitling, cancelling, drastically revising, combining, and re-grouping existing ones—the goal of accurately tracing the book’s evolution has consistently frustrated scholars. Recognizing that “for the reader to understand how Leaves of Grass grew from edition to edition, some sense had to be made of these often bewildering textual permutations,” a group of late-twentieth century scholars labored for over a decade to produce a variorum edition, a tremendous accomplishment that has, unfortunately, done little to alleviate the bewilderment of permutations. 

The hope that digital technologies might offer a way, at last, to lucidly represent the various stages in the evolution of Leaves of Grass was one of the early motivations for the creators of the Whitman Archive in the late 1990s. We have often revisited the question of how to convey visually the information represented in the arcane coding of the 3-volume print variorum and inherent in the separate digitized editions. Nearly two decades later, however, we haven’t made much progress. 

Though they cannot provide the kind of detailed, objective understanding that might be conveyed by the schematic, interactive interfaces that we’ve sometimes (very hazily) imagined—ones that somehow collate whole texts, poems, lines, and phrases—we have begun to experiment with distant reading strategies that provide a different sort of view. So while collation tools do not cope well with the scope of transformation involved in Whitman’s reworking the first edition’s 10,000-word prose preface into the 4,000-word poem “By Blue Ontario’s Shore,” text analysis tools such as Voyant offer a number of potentially enlightening prospects on the two works and their relationship. 

Likewise, such tools can begin to offer ways to assay and quantify some of the critical commonplaces that have grown up around Leaves of Grass: Is Whitman’s diction, in fact, innovative and what makes it so? How do Whitman’s early poems compare to his later poems? What basis might be found for claims that Whitman is the great poet of America, women, the body, male homoeroticism, or democracy?

At the University of Nebraska–Lincoln's Center for Digital Research in the Humanities we have been experimenting with a new way of visualizing phenomena in TEI corpora and have created Indigo, an experimental XSLT-based tool that queries TEI files and generates animated videos of the results. Using XPath and XQuery techniques, this tool makes it possible to ask specific or general questions of a corpus. The data are then output as scalable vector graphic (SVG) files that are converted to raster images and rendered in high definition H.264 video at 30 frames per second. At its core, Indigo is a program for performing scripted stop-motion animation, arranged in one or more scenes. What each scene contains is up to the user: it might include letters, numbers, shapes, colors, gradients, patterns, lines, paths, or imported raster images, each moving or not moving. The only requirement is that a scene must be modeled in XSLT, with SVG structures as the initial output. For the user wishing to visualize aspects of TEI text corpora, the news is good, for that format shares membership with XSLT and SVG in the XML ecosystem. Indigo provides a method for presenting, in fresh and unexpected ways, quantitative data relevant to scholarly questions in a way that is open-ended, making the user a co-creator with Whitman in the “meaning” of his texts. 

Our experiment involves such activities as creating quantitive analyses of some of the linguistic characteristics of Whitman's poetic corpus, comparing them to those of some of his popular contemporaries, and then "presenting" the results as a video sequence. Such a procedure is admittedly outside the mainstream of critical methodology in the humanities, but it is entirely in keeping with Whitman’s own theories of the proper relationships among authors, readers, and texts. “The process of reading,” he said, “is not a half-sleep, but, in highest sense, an exercise, a gymnast’s struggle; . . . the reader is to do something for himself, . . . must himself or herself construct indeed the poem, argument, history, metaphysical essay—the text furnishing the hints, the clue, the start or frame-work.”1

As Tanya Clement has recently observed, "sometimes the view facilitated by digital tools generates the same data human beings . . . could generate by hand, but more quickly," and sometimes "these vantage points are remarkably different . . . and provide us with a new perspective on texts."2 And as Dana Solomon has written, "due in large part to its often powerful and aesthetically pleasing visual impact, relatively quick learning curve … and overall 'cool,' the practice of visualizing textual data has been widely adopted by the digital humanities."3

In representing the literary work as an absorbing performance, one that comprises both "data" and "art," the method we are presenting is calculated to provoke responses in both informational and aesthetic registers. It is, in the terms of Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels, an act of “interpretive deformance,” whereby “we are brought to a critical position in which we can imagine things about the text that we didn’t and perhaps couldn’t otherwise know.”4

References
1. Whitman, Walt (1892). Democratic Vistas in Complete Prose Works, (Philadelphia: David McKay), p. 257.

2. Clement, T (2013). Text Analysis, Data Mining, and Visualizations in Literary Scholarship in Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving Anthology (eds., Kenneth M. Price, Ray Siemens). Modern Language Association.

3. Solomon, D. (2013). Building the Infrastructural Layer: Reading Data Visualization in the Digital Humanities. MLA 2013 Conference Presentation. url: danaryansolomon.wordpress.com/2013/01/08/mla-2013-conference-presentation-from-sunday-162013/

4. McGann, Jerome and Lisa Samuels.Deformance and Interpretation url: www2.iath.virginia.edu/jjm2f/old/deform.html
18thConnect (18thConnect.org) and REKn (the Renaissance English Knowledgebase Project) are two new digital aggregators of early modern digital materials and scholarship, both built on the model of NINES (the Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth Century Electronic Scholarship, nines.org) (McGann and Nowviskie). Unlike NINES, however, 18thConnect and REKn have two major digital resources for primary materials: Early English Books Online dataset (EEBO) and Eighteenth-Century Collections Online (ECCO), the former owned by ProQuest, the latter by Gale Cengage Learning. Both companies have given us the opportunity to work with the page images in these collections which have been derived, unfortunately, from microfilm. In fact, many of these page images are practically impenetrable to Optical Character Recognition Engines, for reasons having to do both with early print practices during the handpress era and the quality of the images themselves. A consortium of libraries called the Text Creation Partnership (TCP), led by Rebecca Welzenbach at the University of Michigan, has decided to key in, type by hand, one instance of each "title" in the collection.  But because metadata for such early texts is notoriously unreliable, the texts not typed may contain some “buried treasures” in the EEBO Collection (Jackson). The TCP has not generated enough money to key ECCO texts: only approximately 1.2% of the 182,000 documents have been typed by the TCP. Texas A&M University has received generous funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to work on creating Optical Character Recognition training sets for open-source OCR engines that will allow us to mechanically type those page images. However, OCR can only work so well with these images, and so the Early Modern OCR Project (eMOP; emop.tamu.edu) is also building three crowd-source correction tools: TypeWright, Cobre, and MapThePage. This poster will demonstrate these tools, revealing their use in research and teaching. Cobre allows users to consult multiple editions at once in order to corroborate image data.  For images that are particularly problematic for the eMOP OCR engines, the AWL editor allows users to edit the bounding boxes in order to produce a more accurate OCR.  Finally, within TypeWright users can compare the OCR with the actual images, updating the former as needed.  The proposed poster will:

1. Describe the development of each of these three open-source tools.

2. Detail how each tool is needed for creating and verifying OCR data.

3. Demonstrate the online versions of each tool.

4. Show the utility of these tools both inside and outside of the classroom by discussing how they have been used by researchers and students at Texas A&M University.

5. Explain how this improved OCR will then be fed to EEBO and ECCO to enhance scholarship worldwide.

6. Outline the generous contracts we received from ProQuest and Gale: anyone who corrects a text gets to have it and, in effect, liberates it so that it can be full-text searchable, for free, via the 18thConnect and REKn interfaces. Also, scholars are given TEI versions when the text has been freed by their work, enabling them to make digital scholarly editions such as Jess McCarthy’s edition of Daniel Defoe’s “Hymn to the Pillory” (ahymntothepillory.blogspot.com).

We are about to start a “Liberate the Text!” campaign, and we would like to demonstrate the crowd-sourced correction tools and how to use them as a poster at the DH2014 Conference.

References
The eMOP Project: emop.tamu.edu

Jackson, Millie (2008). “Using Metadata to Discover the Buried Treasure in Google Book Search.”Journal of Library Administration 47.1/2: 165-73.

McGann, Jerome, and Bethany Nowviskie (2005). NINES white paper (PDF, 124kb).
1. Introduction
The copyright expiry on James Joyce’s Ulysses in 2012 created a unique opportunity to read the seminal modernist text through the refraction of technologies made available by the Digital Humanities and techniques from Computer Science. Ulysses is avowedly and manifestly a work both constructed by and read through explicit references to geography and spatial relations. For instance, Frank Budgen attributes the following statement to Joyce, “‘I want,’ said Joyce, as we were walking down the Universitätstrasse, ‘to give a picture of Dublin so complete that if the city one day suddenly disappeared from the earth it could be reconstructed out of my book.’”.1

However, it has been suggested that uncertainty and disorientation play as great a part as explicit references to place and these qualities are evoked through specific narrative strategies.2 From a Digital Humanities perspective, being able to note such contested or defamiliarising areas presents a challenge.

Significant work has been done in the scholarly literature to manually compile and list named entities such as geographic and place name references in Ulysses. However a significant occasion exists to exploit techniques such as XML mark-up and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to explicitly render geographic and spatial references in Ulysses, make the references available for machine processing and accessible to users for reading the novel.

This paper investigates the automatic extraction of toponyms from the Wandering Rocks episode of Ulysses, proposes a model for encoding the episode and accounting for different types of place (including uncertain locations) and, combining these elements, explores XSLTs and visualisations that support a spatial reading of the text. The model proposed by the paper supports not only the notion of the significance of place but also qualities of spatial uncertainty and disorientation noted in the critical literature. The approach taken in the paper leverages exisiting models and technologies.

2. Methodology
This approach seeks to instantiate geographical evidence in the narrative that is almost exclusively transmitted to the reader through unstructured text in print presentations of the novel. This has been done through a combination of Natural Language Processing tools, geocoding the resulting data and merging the data into a TEI encoded version of the text and presenting the output in a web application.

From a Digital Humanities and Computer Science perspective, a number of readily available tools, technologies and methodologies exist to link place names in unstructured text to geographical data. Such tools allow the novel approaches suggested by Moretti and undertaken by Clement.34For example, Named Entity Recognition (NER), a subset of Natural Language Processing, represents a viable methodology to extract toponyms from unstructured text. Geoparsing place names to match geographical coordinates is assisted through such openly available digital gazetteers such as GeoNames.5  Projects such as the University of Edinburgh’s  Unlock provide non-technical interfaces that allow for automated NER and geoparsing. 6


This paper addresses the role that names play in Ulysses, specifically the Wandering Rocks episode and what this role reveals about the novel as a whole. It confronts whether there is a topographical quality in Ulysses and if so how that quality is defined. Accordingly, it considers three hypotheses: that geoparsing of Ulysses enables distant reading that will in turn enable new interpretations of the text; that geoparsing Ulysses creates a virtual gazetteer of the text; that the development of a model for encoding encompasses areas, such as uncertainty as a quality of place, outside of the scope of geoparsing.


Geoparsing and geocoding have been utilised as a primary methodology for the project. A number of technologies such as the Natural Language Toolkit and software produced by Stanford’s Natural Language Processing Lab were available and assisted in determining whether such an approach was feasible78. Again, it was anticipated that an iterative approach would be followed where initial automated extraction of toponyms via NLP would inform the encoding of episodes. This encoding, in turn, would provide the basis for a coterminal presentation of text and geographical elements through the web application and as the basis for interrogating the text along a geographical orientation.


The data model for the Literary Atlas of Europe was utilised as a framework to assign types to toponyms in the resulting TEI.9 The framework provided by the LAE allowed for further analysis on the role of place in the text, particularly the representation of uncertainty. Accordingly, while the LAE model provides a preliminary scaffolding, the mode proposed in the paper combines semi-automated extration of toponyms combined with a document-based encoding.

3. Lessons Learned
The work described by the paper resulted in a number of outcomes. Firstly, the development of the model and subsequent encoding of toponyms in the text rendered a comprehensive and programmatically presentable list of geographic references. Such a list constitutes a sort of virtual gazetteer for the novel. Secondly, this approach works towards identifying any inconsistencies in Joyce’s use of geographic references (with regard to the “traps” identified by Hart), indicates the role of geographical uncertainty in the episode and potentially suggests productive interpretive approaches.10 Thirdly, such an approach contributes towards the notion of a literary cartography and echoes the work undertaken by the Literary Atlas of Europe. The data produced by such an approach would be available for use in contexts outside the academic realm including use in literary tourism.

4. Conclusions
This paper tentatively indicates that automated processing of text may support a procedural, iteratively based approach to geoparsing Ulysses that combines the application of software with manually identified terms. The project strongly suggests that the NER-CRF software was most effective in identifying explicit toponyms that were marked in the encoding as either routes or projected spaces. What the results of the project suggest also is that the application of typography might be partially automated; types of place may be determined through automated  processes.

The application of the Literary Atlas of Europe’s five categories of spatial representation as a place type within the encoding of the episode clearly supports the contentions of Gunn, Hart and others that place plays a dominant role in the Wandering Rocks episode.11 The relative dominance of places of type “route” in the episode is not surprising and supports the notion of place as being significant to the novel.12 What this approach indicates though is that such critical insights may be verified using the algorithmic or distant reading frameworks. In this case, place is important to the episode because the majority of toponyms indicate explicit routes in particular, verifiable places.

However, one is also left with the insight that uncertainty, as marked by the absence of geographical identifiers, is the highest for certain types of places in the text. While place's significance to the novel is undoubtedly a likely outcome of a traditional, close-reading approach, the model proposed in the paper enforces a certain rigour in its approach to the text. Therefore, while the episode may be in some way explicitly “about” place, roughly a third of the places are of uncertain locations. This would markedly imply that, in the critical literature, Bulson’s emphasis on the notion of disorientation and Hart’s attention to the various “traps” of place can be traced back to measurable “quantities”, within the confines of a constricted model, in the text. Additionally, one outcome of this approach is the difficulty in visually representing spatial uncertainty. This element is accomodated in the web component in terms of character routes rather than explicit location.

While toponym extraction and a geographically-contextualised approach towards the text enabled visual representations of the types of place in Wandering Rocks, the evocation of uncertainty, as facilitated by the LAE data model, made representation of such data challenging in a web-based, visual environment. The work described in this paper is generalizable within the larger Digital Humanities context as it demonstrates the practical application of NER, uses document encoding to explore meaningful geographic relationships in the text and leverages these relationships to interrogate spatial uncertainty.

References
1. Budgen, F. & Hart, C., (1989). James Joyce and the making of ‘Ulysses’ and other writings, Oxford University Press.

2. Bulson, E., (2011). ‘Disorienting Dublin’ in Making Space in the Works of James Joyce 1st ed. V. Benejam & J. Bishop, eds., Routledge.

3. Moretti, F., (2007). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History, Verso.

4. Clement, T.E., (2008). ‘A thing not beginning and not ending’: using digital tools to distant-read Gertrude Stein’s The Making of Americans. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(3), pp.361 –381.

5. Anon, GeoNames. Available at: www.geonames.org [Accessed November 3, 2011].

6. Edina, (2009). Unlock - Unlock Text: Geoparser Web service. Unlock - Unlock Text: Geoparser Web service. Available at: unlock.edina.ac.uk [Accessed November 4, 2011].

7. Bird, Stephen, (2013). Natural Language Toolkit, Available at: www.nltk.org [Accessed March 6, 2013].

8. Stanford Natural Language Processing Group, (2013). The Stanford NLP (Natural Language Processing) Group, Available at: nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml [Accessed August 10, 2013].

9. Piatti, B., (2013). A Literary Atlas of Europe. Available at: www.literaturatlas.eu/en [Accessed November 4, 2011].

10. Hart, C., (1974). “Wandering Rocks” in James Joyce’s Ulysses. Critical essays. Edited by Clive Hart and David Hayman., Berkeley: University of California Press.

11. Gunn, I., Hart, C. & Beck, H., (2004). James Joyce’s Dublin: A Topographical Guide to the Dublin of Ulysses: with 121 Illustrations, Thames & Hudson, Limited.

12. Bulson, E., (2001). Joyce’s Geodesy. Journal of Modern Literature, 25(2), pp.80–96.
Introduction
Notre propos porte une réflexion sur la manière d’exposer et d’analyser une oralité. Dans le cadre d’un projet collectif, nous avons produit une édition critique numérique des cours d’Antoine Desgodets à l’Académie royale d’Architecture, en France, de 1719 à 17281. Avec cet enseignement, l’architecte opérait une rupture par rapport à ses prédécesseurs (François Blondel et La Hire père et fils) en proposant de mettre en ordre les savoirs d’une discipline professionnelle alors en formation, l’architecture. La particularité du matériau étudié réside dans le fait que les cours ne nous sont parvenus qu’à travers une tradition de manuscrits épars, dispersés dans plusieurs bibliothèques à travers le monde ; aucun des témoins ne semble être autographe. Les quatre thèmes abordés (les ordres, la commodité, les servitudes et le toisé) font l’objet d’une édition critique et ce sont au total trente trois manuscrits et textes imprimés qui ont été traités. En dehors de faire entrer des sources inédites dans l’histoire de l’architecture, des mathématiques et du droit, un des enjeux spécifiques du projet consistait à poser les jalons d’une réflexion sur la façon de traduire, et de mettre à disposition de la communauté des chercheurs, ce passage de l’oralité à l’écrit, puis dans certains cas à l’édition. Ici, tout en plaçant le projet dans le contexte des digital humanities, l’utilisation de méthodes d’édition électronique XML-TEI s’est révélée particulièrement adaptée2. Ce sont les particularités de notre corpus protéiforme qui nous ont amenés à apporter notre contribution à cette problématique : d’abord l’instabilité du texte par le nombre des témoins conservés ; la place et le rôle des images dans le discours ; enfin la forte diffusion du texte juridique par ce que nous nommerons « l’édition à valeur ajoutée ».

1/-  Traduire la labilité du corpus
Le corpus rassemblé contenait plusieurs états du prononcé de certains cours (ordres et toisés). De ce fait, notre but n’a pas été – même si nous en avons été tentés – de reconstituer une version unique de ces cours mais d’en conserver toute la fluidité. Les statuts si différents des témoins reproduits, sans que l’on sache précisément s’ils proviennent d’une dictée académique, d’une copie sur un texte maître disparu laissé à l’académie pour que les absents récupèrent le savoir ou de la simple copie par un clerc pour enrichir une bibliothèque privée ou par un praticien en quête de méthode, empêche de les traiter comme des textes identiques. L’oralité réside ici tant dans les traces de prononciation ou les problèmes d’écoute que dans la multiplicité des versions qui témoignent des différents prononcés du cours. Etant donné que ceux-ci sont dans leurs majeures parties semblables, mais jamais tout à fait identiques, seuls les moyens informatiques nous autorisent à ne pas figer définitivement ce savoir. Le jeu des variantes rendues en ligne propose une double lecture – à la fois rétrospective mais aussi prospective – des témoins sous l’œil averti du chercheur. La première fouille les détails pour requalifier le témoin et se rapprocher de l’oralité originelle ; la seconde plus globale donne une idée d’un savoir voué à encadrer une nouvelle profession. Sans les spécificités de structuration et de précision sur les hésitations manuscrites offertes par les DH, et en particulier l’utilisation d’un balisage XML-TEI, ce matériau variant et composite serait resté insaisissable et intraitable par les procédés classiques de l’édition. L’alignement des témoins au sein du corpus a été déployé dans un fichier externe en utilisant la méthode de localisation référencée. La production d’artefacts numériques offre aux chercheurs l’opportunité de collecter les textes, de les analyser et de les mettre les uns en rapport avec les autres avec la souplesse inhérente au support numérique par l’intermédiaire d’une interface graphique centrée sur la comparaison.

2/- Dire les images au-delà de les montrer
L’architecture est une discipline pour laquelle le dessin n’est pas seulement primordial mais indispensable. Dans la plupart des pratiques architecturales, le dessin est le seul discours de l’architecture, le texte d’accompagnement ne sert souvent que d’explicitation des figures, voire de légende. Trois des cours de notre corpus contiennent des images, soit sous forme de planches comportant des plans ou des coupes et élévations (dans les ordres et les commodités), soit des détails décoratifs d’architecture, des croquis techniques de machines ou de figures géométriques (dans les toisés). Nous ne sommes pas face à des traités d’architecture imprimés, ouvrages savants classiques et référents, mais devant des cours pratiques prononcés devant un parterre d’élèves. Le texte ne fait alors qu’éclairer l’image, la commenter. Celle-ci devrait se suffire à elle-même. Le discours ne serait en quelque sorte que la forme orale de l’image exposée. L’éditorialisation numérique offre la possibilité de montrer les dessins dans leurs variantes et dans leur contexte, bref de les comparer et de les associer avec les textes correspondant par des mécanismes d’alignement et des modalités de consultation différentiées, si tant est que nous soyons parvenus à lever les freins concernant les droits de diffusion. Un tel dispositif replace davantage les illustrations dans leur rôle pédagogique initial et les textes dans celui d’hypertexte, comme si nous avions dû les « dire ».

3/- La mise en abyme des discours
Pour les servitudes, nous n’avons découverts que deux manuscrits non pas du même cours mais préparatoires de celui-ci. Le premier est une compilation de sources, le second un commentaire d’une source principale. Or, d’après ce que nous en savons par ailleurs, le cours a été composé à partir du second complété par des éléments du premier. De surcroît, et c’est la particularité de ce cours de droit, il est le seul à avoir été publié de manière posthume. On peut dire que cette édition connaît un énorme succès si l’on sait que le texte a été commenté, mis à jour, complété, restructuré, annoté par plusieurs mains et compétences une trentaine de fois pendant un siècle. Les méthodes d’édition électronique nous ont permis de rendre compte et d’autoriser l’étude des continuateurs et suiveurs du texte par une sorte d’alignement successif des variantes (comparaison de textes, indexations). Il ne s’est pas agi de faire une édition génétique textuelle – désormais classique pour les œuvres littéraires –,  à laquelle nous n’avons pas pu échapper d’ailleurs pour ce qui concerne la source coutumière, mais surtout de suivre les filiations d’idées dans le futur, bref d’avancer dans le temps plutôt que de reculer. La coutume est intrinsèquement le véhicule d’un contexte validé par sa diffusion sous forme imprimée, elle a sans cesse été glosée et revisitée. Nous aurions aimé pouvoir retrouver des manuscrits d’étudiants mais tous les textes rassemblés sont tous rattachés au commentaire de Desgodets. Le dispositif de consultation mis en place facilite l’analyse de tels enchâssements de textes afin de mettre au jour, selon les travaux de D. F. McKenzie, un « texte social » agrémenté d’un contexte historique, ce qui se révèle particulièrement riche pour des concepts juridiques qui évoluent lentement toujours en rapport avec leur environnement social, politique et économique. C’est la constitution de ce « texte social » que nous voudrions maintenant pouvoir rendre explicite au moyen de visualisations.

Conclusion
Notre méthode numérique d’édition critique de cours appliquée à Desgodets mériterait d’être appliquée à d’autres matériaux inédits qui ont participé à transmettre du savoir. Le fait de ne pas s’arrêter à la publication d’un cours autographe mais à sa perception par les élèves et les praticiens, donne l’occasion de poser les bases d’une réflexion sur la normalisation de la discipline architecturale, la faisant passer d’un académisme engourdi à une solide professionnalisation. Le dispositif de consultation produit, qui est d’abord un dispositif d’étude, entend offrir au chercheur l’opportunité d’explorer avec fluidité toute la richesse de cette tradition de l’oral à l’écrit à travers le support numérique.



References
1. L'édition électronique des cours d'Antoine Desgodets sera accessible en ligne au début de l’année 2014 à l’adresse suivante : www.desgodets.net. Une équipe interdisciplinaire de quinze chercheurs a participé au projet qui a été financé par l'Agence nationale de la Recherche (ANR) de 2008 à 2013. Les membres de l'équipe étaient Joëlle Barreau, Basile Baudez, Anne Bondon, Robert Carvais, Pierre Caye, Emmanuel Château, Guillaume Fonkenell, Béatrice Gaillard, Juliette Hernu-Bélaud, Frédérique Lemerle, Olga Medvedkova, Linnéa Rollenhagen-Tilly, Hélène Rousteau-Chambon, Joël Sakarovitch, Werner Szambien et Dirk Van de Vijver.

2. Plusieurs projets pionniers en histoire de l’art ont constitué des modèles structurants (Blake Archive, Rossetti Archive, etc.). Hormis la récente et excellente édition de la correspondance de Van Gogh, les projets d’édition électronique de sources primaires en histoire de l’art restent peu nombreux.

Computers and the Humanities, Image-Based Humanities Computing, vol. 36, n° 1, feb. 2002.

Burnard, L, O’Brien, K., O’Keeffe, Unsworth, J. (eds.) (2006), Electronic Textual Editing. New York:The Modern Language Association of America.

Hayles, K. (2004), “Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis”. Poetics Today, 25, p. 67-90.

Hayles, K. (2003), “Translating Media: Why We Should Rethink Textuality”, The Yale Journal of Criticism, 16(2), p. 263-90.

Kirschenbaum. M. (2001), "Materiality and Matter and Stuff: What Electronic Texts Are Made Of." Electronic Book Review, 1 Oct. 2001. http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/electropoetics/

McCarty, W. (2006), Humanities Computing. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

McGann J. (2006), “From Text to Work: Digital Tools and the Emergence of the Social Text”. Romanticism on the Net, n° 41-42, février-mai 2006. http://id.erudit.org/iderudit/013153ar.

McKenzie D. F. (1986), Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. The Panizzi Lectures 1985. The British Library: London.

McKenzie D. F. (1962), Making Meaning. “Printers of the Mind” and Other Essays. Ed. Peter D. McDonald and Michael Suarez, SJ. U. of Massachusetts Press: Amherst and Boston, 2002.

McLuhan M., The Gutenberg galaxy, the making of typographic man. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Shillingsburg P. L. (1996), Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age: Theory and Practice, 3e édition. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Shillingsburg P. L. (2006), Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts. Cambridge University Press.

Waquet F. (2003), Parler comme un livre. L'oralité et le savoir, XVIe-XXe siècles. Paris : Albin Michel.

Waquet F. (2008), Les enfants de Socrate, Filiations intellectuelles et transmission du savoir XVIIe-XIXe siècles. Paris, Albin Michel.
1. Introduction
Due to an exceptional event, a fragment of The Dream of the Rood poem is found on the Ruthwell Cross (Dumfriesshire, Scotland) in the form of an inscription in runic characters; another fragment of the same work, although much smaller, is visible on the Brussels Cross (St. Michael and St. Gudula Cathedral, Brussels, Belgium); the two monumental crosses of Ruthwell and Bewcastle (Cumbria, England) share the presence of runic inscriptions and the same type of carved decorations; the two poems Elene and The Dream of the Rood (full version) are part of a florilegium of religious works, the Vercelli Book (MS CXVII, Biblioteca Capitolare di Vercelli, Italy), in virtue of the central role that the Cross plays in both: the first poem belongs to the texts inspired by the legend of the inventio crucis by St. Elena, mother of emperor Constantine, while in the second one the Cross itself appears in dream to the author and tells its own story. These witnesses of the Anglo-Saxon Middle Ages are closely related from a thematic point of view as well as for their contents1: one could say that this specific thematic cluster was handled by means of a sophisticated multimedia approach by Anglo-Saxon authors, especially visible in the case of the Ruthwell and Bewcastle crosses. The Visionary Cross project2 aims at creating a mixed media edition of these artifacts putting together not only the critical edition of the poem, which is going to be showed together with the digitized images of the Vercelli Book, but also the three-dimensional data related to the Crosses.

2. Methodological issues I: integration of heterogeneous data
Within the scope of the project I am currently working with the ISTI-CNR researchers (Pisa) to refine and improve the current version of a combined 3D model / textual edition browsing software3, and to prepare a digital edition of the runic version of the Dream of the Rood poem. During this work we faced two critical issues:

the integration of heterogeneous data on the web platform that we are building to visualize the edition: namely, the 3D model of the Ruthwell Cross, which is in a standard format (PLY - Polygon File Format4) but needs specialized software libraries to be displayed in a Web browser window; the digitized images of the Vercelli Book manuscript; and finally, the edition texts (diplomatic and critical editions of the poem fragment);
the adoption of an encoding standard that would allow to preserve the different layers of the text (on the graphic level: rune characters vs. transliterated characters vs. modern rendering of text; on the edition level: diplomatic, interpreted and critical editions) at the same time connecting seamlessly with the 3D and 2D elements included in the web platform.
The two issues mentioned above are currently being solved by means of a software framework designed to be flexible enough to be adapted to different types of media and to cope with the specific characteristics of each object; and by use of the TEI XML schemas5, in a ad hoc customization using only the TEI P5 modules needed for our purposes, to accomplish an encoding of the runic text which is fully interoperable with both the web-based visualization system and the tools commonly used in the digital philology field. The rationale being that, while 3D models have recently started to appear and gain in popularity, they still are self-contained objects with little to no concession to the (possibly very relevant) textual content of the original artifact: our goal is to integrate the separate components in such a way that all the subtle interrelations and connections between the different objects, in short their original multimedia nature, are exposed and made explorable in a flexible browsing environment. For instance, the runes are inscribed on the two narrower sides of the Ruthwell Cross and it is likely that each side, including the larger ones with figural panels, were to be "interpreted" in turn according to the movement of the sun6; furthermore, the Bewcastle Cross shows similar iconographic content, but with subtle differences that can be ascribed to the influence of larger cultural traditions (Celtic, Roman) on the work of local artisans.


Fig. 1: Experimental edition of the runic text of the Ruthwell Cross

3. Methodological issues II: defining the user and what s/he can do with the edition
While exploring the future shape of the aforementioned environment, though, we came up with new research questions begging for an answer:

who is going to be the “typical” user of our edition? This is apparently an easy question, but when we considered possible use cases we came up with many more than first anticipated, so that the perspective audience almost looks as heterogeneous as the different media of the edition; taking into account these use cases has led to new functionality being added to the browsing environment, and to the decision that it should be as modular and flexible as possible for future expansion;
what is our user going to do with our edition? Another apparently innocuous question, especially since we considered from the start, besides simple browsing of the content, the possibility of user annotation of edition objects; what is different, as we could try for ourselves, is that giving more powers to the user leads to interesting (and potentially risky) new scenarios.
A traditional edition lets the user verify the soundness of the editor’s constitutio textus by means of the critical apparatus: the latter is a very successful compromise dictated by the limits of the printed edition format, but a digital edition can go beyond such limits and make it possible not only to verify the current version of the edited text but also to experiment with alternatives7, creating a “personal edition” on the basis of the available material and the tools provided by the browsing platform, and sharing it according to the “social edition” concept8, although this will be limited to the "collaborative annotation" feature described by Siemens rather than to the "user derived content" one (in other words, we are not thinking of a full "collaborative edition"). Note that in theory this is possible not only with regard to textual content, but also for the 3D reconstruction we offer: the Ruthwell Cross is suffering by problems of incompleteness (the horizontal arm is a spurious piece dating to the XIX century), wrong reconstruction (the top piece was placed back-to-front), legibility of the inscriptions (part of the runes have been effaced by the prolonged exposure to the weather and other damages): making the 3D model dynamic and open to alternative positioning of selected parts, and offering digital restoration tools to insert “digital runes” where the original ones are no longer visible, it will be possible to build and check different theories about the Cross and the text it bears.


Fig. 2: The Ruthwell Cross 3D model as a teaching tool, clicking on the presentation arrows the model rotates andmoves to the location described in the slide

We intend to offer suitable tools to verify our own (as editors) hypotheses, but also to create and manage newhypotheses and to share them with other users, be they related to the textual layers of the edition or to thematerial aspects of the artifact(s) available in the browsing environment. To do this we will have to go beyond asimple catalog of possible use cases, but also prepare the environment for different user “roles”, assigning to eachrole an appropriate set of capabilities (and responsibilities). While the original plan was that of a singleenvironment for all types of possible users, in fact, our initial work with text and 3D models convinced us that it isimpossible to conflate together extremely heterogeneous features. Hence the need to set up a very small numberof different environments in which part of the functionality is shared and always present, while other features arespecifically targeted to a particular type of user.

Conclusion
This paper will report on the methodological issues described above, explaining which solutions have already beenfound and at least in part implemented in the browsing environment, which issues are still open and how theproject researchers intend to deal with them.

References
1. Karkov, C., Keefer, S.L. and Jolly, S.L. (eds.) (2008). Cross and Culture in Anglo-Saxon England. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press.

2. Project web site: www.visionarycross.org/.

3. Callieri, M., Leoni, C., Dellepiane, M., Scopigno, R. (2013). Artworks narrating a story: a modular framework for the integrated presentation of three-dimensional and textual contents. ACM WEB3D - 18th International Conference on 3D Web Technology, pp. 167-175.

4. See en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLY_(file_format).

5. Burnard, L., and S. Bauman (eds.) TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.6.0. Last updated on 20th January 2014. www.tei-c.org/P5/.

6. Ó Carragáin, É. (2007). Christian Inculturation in Eighth-Century Northumbria: The Bewcastle and Ruthwell Crosses. Colloquium Journal 4. ism.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/Christian%20Inculturation%20in%20Eighth.pdf

7. Gabler, H. W. (2010). Theorizing the Digital Scholarly Edition. Literature Compass 7 (2). 43.

8. Siemens, R., et al. (2012). Toward modeling the social edition: An approach to understanding the electronic scholarly edition in the context of new and emerging Media. Literary and Linguistic Computing 27 (4). 445-61.
Existing historical linguistic corpora vary a great deal with respect to formats, corpus architecture, annotation types and values and preparation steps. The LAUDATIO-Repository (www.laudatio-repository.org) provides an open access environment to facilitate the management of such heterogeneous research data with an extensive, uniform and structured documentation and faceted and free-text search without limitation with respect to formats or annotations. For this purpose, we have developed a meta-model which is expressive enough to represent a large variety of corpus formats. This meta-model, described as a TEI-ODD specification with automatically generated schemas (Burnard & Rahtz 2004), is also the basis for the technical implementation in the repository.

Building and analyzing historical corpora often incorporates diplomatic transcriptions, normalizations of these transcriptions and research specific annotation layers which will be illustrated with the help of two corpora; the German Manchester Corpus (GerManC) and the RIDGES Herbology Corpus. GerManC1 (Durrell, Ensslin & Bennett 2007) contains for instance two formats (TEI XML and CoNLL) which represent different kinds of annotations and analyses. The TEI XML format contains a diplomatic transcription and a register specific mark-up. By contrast, the CoNLL format contains token annotations for normalization, part- of-speech (POS) and lemmatization (e.g. the STTS tag set, Schiller et al. 1999) as well as morphology and dependency annotation for syntactic relations between the tokens (e.g. Foth 2006). Thus, this corpus uses two formats for encoding different kinds of annotations and analyses.2 On the other hand, the second version of the RIDGES Herbology Corpus3 contains all annotations in one format (EXMARaLDA, Schmidt & Wörner 2009) which is then converted into the relANNIS format used by the ANNIS corpus system (Zeldes et al. 2009) for search and visualization capacities. The corpus architecture of RIDGES is specific in the following way: Via multiple segmentations, annotations can refer to different basic textual data in the corpus (Krause et al. 2012). To normalize separate spellings of complex verbs in historical German such as zusammen gesetzet to zusammengesetzt (RIDGES, Curioser Botanicus oder sonderbares Kräuterbuch, 1675), the tokens need to be merged in the normalized annotation whereas tokens need to be separated when normalizing zuverstehen to zu verstehen (RIDGES, Alchemistische Praktik 1603). Every further annotation — for instance the POS annotation may either refer to the diplomatic segmentation layer or to the normalized segmentation layer.

Having identified what exactly needs to be described by a meta-model, we then define the actual use-cases associated with this meta-model. With respect to range, specificity and user scenarios, distinct requirements could only be designed for concrete applications. For this study, the LAUDATIO-Repository (Krause et al. 2013) is taken as an example. In this case, the meta-model will enable a retrieval of, a structured search on and a holistic and extensive documentation of the heterogeneous historical corpora and their preparation (for further details see Odebrecht & Krause 2013 and Odebrecht & Zipser 2013). It should be possible to search for a distinct annotation type or content in several different corpora within the repository. Along with the content requirements the repository needs a structured, machine readable metadata format which can be represented in a graphical interface for the display of information and in the repository system for the different ways to search through the data, e.g. faceted search and free-text search. The meta-model developed from these requirements results in a metadata TEI XML format for the LAUDATIO-Repository but is also designed for and may be applied to other use cases and applications.

The meta-model is designed as an analytic class diagram for which the Unified Modeling Language is used4. Such a diagram is useful to document the important issues or concepts in an abstract way. Therefore, the class concepts represent the concepts for the subject-specific application domain ‘historical corpora’.5

Four main classes are defined: ‘corpus’, ‘document’, ‘annotationKey’ and ‘annotationValue’ which refer not only to historical corpora but to textual corpora in general: 


Fig. 1: Meta-model of a corpus. For the sake of concision, the attributes of the classes are left out.

As shown in figure 1, the meta-model6 defines a corpus as the sum of all documents regardless of their structure and size. A document is defined as the sum of all annotations regardless of their structure, format and content. ‘Annotation’ is defined by the sum of all annotation keys and values. For the meta-model, it does not matter whether they have flat, hierarchical or semantic relations. Every concept carries its own attributes. A ‘corpus’ is a conceptual collection of digitized and not only linguistically processed (here historical) text. It carries among other things the attributes title, creator, creation date, revision history etc. The class ‘document’ represents the actual historical text – source text - with its own attributes such as author, date and publication history. The classes ‘annotationKey’ and ‘annotationValue’ constitute a document because the sum of transcriptions, normalizations, including segmentations and further annotations build - technically speaking - a ‘document’. ‘AnnotationKey’ in turn carries attributes similar to ‘corpus’ and ‘document’ such as date, author and revision history. For example, the attribute ‘author’ can refer either to the creator of a historical text or to the annotator of a certain annotation layer and may also refer to the same entity or person. This is important for corpus documentation. When re-using corpora, for instance further annotations on an existing corpus are made by third parties, a clear reference can be made to the copyrights. Attributes such as ‘date’ also refer to every class of the meta-model, meaning that ‘corpus’ as well as ‘annotation’ may have a date of creation like ‘document’ which genuinely has a publication date.

For the technical realization7 we used a customization of TEI XML with an ODD specification. The meta-model was mapped to three TEI header structures, one for each concept: a header for ‘corpus’, ‘annotationKey’ and ‘annotationValue’, a header for each ‘document’ in the corpus and a header for each preparation step of the corpus in general: 


Fig. 2: Technical mapping of the meta-model and the TEI xml header structure

The attributes of each class are mapped into the corresponding TEI element sets. For example, the attributes date and author correspond to the TEI elements <date>, <author> and <editor> with a specifying attribute @role for “annotator” in the <fileDesc> element. The <publicationStmt> element contains the attributes revision and/or publication history for each class. The classes ‘annotationKey’ and ‘annotationValue’ are realized with the element set of <elementSpec>. With the help of the attribute @corresp, references between the list of annotation keys and values of the whole corpus to each document and to each preparation step, including information about formats and annotation relations such as segmentations of the annotations, are technically implemented. Each TEI header is customized with the help of ODD8. The TEI headers are the technical basis for the uniform display and search of every class and its attributes in the repository. For every corpus, e.g. RIDGES and GerManC, the values for <author> referring to either a distinct annotation layer or a distinct document can be uniformly searched via a faceted search or can be displayed in the corpus view.

The meta-model presented here provides a generic mechanism for the representation of multiply annotated corpora that probably goes beyond the scope of historical corpora alone. Our experience with dealing with a variety of available historical resources has shown how flexible and reliable the model can be in this domain, though work remains to be done in dealing with more relational annotation schemes describing disconnected sources such as annotation between documents in the same or in different corpora. 

References
1. GerManC is freely available at hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-1D32-8

2. GerManC is also available in the standoff format GATE which maps all annotations of the TEI XML and the CoNLL formats.

3. The RIDGES Herbology Corpus is freely available at hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-1CDB-B

4. OMG (2009) OmG unied modeling languagetm (omg uml), infrastructure: www.omg.org/spec/

5. For the sake of brevity, the attributes of the classes are left out in figure 1.

6. All ODDs are freely available at www.laudatio-repository.org/repository/documentation.

7. For the technical implementation of the header in the basis systems of LAUDATIO-Repository with the help of elastic search & co see www.laudatio-repository.org/repository/technical-documentation/

8. Each ODD is freely available at korpling.german.hu-berlin.de/schemata/laudatio/doc/S6/

Burnard, Lou, Rahtz, Sebastian (2004) RelaxNG with Son of ODD. Extreme Markup Languages Proceedings 2004. Montréal, Québec.

Durrell, Martin, Ensslin, Astrid, Bennett, Paul (2207) The GerManC project In Sprache und Datenverarbeitung 31 (2007), pp. 71-80.

Foth, Kilian A. (2006) Eine umfassende Constraint-Dependenz-Grammatik des Deutschen. Technischer Report. Universität Hamburg. Hamburg.

Krause, Thomas, Odebrecht, Carolin, Zielke, Dennis (2013) Wie kann der Zugriff, die Wiederverwendung und langfristige Speicherung von linguistischen Korpora realisiert werden? 35. Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Sprachwissenschaft (DGfS). 12.-15.03.2013. Potsdam Germany. 

Krause, Thomas, Lüdeling, Anke, Odebrecht, Carolin, Zeldes, Amir (2012) Multiple Tokenization in a Diachronic Corpus. Exploring Ancient Languages through Corpora Conference (EALC). 14.-16.06.2012. Oslo Norway.

Odebrecht, Carolin, Zipser, Florian (2013) LAUDATIO - Eine Infrastruktur zur linguistischen Analyse historischer Korpora. DTA-/CLARIN-D Konferenz und -Workshops: Historische Textkorpora für die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften. Fragestellungen und Nutzungsperspektiven 18.-19.02.2013. Berlin Germany.

Odebrecht, Carolin, Krause, Thomas (2013) Metadata in an Infrastructure for Historical Corpora. SFB 732 Incremental Specification in Context - Colloquium 20.06.2013. Stuttgart Germany. http://www.uni-stuttgart.de/linguistik/sfb732/files/abstract_odebrechtkrause.pdf

Schmidt, Thomas, Wörner, Kai (2009) EXMARaLDA - Creating, analysing and sharing spoken language corpora for pragmatic research. Pragmatics 19/4. pp.565-582.

Schiller, Anne, Teufel, Simone, Stöckert, Christine, Thielen, Christine (1999) Guidelines für das Tagging deutscher Textkorpora mit STTS. Technischer Report. Universität Stuttgart, Institut für maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung & Universität Tübingen, Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft.

Zeldes, Amir, Ritz, Julia, Lüdeling, Anke & Chiarcos, Christian (2009), "ANNIS: A Search Tool for Multi-Layer Annotated Corpora". In: Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2009, July 20-23, Liverpool, UK.
I propose to contribute a poster at the Digital Humanities 2014 Convention on my recent initiative with Melville’s Marginalia Online (www.melvillesmarginalia.org). In addition to creating an interactive, reader-friendly digital bibliography of the books Herman Melville was known to have owned, borrowed, and consulted, the editors of the project have been editing digital editions of the surviving books that contain Melville’s marginalia. The next phase for the project is to mark up the marginalia files in TEI P5, as well as thinking of new ways to represent the individuality as well as the totality of Melville’s reading practices. I have taken responsibility for this phase, first by collecting the OCR’d files of Melville’s editions, then by finding a way to mark up the marginalia. One challenge of the project is that it uses the “coordinate capture” tool (created by Matt Cohen at the University of Texas at Austin and the Walt Whitman Archive), which creates XML coordinates corresponding to the image file of each and every aspect of the book (from spine to covers to individual pages). However, these coordinate-captured XML files cannot be manipulated, which complicates the task of marking up the marginalia up in TEI. Furthermore, currently there exists no standard in the TEI Guidelines for marking up marginalia (especially as those kinds of “notes” correspond to specific places in the text while not being written in a linear fashion in most cases). Yet another question remains about Melville’s reading: how can we better understand not only his reading practices, but also quantitatively understand how his reading affected his published work? Countless studies have elucidated Melville’s sources (both with solid research methods and conjecture), but I propose to include a topic model (using Mallet) on Melville’s Marginalia Online that will “read” Melville’s reading in ways that will change the way we think about how the works he read influenced him. No longer must we guess how his reading influenced him; topic modeling will let us read the library of his entire life, and apply that information to his published writings. Gathering data through topic modeling allows Melville scholars a new way of studying literary influence. In the poster session, I look forward to reporting on the TEI markup of the marginalia files in order to show other attendees working on authors’ libraries how best to accomplish this task, as well as to demonstrate a custom algorithm for topic modeling large literary corpora relating to authorial influence.
Editing is one of the most important activities we have to perform as digital humanists: with the entire literary and historical production facing remediation, the need for a theoretical as well as practical understanding of what it is at stake and what does it mean to create a digital (scholarly) edition is of crucial importance. Many contributions in the past have dealt with the issue of what a text is, what a document is, how they relate to each other and which are the implications of their ontological status with respect to the work they manifest1 2 3456 78 910 1112 to name a few). The topic has been tackled from different points of view: sociological, cultural, psycholinguistic, philosophical, historical and computational. Why, then, is it necessary to return to the same topic once again? Because while some if not most of the previous contributions have touched upon it, none has tried to account for the whole concept of digital editing, and if a model is “a representation of something for purposes of study, or a design for realizing something new” (p. 21) 13, a new purpose of study will require a new model. In order to perform an activity with the help of a computer, in order to digitize a workflow, such an activity (i.e. editing) needs to be modelled, as there is “the fundamental dependence of any computing system on an explicit, delimited conception of the world or ‘model’ of it” (p. 210)14.

The only existing model of text that has been developed explicitly for computational purposes is represented by the so-called OHCO model15, the limitations of which are widely known 16 17 1819 20. However, as it reflects upon the fundamental way of functioning of the most important technology used so far for the production of digital editions, i.e. XML, in spite of its inadequacy, it still represents a fundamental approach for editorial endeavours: if one edits using XML and TEI, then one will have to adopt some sort of model which strongly relates to the OHCO model. But besides all the issues already pointed out by earlier critics, there is a series of facts and entities which are outside the scope of the OHCO model but which are nevertheless of fundamental importance in scholarly editing; namely, what is an edition? What is a work? What is the relationship between an edition and the text it edits, and the work the text represents? What is the function of the reader and of the editor in establishing the text and the edition?

The edition of a text, any text, embodies a model of the work which the text represents. In the same way that a map can be considered a model of the earth built for a specific purpose, an edition of a text can be considered as a model of the text itself, because it represents a selection of the infinite features of a text according to particular point of view, scholarly or not. Selecting also mean simplifying: a model is necessarily a simplification of a real life object, which makes it more apt to analysis and manipulation, In a contribution from 2009 Michael Sperberg-McQueen declared that there are three things to consider when we edit a text (p. 31)21:

There is an infinite set of facts related to the work being edited.
Any edition records a selection from the observable and the recoverable portions of this infinite set of facts.
Each edition provides some specific presentation of its selection.
In saying this he declared an edition to be a model of a work, where the act of selecting features from the uninterrupted continuity of the reality is the defining act of modelling, the purpose of which in turn is to provide a discrete selection of facts to be interpreted. The present research stems from this consideration and proposes a new, comprehensive conceptual model of the editorial domain, which could be called the Digital Editing Model, or DEM.

The conceptual model deals with the following entities:

Documents, i.e. physical objects that contain some sort of information; therefore a book is a document, as is a leaf with some writing on, a stone, and so on. More generally, a document is a physical object that has some text on it, or more formally, a Verbal Text Bearing Object, or VTBO. This definition willingly and knowingly omits non-verbal documents, as the object of the present research is to analyze and model written and verbal texts with the purpose of editing them.[1]
User-function: any type of human interaction with the documents. The entity represents set of functions, more than human beings, such as, for instance, reading, editing, collecting, preserving, transcribing, analyzing etc.
As seen before, documents present an infinite set of facts. A user-function selects a subset of these facts and, according to an organizing principle, groups them into dimensions. As the dimensions that are potentially observable in a document are defined by the user-function’s purpose, consequently it is impossible to draw a stable and complete list of such dimensions; however, for the purpose of exemplification, such a list could include linguistic, semantic, literary, genetic, iconographic, codicological, and palaeographical dimensions.

The interaction of user-functions with documents generates

Document models: the meaning(s) that user-functions give to the subset of dimensions they derive from a document and that they consider interesting. If the subset of dimensions considered by the user includes the verbal content of the document, such a document’s model is defined as a text.
Works: an editorial statement of the fact that a number of documents aim to contain more or less the same verbal content. The sum of all possible texts derived from such documents, in a one-to-one or many-to-one relation, constitute the work.
The model does not necessarily need an author-function, but it may, if the user-editor postulates it. If present, the author-function performs two main sub-functions, one in posse and one in esse, where the latter represents the activities of producing some of the facts present in the documents, especially, but not exclusively, the ones concerning the verbal content of the documents. The function in posse concerns instead the authorial intention, namely what the author-function wanted to produce but did not, or, if it did, the evidence for this is lost. It is in posse because it is unachieved (or perhaps is achieved but with no way of knowing this).

The DEM model sketched out here, will be supplemented by a second one on text transmission (how text migrates from one support to the next), where emerging theories of transcription will also fit very well 22 23242526.  However, these latter theories can also be thought as an instance of the user-function, encompassing the building of texts from the infinite set of facts available from the documents, and therefore are integrated into the DEM. In its full version, DEM will also deal with concepts such as versions and derivative works.

In conclusion the proposed DEM contributes to the elaboration of a set of models required by the renewed work and workflow of digital editing, in dialog with previous scholarly elaborations, providing a holistic and agnostic base for the understanding of the digital editorial endeavour.

 

[1] A similar but more generalized definition is given by Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen, who prefer to speak of ‘marks’ on a document, rather than of ‘verbal text’: ‘By a document we understand an individual object containing marks. A mark is a perceptible feature of a document (normally something visible, e.g. a line in ink)’ 27.

References
1. DeRose, S. J., D. G. Durand, E. Mylonas, and A. H. Renear (1990). What is Text, Really? Journal of Computing in Higher Education 2:1 3-26.

2. Shillingsburg, P. L. (1991). Text as matter, concept, and action. Studies in Bibliography, 44:31–83.

3. Shillingsburg, P. (2006). From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

4. Caton, P. (2013). On the term text in digital humanities. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(2):209–220.

5. Gabler, H. W. (2012). Beyond author-centricity in scholarly editing. Journal of Early Modern Studies, 1:15–35.

6. Eggert, P. (2009). Securing the Past: Conservation in Art, Architecture and Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

7. Tanselle, G. Thomas. A Rationale of Textual Criticism Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989. 104 pp.

8. Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2009). How to teach your edition how to swim. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(1):27–52.

9. Robinson, P. M. (2009). What text really is not, and why editors have to learn to swim. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(1):41–52.

10. Robinson, P. M. W. (2013). Towards a theory of digital editions. Variants 10. 105-132.

11. Barthes, R. (1968). La Mort De l'Auteur. Manteia (4e trimestre).

12. Ong, J. Walter (1975). The Writer's Audience is Always a Fiction. PMLA, Vol. 90/1, pp. 9-21

13. McCarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing. Palgrave Macmillan.

14. McCarty, W. (2004). Modeling: a Study in Words and Meanings. in Companion to the DigitalHumanities. Blackwell.

15. DeRose, S. J., D. G. Durand, E. Mylonas, and A. H. Renear (1990). What is Text, Really? Journal of Computing in Higher Education 2:1 3-26.

16. Huitfeldt, C. (1994). Multi-Dimensional Texts in a One-Dimensional Medium. Computers and the Humanities, 28(4-5). Humanities Computing in Norway. 235-241.

17. Pichler, A. (1995). Transcriptions, texts and interpretation. In Johannessen, K. and Nor- denstam, T., editors, Culture and Value: Philosophy and the Cultural Sciences, pages 690–695. Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, Wien.

18. Renear, A. H., Mylonas, E., and Durand, D. (1996). Refining our notion of what text really is: The problem of overlapping hierarchies. In Ide, N. and Hockey, S., editors, Research in Humanities Computing. Oxford University Press.

19. Pierazzo, E. and Stokes, P. A. (2010). Putting the text back into context: a codicological approach to manuscript transcription. In Fischer, F., Fritze, C., and Voelgler, G., editors, Kodikologie und Palographie im Digitalen Zeitalter 2 - Codicology and palaeography in the digital age 2, pages 397–430. Books on Demand, Norderstedt.

20. Deegan, M. and Sutherland, K. (2009). Transferred Illusions. Digital Technology and the Forms of Print. Ashgate, Farnham.

21. Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2009). How to teach your edition how to swim. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(1):27–52.

22. Huifeldt, C., and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2008). What is transcription? Literary and Linguistic Computing. 23 (3). 295-310. doi:10.1093/llc/fqn013

23. Huitfeldt, Claus, Yves Marcoux and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2010). Extension of the type/token distinction to document structure. In Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010. held August 3-6, 2010 in Montréal, Canada. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup C

24. Sperberg-McQueen, C. M.. Claus Huitfeldt, and Yves Marcoux (2009). What is transcription? Part 2. Talk given at Digital Humanities 2009, College Park, Maryland. Slides on the Web at blackmesatech.com/2009/06/dh2009/.

25. Caton, Paul (2013=. Pure transcriptional encoding. Paper given at Digital Humanities 2013, Lincoln, Nebraska.

26. Caton, P. (2013). On the term text in digital humanities. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(2):209–220.

27. Huitfeldt, Claus, and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen. (2008) What is transcription? Literary & Linguistic Computing 23.3: 295-310.
Accounting documents seem to be are well suited digital reproduction: they contain a significant number of highly structured information which was meant to be calculated already in its original context . Creating a database for executing statistical and numerical analysis of the data seems to be a promising method to analyse these documents. This assumption is not reflected in the practice of critical scholarly editions of accounting books. The digital humanists creating resources of accounting documents have not succeeded to build a common form of representation apart from the preference of spread-sheet style data storage. This approach neglects important information in the original documents which become in particular clear when studying medieval account books:

The recent scholalry edition of the Luxemburg city accounts 1 shows that accounting is close to everyday language and thus an important source for research on the history of a language. A digital resource concentrating on numbers, short descriptions of bookkeeping entries and classifications excludes that information.
Producing an account in the middle ages was a process which included several steps: collecting the information from informal documents into a fair copy, reading the listed transactions to a supervising committee or to a person using the abacus, deleting debit entries with their fulfilment, entering debits for tax or rent collection and updating the entries during money collection while tax collection or in manorial administration. Medieval accounts thus can be a protocol of acts of accounting and controlling.
The layout of medieval accounts changed in time, i.e. for example in administrative accounting the layout developed from protocols in simple text blocks to sophisticated tabular representations2. The early forms of double entry bookkeeping are based on the position of the entry on the page 3. The development of the visual form of accounting documents is part of the research on the history of accounting.
Account books give an insight in everyday life and its economy which can be researched only when the variety of existing entries is transfered into a taxonomy. Medieval and early modern accounts used variety of taxonomies to structure the data. All this can only be accessed by researcher with a thorough encoding of the “content”.
Traditionally this multiple interest in the account books led to a decision on one preferred approach. On paper the text could be printed economically only either as tables or as full transcriptions.

The current state of digital edition theory promises to solve this problem: an edition as a digital resource can include several layers of interpretation and leave the decision on the presentation to the user. But a brief survey done on relevant digital resources 4 shows these possibilities are rarely exploited in full.

The paper discusses some reasons for this situation, in particular the influence of the dominant schools in digital scholarly editing and the resulting models which focus on textual variance, representation of text and documentary edition. Syd Baumann and Kathryn Tomasek have already suggested changes in the de-facto standard for encoding of historical documents the TEI 5. They propose an element to describe transactions by referring to the textual parts describing the business facts. An alternative standard for the encoding of business facts can be found in XBRL6 which offers a flexible methodology and in the “Global Ledger”-module a taxonomy of basic business facts which can be transferred to many historical documents. While the TEI guidelines are good to encode the accounts on the documentary and linguistic level, XBRL seems to offer a good base to model the economic content. A simple bookkeeping ontology would have to include the following facts: gl-cor:entryDetail(gl-cor:account, gl-cor:signOfAmount(bk:i, bk:d), gl-cor:amount(tei:measure(tei:quantity, tei:unit), gl-cor:debitCreditCode), bk:price(tei:measure[x], tei:measure[y]), bk:transaction(bk:when, bk:where, bk:who, what, gl-cor:entryDetail[bk:debit], gl-cor:entryDetail[bk:credit]) which represents the single entry (gl-cor:entryDetail), their organization in bookkeeping (bk:account, gl-cor:debitCreditCode), the central economical informations (amounts, increase/decrease, prices) and the social act of transaction (bk:transaction).

Departing from the theoretical considerations presented by Manfred Thaller at the DH2012 7 the paper tries to develop a RDF-model which integrates the multiple layers how an account book can be conceptualised in a digital scholarly edition (text as image, as trace, as language and as meaning). The model is based on references between an URI for the physical object, the images of the object, the transcription and the bookkeeping facts (see fig. 1).


Fig. 1: conceptual model for stand-off markup of digital scholarly editions

The model can be aligned with upper level ontologies like the CIDOC-CRM 8 as the basic entities relate to linguistic objects (crm:E33, text as language), to images (crm:E38, text as image), to inscriptions/marks (crm:34/crm:37, text as trace) and to facts which can be described as events (crm:E5, business transactions as the meaning of the accounts), although substantial intermediate steps have to be included (e.g. price relations, measurements and monetary values as subclasses of propositional objects, crm:89). It allows like XBRL the inclusion of taxonomies for commodities or for types of transaction.

The model can be serialized with the help of the feature structures in TEI and converted into explicit RDF with simple XSL which includes the transformation of DOM relations (e.g. ‘contains’) into ontology statements (e.g. <list ana=”bk:d”><item ana=”bk:entry”>For <seg ana=”bk:account”>wood</seg> <measure ana=”bk:amount” quantity=”10” unit=”lb”>x lb</measure></item></list>). First experiences in a project to create a digital edition of a whole series of early modern city accounts show that the model can be used efficiently when the encoding of this kind of structures is supported with a TEI customisation which helps the transcribers to replace repetitive and verbose code with simple XML tags (like <r:lb> for <measure type=”currency” unit=”lb”> or <r:e> for <item ana=”bk:entry”> and when repetitive tasks like the transformation of roman numbers can be included in the XSL transformation from customised code to TEI.

The paper will demonstrate the application of the model to several late medieval account books in a TEI serialization9. The integration in the GAMS repository infrastructures10 allows showing possible functionalities of digital editions based on the model. This includes joint operations on the XML text stored in a Fedora Commons repository and the RDF representation stored in a triple store.

References
1. Die Rechnungsbücher der Stadt Luxemburg, bearb. v. Claudine Moulin u. Michel Pauly, z.Zt. 6 Hefte, Luxemburg 2007 - 2012 (Schriftenreihe des Stadtarchivs Luxemburg ...)

2. Mark Mersiowsky: Die Anfänge territorialer Rechnungslegung im deutschen Nordwesten. Spätmittelalterliche 2. Rechnungen, Verwaltungspraxis, Hof und Territorium (zugl. Diss. phil. Münster 1992) , Sigmaringen 2000 (Residenzenforschung 9); Georg Vogeler: Spätmittelalterliche Steuerbücher deutscher Territorien, Teil 1: Überlieferung und hilfswissenschaftliche Analyse, in: AfD 49 (2003), S. 165-295, Teil 2: Funktionale Analyse und Typologie, in: AfD 50 (2004), S. 57-204.

3. Federigo Melis (1950): Storia della Ragioneria. Contributo alla conoscenza e interpretazione delle fonti più significative della storia economica, Bologna; Franz-Josef Arlinghaus: Bookkeeping, Double-Entry Bookkeeping, in: Medieval Italy. An Encyclopedia, hg. v. Christopher Kleinhenz, New York 2004, S. 147-150; Basil S. Yamey: Scientific Bookkeeping and the Rise of Capitalism, in: EHR N.S. 1 (1949), S. 99-113.

4. Die Cameralia des Stadtarchivs Regensburg, Bd. 3: Ausgaben der Stadt Regensburg 1393 - 1394, ed. by Heidrun Boshof (Fontes Civitates Ratisponensis) www.fcr-online.com/editions/c03/index.htm; Die mittelalterlichen Schuld- und Rechnungsbücher des Deutschen Ordens um 1400. Eine synoptische Edition im Internet, ed. by Christina Link u. Jürgen Sarnowsky, Hamburg 2008, www.schuredo.uni-hamburg.de; Les comptes des consuls de Montferrand (1273–1319)2006 (Éditions en ligne de l'École des Chartes, volume16), éd. R. Anthony Lodge 2006 elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/montferrand/; Comptes de châtellenies, http: www.castellanie.net; Comédie-Française Register Project, http: web.mit.edu/hyperstudio/cfr; Open domesday. The first free online copy of Domesday Book, ed. by Anna Powell-Smith, J.J.N. Palmer, Univ. of Hull http: www.domesdaymap.co.uk; The Alcalá account book project, National University of Ireland, Maynooth 2008, http: archives.forasfeasa.ie; Henry III fine rolls Project, King’s College London et al., 2007-2011, http: www.finerollshenry3.org.uk

5. Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research, paper presented ad the TEI-MM 2012 in College Station, http: idhmc.tamu.edu/teiconference/program/papers#encfin; Syd Bauman, Transactionography Customized Documentation, Encoding Historical Financial Records Open Access Library, accessed October 28, 2013, http: omeka.encodinghfrs.org/items/show/5; hitepaper 2012, NEH Ref: HD-51224-11, omeka.encodinghfrs.org/items/show/4

6. eXtensible Business Reporting Language, www.xbrl.org, Global Ledger Taxonomy: www.xbrl.org/gltaxonomy

7. Manfred Thaller: What is a text within the Digital Humanities, or some of them, at least? digital humanities 2012 (Hamburg) www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/beyond-embedded-markup

8. Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model, ed. by Nick Crofts, Martin Doerr, Tony Gill, Stephen Stead, Matthew Stiff, December 2011. www.cidoc-crm.org

9. Rechnungen des Mittelalters und der frühen Neuzeit, Prototypen, ed. by Georg Vogeler, 2012ff. gams.uni-graz.at/rem

10. Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System [(Humanities Asset Management System], curated by the Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung – Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities gams.uni-graz.at/context:gams/sdef:Context/get?mode=about
The SeNeReKo project is a joint research project of the Center for Religious Studies (Bochum, Germany) and the Center for Digital Humanities (Trier, Germany), funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The project develops methods for the application of network analysis as a tool for the study of historical religious texts. Informed by theoretical approaches in the study of religion which stress the importance of interreligious contacts for the formation and development of religious traditions, concepts from network theory are used in order to analyse the context and interdependence of religious actors and concepts. Religious traditions are seen as developing face to face of each other, developing their own meaning systems by at the same time recognising and rejecting – or adopting and transforming – meaning systems of “others”.1 The relational framework of network analysis is taken as a methodological tool to operationalise such approaches.

The analytical process consists of two steps: Firstly, networks have to be created on the basis of the textual sources by identifying nodes and their relations. In contrast to applications of network analysis that are only interested in the relations of (historical or literary) social actors,2 the project also takes semantic structures into account. During the first step, methods from computational linguistics (e.g. part-of-speech tagging, lemmatisation, syntax parsing, anaphora resolution) are applied in order to identify relevant terms (nodes) and their relations (edges). Since such tools are not available for the target languages, existing state-of-the-art tools are adapted for these tasks. Building on these linguistic annotations, networks of words (terms/lemmas) are created. For this purpose, a set of tools is built, implementing several existing and newly developed network creation algorithms.3 These tools are compatible to the CLARIN WebLicht infrastructure, using TCF as their data exchange format, and ISOcat for handling linguistic tag sets. They will be made available under an open source license.

Secondly, the resulting networks are analysed using methods from network analysis. During this step, centrality measures and clustering algorithms are applied in order to discover semantic structures.4 Results of these analytical methods are compared to other approaches like Topic Modelling.5

Two independent corpora are used as separate test cases for the development and application of the methodological approach: The Buddhist Pali Canon and a selection of ancient egyptian texts. These diverse corpora are used as a test bed for the development and application of language independent analytical tools. These corpora are available only in project specific formats. In order to have a generic starting point for analysis, they are converted to TEI compliant XML.

The Pali Canon is a huge collection of Buddhist texts in the middle Indic language Pali. It has been composed around the Common Era in Northern India and Sri Lanka and is nowadays available in a digital version.6 The Canon contains a lot of narratives in which the Buddhist authors depict the Buddha and his followers in relation to competing religious groups or individuals. Therefore the Pali Canon is a rich source for the analysis of interreligious dynamics in ancient South Asia. As the Canon is too huge for manual analysis, computational analysis is needed to get a clear picture of the social-semantic structures inherent in these narratives.

The database Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae7 represents an annotated selection of ancient Egyptian texts from different genres and periods. In our case it is used to analyse religious dynamics in the history of Ancient Egypt. An application of network analysis shall open up another perspective for an interpretation of interreligious contacts between Egypt and for instance the Near East. For this purpose the relations between actors,and between actors and concepts are extracted from syntactic and semantic structures.

The project contributes to the development of new analytical tools for the humanities. These should be of use for further research beyond the project. At the same time, significant results are expected for the fields of Egyptology, Indology, and the study of religions. Building on past digitisation efforts, the project allows for new insights based on the computational analysis of the corpora, complementing conventional hermeneutic approaches.

References
1. cf. Krech, Volkhard. (2012). Religious Contacts in Past and Present Times: Aspects of a Research Programme. Religion 42 (2): 191–213. doi:10.1080/0048721X.2012.642572.

2. cf. Gramsch, Robert. (2013). Das Reich als Netzwerk der Fürsten: politische Strukturen unter dem Doppelkönigtum Friedrichs II. und Heinrichs (VII.) 1225-1235.

3. cf. Biemann, Christian, Stefan Bordag, Gerhard Heyer, Uwe Quasthoff, and Christian Wolff. (2004). Language-Independent Methods for Compiling Monolingual Lexical Data. In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, edited by Alexander Gelbukh, 217–28. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2945. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-24630-5_27. Ferrer i Cancho, Ramon, Ricard V. Solé, and Reinhard Köhler. 2004. “Patterns in Syntactic Dependency Networks.” Physical Review E 69 (5): 051915. Ferrer2004. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.69.051915. Paranyushkin, Dmitry. 2011. “Identifying the Pathways for Meaning Circulation Using Text Network Analysis”. Nodus Labs. noduslabs.com/research/pathways-meaning-circulation-text-network-analysis/.

4. cf. Dorow, Beate, and Dominic Widdows. (2003). Discovering Corpus-Specific Word Senses. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics - Volume 2, 79–82. EACL ’03. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:10.3115/1067737.1067753. dx.doi.org/10.3115/1067737.1067753.

5. cf. Blei, David M., Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3: 993–1022.

6. tipitaka.org

7. aaew.bbaw.de/tla
1. Projekthintergrund: Ziele, Methoden, Ressourcen
Strukturierte Sprachressourcen (annotierte Textkorpora, Baumbanken, Wortnetze) bieten neuartige und attraktive Möglichkeiten, linguistische Fragestellungen an authentischen Sprachverwendungsdaten zu untersuchen und quantitativ auszuwerten (vgl. z.B. McEnery et al. 2006, Lüdeling & Kytö 2008/2009). Infrastrukturprojekte wie CLARIN bieten flexible Werkzeuge an, um aus diesen Ressourcen Daten zu gewinnen und auszuwerten. Für sehr viele linguistische Forschungsfragen müssen die automatisch gewonnenen Ergebnisse allerdings noch weiter bearbeitet werden – gerade wenn die Anwender nicht selbst Softwarelösungen für die Datenauswertung entwickeln können, sehen sie sich mit zeitaufwändigen, manuellen Routinearbeiten konfrontiert. Im Verbundprojekt Korpus-basierte linguistische Recherche und Analyse mit Hilfe von Data-Mining (KobRA) arbeiten Partner aus Informatik, Linguistik und Sprachtechnologie gemeinsam daran, die quantitative Auswertung strukturierter Sprachdaten zu verbessern und zu beschleunigen. Dazu werden im Rahmen korpusbasierter linguistischer Studien, die mit konkreten Forschungsaktivitäten der Projektbeteiligten in Verbindung stehen, Data-Mining-Verfahren (insbesondere Lernverfahren) im Zusammenspiel mit vorhandenen Sprachressourcen erprobt und angepasst. Die Verfahren operieren auf den Suchtrefferlisten bzw. auf großen Korpora und gehen über die reine Suche hinaus, indem sie die Suchergebnisse filtern, sortieren oder strukturieren sowie ggf. die weitere Aufbereitung der Daten für eine konkrete Fragestellung erleichtern. In unserem Vortrag stellen wir den Ansatz des Projekts vor (Abschnitt 2) und berichten über erste Ergebnisse (Abschnitte 3 und 4).

2. Projektarchitektur
Die Data-Mining-Verfahren des Projekts setzen auf der Infrastruktur der Sprachtechnologie-Partner auf. Es gibt einerseits eine Schnittstelle zu den linguistischen Anwendern und andererseits eine interne Schnittstelle zwischen der Data-Mining-Komponente und der Infrastruktur. Das Schaubild in Abbildung 1 verdeutlicht diese Verzahnung.


Fig. 1: Verzahnung und Schnittstellen zwischen den Projektkomponenten

Einige der im Projekt zu entwickelnden Lernverfahren werden direkt auf den Ergebnislisten (inkl. Annotationen und Metadaten) der von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, dem Institut für deutsche Sprache (Mannheim) und dem Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Tübingen bereitgestellten Sprachressourcen ausgeführt. Andere Verfahren operieren an der Schnittstelle zwischen der Data-Mining-Komponente und der Korpusinfrastruktur.

Zum Einsatz kommen bislang Verfahren der Klassifikation (z.B. Stützvektormethode (SVM), vgl. Joachims 2002) und des Clusterings (v.a. Topic Models, z.B. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), vgl. Blei et al. 2003; Tomanek & Morik 2011), die die automatische Bereinigung und Disambiguierung bzw. Klassifikation von Treffern (ggf. auf Basis einer möglichst geringen Menge intellektuell analysierter Treffer, z.B. mithilfe von Active Learning, vgl. Tomanek 2010, Tomanek & Morik 2011) ermöglichen. Um die Nutzer bei der Exploration verschiedener strukturierter Datenbestände zu unterstützen, werden auch innovative Formen der Visualisierung für typische sprachbezogene Forschungsfragen erprobt.

3. Fallstudien zu den Bereichen Lexikographie und Diachronische Sprachforschung
Erste Ergebnisse zum Nutzen von Data-Mining-Verfahren für konkrete korpusbasierte Forschungsvorhaben liegen bereits vor. Im Einzelnen wurden Verfahren für folgende Vorhaben angepasst und evaluiert: 

a) Studien zu deutschen Stützverbgefügen.

b) Studien zur korpusgestützten lexikographischen Beschreibung von Wörtern mit mehreren Lesarten.

Ad a) Stützverbgefüge sind Konstruktionen aus einem prädikativen Nomen und einem semantisch blassen Stützverb wie z.B. Anwendung findenoderzur Anwendung kommen. Im Rahmen eines Forschungsprojekts der Dortmunder Projektleiterin zur diachronen Entwicklung und Textsortenspezifik von Stützverbgefügen wurden erstmals große Korpusbestände aus unterschiedlichen Textsortenbereichen untersucht (vgl. Storrer 2013a). Weil die formbasierte Suche in den Korpora bislang keine Möglichkeit bietet, automatisch zwischen Vollverb- (etw. finden) oder Stützverbverwendungen (Anwendung/Beachtungfinden) zu unterscheiden, mussten die ermittelten Suchtreffer manuell-intellektuell analysiert werden. Die dabei entstandenen annotierten Daten wurden im KobRA-Projekt genutzt, um ein automatisches Klassifikationsverfahren für Stützverben zu lernen. Bisher wurden SVM-basierte Klassifikationsverfahren (Stützvektormethode, vgl. Joachims 2002; als Merkmale wurden Kontextwörter und syntaktische Strukturen berücksichtigt) evaluiert, die aktuell auf Trefferlisten aus dem DWDS-Kernkorpus des 20. Jh. abhängig von Verb und Textsortenbereich eine Genauigkeit (Precision) von zwischen 70 und 87% sowie eine Ausbeute (Recall) von zwischen 36 und 80% erreichen. An einer Verbesserung der Ausbeute wird derzeit noch gearbeitet. Die Klassifikationsverfahren werden für den korpusgestützten Aufbau eines Wikis zu deutschen Stützverbgefügen genutzt.

Ad b) Ausgangspunkt für die Studien zur korpusgestützten lexikographischen Beschreibung von Wörtern mit mehreren Lesarten ist das Problem, dass strukturierte Sprachressourcen momentan noch nicht in semantisch disambiguierter Form vorliegen. Automatische Frequenzerhebungen beziehen sich deshalb immer nur auf Formeinheiten; für die lexikographische Arbeit ist man aber gerade auch an den Frequenzen zu einzelnen Lesarten homographer bzw. polysemer Wörter interessiert (z.B. für das Wort Leiter: Sprossenstiege, Tonfolge, Verantwortlicher/Vorstehender, Energie übertragender Stoff). Um Wörter wie Leiter adäquat beschreiben zu können, müssen korpusbasiert arbeitende Lexikographen bislang sämtliche Treffer zu einem Suchwort sichten (für Leiter: 6895 Treffer im DWDS-Kernkorpus des 20. Jh.); Werkzeuge zur automatischen Disambiguierung wären deshalb sehr hilfreich. Sie könnten auch statistische Analyse- und Visualisierungswerkzeuge verbessern (z.B. Kookkurrenzanalysen, Wortverlaufsdiagramme), die bislang ebenfalls nicht zwischen Lesarten differenzieren. Aus diesem Grund werden im KobRA-Projekt Clusteringverfahren zur Partitionierung von Suchtrefferlisten nach Lesarten eines gesuchten Wortes evaluiert und angepasst. Beim Clustering von Trefferlisten aus dem DWDS-Kernkorpus des 20. Jh. zu den Wörtern Leiter und zeitnah(zeitgenössisch, zeitkritisch vs. unverzüglich) mithilfe von LDA-Topic-Models (vgl. Blei et al. 2003) konnten bislang F1-Werte (gleich gewichtetes Mittel zwischen Genauigkeit (Precision) und Ausbeute (Recall)) zwischen 74 und 78% erreicht werden. Dabei wurde die Partitionierung zunächst lediglich auf Basis der Kontextwörter (Bags-of-Words) vorgenommen. Aktuell wird auch der Nutzen weiterer Merkmale (Wortarten, Syntax, Textsorte, Erscheinungsdatum) erprobt.

4. Fallstudien zum Bereich Varietätenlinguistik / Internetbasierte Kommunikation
Die Kommunikation auf der Grundlage internetbasierter Kommunikationstechnologien und sozialer Medien stellt ein wichtiges neues Teilgebiet der Digital Humanities dar. Bei der interpersonalen Kommunikation in Genres wie Online-Foren, Weblogs, Chats, Twitter oder sozialen Netzwerken finden sich Produkte schriftlicher Sprachverwendung, deren sprachliche Gestaltung an den Bedingungen dialogischer Kommunikation im sozialen Nähebereich orientiert ist. Typische Merkmale der interaktionsorientierten Schreibhaltung (Storrer 2013b), auf die die Orientierung an der Mündlichkeit in der schriftlichen internetbasierten Kommunikation (IBK) zurückgeführt werden kann, sind u.a. Phänomene geschriebener Umgangssprache wie etwa Verschmelzungs-/Allegroformen (haste, biste, willste, machstes, isses, aufm, aufn), Schwa-Elisionen (ich schreib, ich mach, ich sag), die Verwendung umgangssprachlicher Lexik (moin, Maloche) oder dialektal/regional gebundener Aussprachevarianten (Oida wos wüst < Alter, was willst (du); wech < weg) sowie die häufige Verwendung von Einheiten wie Interjektionen und Abtönungspartikeln. Darüber hinaus bilden sich in der schriftlichen internetbasierten Kommunikation sprachliche Mittel aus, die auf die Unterstützung der interaktiven schriftlichen Kommunikation am Nähepol optimiert sind. Typische Beispiele dafür sind Inflektive (freu, lach, grübel, wink, seufz) und Inflektivkonstruktionen (wildsei, malanmerk, bedenkenhab), Emoticons sowie die Nutzung von Verfahren der Graphemiteration (gaaaaaanz schlecht) und der Großschreibung (mathe mündlich? BRUTAL!!!) für die graphische Nachbildung stimmlicher Kommunikationssignale.

Um die Besonderheiten der Schreibformen und sprachlichen Besonderheiten in der internetbasierten Kommunikation empirisch begründbar in einen sprach- und varietätengeschichtlichen Rahmen einordnen zu können, müssen Ausgangsbedingungen geschaffen werden, die einen Vergleich von Phänomenen konzeptioneller Mündlichkeit in internetbasierter Schriftlichkeit und dem Schreibgebrauch in historischen Korpora ermöglichen. Beim Aufbau von IBK-Korpora stellen sich derzeit noch viele Herausforderungen (vgl. z.B. Beißwenger & Storrer 2008, Storrer 2013b: Abschnitt 4), weil Verfahren und Standards, die sich für die Annotation von Textkorpora bewährt haben (Annotationsstandards, Metadatenschemata, Werkzeuge und Tagsets für die linguistische Analyse), nicht ohne Anpassungen für IBK-Korpora übernommen werden können.

Im  KobRA-Projekt werden auf der Grundlage manuell annotierter Trainingsdaten Verfahren zur Klassifizierung und Disambiguierung auf die Behandlung von Phänomentypen (Verschmelzungen, Inflektive, Emoticons) trainiert, die in der Domäne typischerweise auftreten und die von Verarbeitungswerkzeugen, die auf den Umgang mit redigierten Texten trainiert sind, nicht angemessen behandelt werden können. Als Testbett für diese Verfahren dienen Daten aus verschiedenen im Aufbau befindlichen IBK-Korpora, die im Projekt zur Verfügung stehen – u.a. aus dem Wikipedia-Korpus am Institut für deutsche Sprache (Mannheim), dem Projekt „Deutsches Referenzkorpus zur internetbasierten Kommunikation“ (DeRiK, Beißwenger at al. 2013) sowie dem Dortmunder Chat-Korpus (Beißwenger 2013). Die Verfahren sollen in Arbeiten zur Anpassung von Werkzeugen für die automatische Wortartenannotation auf die Verarbeitung von IBK-Daten einfließen. Die Annotation erfolgt auf der Grundlage einer erweiterten Version des STTS-Standards für das POS-Tagging deutscher Sprachdaten, in dessen Erarbeitung die Projektbeteiligten involviert sind (Bartz et al. 2013). Sie ist abgestimmt auf Aktivitäten zur Erarbeitung eines Standards für die Strukturannotation von IBK-Korpora im Rahmen der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI).

References
Bartz, T., Beißwenger, M., Storrer A. (2013): Optimierung des Stuttgart-Tübingen-Tagset für die linguistische Annotation von Korpora zur internetbasierten Kommunikation: Phänomene, Herausforderungen, Erweiterungsvorschläge.Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics (Themenheft „Das STTS-Tagset für Wortartentagging – Stand und Perspektiven“).

Beißwenger, M. (2013): Das Dortmunder Chat-Korpus. Zeitschrift für germanistische Linguistik 41/1, 161–164. (Erweiterte Fassung online: http://tinyurl.com/chatkorpus).

Beißwenger, M., Ermakova, M., Geyken, A., Lemnitzer, L., Storrer, A.(2012): A TEI Schema for the Representation of Computer-mediated Communication.Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (jTEI), Issue 3, jtei.revues.org/476 (DOI: 10.4000/jtei.476).

Beißwenger, M., Ermakova, M., Geyken, A., Lemnitzer, L., Storrer, A.(2013): DeRiK: A German Reference Corpus of Computer-Mediated Communication. In: Literary and Linguistic Computing. tinyurl.com/derik-llc (DOI: 10.1093/llc/fqt038).

Beißwenger, M. and Storrer, A. (2008): Corpora of Computer-Mediated Communication. In Lüdeling, A. und Kytö, M. (eds), Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook. Volume 1. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter (Handbücher zur Sprache und Kommunikationswissenschaft / Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science 29.1), pp. 292–308.

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., Jordan, M. I. (2003): Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, pp. 993–1022.

Geyken, A. (2007): The DWDS corpus: a reference corpus for the German language of the 20th century. In Fellbaum, C. (ed), Idioms and collocations. Corpus-based linguistic and lexicographic studies. London: Continuum, pp. 23– 40.

Joachims, T. (2002): Learning to Classify Text Using Support Vector Machines. Dissertation. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Krenn, B., Erbach, G. (1994): Idioms and support verb constructions. In Nerbonne, J., Netter, K., Pollard, C. (eds), German in Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Stanford: CSLI publications, pp. 365–395.

Langer, S. (2004): A linguistic test battery for support verb constructions. Linguisticae Investigationes 27 (2), pp. 171–184.

Lüdeling, A. and Kytö, M.(eds) (2008/9): Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook. 2 Bände. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter.

Morik, K., Kaspari, A., Wurst, M., Skirzynski, M. (2012): Multi-objective frequent termset clustering.Knowledge and Information Systems 30 (3) (DOI:10.1007/s10115-011-0431-3), pp. 715–738. 

McEnery, T., Xiao, R., Tono, Y. (2006): Corpus-Based Language Studies. An Advanced Resource Book (Routledge Applied Linguistics). London, New York: Routledge.

Storrer, A. (2007): Corpus-based investigations on German support verb constructions. In Fellbaum, C. (ed), Idioms and collocations. Corpus-based linguistic and lexicographic studies. London: Continuum Press, pp. 164–188.

Storrer, A. (2013a): Variation im deutschen Wortschatz am Beispiel der Streckverbgefüge. In Deutsche Akademie für Sprache und Dichtung; Union der deutschen Akademien der Wissenschaften (eds), Reichtum und Armut der deutschen Sprache. Erster Bericht zur Lage der deutschen Sprache. Berlin/New York: de Gruyter, pp. 171–209.

Storrer, A. (2013b): Sprachverfall durch internetbasierte Kommunikation? Linguistische Erklärungsansätze – empirische Befunde. Sprachverfall? Dynamik – Wandel – Variation. Jahrbuch des Instituts für Deutsche Sprache 2013.

Tomanek, K. (2010): Resource-aware annotation through active learning. Dissertation, TU Dortmund.

Tomanek, K., Morik, K. (2011): Inspecting Sample Reusability for Activ Learning. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings 16, pp. 169–181.

Das Verbundprojekt wird vom Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) seit Herbst 2012 im Rahmen des Programms „eHumanities“ gefördert. Informationen zu den Projektbeteiligten und den Ergebnissen unter: http://www.kobra.tu-dortmund.de.

Engl. „support verb constructions“ (vgl. u.a. Langer 2004, Krenn & Erbach 1994, Storrer 2007/2013).

Zu den Korpora im Projekt „Digitales Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache“ (DWDS) vgl. Geyken (2007).

Relevant sind hier v.a. die Aktivitäten der Special Interest Group „Computer-Mediated Communication“ (http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/SIG/CMC/); ein erster Entwurf für ein TEI-Schema für die Annotation von Genres internetbasierter Kommunikation ist in Beißwenger et al. (2012) beschrieben.
In this paper, we theorize about the role of the curator – or perhaps it would be more accurate to say “custodian” or even “collection designer” – in preparing electronic texts for use in an online digital environment. This scholarly role is becoming increasingly important to new forms of knowledge dissemination as a result of the growth in aggregating or mashing up existing digital content. The goal of these aggregations is to add value for particular purposes, as seen in initiatives such as the Journal of Digital Humanities, which aims to collect already published materials into quarterly thematic collections, and the related website Digital Humanities Now, which curates weekly the feeds of other digital humanities websites (Digital Humanities Now).

By analogy with the definition of a curator as “The officer in charge of a museum, gallery of art, library, or the like; a keeper, custodian” (“curator,” def. n. 6), the digital scholarly curator performs a similar role with respect to the circulation of digital content, though with a number of significant differences. Gallery or museum curators, for instance, have their own scholarly and professional training and preparation, often with respect to proper handling and display of fine art and other valuable physical objects. There are those who feel that at least some curators should be considered artists themselves (e.g. Ventzislavov). There is also widespread acknowledgment that curators who work with digital materials require a different set of competencies. Melody Madrid, for example, reports a study that resulted in a list of 20, divided into the categories operational and managerial. Digital scholarly curation also harnesses social media technologies (e.g. crowdsourcing, folksonomies) to encourage a new level of user participation in the management and preservation of digital content (Poole). Not quite an editor, but acting as a mediator between the producers of these contents and its audience through such activities as selecting and reframing them, the digital scholarly curator is in a rather unique position. Our discussion considers this role in relation to the Dynamic Table of Contexts (DToC) interface, a generalized tool for the dissemination of digital text that enables the designer of the collection to mediate specifically between the XML encoding of the text and the affordances that such encoding provides in the reading interface (Brown et al.; Dobson et al.).

The Dynamic Table of Contexts (Fig 1) is a joint initiative between the Interface Design research team of the Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE) project, the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC), the University of Alberta Press, and the Voyant Tools project. The DToC currently leverages four principal components of a digital text: the actual text of the document, a table of contents, an index, and XML encoding of the document. The goal of the prototype is to provide an online reading environment where the table of contents provides a conventional overview of a book while at the same time incorporating the index terms and XML tags and the text to which they point (Ruecker et al.). The terms and tags can be selected and deselected, providing interactivity between these three means for accessing and navigating the content of the text or collection.


Fig. 1: Dynamic Table of Contexts Interface

The ability to leverage XML markup as part of the navigational interface is a distinguishing feature of the DToC. Customization of that affordance is enabled by what we call the DToC’s “curator mode,” which is distinct from the reading mode in that it allows technically adept superusers to create customized tag lists to serve as navigational aids alongside the index terms, as well as to determine the organization of the table of contents (login is not required, the curated view is expressed through a unique URL). In a print edition, and in particular for anthologies, it is necessary for the editor to decide which of the various alternatives will be used to organize a particular table of contents. For example, a collection of essays might be organized

alphabetically by title
alphabetically by author’s last name
chronologically
by theme
or by some other principle, in order to ensure a certain kind of development or coherence from beginning to end.
A collection of poems, for example, might add organization alphabetically by the first line of the poem, for cases where the poems do not have a title, and other arrangements are also possible, for instance by geographic location, language, or genre. In the case of an instructor preparing a course pack, the arrangement would naturally correspond to the sequence in which the materials will be used in the class. In the history of print, the possibilities for multiple representation of contents were limited.

In addition to the selection and organization of the contents themselves, curators of DToC collections need to make choices with respect to how the encoding works in the interface. Given the more generic and multi-purpose nature of XML encoding, particularly its use to structure a text, curators need to select which tags the DToC interface will display to the reader, and what user-friendly labels to use for those tags. For many purposes (although not all), the structural encoding can be set aside in favor of semantic encoding (when present). For choices among these tags, there is probably some golden mean that’s most appropriate for generic use; the primary benefit of the Dynamic Table of Contexts is to allow variants for more specific uses. Tags that have been rarely used may already be covered by the index, or may be too insignificant to take room on the list. On the other hand, in cases where the tags have been used heavily enough, it may not be useful to include them since it would result in too great a density of hits.

There are also large differences between what kind of curation of tags is required – depending on whether a schema or tagset has instead been applied throughout a collection, such as in the Brown Women Writers Project’s use of the Text Encoding Initiative – as opposed to highly customized versions of the TEI adapted to the needs of a particular text. Finally, the curator is also enabled to label how tags will appear in the interface, so that readers are not asked to decipher cryptic forms such as <biblStruct>, but are instead presented with labels for such tags that are meaningful in the context for which the curated text or collection is being prepared. This functionality is useful in cases where there is a nuanced difference between two similar tags that needs to be conveyed to the readers (Fig 2).


Fig. 2: Dynamic Table of Contents Curator Interface

What this means in terms of the training and qualifications of the DToC curator is that the person needs to hypothesize how the target readers will be dealing with the material, and to use the curatorial functions to customize the view of the text in the DToC interface to meet the anticipated use case(s). In the case of class instructors, to a certain extent the job will be simplified since the course pack has been chosen purposively for the class. In other situations, there may be multiple and possibly conflicting anticipated use cases. The curator also needs to be comfortable enough with XML not only to choose appropriate tags and rename them, but also, if needed, to specify XPath queries to locations in the document that cannot be identified through tag names alone. There will be considerable variation in XML expertise amongst curators, and a previous user study of ours on an earlier version of DToC indicated that a closer relationship to the encoding correlated with more positive experiences of the DToC interface (Dobson et al.).

The paper will frame our understanding of digital scholarly curation in relation to more traditional, historical understandings of curation and representation of contents and will demonstrate the curator mode in the DToC interface. Our previous user studies of the interface found both considerable confusion on the part of users with respect to the role of the encoding or tagging in the DToC (Brown et al.), and, among those who understood it, considerable emphasis on the importance of the XML markup and its ability to shape the reader experience in the interface. As one user said in mousing over the XML Markup pane: “Well, this seems to me the most relevant section, so whoever puts that together is pretty much the wizard in this Oz” (Dobson et al.). Our discussion will incorporate results of the next user study we are conducting on the DToC, with a stress on the curator mode, that will probe these findings which go to the heart of the DToC’s affordances. Our aim will be to gain a fuller understanding of the ways in which users with a range of technical knowledge understand the role of markup in the DToC interface, and their understanding as both readers and curators of the curatorial role. This study will inform our understanding not only of the ways in which reading environments such as the DToC can effectively leverage XML encoding, but more generally of the ways in which the idea of curation is rapidly evolving within the online scholarly environment.

References
Brown, Susan, Brent Nelson, Stan Ruecker, Stéfan Sinclair, Nadine Adelaar, Ruth Knechtel, Jennifer Windsor and the INKE Research Group. “Text Encoding, the Index, and the Dynamic Table of Contexts.” Paper presented at the annual Digital Humanities conference (DH2013), Lincoln, Nebraska. July 16-19, 2013

“Curator.” Def. n. 5. The Oxford English Dictionary. 2013. OED Online. Web. 1 Nov. 2013.

Digital Humanities Now. http://digitalhumanitiesnow.org/

Dobson, Teresa, Brooke Heller, Stan Ruecker, Milena Radzikowska, Mark Bieber, Susan Brown, and the INKE Research Group. “The Dynamic Table of Contexts: User Experience and Future Directions.” Paper presented in the panel “Designing Interactive Reading Environments for the Online Scholarly Edition” at the DH2012 conference, Hamburg, Germany. July 16-20, 2012.

Kholeif, O. The Curator’s New Medium. Art Monthly. February 2013, (363):9-12. Ipswich, MA.

Little, G. Thinking Like Curators. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 2013, 39(2), 123-125. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2013.01.003

Madrid, Melody M. A study of digital curator competences: A survey of experts. The International Information & Library Review, Volume 45, Issues 3–4, December 2013, pp 149-156.

Poole, Alex H. “Now is the Future? The Urgency of Digital Curation in the Digital Humanities.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 7:2 (2013).

Ruecker, Stan and the INKE Research Group. “Introducing the Dynamic Table of Contexts for Scholarly Editions.” Paper presented at the Modern Language Association (MLA) Conference. Los Angeles, CA. Jan 6-8, 2011.

Ruecker, Stan, Susan Brown, Milena Radzikowska, Stéfan Sinclair, Thomas M. Nelson, Patricia Clements, Isobel Grundy, Sharon Balasz, and Jeff Antoniuk. “The Table of Contexts: A Dynamic Browsing Tool for Digitally Encoded Texts.” In The Charm of a List: From the Sumerians to Computerised Data Processing. Ed. Lucie Dolezalova. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2009. pp. 177-187.

Ventzislavov, R. (2014), Idle Arts: Reconsidering the Curator. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 72: 83–93. doi: 10.1111/jaac.12058
1. Introduction
As part of its KOTONOHA (meaning ‘words of the language’ in classical Japanese) Project, the National Institute of Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL) is conducting a morphological analysis of Japanese classics. Both the selection and digitization of classic documents are required in order to execute the analysis correctly. Digitization and morphological analysis have been done thus far on the literature of several ages and styles (Ogiso et al., 2012; Ichimura et al., 2012; 2013), and various text corpora have been published. These text corpora are marked up with NINJAL’s original Document Type Definition (DTD). However, some elements are used in common on all corpora but basically are not unified nor standardized. Under this circumstance, it enables structural analysis and string extraction from a single corpus but causes problems with structural comparison and numerical analyses between several corpora. Thus, it is necessary to design and mark up a unified definition from a higher level in order to conduct analyses concurrently.

In the previous study, we examined the possibility of converting classic documents with TEI-compliant XML (Kawase et al., 2013), in particular, by designing a tag-set and strictly structuring an old wood-block printed book from Sharebon’s “Keisei-kai Futasuji-no-michi” (published in 1798, e.g. Fig. 1) as a model case, and sorted out this problem. This work aims to provide further insights into those problems and propose a solution.


Fig. 1: Excerpt image of Sharebon's “Keisei-kai Futasuji-michi” (owned by NINJAL)

2. Significance of Encoding Classic Documents
The reason for choosing Sharebon as a subject is because it is important primary linguistic data from the early modern period (Keene, 1999) and it has the following three features: (1) published in the broad age from the 18th to the first half of the 19th century; (2) uses colloquial words and expressions among conversations between characters; (3) abundantly describes things in Edo (former name of Tokyo) language and Kamigata (Kyoto-Osaka region) language.

Therefore, describing Sharebon in a machine-readable manner has profound significance not only for bringing numerical analysis of unexplained colloquial expressions of the modern period into reality but also for facilitating humanities research in language history and descriptive bibliography. Furthermore, since many texts that have a similar structure to Sharebon were published over the same period of time, this study will offer a common format for archiving coeval literature. 

3. Issues in Encoding Sharebon
In order to analyze the manuscript from a corpus linguistic viewpoint, not only outward mark-ups but also internal mark-ups of both document structure and linguistic structure are required. In general, Sharebon is composed of a combination of three parts: the front matter; the narrative body that contains colloquial expressions and descriptive texts; and the back matter. For instance, in the case of “Keisei-kai Futasuji-michi”, the narrative body is made up of two chapters, ‘Natsu-no-toko’ (Summer Alcove) and ‘Fuyu-no-toko’ (Winter Alcove). Since the composition of this whole document is well accorded with the composition of an orthodox Western manuscript, we may mark up most of the elements in reference to TEI P5: Guidelines (Burnard and Baumanm, 2007). Table 1 shows the list of elements with an explication of their roles used to mark up the document.

The problems incurred in the process of encoding Sharebon can be broadly classified into two matters: (A) text formatting on a #PCDATA (character data) level; and (B) structuring ruby annotations. We will discuss these two matters in more detail in the following sections. 


Fig. 2: List of elements with an explication of their roles to mark up Sharebon

3.1 Text Formatting on #PCDATA
To design and assure a high-quality corpus in terms of linguistic resources, it is necessary to index information about lexical morphemes (e.g. word class, inflected forms, pronunciations) at the body-text level. However, since there are three problems in the sentences of early modern Japanese, it is difficult to conduct morphological analysis properly: (A-1) voice markings called dakuten are missing where they should be; (A-2) corresponding phonetic characters called hiragana and katakana are not unified; (A-3) iteration symbols called odoriji are unmodified.

For example, dakuten makes a phonetic shift from ka, ki, ku, ke, ko (written in hiragana letters as か, き, く, け, こ) to ga, gi, gu, ge, go (rendered as が, ぎ, ぐ, げ, ご). 

3.2 Structuring Ruby Annotations
Such annotations are the small-text characters rendered alongside the base text. In vertical writing, ruby is typically printed on the right-hand side. However, since the three problems exist, it is difficult to mark up both outward information and the linguistic structure simultaneously: (B-1) ruby text carries extended characters (gaiji), damaged and missing characters, and some typographical errors and omissions; (B-2) words of such text and base text are not in one-to-one correspondence; (B-3) There can also be another ruby annotation on the left-hand side simultaneously.

4. Means for Solving the Problem
4.1 Text Formatting on #PCDATA
At NINJAL, for problems (A-1), (A-2), and (A-3), the character level is corrected using the original elements of <vMark>, <kana>, and <odoriji>, respectively (Ichimura et al., 2012; 2013). We accurately describe the text formatting in a uniform way by combining the TEI elements <seg> and <choice> (e.g. Fig. 2).

According to TEI P5: Guidelines (Burnard and Baumanm, 2007), <seg> (arbitrary segment) represents any segmentation of text below the ‘chunk’ level, and <choice> groups a number of alternative encodings at the same point in the text. Distinctions in the corrections of (A-1), (A-2), and (A-3) can be shown by writing @type, holding selectable values from vMark, kana, and odoriji, to the attribute of element <seg>. The original text marked with TEI element <orig> (original form), along with the corrected text (the optimal version for morphological analysis) marked with TEI element <reg> (regularization) are written below the <choice> level.

This description policy preserves both the outward and linguistic structure, even if problems (A-1), (A-2), and (A-3) carry over extended characters or omissions in the original manuscript, and brings morphological analysis into reality as well. 

4.2 Structuring Ruby Annotations
At NINJAL, regarding structuring ruby annotation, since priority is given to morphological analysis, words and characters are encoded using the original defined element <ruby> with an attribute @rubyText (e.g. Fig. 3a). To express this structure with TEI-compliant XML, we can simply substitute the element <ruby> with <w> (word) and the attribute @rubyText with @ana (e.g. Fig. 3b). However, the important ruby text information is described inside @ana as a value, we cannot solve problem (B-1) under this policy. Depending on the technology, CSS, XHTML, and HTML5 platforms might be considered as alternatives in order to structure ruby annotation (Benoit, 2010) (e.g. Fig. 3c).

Here, each <ruby>, <rt>, and <rp> represent inline elements that contain base text with ruby annotation, the superscript which comes over the base text, and ruby parentheses which are used to wrap around opening and closing parentheses <rt>, respectively. However, since the ruby text comes over the #PCDATA level, we cannot solve problem (B-2) under this policy. In addition, we have to solve the above problem and problem (B-3), securing the coexistence of ruby on the right-hand side and left-hand side, simultaneously.


Fig. 3: Examples for encoding ruby annotations


Fig. 4: Examples for ruby annotations on both sides

Imaginably, as shown in Fig. 4a, we will be able to suggest one solution to express the character on base text in a stand-off fashion, in case of the base text carries double ruby on the both sides. However, the above suggestion may work only the character string and both sides of ruby correspond each other. As shown in Fig. 4b, when ruby on either side does not fit or exceed the each target character, this suggestion would be inapplicable.

Currently, we have difficulty in choosing a path that allows specifying both the object outline and structure of Japanese language together; therefore, a new definition over ruby annotation is needed as a means to this end. As shown in Fig. 5, our current solution is to mark up the manuscript in a way which makes it possible to output two types of XML file that specify the information of the object and the structure of Japanese language separately, rather than to fulfill both at the same time.


Fig. 5: Solution for problem (B); exporting two types of XML file

5. Conclusion
In this study, developing a corpus for historical documents in a comprehensive and versatile way was considered the ultimate goal. We devised a tag-set based on the TEI-element, and structured Sharebon’s “Keisei-kai Futasuji-michi” as a model case. We examined the problems of (A) text formatting on #PCDATA level and (B) structuring ruby annotations which were previously unsolved. For problem (A), a concrete policy to bring morphological analysis into reality, by combing the element of <seg> and <choice>, was considered. For problem (B), major difficulties of structuring both outward information and the linguistic structure of Japanese documents at the same time were presented, and problems to solve were pointed out. Especially, ruby annotation is absolutely imperative for Japanese documents. This extra-textual addition is common and employed almost everywhere from historical documents to modern comics for highlighting the pronunciation or meaning of a word. Our future challenge is to examine a compromise that satisfies both structures simultaneously while working out the problems with the TEI Council.

Funding
This work was supported by the collaborative research project “Design of a Diachronic Corpus” and “Study of the History of the Japanese Language Using Statistics and Machine Learning” carried at the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics. 

References
Benoit, G. (2010). Expanding, Facilitating, and Applying Ruby to Explore User Engagement with Encoded Texts, http://web.simmons.edu/~benoit/rc/ruby/ Ruby-Poster.pdf (accessed 15 October 2013).

Burnard, L. and Bauman, S.(2007).TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Text Encoding Initiative.Arlington, MA: TEI Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ (accessed 15 October 2013).

Ichimura, T., Kawase, A. and Ogiso, T. (2012). Structuring Colloquial Early Modern Japanese Text and Its Issues of Definition, Proceedings of the 96th IPSJ SIG Computers and the Humanities, CH96: 1-8.

Ichimura, T., Kawase, A. and Ogiso, T. (2013). Structuing the Corpus of Share-bon, Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Corpus Japanese Linguistics, 249-258.

Kawase, A., Ichimura, T. and Ogiso, T. (2013). Problems in TEI P5 Encoding on Colloquial Japanese Documents of the Early Modern Period, Proceedings of the IPSJ SIG-CH/PNC/ECAI/CIAS Joint Symposium 2013, 7-12.

Keene, D. (1999). A History of Japanese Literature Volume 2: World Within Walls, Columbia University Press, New York.

Ogiso, T., Komachi, M., Den, Y. and Matsumoto, Y. (2012). UniDic for Early Middle Japanese, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resource and Evaluation (LREC), 911-915.
Introduction
In a paper we presented at the 2012 TEI Members' Meeting[1] and published in the Journal of the TEI[2], we introduced the idea of the "transactionography" as a way to model transactions found in historical financial records (HFRs). In this short paper we briefly review transactionography as a model and discuss a few problems that have arisen as we have been testing it.

Transactionography
We have developed a data structure for recording transactions found in historical financial records and linking that data structure with the segments of running prose or apparently tabular information that attest it or refer to it. While this is certainly a labor-intensive approach, we consider it nonetheless one worth serious consideration.

Our model is similar to the TEI P5 models for contextualization, which offer TEI-compliant models for standoff markup of extra-textual information in files such as prosopographies and gazetteers. Thus in the same way that a prosopography maps how a name of a person that appears in running prose refers to said person, a transactionography maps how the financial records that attest a transaction refer to said transaction. That is, there exists a real-world thing or action that is being referred to by the words (or other marks) in a document we are encoding. The transactionography is a separate file that brings together information that is attested in multiple archival documents to describe a series of transactions.

 We noted in our previous paper:

 

Our model of a transaction is perhaps somewhat more inclusive than some dictionary definitions. We think of a transaction as a coherent set of one or more transfers of something of perceived value from one entity to another. A transfer has three main components, which may be summarized as "what", "from whom", and "to whom". Furthermore, the "what" is likely to be divisible into a certain amount (that is, a quantity and a unit) of a given commodity. It is worth noting that transfers take place at a certain point in time, even if we don’t know when that time was. Or, at least, transfers are completed at a certain point in time. A transfer may occupy a signiﬁcant duration of time from start to finish. For example, a transaction may be conducted by ground postal service.     

 Some common transaction categories can be identified.

A standard exchange of money for goods is a purchase, consisting of two transfers: e.g., I transfer $2 to the convenience store, and a tiny little bottle of apple juice is transferred from the store to me.
A similar trade that does not involve currency is a barter, for example, trading a large red paper clip for a fish-shaped pen.
A gift is a single uni-directional voluntary transfer; a single uni-directional involuntary transfer is called theft or embezzlement.
A set of transfers among more than two entities may be referred to as a multilateral trade.
To model the "what", the TEI <measure> (or <measureGrp>) element seems tailor-made for the purpose. To model the "when", the attributes from the TEI att.datable class seem to be quite reasonable: they can handle specific dates, times, date ranges, and particular dates that took place sometime within a range.

 

For representing "from whom" and "to whom" we have created new attributes, fra= and til= (Norwegian for "from" and "to") as the attributes from= and to= already occur in TEI, and creditor= and debtor= have different meanings in different contexts.

Problems
Data capture interface
Complex transactions
In our model, a _transaction_ is a series of one or more _transfer_s from one entity to another. (An entity here is a person, an organization, or an account.) This works well for simple purchases, barters, and trades (each of which comprises 2 transfers), as well as gifts and theft (each of which comprises 1 transfer). It also works well for simple multilateral trades. E.g., if Mr. Baxter gives 86.50 USD to Mr. Sheldrake, who gives flowers to Ms. Kubelik, who gives basketball tickets to Mr. Baxter, the transaction comprises three transfers.

 Our model does not yet include a way to handle more complex transactions that involve multiple entities paying and receiving different amounts of cash. Such a transaction might look like this:

 

A pays $2

B pays $4

C gets $3

D gets $3

Our model requires the addition of a fifth entity to hold contributions before distributions can be made. A fictional or temporary account entity could easily be used for this purpose. Colloquially, we might refer to this account as a "pot" or "kitty," borrowing terminology from card playing games.A different model, one perhaps in which transfers were listed by person or account rather than by event or date, might solve this problem. E.g., the following models the example above.


(Note that this example is quite simplified, in that whatever C & D give A & B in return for the $6 is not included.) However, this sort of model seems overall more cumbersome in the simpler cases.While we note this as an outlier case that our model handles only clumsily, we question how often it would occur in practice, and thus how much of a burden on the encoder of HFRs it would present.

Services
We noted in our poster presented at TEI 2013[3] that services are a problem, but adding the attribute @service to the TEI <measure> element might solve it. We quote from said poster:

Many historical financial records, however, include or are even primarily about the exchange of money for services (e.g., laundering, room and board, or domestic service). Since these services were more usually performed by women and often recorded by women, study of these types of HFRs is of particular interest to practitioners of women’s history.

In our “transactionography” we have heretofore used the TEI <measure> element, with its @quantity, @unit, and @commodity attributes, to represent that which is transferred from one person or account to another in a transaction. But in the laundry list case, the work performed by the laundress is not a “commodity” but a “service”, the service for which the boarder paid the boardinghouse keeper in this transaction. However, using the <measure> element with existing attributes leads to markup that fails to distinguish the purchase of a garment from paying for the service of laundering it. One possible solution is to add a new attribute, @service. Thus for instance, a line from a laundry list might be marked up as follows:


This solution seems to have broad application. E.g.:


We will not be surprised, however, if there are cases it does not handle well.

Another approach might be to think of "shirt" as the unit and "launder" as the commodity. This would have the advantage of not requiring the addition of an extra attribute to the <measure> element. And since we have marked the unit as "count" in both the examples of framing and shoe shining, these examples might suggest that this latter approach is more elegant than our more verbose use of @service. We wonder, though, whether the programming example might point to a place where the option of greater verbosity constitutes an advantage.Nor does the alternative approach offer a solution to at least two other complexities that occur when we try to formalize references to women’s work in HFRs. We might call these multiplicity and indirection. We quote again from our TEI 2013 poster:

 

By “multiplicity” we mean that the goods or services being transferred are actually a combination of distinct separate goods or services being transferred as a unit. A common example of this is a suit of men’s clothes, which at one point in the twentieth century might have meant either a jacket and trousers or a jacket, a vest, and trousers.

The problem of “indirection” occurs when the goods or services being transferred are referred to indirectly or metaphorically. ...

These two problems can, and often do, occur simultaneously. For example, the reference to “steak” on a restaurant receipt does not refer to a single chunk of uncooked meat as it would on the receipt from a butcher shop. Rather, it refers to the meat, and perhaps some sauce, in addition to the services of cooking the dish and delivering it to the table.

We do not know, at least not yet, which of these approaches is superior. However, we feel they are probably close enough to each other in expressive power and usability that the important thing, as Tommie Usdin points out[4], is for the HFR encoding community to pick one.

Conclusion
We have considered here some problems that have arisen as we have tested the transactionography model. We are aware of numerous projects in which scholars are working with problems related to markup of HFRs, and we have created a website with space for both discussion of these problems and display of proposed solutions. We invite our colleagues to contribute to Encoding Historical Financial Records <encodinghfrs.org> as we continue to explore TEI-conformant models for markup of these abundant archival records.

Acknowledgement
The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge C. Michael Sperberg-McQueen for not only finding problems with transactionogrophies, but also allowing us to bounce ideas around.

References
[1] Tomasek, Kathryn and Bauman, Syd (2012), “Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research”. Presented at _TEI and the C{rl}O{wu}D: the Text Encoding Initiative Conference, College Station, TX, November 8–10, 2012.

[2] Tomasek, Kathryn and Bauman, Syd, “Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research”. _Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative_, issue 6.

[3] Tomasek, Kathryn and Bauman, Syd (2013), “Laundry Lists and Boarding Records: challenges in encoding ‘women’s work’”. Poster presented at The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web: the TEI Conference, 2013, Rome, Italy, October 2–5, 2013.

[4] Usdin, Tommie (2002), “When “It Doesn’t Matter” means “It Matters””, presented at Extreme Markup Languages 2002, Montréal QC. conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2002/Usdin01/EML2002Usdin01.html
heureCLÉA (www.heureclea.de) is a BMBF-funded eHumanities project1 which combines the two conceptual perspectives on object annotation that set apart the humanities and the 'hard sciences': strictly rule-based explication of uncontroversial object features as exemplified in the measurement of values, such as length, height, density, etc., versus the hermeneutic response for which observation and emotive engagement from a subjective point of view must go hand in hand in order to facilitate interpretation. These are of course ideal types and the actual practice of annotation in the humanities is situated at their interface, which is heuristics—the methodologically controlled 'art of finding' that goes beyond pure measurement, but whose purpose it is to generate relevant questions rather than conclusive answers. Against this backdrop heureCLÉA aims to implement a digital heuristics module for the text annotation tool CATMA (www.catma.de) so that we may benefit from synergies between the computationally automated and the subjectively motivated, human generated annotation of texts.

1. The heureCLÉA Project
The practical backbone of heureCLÉA are two software developments: HeidelTime, which was developed at Heidelberg University, is a rule-based system for the extraction and normalization of temporal expressions.2 It needs to be significantly modified to cope with the complexity of literary narratives.3 – The CATMA (Computer Aided Textual Markup & Analysis) markup tool was developed at Hamburg University. The current release of CATMA (version 4.0) is open source and provides a robust web based annotation environment for collaborative markup.4 CATMA not only supports intuitive text annotation in a flexible, XML/TEI-compliant format, but also integrates markup with analytical and visualization functions (cf. Fig.1). This enables users to switch ad hoc between text annotation and text analysis in either direction as well as recursively. CATMA thus supports what Burnard referred to as the 'continuous turning of the hermeneutic wheel'5—i.e. the back and forth between formal text analysis and the generation of interpretative hypotheses. In its most recent development phase (called CLÉA)6, CATMA then progressed from a stand-alone desktop application to a web-based solution. This adds yet another conceptual dimension, that of collaborative markup:7 in CATMA researchers can now share, reuse, amend and dispute each other's markup.


Fig. 1: Exploration and Annotation in CATMA

CATMA's overall design is based on the premise that a DH tool should emulate the methodological and social practice of traditional philology as closely as possible. This practice integrates three methodological primitives: analytical/declarative operations, hermeneutic operations, and discursive critique of explications and theories.8 This conceptual high-level design goal also determined our choice between the two competing paradigms of embedded (in-line) markup and external standoff markup, which we regard as methodological rather than technological opposites. Accordingly, embedded markup represent the idea of objective taxonomic universality and the potential immanence of 'truth' in an object. External standoff markup, on the other hand, is based on the acknowledgment of the contingent nature and historical transience of object interpretation. In a contemporary philological perspective, embedded markup therefore constitutes something of a methodological anachronism: for conceptually it resembles the pre-enlightenment model of canonical text exegesis which the modern humanities have long replaced by a critical, self-reflexive hermeneutic approach. Yet this critique is of course of a purely philosophical nature when dealing with pre-interpretive analytical and declarative tasks, such as POS tagging.

However, once higher-level semantics are at stake, these considerations force us to adopt a truly 'hermeneutic' approach to markup.9 Interpretation varies depending on interpreter, context and interpretive theory. Accordingly, even elementary markup produced in order to support higher-level interpretation must still remain transparent as one possible account among many, and users must be able to produce and store ambiguous and indeed even contradictory markup for the same text in a standoff manner. Since rich interpretations are best generated in a discursive practice, it is also necessary to enable the easy sharing and combining of markup generated by different interpreters.

However, while these desiderata can all be considered emulative goals which informed the development of CATMA, their conceptual benefit for the digital humanities at large lies elsewhere. A truly non-deterministic and discursive approach to markup yields diverse annotation data—and that type of data can subsequently be analyzed in order to "push back" the boundary separating interpretation and declaration.

What this means is best illustrated by outlining the three components and phases of heureCLÉA (cf. Fig. 2):

1. Narratological Analysis of Temporal Phenomena: In heureCLÉA the identification of the temporal structure of narrative texts is approached concurrently through

(a) manual collaborative annotation with CATMA, and

(b) automated temporal tagging with HeidelTime.

In (a) we draw upon (but do not restrict our taggers to) the narratological taxonomy of Genette10, which is supplemented by a taxonomy suited to capture action and event segmentation. In (b) automated temporal annotations are generated via an UIMA pipeline11 that includes HeidelTime as a rule-based temporal tagger, the TreeTagger12 as a POS tagger, and Morphisto13 for a morphological analysis.

2. Machine Learning Approach towards an Automation of Complex Time Annotation: The next step is the learning of new rules for automated annotation from the manually generated markup. Different methods for the derivation of rules—especially those for typical co-occurrence of temporal expressions—are used. Once integrated into the components of the heureCLÉA UIMA pipeline these rules enable the system to handle more complex annotations. This process is dynamic as growing quantities of markup facilitate more complex modeling strategies based on e.g. distributional approaches (such as Latent Semantic Analysis). Finally, patterns representing typical temporal sequences may be extracted (Sequence Mining).

3. Integration of the Heuristic heureCLÉA Module into CATMA:Once a functional threshold has been passed (i.e.: reliability of automated detection of temporal references of low complexity; performance/robustness) the heureCLÉA UIMA pipeline will be integrated into CATMA as a service. It then provides a 'digital heuristics' for the partially automated, partially interactive generation of temporal markup, and will be tested and evaluated to verify the adequateness of the automatically generated markup (partially through stochastic methods.)


Fig. 2: heureCLÉA's interrelated areas of work

2. The Heuristics/Hermeneutics Divide As a Conceptual Boundary in the Digital Humanities
What is the methodological relevance of this work toward a digital heuristics? The realization that text markup is essentially interpretive per se is anything but new.14 Indeed, the argument about what markup is seems somewhat artificial; it might have sufficed to ask literary scholars what markup is there for: in their view the raison d'être of any object annotation and classification is always interpretation. But is the boundary between a declarative and an interpretive method rigidly defined for the digital humanities?

Some experiences gained in the heureCLÉA project may offer an answer. To begin with, the hermeneutic nature of building time constructs from narratives proves to be only partially owed to the 'fuzziness' of natural language. As a complex symbolic system narrative is also characterized by the intricate coupling of a referential and an indexical semiotics. 'Time' illustrates this: on the surface it is referenced as chronological structure of a particular 'story world'.15 Yet on a deeper level it is also communicated as an implicit processing instruction encoded in the form of temporal deixis and ellipsis, and of linguistic markers for the contraction or expansion of time (viz. a summary vs. a scenic description). This information is termed 'indexical' because it refers back to the instance of utterance (the narrator or narrating character). The reader needs to process that information in parallel with the referential in order to reconstruct two intersecting chronologies—that of the 'story world', and that of the representational discourse which he is trying to reverse engineer. However, the reach of the indexical extends beyond the text-reader-system: as we read we also become subject to the indexical temporality of the 'how' of representation (discours) on an existential level.16 As Ricoeur argues, the reconstruction of temporality on the referential and discursive levels of narrative is indeed how we learn to experience temporality.17

Time is only one of many phenomena of narrative representation and understanding characterized by this triple-layered semiotics—and against this backdrop it becomes clear why hermeneutic text interpretation cannot be automated. The machine is (as yet) not an interpreting agent able to engage reflexively and speculatively with its object. It is confined to a fully explicated, operational definition of 'relevance' in terms of known tasks and objectives. While it can resolve an indexical reference in order to compute, say, chronological order and extension, the interpretation of the existential relevance of that double-encoded message as one which also addresses the interpreting mind will remain beyond its ability for as long as it is not equipped with a concept of 'mind'.

However, the foundational human interpretive operations taking place on the elementary declarative and inferential levels can in part be approximated statistically through recursive routines. This recursive approximation is the functional characteristic as well as the outer boundary of what we term a 'digital heuristic'. By this we mean a computational tool able to support the heuristic operations of analytical identification and categorization of phenomenological primitives that necessarily precede hermeneutic synthesis. These operations form the indispensable basis of any higher-order 'interpretation'. It is in this intersecting terrain of the hermeneutic and the heuristic that the digital humanities might help to "push back the border" and question the hegemony of interpretation.

References
1. See dbs.ifi.uni-heidelberg.de/index.php?id=129&L=1.

2. Mazur, P. and Dale, R. (2010). WikiWars: A New Corpus for Research on Temporal Expressions. "Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2010)". Massachusetts, pp. 913-922.

3. Ricoeur, P. (1983ff). Time and Narrative (Temps et Récit), 3 vols. trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984, 1985, 1988 (1983, 1984, 1985).

4. Burnard, L. (2001). On the Hermeneutic Implications of Text Encoding. In Fiormonte, D. and Usher, J. (eds.), "New Media and the Humanities: Research and Applications". Oxford: Humanities Computing Unit, pp. 31-38. Available online in the 1998 version at users.ox.ac.uk/~lou/wip/herman.htm [accessed 20 September 2013].

5. "CLÉA" is short for "Collaborative Literature Éxploration & Annotation". The accent deguis was added to highlight the diacritical concerns of Non-Anglo literary scholars. The CLÉA development phase of CATMA was generously supported by two Google Digital Humanities Awards (2010, 2011). For further details see www.catma.de/clea.

6. Meister, J. C. (2012). Crowd Sourcing 'True Meaning'. A Collaborative Markup Approach to Textual Interpretation. In McCarty, W. and Deegan, M. (eds.), Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities. Festschrift for Harold Short. Ashgate Publishers: Farnham, Surrey/Burlington, pp. 105-122.

7. McCarty, W. (1996). Implicit Patterns in Ovid's Metamorphoses. "Centre for Computing in the Humanities (CHWP 1996)". projects.chass.utoronto.ca/chwp/mccarty/mcc_8.html (accessed 11 September 2013). First published 1991.

8. Piez, W. (2010): Towards Hermeneutic Markup: an Architectural Outline. "Digital Humanities 2010. Conference Abstracts". London: Office for Humanities Communication, Centre for Computing in the Humanities, King’s College London, pp. 202-205.

9. Genette, G. (1972). Discours du récit. In id., "Figures III". Paris: Editions Du Seuil, pp. 67-282.

10. Strötgen, J. and Gertz, M. (2010). HeidelTime: High Quality Rule-based Extraction and Normalization of Temporal Expressions. "Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (ACL 2010)". Uppsala, pp. 321-324.

11. Schmidt, H. (1994). Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees. "Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing". Manchester.

12. Zielinski, A., Simon, C., and Wittl, T. (2009). Morphisto: Service-Oriented Open Source Morphology for German. "State of the Art in Computational Morphology: Workshop on Systems and Frameworks for Computational Morphology (SFCM 2009)". Zürich, pp. 64-75.

13. See among others Coombs, J. H., DeRose, S. J., and Renear, A. H. (1987). Markup systems and the future of scholarly text processing. "Communications of the ACM", 30 (11): 933-47; Buzzetti, D. (2002). Digital Representation and the Text Model. New Literary History, 33 (1): 61-88; Burnard (2001); Piez (2010).

14. Herman, D. (2002). Story Logic: Problems and Possibilities of Narrative. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

15. Genette (1972).

16. Ricoeur, P. (1983ff). Time and Narrative (Temps et Récit), 3 vols. trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984, 1985, 1988 (1983, 1984, 1985).
1. Introduction
Research in the emergent field of Spatial Humanities, especially in GIS-based approaches, is primarily conducted on a spatial macro-level. Statistical information, such as distributions of archaeological finds or movement and communication patterns is generally mapped to two-dimensional representations of the areas under consideration.12

Humanities research related to spatial contexts is not limited to quantitative scope. Studies in archeology, art history and human geography, to name only a few disciplines, focus on places as small as public spaces and buildings as the stage for liturgical, political and economic practices.3 But important analytical approaches in these fields necessitate three-dimensional representations. Important functional properties of objects in space, such as visibility and accessibility, cannot always be determined by two-dimensional ground plots.

To tackle this shortcoming, the research project Inscriptions in their Spatial Context (IBR) develops research methods and corresponding software tools for Spatial Humanities research on the 3D-geometry of smaller environments like building interiors. Geometric data drawn from geodetic scannings are semantically enriched and connected to scientific textual and visual data. Theoretical foundations as well as the software are being tested in an extensive case study on a medieval church. IBR is a joint research project of the Institute for Spatial Information and Surveying Technology at the FH Mainz - University of Applied Sciences (i3mainz) and the Academy of Sciences and Literature in Mainz. It is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and brings together experts from the fields of geoinformatics, surveying engineering, digital humanities, art history and epigraphy.

2. Acquisition of geometries
Panoramic photography has become a common technique for merging smaller photographs into one larger image. Not only established software solutions like Google Street View are able to visualize such panoramic images. Also popular scientific applications4 are able to convey the impression of standing at the captured location.

Since images do not represent 3D-information, a measuring campaign is necessary to fulfill the real needs of spatial research. Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) creates high quality point clouds in the range up to several hundred meters.5 Until now, tools for processing this kind of information have been mainly designed for the use in the field of engineering. In the Cultural Heritage domain, as in archeology, TLS is usually used for documentation and modeling only or for 2D-analysis, such as for the extraction of floor plans. Parts of the content of the point cloud data are often neither extracted nor used, but can now be reused with the IBR software.

The “GenericViewer” is an easy to handle web-application which provides typical functions of a panorama viewer and allows the user to identify objects in point clouds and to annotate them semantically. Thereby it is possible to work on 3D-objects in an intuitive way, because the software connects panoramic images with point cloud data.6

The application communicates with two data storage units: A triple store contains all connections between expert data, spatial data and external resources. Another database handles point clouds, panorama images and spatial objects. It is possible to access the user created data via the GenericViewer itself and through a machine-readable interface. Only Javascript and a browser with webGL-support are necessary to use the web application.

3. Semantic enrichment
The GenericViewer integrates a customized version of the website-annotator Pundit.78 Users formulate simple subject-predicate-object-statements over geometries and texts that are stored in the form of OAC-conformant RDF-triplets. Semantic entities can be drawn from generic ontologies like DBpedia and if more specialized vocabularies9 do not suffice, also from project-specific resources.

Physical objects identified in the point cloud are represented by 3D-coordinates, i.e. numerical values. To make them become meaningful objects, some semantic description is necessary. Therefore, geometries can be identified as specimen of a certain type, e.g. a tomb slab, and semantically connected to other textual and geometric resources. The tomb slab, for example, can be tagged as an instance of the class “tomb_slab”, and its inscription can be connected to a corresponding critical edition by the relation “is_edition_of”. If a researcher wants to suggest a sculptor for this object, knowing that this attribution remains merely a hypothesis and that there might be conflicting opinions, that hypothesis can be expressed as such via suitable predicate. Thanks to the OAC format, annotations come to represent a scholarly discourse rather than just a set of semantic descriptions. The annotation repository can be programmatically accessed and queried via a SPARQL-endpoint, thereby enabling quantitative analyses (e.g. how many tomb-slabs are there in the church) and the creation of aggregate resources with new applications and information services on top of it. The goal is to create a 3D-GIS for quantitative as well as qualitative research with a focus on the interconnection of resources and geometric analysis, as an alternative to approaches centered on multimedia presentations.10

4. Case study
The GenericViewer is currently being used experimentally in a case study on the late-gothic parish church Liebfrauenkirche in Oberwesel (Middle Rhine Valley, Germany), using 3D-data that has been gathered in a TLS-campaign. The study investigates inter alia the placement of tombs and memorial inscriptions. It looks at potentially relevant factors like the social division of the congregation room, procession routes, and other places of liturgical practices. Among the research questions are: What does the placement of a tomb say about the social status of the deceased, given social features of the surrounding tombs? How does an inscription text relate to liturgical texts that were read on procession stations in its proximity? Who could actually see an inscription from which position in the church, and do some texts appear to have been directed at certain groups within the congregation room? The evidence relevant to such questions as well as conclusions drawn from the data are connected to the 3D-representation as semantic annotations.

An important textual source in this study is the epigraphic database “German Inscriptions Online” (DIO), which provides critical editions for the inscriptions under consideration. The spatial configuration of the objects bearing inscriptions and liturgical "key-positions" like the apse and the chancel have been analysed with respect to visibility patterns. The analytical perspective of Space Syntax11, which has been been successfully employed in earlier works on historic liturgy and interiour church architecture12, seems to be a promising approach. Due to the complexity of the spatial configurations, our approach offers advantages over conventional text-image representations in terms of analysability and confirmability.

The foundational inscription, a glass painting in the apse of the church13, is a case in point. It has been described as a self-assured, even provocative message from the citizenry who build the church to the clergy and especially the bishop. The founders chose the rather exceptional place of the apse windows, because here it was most visible from the choir and the main altar, where the clergy assembled.14 This presupposition was empirically tested in a visibility analysis.

5. Discussion
At the moment, the GenericViewer is usable with TLS-Data only. However, scanning campaigns can be quite expensive, and the geometrical accuracy delivered by this technology is not needed in every case. There are other measurement techniques, e.g. “structure from motion”, that should be supported in future versions.

Visibility is relative to human perception and it is dependent on a variety of factors, many of which can not currently be modelled in our algorithms. Certain aspects of visibility, e.g. the ability to recognize a certain gesture from a distance, still have to be approximated by human experiments.15

How useful the data produced with our software is for a broader scientific community will depend on the choice of semantic resource (users are always faced with a trade-off between specificity and generalizability) and the underlying text-document. Pundit, like many similar annotation tools16, annotates positions in the DOM-tree of HTML-documents. But that means annotating the presentational layer of a text rather than the text itself. Because of that, IBR decided to annotate tree positions in TEI-encoded XML-documents. But not many digital documents in the humanities domain are available in this format, and it is not clear yet how to treat PDF-files.

IBR offers the possibility to contribute to or extend the open source code and to connect third-party applications, analysis tools and ontologies. More informations are available on www.spatialhumanities.de.

References
1. Hernandez, Armando Anaya; Guenter, Stanley P.; Zender, Marc U. (2003): Sak Tz'i', a Classic Maya Center: A Locational Model Based on GIS and Epigraphy. In: Latin American Antiquity, Vol. 14, No. 2 (Society for American Archaeology, Jun., 2003), pp. 179-191.

2. v. Lünen, Alexander and Travis, Charles (ed.): History and GIS. Epistemologies, Considerations and Reflections. Heidelberg [et al.]: Springer, 2013.

3. Ananieva, Anna; Bauer, Alexander; Leis, Daniel; Morlang-Schardon, Bettina; Steyer, Kristina (ed.): Räume der Macht. Metamorphosen von Stadt und Garten im Europa der Frühen Neuzeit. Bielefeld: transcript Verlag, 2013.

4. 3D-viewer of the Romanic dome of Speyer: www.kaiserdom-virtuell.de.

5. Kern, F., Bruhn, K.-Ch., Mehlig, S.: Messtechnik und Inschriftenforschung - Anwendungsbezogene Arbeiten im Projekt "Deutsche Inschriften Online 3D". In: Photogrammetrie, Laserscanning, Optische 3D-Messtechnik - Beiträge der Oldenburger 3D-Tage 2012, hg. v. Th. Luhmann, Ch. Müller, S. 22-33.

6. Kern, F., Mehlig, S., Siegrist, B.: Geometrische Qualität von aus Einzelphotos zusammengesetzten Panoramen. In: 29. Wissenschaftliche Jahrestagung der DGPF - Mainz - Geodaten - Eine Ressource des 21. Jahrhunderts (Publikationen der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Photogrammetrie, Fernerkundung und Geoinformation e.V., Band 20, 2011), hg. v. E. Seyfert, S. 129-136.

7. Pundit Semantic Annotation Tool: thepund.it.

8. Grassi, Marco; Morbidoni, Christian; Nucci, Michele; Fonda, Simone; Ledda, Giovanni (2012): Pundit: Semantically Structured Annotations for Web Contents and Digital Libraries. In: Mitschick, Annett; Loizides, Fernando; Predoiu, Livia; Nürnberger, Andreas; Ross, Seamus (ed.): Semantic Digital Archives 2012. Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Semantic Digital Archives (SDA 2012), Paphos, Cyprus, September 27, 2012, CEUR-WS.org/Vol-912.

9. Getty Art & Architecture Thesaurus: www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/index.html

10. Corrigan, John (2010): Qualitative GIS and Emergent Semantics. In: Bodenhamer, David J.; Corrigan, John; Harris, Trevor M. ( ed.): The Spatial Humanities: GIS and the Future of Humanities Scholarship. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 76-88.

11. Hillier, Bill: Space is the Machine: A Configurational Theory of Architecture, Cambridge: University Press, 1999.

12. Clark, David L. Chatford (2007): Viewing the Liturgy: A Space Syntax Study of Changing Visibility and Accessibility in the Development of the Byzantine Church in Jordan. In: World Archeology, Vol. 39 No. 1 (Mar. 2007), pp. 84-104.

13. Epigraphic Database “Deutsche Inschriften Online” (DIO): www.inschriften.net. DIO 60-27: www.inschriften.net/rhein-hunsrueck-kreis/inschrift/nr/di060-0027.html.

14. Nikitsch, Eberhard Josef (1996): Ein Kirchenbau zwischen Bischof und Stadtgemeinde. Zur angeblich verlorenen Bauinschrift von 1308 in der Liebfrauenkirche zu Oberwesel am Rhein. In: JbWdtLg 22 (1996), pp. 95–112.

15. Clark, David L. Chatford (2007): Viewing the Liturgy: A Space Syntax Study of Changing Visibility and Accessibility in the Development of the Byzantine Church in Jordan. In: World Archeology, Vol. 39 No. 1 (Mar. 2007), pp. 87.

16. Khalili, Ali ; Auer, Sören; Hladky, Daniel (2012): The RDFa Content Editor – From WYSIWYG to WYSIWYM. In: Proceedings of COMPSAC 2012 – Trustworthy Software Systems for the Digital Society, July 16-20, 2012, Izmir, Turkey, 2012.
1. Panel Proposal
The remediation of historical books and newspapers into the digital environment receives ample attention in today’s academic and library communities, and has become a core feature of major digital humanities projects that have enabled innovative methods of inquiry and new scholarly discoveries. However, despite the establishment of pioneering digital resources such as the Modernist Journals Project and the Modernist Magazines Project, the design and research potential of electronic collections of modernist historical magazines remains an understudied and under-theorized topic.

This panel aims to fill this gap by presenting a series of approaches, methodologies and possibilities inherent in the creation of robust digital collections of 20-th century magazines of the arts. We bring together designers of three collections – the Blue Mountain Project (Princeton University), the AAC- Austrian Academy Corpus (Austrian Academy of Sciences), and Digital Archive of Belgian Neo-Avant-garde Periodicals (or DABNAP, at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts Antwerp) – for a conversation addressing both the conceptual underpinnings as well as the practical applications of their work. This international panel will continue a lively discussion started at a conference at Princeton University in October 2013 on remediating avant-garde magazines. Our goal at DH 2014 will be to illustrate a variety of avenues available for digital curation of historical magazine collections, and to move toward a set of shared guidelines for representing this rich material in the electronic environment and facilitating advanced research.

A discussion of the theoretical and practical issues involved in remediating modernist and avant- garde periodicals is both important and timely. In recent years, as the field of Periodical Studies has cohered as subset of print culture scholarship, researchers have started looking at historical periodicals in new ways and discovering that they fundamentally challenge our conventional understandings of modern culture. The recent publication of the Oxford Critical and Cultural History of Modernist Magazines, a hefty three-volume set of essays that discusses over 500 magazines from Europe and the Americas, underscores the relevance of periodicals for today’s research on modern and modernist culture. If, as Sean Latham and Robert Scholes assert in “The Rise of Periodical Studies,” the flourishing of this field has been enabled and invigorated by the affordances of the digital environment – what is the response of the Digital Humanities community to the continued evolution of Periodical Studies? What are our obligations as designers of collections of digital historical periodicals? How must we build resources that embody, allow, and promote the sophisticated new avenues of scholarly engagement made possible by electronic tools and platforms?

The panelists’ answers to these questions will reflect the scope, methodology, and focus of their projects: Crombez’s DABNAP is concerned with magazine as a performance and art text, Biber’s paper illustrates the corpus linguistics approach, and Wulfman and Ermolaev maintain a Periodical Studies perspective. Each will touch upon the intellectual and technological insights that emerge when we remediate the arts magazine, such as: representation of aesthetic, material, and social features, questions regarding materiality (format, typography, paper, binding, etc.), tracing printing and distribution history, data modeling, linguistic analysis, semantic enrichment and tagging, entity and name recognition, interface design, and application and tool-building.

This panel promises to stimulate a coherent discussion that will be informative to a broad range of digital humanists. By presenting a cross-section of types of collections, the panel will demonstrate the current state of innovative projects on 20-th century arts magazines, and help forge the way for future work.

All panelists have agreed to participate.

2. Paper 1: Magazines of Magazines. Corpus Research Applications for New Digital Editions of Historical Magazines (Hanno Biber)
A magazine can be regarded as a specific container of texts. A corpus can be regarded as a structured and complex collection of texts. The simple questions of how to structure these complex texts in text corpora and how to integrate magazines in corpora and to make them accessible for research purposes is particularly challenging. This paper will present corpus research applications for innovative digital editions of magazines. Therefore, three research aspects have to be considered. First, the methodological parameters of corpus research have to be determined and the applicability of corpus linguistics for the question of designing and building digital text editions of historical magazines has to be examined. Second, the research potential of scholarly digital editions of magazines in the context of a digital humanities framework has to be described. And third, a practical corpus- based methodological approach of magazine studies has to be given by investigating the specific textual qualities of the magazines and the specific language use in the magazines’ texts, which have been annotated and made accessible with the help of corpus linguistics as well as innovative interface design and graphic design principles. The study will present several aspects of these research questions illustrated by text examples and discuss the methodological implications of such corpus-based investigations into the use of language in texts in particular. Literary magazines in particular have specific properties that can be recognized and registered by means of a corpus-based study of language. Therefore the literary magazines subsection of the “AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus” will be used as examples for this type of research. This resource is an ideal basis for a corpus linguistic exploration into the study of literary magazines. Corpus-based text studies can be regarded also as instruments of textual critique, whereby the corpus-based approach allows various ways of philological research and text analysis.

The framework of the “AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus” offers a research platform for corpus linguistics in a very broad sense as well as for corpus-based magazine studies in particular. So far, two model digital editions of magazines have been developed within the AAC for the purpose of analysing large amounts of literary texts with a methodological approach offered by corpus linguistics. The “AAC-FACKEL”[6] and the “Brenner online”[7] editions are two examples of how corpus research initiatives can help to develop new applications in the field of digital humanities, in particular for language studies in the context of literature research as well as for historical studies and for broader issues related to cultural studies. The “AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus” has been established as a corpus research initiative concerned with exploring electronic text corpora and conducting research in the fields of corpus linguistics, text analysis and digital text corpora. More than 500 million running words of text have been scanned, converted into machine-readable text and carefully annotated with structural mark-up. The texts that have been integrated into the AAC are German language texts of historical and cultural significance. The historical period covered is ranging from 1848 to 1989, a period showing historical changes with remarkable influences on the language and the language use. In the context of the subset of the AAC digital editions the language of satire written by Karl Kraus and his use of language in his magazine is of particular interest for a study on language use and in particular for a study on language use based upon the principles of corpus linguistics. Apart from the digital editions of the “Brenner online” and the “AAC-FACKEL”, which has been annotated to a large extent, the AAC magazines corpus holdings provide a great number of reliable resources and interesting corpus based approaches for investigations into the properties of these texts. Several other magazines have been digitized making use of XML-related standards. Both the „AAC-FACKEL“ and “Brenner online” offer fully searchable online editions of the journal with various indexes and search tools in a web interface, where all pages of the original are available as digital texts and as facsimile images. The „AAC-FACKEL“ and “Brenner online” allow new methods of scholarly research and philological analysis of texts that are of crucial importance for the history and study of not only the language but also of the status and the properties of the magazine. The edition interface of the AAC digital editions has several sophisticated search mechanisms and indexes as well as five individual frames synchronized within one single window. The philological principles of scholarly digital editions within the “AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus” are determined by the conviction that the methods of corpus research enable valuable text resources and research tools for linguists and literary scholars. The resource is an interesting text basis for corpus linguistic explorations whereby a corpus-based approach allows new ways of philological research and analysis of magazines.

3. Paper 2: The Blue Mountain Project and the Language of Avant-Garde Magazines (Wulfman and Ermolaev)
Introduction
This paper initiates a dialog with Hanno Biber’s contribution to this panel by suggesting that a magazine is not only a container of texts but a text itself. As Carolyn Ulrich, one of the authors of the influential book, The Little Magazine: A History and a Bibliography, wrote to her co-author Frederick Hoffman, “a magazine is a tricky individual”: tricky in its identity and tricky in its individuality. What is a magazine? Is it a particular issue (a manifestation at a particular point in time – a copy, an issuance, etc.), or is it a title with some sort of identity over time (expressed through editorial consistency, name continuity, etc.)?

To ask these questions is to engage Biber’s research approach to the magazine – specifically, “the applicability of corpus linguistics [to] the question of designing and building digital text editions of historical magazines.” While the methods of corpus linguistics are, without a doubt, of crucial importance to the study of historical magazines, other disciplinary methodologies can compliment lexical analysis by highlighting additional key aspects of this diverse and rich material.

In their 2010 book, Modernism in the Magazines: An Introduction, Wulfman and Scholes critique the conventional distinctions that have, historically, been applied to magazines, especially generic labels such as “little”, “mass”, “literary”, “avant-garde”, etc. They suggest employing a more analytic approach instead, one which entails identifying a set of characteristics that contribute to our understanding of magazines and then clustering them in different ways, much as linguists characterize speech sounds by clustering features into phonemes. The Blue Mountain Project at Princeton University is continuing this line of inquiry, and in this paper we describe our development of a language of magazines, and of a technological infrastructure and set of applications to represent this complex language in a robust digital resource.

An Ontology of Historical Magazines
The Blue Mountain Project, based in the Princeton University Library and funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities, was launched in 2012 as a freely-available electronic resource for art, music, and literary periodicals published in Europe and the United States between 1850-1923. In the first 2-year grant cycle, Blue Mountain is making 34 titles (approximately 95,000 pages) available in French, German, English, Italian, Spanish, Czech, Russian, Polish, Finnish, and Danish.

In the first part of this paper, we present our research on an ontology of historical magazines – that is, a set of concepts with which knowledge of magazines is represented, expressed in a vocabulary that denotes the types, properties and interrelationships of those concepts – that has become the core intellectual infrastructure of the Blue Mountain Project. This ontology differs from the terms of descriptive bibliography developed in the library community such as MARC (MAchine-Readable Cataloging), and from the critical terminology traditionally used by scholars and critics. The purpose of our ontology is to provide a framework on which researchers and scholars may encode and describe historical magazines.

To be sure, some of the concepts do come from the language of descriptive bibliography: title, editor, contributor, and so forth; but others are more nuanced than descriptive bibliography usually expresses. Issuance, for example, is often a complex phenomenon, especially for magazines published internationally, making the concept of an original copy from which a digital edition is derived a vexed one and requiring scholars to rethink narratives of publication. Other concepts, like circulation and price, are tied to data that are difficult to obtain; still others, like readership, are complex concepts whose sub-concepts must be teased apart and identified before they may be used meaningfully.

Other terms in the Blue Mountain ontology come from the languages of typography, book history, and graphic design, and are inspired by Jerome McGann’s notion of the “bibliographic code.” In order to discuss the relationship of content elements in a magazine, for example – such as the relationship of advertisements to articles – one must have a common language for expressing layout. Simple text transcription of a magazine's contents is insufficient for many kinds of research; thus our ontology is based on an understanding of the historical language of page composition (columns, paragraphs, various forms of headings, publication metadata, and so on) that is vital to the useful encoding of magazine structure and the analysis of a magazine's meaning.

Advanced Applications: Blue Mountaineer and Blue Mountain Springs
In the second part of our paper, we present an experimental architecture for encoding and expressing the language of magazines. The Blue Mountain Project has been designed to support a variety of research uses, beyond the now-standard modes of full-text searching and page browsing. To support those uses, we create high- resolution digital images and provide robust library-standard metadata including title, issue and constituent-level MODS (Metadata Object Description Schema) and METS/ALTO (Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard/Analyzed Layout and Text Object) records. In our next phase of work, however, we plan to expose this highly structured data for mining and analysis by means of two new modules: Blue Mountaineer and Blue Mountain Springs.

Blue Mountaineer
The Blue Mountaineer is a set of web applications we will design for exploring Blue Mountain content through visualizations, topic modeling, and other forms of data mining and retrieval. It is intended to showcase the power and utility of a rich XML-encoded database while providing researchers and students with tools they can use in their own investigations. Examples of the type of research Blue Mountaineer will enable include the following:

Social Network Analysis: Users will be able to explore the complex publication webs with tools that enable them to plot graphs of relations among titles, authors, artists, languages, and nationalities using Blue Mountain's rich metadata. They will, for example, be able to see all the issues in which Tristan Tzara and Francis Picabia appeared together.

Data-Driven Timelines and Clusters: Blue Mountain will employ off-the-shelf natural-language processing software such as Apache OpenNLP and the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer, as well as Princeton's own WordNet, to perform first-order named-entity detection on its corpus of magazines. The results of these analyses will be encoded in Blue Mountain's TEI transcriptions, which will make it possible for researchers to discover and visualize sequences and relationships buried deep in the textual data itself. They will be able to compare how two authors use a particular term, for example, or see how the work of a particular artist relates to particular advertisers.

Topic Modeling: The aggregation and clustering of content zones encoded in METS/ALTO make it possible for topic modeling algorithms to perform much more fine-grained analysis of magazines and newspapers than they can perform using unzoned, "dirty-OCR'ed" texts. Researchers will be able to study and compare the abstract topics occurring in the work of two authors, for example, or to compare the topics in a magazine's articles with those in its advertising.

Blue Mountain Springs
Information scientists and digital humanities researchers often want to bypass reader-oriented interfaces and access full-text data directly and programmatically for use with external analytic tools. The Blue Mountain Springs module will make Blue Mountain an abundant source of clean data by providing an application programming interface (API) to Blue Mountain's metadata and machine-readable full-text transcriptions. Blue Mountain Springs will support traditional metadata harvesting via OAI-PMH[14], as well as the more elaborate aggregations supported by OAI-ORE[15]. It will enable software clients to access the plain text of Blue Mountain's materials through web-addressable text streams that can be piped directly into visualization and analysis applications.

4. Paper 3: The Document as Event. Analyzing Artist Networks through a Digital Archive of Avant-garde Periodicals (Crombez)
Introduction
In this panel presentation, I would like to highlight the ideas, problems and outcomes of DABNAP, which stands for the ‘Digital Archive of Belgian Neo-Avant-garde Periodicals.’ A considerable collection of forty artist periodicals from the 1950s to the 1980s is being digitized, in order to examine the underlying network of artists and artist groups.

My main interest will be the issue of semantic enrichment of the source documents. To various degrees, semantic enrichment is already common to many scholarly digitization projects. Think, for instance, of marking up personal names and locations in a TEI-encoded document. But for large-scale projects, manual semantic enrichment is often unfeasable. Can automatic procedures, such as named entity recognition (NER), help to mine art periodicals? Furtherwise, can we imagine and develop software that detects not merely names, but also artistic information in vast collections of text?

In order to answer these ambitious questions, I will first develop a new conceptual model (centered on ‘the document as event’), and then highlight the actual context in which this model will be put in practice.

The Document as Event
The archive of back issues from LIFE Magazine (spanning five decades) was a showcase project for Google Books when the initiative started in 2004. Apart from access through browsing or through the ubiquitous search box, the internet company uses basic text analysis to help users navigate the archive. The interface presents a cloud of words and expressions that are characteristic for the issue that the user is currently browsing. For the February 1937 issue, the web archive is happy to inform the user that “Leon Trotsky,” “Reichstag,” “Studebaker,” and “Kleenex” are among the common terms and phrases. But it is obviously blind to the question whether these names belong to people, organizations, places, or brands.

Current digital archives, then, create at least as many problems as they solve. Users prefer to direct their questions to a simple search box. But the limitations of this model for search are obvious to academic users, and have recently led Google itself to introduce the ‘Knowledge Graph’, enriching search results with semantic metadata. The Knowledge Graph or, more generically, semantic enrichment, shows the future direction of digital text collections.

In order to deal with this new conceptual reality behind current and future digitization projects, let me introduce a new conceptual model to think about such document collections.

I would like to conceptualize the document as event, in order to transfer something of the dynamics of the event onto the document, which is commonly conceived of rather statically. A periodical is occasioned by artistic events, such as the publication of new literary works, the exhibition of visual art, or the presentation of a new theatrical performance. However, as a document, it can also be considered to be an ‘event’ in itself. The text functions as a linguistic meeting space for a wide diversity of named entities. This includes names of artists, writers, dramatists, performers, directors and critics; names of museums, galleries, theatres, companies and schools; and titles of books, art works and theatrical productions. In other words, the concept of the document as event serves as a bridge between the literary and art-historical approach to sources as autonomous documents (and hence all too easily viewed as unconnected), and the linguistic approach to sources as text (which all too easily flattens the document).

The DABNAP Collection
The artistic renewal in Belgium since the 1950s, sustained by small groups of artists, led to a first generation of postwar artist periodicals. Titles such as Le surréalisme révolutionnaire, Cobra, De Tafelronde, Het Cahier and Gard Sivik proved decisive for the formation of the Belgian neo-avant-garde in literature and the visual arts.

During the 1960s and the 1970s, happening and socially engaged art (inspired particularly by the Provo movement) took over and gave a new orientation to artist periodicals. Examples include Happening News, Revo, Anar, Milky Way, Total’s, and, on the side of literature, Labris, Yang, Bok, MEP, Heibel, Boemerang, and many others. Finally, the 1970s and 1980s saw the rise of punk-inspired zines, including Force Mental.

The challenges and difficulties of this project lie in dealing with non-standard formats, types of paper, typography, and non-paper inserts. Paper sizes range from the ludicrously large (A2) to the very small (half of A5). Printing techniques include offset, mimeograph, screen printing and photocopy – resulting in extremely diverse kinds of lettering and typography, which often confuses the OCR software that is used to extract text from the scanned pages.

Apart from the technical difficulties of scanning and extracting text from the heterogeneous source documents, further difficulties of the DABNAP project include interface design and handling copyright issues, which will briefly be discussed in the presentation. The main and final difficulty (or rather, ambition) of DABNAP is to process of extracting complex information about artistic events from the text. This will require, first, to expand common procedures for named entity recognition with techniques for recognizing titles and events. In other words, which means are appropriate, and which linguistic tools have to be developed, for the task of recognizing meaningful relationships between names (e.g., that a certain director is the author of a theatre production)?

References
Both large-scale digitization of books (such as Google Books and the Open Content Alliance) as well as small, curated collections (such as ArchBook http://archbook.ischool.utoronto.ca) are transforming reading and research practices in literary studies and book history. Ryan Cordell’s research using data from the Library of Congress “Chronicling America” project is a prime example of new scholarly engagement with historical newspapers (see Cordell’s “Uncovering Reprinting Networks in Nineteenth-Century American Newspapers,” http://www.viraltexts.org).

Modernist Journals Project: http://modjourn.org; Modernist Magazines Project: http://www.modernistmagazines.com.

The 19th century periodical has been more heavily studied; see especially the project, nineteenth-century serials edition (http://www.ncse.ac.uk) and the essays: James Mussell and Suzanne Paylor,“Mapping the ‘Mighty Maze’: The Nineteenth-Century Serials Edition,” Nineteen: Interdisciplinary Studies in Nineteenth- Century Studies, 1 (2005) and Mussell, Paylor, M. Deegan and K. Sutherland, “Editions and Archives: Textual Editing and the Nineteenth-Century Serials Edition (ncse),” in Text Editing, Print, and the Digital World (Farnham: Ashgate, 2009), 137-158.

See Sean Latham and Robert Scholes, “The Rise of Periodical Studies,” PMLA, Vol. 121, No. 2 (Mar., 2006), pp. 517-531. In this article, Latham and Scholes discuss the context of North American academia.

The Oxford Critical and Cultural History of Modernist Magazines: Volume I: Britain and Ireland 1880-1955 (ed. Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker, Oxford University Press, 2009); Volume II: North America 1894-1960 (ed. Brooker and Thacker, 2012); Volume III: Europe 1880 - 1940 (ed. Peter Brooker, Sascha Bru, Andrew Thacker, Christian Weikop, 2013).

AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus: AAC-FACKEL. Online Version: »Die Fackel. Herausgeber: Karl Kraus, Wien 1899- 1936«. AAC Digital Edition No 1, (Editors-in-chief: Hanno Biber, Evelyn Breiteneder, Heinrich Kabas, Karlheinz Mörth; Graphic Design: Anne Burdick) http://www.aac.ac.at/fackel.

AAC-Austrian Academy Corpus und Brenner-Archiv: BRENNER ONLINE. Online Version: »Der Brenner. Herausgeber: Ludwig Ficker, Innsbruck 1910-1954«. AAC Digital Edition No 2, (Editors-in-chief: Hanno Biber, Evelyn Breiteneder, Heinrich Kabas, Karlheinz Mörth; Graphic Design: Anne Burdick) http://www.aac.ac.at/brenner.

Robert Scholes and Clifford Wulfman, Modernism in the Magazines: An Introduction (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010)

Modernist Journals Project: http://modjourn.org; Modernist Magazines Project: http://www.modernistmagazines.com.

Jerome McGann, The Textual Condition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991)

http://opennlp.apache.org

stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml

http://wordnet.princeton.edu

http://www.openarchives.org/pmh

http://www.openarchives.org/ore
Within the Digital Humanities, there is a long history of debate and discussion as to how texts are accurately represented in digital form. Arguments as to how texts are encoded in both a logical and semantic sense are a recurring feature of past DH conferences. 

 Yet the intense intellectual focus on the precise details of marking up small corpora or even individual texts has masked the fact that issues related to the representation of large corpora of digitised materials - books, manuscripts, newspapers, records etc. - have been too often ignored.  Libraries, archives, museums and other collection institutions have now been digitising corpora of material for many years, but with a very few exceptions, it is still quite rare for an entire run of primary sources to be digitised and made available online.

This means that there are gaps within the digital record.  Yet it is unusual for online resources to actively demonstrate these gaps; resources may be advertised as a growing corpus, but when searching through or downloading a digital resources there is rarely any indication of what has not been digitised. This skews the sense of the nature of the collection the scholar is working with and erodes trust. 

This problem is compounded by assumptions made by end users that when a search is made in a digital resource, they actually are searching over everything in the original archive.  In most cases, this is far from being the case. 

 This long paper looks at this problem in the context of the Europeana Newspapers project (www.europeana-newspapers.eu), a three year, four million euro project, which is creating full-text for 10m pages of digitised newspapers from 12 libraries across Europe, and also developing an interface to allow for cross searching of over 18m newspaper pages. The final interface, available from the European Library in 2014 (www.theeuropeanlibrary.org), will also provide keyword searching over the OCRd (Optical Character Recognition) text and allow users to compare different newspapers from around Europe published on the same day.

While it is an ambitious project, it is only a drop in the ocean of the overall number of digitised newspapers in Europe (a conservative calculation within the project put the number of digitised newspaper pages in European libraries at 130m ). What appears on the final interface will only be a sample of what actually exists in European libraries. 

 Moreover, other issues - political, economic, legal and technical - mean that the quality and national distribution of newspapers in the project (and therefore represented in the final online interface) are unevenly balanced. For the resource to be trusted by the academic community, this lack of balance must be acknowledged

In terms of the economic and legal issues, the project is integrating newspapers from 12 existing newspapers online libraries, each of which have different business models. These different business models affect the final project interface. The National Library of Turkey and the British Library newspapers operate behind a pay wall, for instance - therefore the final Europeana Newspapers site will not be able to directly show images from their collection.

Other libraries are wary of sharing full-resolution images, with the legitimate fear that the users will no longer visit their own national website. In such cases, only fragments of their newspaper images will appear in the central site. Legal issues are also pertinent; some libraries are unsure of the copyright status of some of their historic newspapers and therefore do not want to commit to allowing another entity to publish them

In addition, there are several technical issues impeding uniform access to the resources. Nearly every digital newspaper collection today contains full-text derived from automatic processing with OCR software. But while some newspaper repositories grant access to the full-text, often the full-text is hidden and only exposed as an index for searching, but not available to the end user for online display or (programmatic) download, or sometimes not even for indexing by Google.

In other cases, full-text is made available, but not for the entirety of the collection, either due to IP issues or because the content holder took a deliberate decision not to show the full-text to the user, often because of the amount of error rate in the OCRd text. Regularly there is no sufficient information provided about the OCR error rate of a particular digital resource, which makes it even harder to assess what amount of the content can realistically be retrieved through a full-text search.

There are also different ways how digital facsimiles are made accessible. Many recent online newspaper portals use the JPEG2000 image file format. The benefit of this is the ability to zoom more or less seamlessly in and out of the digital facsimile. But since JPEG2000 has not been around for a very long time in the digitisation community, many collections that have been digitised in the past are only available in TIF format. This means that zooming can only be provided in a static way on these images, e.g. through different resolution JPEGs. As a result, it is often not possible for researchers to explore these legacy resources in much the same way as they do with recently digitised materials. 

In other cases, digital facsimiles have been produced by capturing existing microfilm copies rather than the original source material, thus the digital versions expose artefacts that were not present in the original paper source, but only introduced in the microfilm. However, this type of provenance is most typically not available to end users who are left alone in their interpretation of the differences in resource presentation and functionality.

Finally, the metadata standards used to describe the digital contents also vary. Not only are there different representations in use for encoding full-text such as plain text, ALTO or TEI. But also descriptive metadata is commonly encoded in different standards, and with different degrees of granularity. While standard bibliographic information such as the title or date of publication are commonly available, more specific information on, for example, a particular article or the names of persons or places occurring in it rarely are. Within the Europeana Newspapers project a subset of 2m pages out of the total 10m will be refined further down to the article level, thus enabling more sophisticated search and retrieval functionality than the remaining 8m pages.

A central point of this paper is that these issues are not just issues for librarians; it is not about showcasing how a digital resource is. Rather it is the urgent need to demonstrate how such issues have a profound effect on the academic community’s engagement with online resources.

If a researcher wants to conduct a comparative analysis of newspapers in Chronicling America (the US historic newspaper site), the National Library of France and the British Library, she will have to use three different interfaces with different levels of content and metadata quality. Moreover, she will also have to grasp the particularities of each of these collections with regard to their quality and completeness and what that entails for her research.

This paper will conclude with some recommendations for how those building digital resources can make their content choices more transparent. Informed dialogue between the cultural heritage organisations and the research communities is required. It calls for creators to tear down the illusion of completeness and help persuade end users that many digital resources are fragmentary things, where the representation of absence is just as important as representation of existence.

References
For a brief summary of the issue see Julia Flanders, ”Collaboration and dissent: challenges of collaborative standards for digital humanities” in Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities (eds. Marilyn Deegan, Willard McCarty), 2012. The TEI mailing list provides ample evidence of such discussion listserv.brown.edu/archives/cgi-bin/wa?A1=ind1309&L=TEI-L.

For instance, Johanna Drucker in “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface”Digital Humanities Quarterly (2013, Volume 7 Number 1) and also “Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display”Digital Humanities Quarterly (2011, Volume 7 Number 1)  addresses theoretical concerns relating to the interface but with less focus on its practical representation within online resources. The issue has received much more attention in the world of 3D visualisation, e.g. with the creation of the London Charter (www.londoncharter.org).

See “History, Digitized (and abridged)” for a summary of the extent of digitisation in 2007. www.nytimes.com/2007/03/10/business/yourmoney/11archive.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1.

One of the findings in, Reinventing research? Information practices in the humanities, Research Information Network, 2011, www.rin.ac.uk/our-work/using-and-accessing-information-resources/information-use-case-studies-humanities.

David Nicholas, Ian Rowlands (2007), Google Generation, Paul Huntington www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/resourcediscovery/googlegen.aspx.

Alastair Dunning, European Newspaper Survey Report, 2012, www.europeana-newspapers.eu/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/D4.1-Europeana-newspapers-survey-report.pdf.

For a comparative study of search ranking of digital newspaper repositories see Digital collections: If you build them, will they visit?, Frederick Zarndt et. al., IFLA WLC2013, Newspaper and Genealogy Section, Singapore, www.ifla.org/files/assets/newspapers/Singapore_2013_papers/day_1-_01_xzarndt_frederick_et_al_digital_collections.pdf.

Jan Hillgärtner (2013), Digitalisierte Zeitungen und OCR: Welche Forschungszugänge erlauben die digitalen Bestände?, 18/03/13, newsphist.hypotheses.org/23.

For a study in the methodology and analysis of digitised newspapers vs. paper copies see  The Digital Turn. Exploring the methodological possibilities of digital newspaper archives, Bob Nicholson, in Media History Vol. 13, Issue 1 2013, Special issue: Journalism and History: Dialogues.

For an example of this issue within the Digging into Data projects see One Culture. Computationally Intensive Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences A Report on the Experiences of First Respondents to the Digging Into Data Challenge,Christa Williford and Charles Henry, (2012) www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub151 and also the aforementioned Reinventing research? Information practices in the humanities.
1. Participants
Panel conveners:
Aurélien Berra (Université Paris-Ouest & EHESS)
Matteo Romanello (German Archaeological Institute & King’s College London)
Alexandra Trachsel (University of Hamburg)
Further participants:
Monica Berti (University of Leipzig)
Neil Coffee (University at Buffalo, SUNY)
Annette Geßner (University of Leipzig)
Charlotte Tupman (King’s College London)
2. Description of the panel
2.1 Why rethink text reuse
Text reuse is the meaningful reiteration of text, usually beyond the simple repetition of common language. Such a broad concept can naturally be understood at different levels and studied in a large variety of contexts. This diversity of approaches is to some extent explained by the fact that the phenomenon exists in almost all disciplines of the Humanities, and is crucial in those which focus on texts.

At one end of this spectrum we find the methods developed by computational linguistics. Research projects in this field study text reuse through automatic analyses within large corpora that often come from widely different backgrounds. The approaches range from the automatic detection of allusions and intertextual phenomena, for example in historical texts, to the detection of plagiarism in modern ones 1234. At the other end, the concept also designates a core scholarly activity, connected to most of the “scholarly primitives” 5– this meta-level being obviously our own practice, and having its roots in Antiquity. Furthermore, any kind of citation constitutes an indirect way of transmitting knowledge, either consciously or unconsciously, as well as a rhetorical or narrative device allowing an author to communicate with his audience beyond the level of the linguistic content. As a result, this notion shows how deeply intertwined objectivity and subjectivity are when one handles texts.

Digital approaches often aim at highlighting or defining these complex links between an initial statement and its multiple occurrences (often translations) in later contexts. Indeed, especially when the text reuse of ancient elements in corpora of more recent texts is studied, the fact that the statements are given in translation is an important issue and introduces an additional difficulty. This, however, is not a completely new problem. It can be observed each time that two cultures meet and borrow elements from each others’ cultural heritage. A further notion of text reuse is reached when not only the interconnections between the different reuses of a given textual element are investigated, but also the connections between the contexts in which they occur, whether in the form of unabbreviated quotations or as references within a more conventional citation system.

This panel proposes to gather researchers from different projects focusing on text reuse in order to create an inventory of the possible approaches to and understandings of the notion. Our objective is to highlight the historical dimension of the phenomenon and, ultimately, find some common features that could lead to a more systematic study. Texts are data indeed, but text reuse provides an excellent demonstration that they must be studied also and at the same time as intentional, sophisticated and reflexive cultural products. The emergence of Digital Classics, and of Digital Humanities in general, is an occasion to rethink text reuse and work towards the integration of – or at least foster dialogue and interconnection between – various perspectives.

2.2 Studying text reuse in Digital Classics
A panel on text reuse at the Digital Humanities 2014 Conference seems a very timely initiative, because several projects are currently addressing the question and developing new tools to deal with its different aspects.

The Perseids platform 67 can be mentioned first. As a project of the Perseus Digital Library 8, it aims at creating a collaborative online environment for the edition of a great variety of ancient documents, privileging the requirements of the editing of fragmentarily preserved sources (especially if they are transmitted through quotations) – a specific case of text reuse 9101112. Indeed current digital libraries, like the Perseus Digital Library or the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, have started with the wholly preserved ancient texts and deal with fragmentary works as if they were independent entities at the same level as the others. This clearly creates conceptual difficulties, since we only have indirect access to most of the fragmentarily preserved work: some parts of a lost initial work have been reused in the form of quotations in later texts. This reuse may have left some traces in the rewording of the quotation and therefore it is essential to keep the link to the context in which a given passage has been embedded when editing fragmentarily preserved texts.

One way of addressing this issue has been explored by the Sharing Ancient Wisdoms project 13. The project’s goal was to provide digital editions of several texts belonging to the so-called tradition of wisdom literature, by analysing the quoted sayings or proverbs and creating an ontology allowing to describe their diverse relationships 14. Still another approach must be chosen when the focus is shifted from the edition of a text with many quotations in it, such as those dealt with in the SAWS project, to the edition of a set of quotations that come from different source texts, but belong to one lost work, as is currently being explored in Alexandra Trachsel’s research on Demetrios of Scepsis.

In a complementary fashion, the study of single works of considerable size as webs of quotations should enable us to deal better with the reflexive dimension of encyclopaedic writings. Such a perspective is being built in the Digital Athenaeus project, which will explore the combination of digital and philological means of analysis in the preparation of a new edition of the Deipnosophists – a complex literary construction which sets scholarly discussions and pastimes in the context of an Imperial symposium and thus witnesses to the dynamics of text reuse 15.

Further projects, such as Tesserae 16 or Eumaios 17 move beyond the concept of quotation and focus on more hidden or less acknowledged forms of intertextuality. Tesserae, in particular, is devised to help scholars find previously unexplored intertextual parallels by means of automatic text reuse detection 18. This work has employed small benchmark sets of recognised parallels against which search techniques are measured and methods are improved. But having at hand a large and systematic repertory of already studied loci paralleli is something from which a tool like Tesserae will benefit immensely and that can be built, to a large extent automatically, by extracting from the literature the text passages that were already studied in relation to one another. These parallels are usually signalled in journal articles and other types of secondary sources by means of canonical citations, whose automatic extraction from large corpora of unstructured texts, such as those of JSTOR or the Internet Archive, is a topic that is currently being explored 1920.

The identification and extraction of text reuse is central in eTRACES, a project which just developed a tool named GERTRUDE (Göttingen E-Research Text-Re-Use for Digital Editions). Working on extremely heterogeneous corpora and primarily on German literature written between 1500 and 1900, it actually reflects on and solves similar problems.

All these projects, though they have the concept of text reuse in common, can be distinguished either by the type of corpus they use (texts from Antiquity, German literature, modern scholarly writings) or by their starting point (working on source texts where quotations are preserved, establishing relationships between different works in which the same textual elements occur, or focusing on quoted or reused elements). However, they have accumulated a great amount of knowledge on how to deal with the multiple forms of this cultural practice. The panel therefore aims at bringing together these efforts and should allow each of the projects to benefit from the expertise of the others, so that the solutions already found may be discussed and in the hope that our desiderata may lay the ground for further research.

3. Practical organisation of the panel
Besides the conveners, who will introduce and moderate the discussion, the panel will involve four speakers. After a brief presentation of the participants and of the main issues of the topic (10 minutes), short talks will be given by the four panel participants, illustrating different aspects of text reuse (40 minutes). The remaining time will be devoted to a discussion among all the participants and will be focused on the challenges and desiderata for further projects dealing with text reuse, in Digital Classics and beyond this field (40 minutes).

References
1. Bamman, D., & Crane, G. (2008). The logic and discovery of textual allusion. In: Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2008), Marrakesh.

2. Büchler, M. (2013). Informationstechnische Aspekte des Historical Text Re-use. PhD Thesis, Universität Leipzig. Retrieved from nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:15-qucosa-108515.

3. Bamman, D. & Crane, G. (2009). Discovering Multilingual Text Reuse in Literary Texts. Available at www.perseus.tufts.edu/publications/2009-Bamman.pdf

4. Lee, J. (2007). A Computational Model of Text Reuse in Ancient Literary Texts. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 472–479. Prague, Czech Republic: Association for Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from acl.ldc.upenn.edu/P/P07/P07-1060.pdf.

5. Unsworth, J. (2000). Scholarly Primitives: What Methods Do Humanities Researchers Have in Common, and How Might Our Tools Reflect This? Formal methods, experimental practice. King’s College, London. people.lis.illinois.edu/~unsworth/Kings.5-00/prim

6. Almas, B. & Berti, M. (2013). Perseids Collaborative Platform for Annotating Text Re-Uses of Fragmentary Authors. In F. Tomasi & F. Vitali, eds. DH-Case 2013. Available at dx.doi.org/10.1145/2517978.2517986.

7. Perseids. A collaborative editing plaftorm for source documents in Classics, sites.tufts.edu/perseids

8. Perseus Digital Library, www.perseus.tufts.edu (Accessed on November 1, 2013).

9. Romanello, M., Berti, M., Boschetti, F., Babeu, A., & Crane, G. (2009). Rethinking Critical Editions of Fragmentary Texts by Ontologies. In. S. Mornati, ed., Rethinking Electronic Publishing: Innovation in Communication Paradigms and Technologies - Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Electronic Publishing held in Milano, Italy 10-12 June 2009, pp. 155-174.

10. Romanello, M. (2011). The Digital Critical Edition of Fragments: Theoretical Problems and Technical Solution. In P. Kurras Cotticelli, ed., Linguistica e Filologia Digitale: Aspetti e Progetti, pp. 147–155. Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso. Retrieved from eprints.rclis.org/handle/10760/15592.

11. Trachsel, A. (2012). Collecting Fragments Today: What Status Will a Fragment Have in the Era of Digital Philology? In C. Clivaz, J. Meizoz, F. Vallotton, & J. Verheyden, eds., Lire demain – Reading Tomorrow, pp. 415-429 (ebook). Lausanne: Presses polytechniques et universitaires romandes.

12. Berti, M. (2013). Collecting Quotations by Topic: Degrees of Preservation and Transtextual Relations among Genres. Ancient Society, 43, pp. 269–288.

13. Sharing Ancient Wisdoms, www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk (Accessed on November 1, 2013).

14. Dunn, S., Hedges, M., Jordanous, A., Lawrence, K. F., Roueché, C., Tupman, C. & Wakelnig E (2012). Sharing Ancient Wisdoms: Developing Structures for Tracking Cultural Dynamics by Linking Moral and Philosophical Anthologies with their Source and Recipient Texts. In Digital Humanities Conference, Hamburg, Germany. Available in the Book of Abstracts at www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts, pp. 176-179.

15. Romanello, M., & Berra, A. (2011). The Critical Step in Open Content Greek: Towards a Digital Edition of Athenaeus. In TEI Members Meeting, Würzburg, Germany. Available in the Book of Abstracts at www.zde.uni-wuerzburg.de/tei_mm_2011, pp. 43-47, and philologia.hypotheses.org/512.

16. Tesserae, tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu (Accessed on November 1, 2013).

17. Eumaios: a collaborative website for Early Greek epic, panini.northwestern.edu/AnaServer?eumaios+0+frame.anv (Accessed on November 1, 2013)

18. Coffee, N., Koenig, J.-P., Poornima, S., Forstall, C. W., Ossewaarde, R., & Jacobson, S. L. (2013). The Tesserae Project: Intertextual Analysis of Latin Poetry. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(2), pp. 221–228. DOI: 10.1093/llc/fqs033.

19. Romanello, M. (2013). Creating an Annotated Corpus for Extracting Canonical Citations from Classics-Related Texts by Using Active Annotation. In A. Gelbukh, ed., Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing. 14th International Conference, CICLing 2013, Samos, Greece, March 24-30, 2013, Proceedings, Part I. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 60–76.

20. Romanello, M., Boschetti, F. & Crane, G. (2009). Citations in the Digital Library of Classics: Extracting Canonical References by Using Conditional Random Fields. In Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries. Morristown, NJ, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 80–87.

21. eTRACES, etraces.e-humanities.net (Accessed on November 1, 2013).
The Letters of 1916 Project is the first crowd-sourced digital humanities project in Ireland. The project pivots around one of the most important events in twentieth-century Irish history -- the 1916 Easter Rising -- in which a small group of Irish Volunteers rebelled against the British Army on 24 April, Easter Monday 1916. The Rising was quickly quashed by the British, but the executions of its leaders several weeks later made martyrs of them, and set in motion a series of events that resulted in Irish independence from the United Kingdom in 1922.

The Letters of 1916 project focuses on this tumultuous period. Its goal is to create a crowd-sourced digital collection of letters written for a six-month period before and after the Easter Rising (1 November 1915 – 31 October 1916).

The project includes letters held at institutions (in Ireland and abroad), alongside those in private collections. The collection criteria is extremely broad: it includes any letter written to or from someone in Ireland, or that contains Irish subject matter. 

The ultimate goal is to create a new online resource that will add a novel and heretofore underutilised viewpoint to the events of the period, a confidential and intimate perspective that will form the basis for a revision of our understanding of life in Ireland in the early 20th Century. 

Letters 1916 integrates four distinct theoretical and methodological approaches:

The creation of a thematic research collection
A crowd-sourced public humanities project
Text analysis
Social media for dissemination and outreach
This paper will explore phase I of the project: the sourcing, gathering, and transcribing/encoding of collection. It will also document how the project is being used in the classroom at the Masters level. 

Phase II will transform the transcribed/encoded letters, along with their accompanying images, into a thematic research collection where users will be able to do full text searching, text analysis, view correspondences, view letters temporally and spatially, and engage with thematic exhibitions. The collection is being viewed as a major new resource and as such, will ultimately be deposited at a cultural heritage institution for long-term preservation. 

In her 2009 article Rose Holley made the distinction between social engagement projects, which she defined as ‘giving the public the ability to communicate with us and each other’ via such activities as tagging, commenting, rating, and reviewing, and crowdsourcing which uses social engagement techniques to help a group of people achieve a shared, usually significant, and large goal by working collaboratively together as a group. Crowdsourcing also usually entails a greater level of effort, time and intellectual input from an individual than just socially engaging

The project stops short, however, of a collective editing project. Phase 1 of the project was launched in September 2013 to a great deal of press.[1] The database was pre-populated with some 300 letters from cultural heritage institutions. To date, the project has 1500 letters in its workflow (about 800 publicly available). 

The project, thus far, uses two distinct crowdsourcing methodologies according to the typology developed by Carletti, et al: a) correction and transcription; and b)  complementing collection. Building on the immense success of the Europeana World War 1 Road shows, we invited the public to bring their letters in for scanning at the launch. This model is being replicated, thus far in Ireland and the UK. Moreover, the software allows the pubic to upload their letters from home, create basic metadata, and provide the project with descriptive information. 

At the time of this writing, there are approximately 30 privately-held collections (or letters from small institutions we would have never have thought to reach out to) for letters from this period. The size of individual deposits range from one letter to 90– a correspondence between the donor’s grandmother and grandfather who happened to be courting during 1916. 

The public is also invited to transcribe previously uploaded letters. The response has been so overwhelming that the project team is frequently can barely keep up with demand. The engagement, encouragement, and reaching out to volunteers is a major aspect of the project to be discussed. At present the site does not utilise some of the more traditional features of crowdsourced projects (such as badges and icons) to engage its volunteers. However, other methods have been implemented, such as a volunteer forum, featuring contributors both on the project site and in the more traditional forms of media. 

The project has benefited immensely from previous crowdsourced projects, from its methodological approaches, to its workflow and software. The project utilises WordPress for its front end, and for its content management system a version of Omeka that was modified by University of Iowa libraries (DIY History) to support crowdsourcing projects. It utilises George Mason’s Scripto tool for transcribing, and the Transcribing Bentham’s TEI/XML toolbar for light encoding. In a domain space that has constantly called for the creation of tools, the ability to fairly rapidly and without a great deal of bespoke programming to string together these diverse tools into one unified web presence, may signal a golden age of tool development for our field. 

The Transcribing Bentham toolbar has been an interesting feature which many transcribers have utilised with little instruction. The Transcribing Bentham project designed the toolbar to hide ‘much of the complexity of TEI markup from the transcriber’ (Moyle, 353). An analysis of the markup used in this environment reveals an especially intuitive use of tagging, something the TEI is rarely praised for. Despite the caveat that the toolbar only allows the encoding of 15 out of the TEI’s hundreds of tags, the ease in which individuals with absolutely no experience in textual editing, AML,  or text encoding have been utilizing it may point to new ways to create a more intuitive encoding interface. A downside to the reduced set of tags available is that users, in trying to make sense of the tags available to them, use certain tags, such as <lb> (line break), so ubiquitously that it almost amounts to tag abuse. 

This project is pitting, in many respects, methods typical of thematic research collections-- including the creation of a carefully curated dataset with fully transcribed and proofed documents, and hand-crafted markup and metadata created in accordance with the Text Encoding Initiative Guidelines-- against the less painstaking creation of a full text dataset amenable to text analysis and visualisation as a method of discovery and analysis. Ultimately, in Phase II of the project, we intend to offer readers both views – the traditional reading environment of the thematic research collection along with the analytics available via text analysis and visualisations. But the decisions we make at this stage which will be detailed in this talk will impact what is possible in later phases.  

The social media dimension of finding and engaging  our audience demonstrates just how significantly the environment in which digital humanists operate has changed over the past decade. An analysis of the first month’s tweets reveal an ever expanding network of cultural institutions, individuals, organisations, and traditional media who have passed the message of the project along. A twitter-feed is a feature of the project’s home page and discussions amongst the project team reveal a shifting notion of how to position the project in a web of similar initiatives in Ireland coming broadly under the rubric of The Decade of Commemoration.[2] The project has already been positioned not as a silo, but as an aggregator embracing multiple communities of holders of these precious objects. We share back with individuals and institutions photographs we take, and will eventually share the fully transcribed/encoded texts files. But as we near the centenary of the Easter Rising, we are aware of our responsibility to, one the one hand, maintain the integrity of the project while, on the other, opening our resource more fully to sister initiatives, while respecting copyright and intellectual property promises to our donators.

References
Carletti, Laura, Gabriella Giannachi,  Dominic Price, Derek McAuley, (2012), ‘Digital Humanities and Crowdsourcing’.MW2012: Museums and the Web 2013. Online

Causer, Tim, Justin Tonra, Valerie Walace (2012). ‘Transcription Maximized; Expense Minimized? Crowdsourcing and Editing The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham’. Literary and Linguistic Computing. 27/2 2012. 119-137.

Dunn, Stuart and Mark Hedges. ‘Crowd-Sourcing Scoping Study: Engaging the Crowd with Humanities Research’. Centre for e-Research, Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London. Online. 

Holley, Rose (2010). ‘Crowdsourcing: How and Why Should Libraries Do It’. D-Lib Magazine. March-April 2010. 16:3/4. Online

Moyle, Martin, Justin Tonra, Valerie Wallace (2011). ‘Manuscript Transcription by Crowdsourcing; Transcribing Bentham’. Liber Quarterly 20:3/4. March 2011.  

Palmer, Carol (2004). ‘Thematic Research Collections’.Companion to Digital Humanities’.  Blackwell. Online. 

Robinson, Peter. (2010). ‘Editing Without Walls’. Literature Compass. Special issue on Scholarly Editing in the Twenty-first Century. 57-61.

Please see letters1916.ie for full press coverage

This shorthand refers to a decade of significant historical events in Ireland 1913-1923 in Ireland, beginning with the Dublin Lockout in 1913 and ending with Irish independence, followed by a Civil War a decade later.
Blumenbach-online, a project of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities, started in January 2010 and aims at both digitizing and presenting the writings and collections of the influential Gottingen physician and naturalist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840), one of the founding fathers of physical anthropology, online. To date, almost half of the textual material (77.000 pages altogether) and roughly a quarter of the collections have been digitized and converted into TEI-encoded texts or entered into a database. It is through an exploration and application of Semantic Web technologies in a spin-off project called "Semantic Blumenbach" that we hope to establish robust and powerful methods for presenting and providing heterogeneous machine-readable linked data for Blumenbach-online. 

Two major tasks have been completed so far. The first is carrying out Named Entity Recognition (NER) on the TEI P5 Tite1 encoded full-texts that have been provided to Semantic Blumenbach2 by Blumenbach-online. These texts lacked the semantic markup e.g. for places, persons and objects from the natural history domain. In addition, we had to deal with historical and irregular orthography of multilingual texts from the second half of the 18th century. Currently we are able to recognize precisely (96%) most (96%) of the technical terms that appear in the text using a list-based algorithm. This algorithm is also able to detect binominal entities from the Linnaean taxonomy, even when they appear as separate strings in different parts of the text. For modeling the relationship between entities in the text and metadata in the collection, we use the WissKI Framework for scientific communication (www.wiss-ki.eu) that allows presenting and using data from various sources in a robust and open system, which is both scalable and reusable by other projects. With the help of the Erlangen CRM Ontology3, an OWL-DL 1.0 implementation of the CIDOC CRM4 and a special application ontology, we model the semantic relationships between objects described in TEI-encoded texts and metadata of these objects.5 We particularly focus on place names, persons and special terms from the natural history domain, including the Latin names of animals and geological objects and construct the relationship between both types of data by using our NER to encode reference strings in the TEI text. 

The Erlangen CRM provides a way to classify these objects in a meaningful way and to model the relationship between the occurrence of the objects in the writings of Blumenbach and the University of Göttingen’s collections. With the help of colleagues from the WissKI Project at Erlangen and Nurnberg we have been able to develop new modules for the Drupal-based system to ingest the TEI and triplify the metadata that we created in the texts. Following a policy of Open Access and Linked Open Data, we will test and implement ways to generate and publish results of academic research in a way that it can be reused in other contexts and by other researchers. Finally, we plan to use a full-text search index (Apache solr) to make both texts and object-related data available in a way that allows both triplyfied metadata and XML full-text to be searched efficiently. 

URL: dhfv-ent2.gcdh.de/blumenbach/wisski

Username and password available on request. 

References
1. www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-exemplars/html/tei_tite.doc.html

2. Wettlaufer, Jörg & Thotempudi, Sree Ganesh (2013): Poster - NER in historical Text corpora. Lessons learned so far. 4.-6.03.2013, Mehr Personen – Mehr Daten – Mehr Repositorien, Tagung des Personendatenrepositoriums der BBAW, Berlin. www.gcdh.de/index.php/download_file/view/168/405

3. erlangen-crm.org

4. “CIDOC CRM,” n.d. www.cidoc-crm.org/index.html.

5. C.f. www.tei-c.org/SIG/Ontologies/meetings/m20131003.html
1. Introduction
How to represent texts in computer systems has always been an important topic in Digital Humanities. Tree based formalisms such as SGML 1 and XML (URL: http://www.w3.org/XML/ (checked 2013-10-26)) are useful for many purposes, but problems related to their hierarchical structures are inherent. Various solutions has been presented over the years, from questioning the existence of overlap in textual material 2 through various workaround for overlapping structures 3 (chapter 20) to the abolition of nesting formalisms, as in the example of MECS 4.

In this paper I will focus on three different design principles for text representation systems, namely, linear, hierarchical and graph based. These labels represent concepts similar to Cayless' data types text as stream, text as tree, and text as graph 5. Examples of text modelling tool types focusing on each of these can be found in table 1. In the following I will analyse the relationship between the left and the right sides of the table based on experiences from the development and use of a text modelling tool called GeoModelText (URL: http://sourceforge.net/projects/geomodel/ (checked 2013-10-26)). Description of the development process can be found at the resource page for my PhD project (URL: http://www.oeide.no/dg/dp/ (checked 2013-11-01)). A use case is described in 6.

Type	Text representation system 	Example of modelling tool type 
1 	Linear	Plain text
2 	Hierarchical 	XML encoding 
3 	Graph based 	RDF encoding 
Table 1 caption: Computer based text representation systems and modelling tools.

2. Previous work
In the last 10–15 years, most practical work in text encoding have lived with the nesting structure of SGML and XML. Alternative formalisms, such as MECS, has mostly yielded to the dominant tree based structure. There has, however, been an undercurrent of experiments and theoretical research into other types of solutions. One important example originally intiated in 2002 is LMNL (URL: http://www.lmnl-markup.com/ (checked 2013-10-26)), with its range based annotation 7. A recent attempt to examine text markup under the microscope is pure transcriptional markup8. Both these examples show on-going attempts to get to the core of markup practice and were important in the development of this paper. 

In my own research into semiotic differences between texts and maps I developed a system for computer assisted conceptual text modelling called GeoModelText where all three types from table 1 have the same status. GeoModelText is currently tailor suited to my work. One aim of this paper is to investigate into its usability for other types of research.

Systems for visualising graph networks based on and connected to texts are easily available. What is lacking are systems for manipulating the graph structure as part of interactive text modelling, that is, including the graph structure in the internal editing system. To the degree graph based editing is included in XML editors it tends to be in an indirect sense, e.g., through manipulation of attribute values for ID–IDREF links.

3. GeoModelText
GeoModelText is implemented as a Java application. The text to be analysed is imported from a TEI P5 document. The import results in a DOM structure representing the XML tree of the TEI source. Within the DOM structure the text itself is found in PCDATA segments. During analysis, these segments are used to reconstruct parts of the text as a linear structure; in this view the XML hierarchy is hidden from the user.

An important function of a tree structure is inheritance, where aspects of a parent is inhereted by its children. This is used in the system to migrate responsibility to statements: the person responsible for a paragraph is also responsible for each sentence in the paragraph. One example is relationships between places claimed in the text. The claims are connected to the person responsible for the encapsulating paragraph. The places are referred to by names. In order to build up networks of related places, co-references between occurrences of names must be taken into consideration. For an introduction to co-reference see 9, and 10 for the use of co-reference networks. Thus, in order to establish this graph structure of related places, we need to read the linear text (type 1 in table 1), use inheretence (type 2), and then build up a network of related places and place names (type 3). This network connects strings which can be found at any level of the document structure. The co-reference networks change the document structure as a whole into a graph, as indicated in figure 1.


Fig. 1: The XML tree turned into a graph.

In the graph data structure, each node has a chain of links back to the place in the tree, and thus in the text, on which it is based. In this perspective, type 3 from table 1 is the dominant, but with links to the other types. In the distinction in 11 (p. 75) between hypertextual editions and editions in database format, GeoModelText is primarily a database system, but with aspects of a hypertext system.

4. The hierachy of structures
Everything we have seen in the example above is well known from XML tools, they are commonly used to establish such data structures. However, in the typical XML tool, the status of the three types are presented differently. To take one example: when opening an XML file in the Oxygen XML editor (URL: http://www.oxygenxml.com/ (checked 2013-10-27)) the tree structure is presented at the left of the Oxygen window as a number of expandable folders. This indicates that this structure is the base structure of the document. In the centre window we see the text as a sequence of tokens, with the XML elements shown in different ways or fully hidden at user discretion. Graph structures, e.g., a co-reference network, is only shown indirectly as attribute values.

Thus, type 1 and 2 from table 1 are highlighted at the expense of type 3. In GeoModelText, on the other hand, separate windows give access to data in any of the three types. I do not claim that the graphical user interface of GeoModelText is better than the one in Oxygen; it is not. Rather, I want to make the point that the freedom of the object oriented programmer is not yet offered to the user of markup tools. What a user actually do with markup tools can be expressed in three different layers:

Create a tree model of the text
Formalise that model in TEI/XML
Reificaite the model into the editing tool
With these layers reified into the tool it is more difficult to get rid of, or even see, the straightjacket of the tree structure. While XML is useful for many purposes and is used both as input format and as storage format for GeoModelText, there is still a tendency to under-expose the non-hierarchical structure of the text. This tendency is there even if a number of technices are developed to overcome the problems created by the hierarchical nature of XML.

A radical solution to these problem would be to leave XML, or, more generally, avoid hierarchical markup systems based on context free grammers all together. This was the solution of MECS. However,  this solution generated its own set of problems. In the development of LMNL, the choice was rather to use XML and the XML tools for what it is good for, and only leave the hierachical structure when one needs something else. This is also used as a design principle in GeoModelText. I use XML, both in the form of linearised files and DOM structures, whenever it is useful. But by operating in a programming environment (which is also where Piez finds himself in his work with the LMNL toolchain Luminescent (URL: https://github.com/wendellpiez/Luminescent/ (checked 2013-11-01)), although the langauge is different), I can leave the XML/DOM structure whenever I need to, e.g., to establish tools for capturing and visualising co-references. 

5. The way forward
Sometimes, in the frustration of the hierarchical straightjacket, it is tempting to leave XML as a whole behind. Keeping XML as a part of the information system, adding non-hierarchical modules as needed, is a better way forward for text encoding in general and for TEI specifically. XML is only a straightjacket in certain situations. Luminescent and GeoModelText are two examples of tools pointing towards a future where we can live with the limitations of XML because we are free to leave it whenever we need to. Craig outlines a complementary strategy for improvements of TEI 12.

One central question remains, however. Is it possible to avoid the straightjacket as a user of a premade system, or is it something fundamental in my role as a programmer who gives me the freedom to create input mechanisms as well as visualisations based on all three types from table 1? Can we make tools which give users this freedom? When we create a tree model of a text we are still aware of the choices made, often out of convenience. When using an XML editing tool these choices has been implemented in a structure with a real material existence. The awareness of the straightjacket may be lost in the process from abstract model to editing tool. 

References
1. Goldfarb, C. F. and Y. Rubinsky (1990). The SGML handbook. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

2. Renear, A., E. Myonas, and D. Durand (1996). Refining our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem of Overlapping Hierarchies. In S. M. Hockey and N. M. Ide (Eds.), Selected papers from the ALLC/ACH Conference, Christ Church, Oxford, April 1992, pp. 263–280. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

3. TEI Consortium (2013). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [2.5.0]. [July 26 2013]. [S.n.]: TEI Consortium.

4. Sperberg-McQueen, C. and C. Huitfeldt (1999). Concurrent document hierarchies in MECS and SGML. Literary and Linguistic Computing 14(1), 29–42.

5. Hugh A. Cayless, Rebooting TEI Pointers. In Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 6(2013). URL: jtei.revues.org/907 (checked 2014-03-07) ; DOI: 10.4000/jtei.907

6. Eide, Ø. (2013). Why Maps Are Silent When Texts Can Speak. Detecting Media Differences through Conceptual Modelling. In M. F. Buchroithner, N. Prechtel, D. Burghardt, K. Pippig, and B. Schröter (Eds.), Proceedings from From Pole to Pole. The 26th International Cartographic Conference 2013, Dresden.

7. Piez, W. (2013). Markup Beyond XML. In Proceedings from Digital Humanities July 16–19 2013, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, USA, pp. 343–345. Center for Digital Research in the Humanities.

8. Caton, P. (2013). Pure Transcriptional Markup. In Proceedings from Digital Humanities July 16–19 2013, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, USA, pp. 140–142. Center for Digital Research in the Humanities.

9. Eide, Ø. (2009). Co-Reference: A New Method to Solve Old Problems. In Proceedings from Digital Humanities June 22–25 2009, University of Maryland, USA, pp. 101–103. Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities.

10. Meghini, C., M. Doerr, and N. Spyratos (2009). Managing Co-reference Knowledge for Data Integration. In Y. Kiyoki, T. Tokuda, H. Jaakkola, X. Chen, and N. Yoshida (Eds.), Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases XX. Amsterdam, Washington, D.C.: IOS Press.

11. Buzzetti, D. (2002). Digital Representation and the Text Model. New Literary History 33(1), 61–88.

12. Hugh A. Cayless, Rebooting TEI Pointers. In Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 6(2013). URL: jtei.revues.org/907 (checked 2014-03-07) ; DOI: 10.4000/jtei.907
TEI is good at what it does: static documents rendered in glorious detail. But TEI is old. Its age doesn’t make TEI irrelevant, but it’s important to be conscious of how the way we weave the fabric of the web has changed since TEI was conceived in 1994, and reevaluate some of our assumptions about its use. In this early work, we are exploring this rethinking as part of a larger study within the center on general methods for isolating the complexity frequently associated with XML-based frameworks.

The Richmond Times Dispatch corpus of TEI-encoded newspapers comprises the Confederate newspaper’s Civil War run, 1860 — 1865. It is compelling both in terms of organization and content and amounts to a comprehensive textual index. In addition to the historical allure of its content, the formal properties of the digitized documents made available through the Perseus Collection make the Dispatch an extraordinary raw material for building a rich interactive visual experience that augments the textual one.

The Dispatch is not in need of a new home; the Perseus Collection hosts a perfectly functional version and uses best practices for data encoding and organization. Rather than strive to be the primary resource for the source material, our project uses the source material to explore recent patterns in web development as well as alternative, more visually compelling ways to interact with XML corpora in a web application. The goal is to produce a powerful reading environment that is tailored to its source material to an extent that the generalized project of the Perseus Collection can afford.

With respect to its implementation, our project fits the genre of a ‘single page application’ (SPA). This project demonstrates best practices for implementing this type of software project using a particular suite of tools; as an open source example of an SPA that is considerably more complex than the usual teaching examples for this kind of thing, we hope that our implementation will be useful to other people who are considering using the same tools, and especially to humanists interested in presenting TEI-encoded documents.

The SPA is du juor. We prefer beautiful URLs and smooth transitions. We are less fond of all these big lists cluttering our sidebars and clunky arrays of checkboxes. We don’t expect websites to always be inert collections of documents. We want to be able to control the connective tissues. The web development community has responded to our current expectations with tools to suite them.

The client-side MVC (Model-View-Controller) libraries that have recently emerged have reached a high level of maturity A client-side MVC library codifies conventional solutions to the generic problems posed by web traffic. It provides semantics for describing the interaction layer between data and presentation. The codification of conventions that MVC libraries manifest is exciting. It deeply simplifies matters for those who want to make interactive documents. Humanists who have a grasp of the language and concepts involved will be that much better able to articulate and realize project architectures that delight the contemporary reader.

For instance, our application is built around a client-side router. The router formalizes protocols for state transitions that allow for timely and efficient request management. We rely heavily on the concept of the run loop, which exposes powerful document management techniques and is tightly linked with a client-driven templating engine. We are able to achieve a remarkably clean separation of concerns in a highly condensed space by exploiting the conventional roles organized and implemented by these libraries. And by shifting our application’s emphasis to the client, we have constant access to a unified programming environment, limiting the context-switching required when developing different parts of the application.

In addition to our project’s strong client-focused application architecture, we also demonstrate a data architecture solution to the problems posed by the corpus’ rich TEI markup. To expose the facets embedded in the source XML, the implementation transforms the deeply nested structure inherent into flat relational representations that can be searched efficiently. Furthermore our project demonstrates a novel, pythonic approach to transforming the source XML to browser-ready HTML that is particularly amenable to the constraints of an SPA.

XSLT wasn’t very well suited to our TEI transformation problem. One of the key UI features of our application was the ability to discover and search for special entities such as people and places in the text. By implementing a custom transformer in python, we had the flexibility to both translate the TEI tag names into valid HTML versions and retain the original TEI tag names and attributes as attributes on the HTML element.

In addition to serving content thus transformed as needed, the role of the server in our application is limited to various precomputation and preprocessing tasks that only need to be run whenever the source material changes--a process that is fully automated with Unix batch processing (via cron) in the cloud. Users never notice. Research projects are often quagmired in a chaotic sprawl of one-off scripts; we demonstrate a coherent architectural pattern for orchestrating these preprocessors.

Sometimes the affordances of an SPA make it worthwhile to depart from the original document’s presentation. Content on the web wants a different kind of exposure than a stack of newspapers. You want to be able to find things quickly. You want to be able to highlight and hyperlink, associate and drill down. Once you’ve computed a graph of your stack of newspapers, now you can move laterally, staying in the same section and moving from date to date, just as easily as you could stay on the same date and move top-to-bottom through the articles. We demonstrate a novel, minimalistic navigation scheme for the Dispatch.

If you’re taking full advantage of a Javascript environment to render your XML content, you can use modern libraries to plug in visualizations with simplicity, and furthermore to turn these visualizations into interactive filters for a very powerful browsing experience. Using a cluster of technologies surrounding Mike Bostock’s work, we demonstrate how to integrate a visualization library into an SPA.

And yet we believe that datafication shouldn’t overwhelm the content. You want to be discrete about placing your controls lest you scare the casual user, but they should be powerful. Live feedback from search inputs has come to be a common expectation for user interfaces and the SPA environment makes it easy to architect that. We show one effective way to make your XML live-searchable.

We close with just a few screenshots of the work in progress. It is important to note that this interface is being further refined based on new work Trevor is doing in his new role as a front-end software developer. 


Fig. 1: An early version of the splash page, presenting user interface controls for the issue date, section, and subsection. Selecting a subsection would reveal the list of headlines it contains. The date selectors reload the issue content asynchronously, without reloading the page.


Fig. 2: The early version of the article reader, presenting the text in a modal context. The summary of facets across the top act as toggles for corresponding highlights in the text. You can page through the section content using the controls at the bottom of the modal.


Fig. 3: This screen capture shows the direction taken in the latest development. The URL bar demonstrates stateful client-side routing. The content selection controls have been flattened into a trio of type-ahead controls with pagination buttons for navigating forward and backwards both in the document structure and across documents.

This stuff is fun. The tools are a joy to use. The free/open source community behind it is excellent and innovative. We want to see more humanists building applications, and moving away from consuming and rather heavyweight content management systems such as Drupal. Based on our experience, humanists can learn the tools and frameworks quickly with excellent results to boot. We hope that our implementation of the Dispatch will set a strong example for our (and others’) future DH projects.

References
We note that we are proponents of using XML, especially for its originally intended purposes of self-describing data interchange, which remains tremendously valuable in developing type safe RESTful web services. 

George K. Thiruvathukal is leading a separate and parallel effort to develop the Standoff Markup text editor, standoffmarkup.org,  which is aimed at simplifying the encoding and maintenance of XML texts (without exposing tree-oriented abstractions). This is where we started exploring the use of SPA when it comes to building DH-facing tools in general.

Richmond Times Collection, www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/collection?collection=Perseus:collection:RichTimes.

Single Page Applications original conception, code.google.com/p/trimpath/wiki/SinglePageApplications

Conventionally, a to-do list. See, for instance, todomvc.com.

The Model-View-Controller design pattern (and paradigm) was introduced as part of the Xerox PARC Alto computer, which used the Smalltalk programming language. An excellent historical read about this paradigm can be found at heim.ifi.uio.no/~trygver/themes/mvc/mvc-index.html.

We use Ember.js: emberjs.com. Our technical term for “high level of maturity” is “rock” but we eschew this Americanism for the purpose of a conference paper submission.

We rely throughout on the wonderful lxml library for Python: lxml.de.

Our present implementation is deployed on Heroku, an agile and scalable framework for deploying apps like ours. The overall project is moving to Linode (a dedicated Linux-based cloud hosting provider).

In this we rely on the large-scale application planning features offered by the Flask web framework for python: flask.pocoo.org.

Author of d3js.org among other things.

We have found dc.js (nickqizhu.github.io/dc.js) to be a perfect storm of visualization functionality.

We use the well-known elasticsearch library (www.elasticsearch.org) to achieve an effect like Google’s live search results.
Our paper explores the role of student participants in outreach and advocacy for digital humanities centers. Although discussion of undergraduates in digital humanities generally focuses on classroom research activities (Croxall 2013), we define “student participant” broadly, including students who are employed by, or complete internships within, a digital humanities center. Because student participants are highly responsive to outreach efforts, and can themselves support outreach by serving as advocates for the center (and digital humanities scholarship in general) during their student years and beyond, cultivating student participants allows centers to enhance existing outreach efforts, so much so that the benefits for students and the center may justify refocusing energy and resources to better support student engagement. At the same time, digital humanities centers must address institutional barriers and ethical concerns that emerge when students are involved in research. Our talk will provide examples of the rationale and strategies that the IDHMC (Initiative for Digital Humanities, Media and Culture) is developing to strengthen student involvement in digital scholarship. Recognizing that funding and other factors create obstacles to student involvement, we are working towards a flexible model that can be adapted to suit local circumstances.

Although discussions of “outreach” for the digital humanities often focus on publicizing projects (see Brennan 2013), centers are expected to perform generalized outreach to promote the center and its work and to make research, tools, and training available to academic and general audiences (Nowviskie 2011). While these forms of outreach are important, they create considerable demands upon staff (Nowviskie 2010; Ramsay 2010) and are limited in their reach and effectiveness. Bringing traditional humanities scholars into digital humanities scholarship is time and labor intensive, and projects and tools often target specific audiences, leaving out constituencies that are institutionally or strategically important for the center’s growth. Student participants both supplement and extend these forms of outreach. 

Focusing outreach efforts on student participants may be more effective than targeting humanities faculty who are not already engaged in digital scholarship. Unlike faculty, whose interest in new technologies is constrained by multiple factors (Wiberly and Jones 2000; O’Donnell 2009), students have time to invest in learning new technologies and approaches and are less invested in traditional disciplinary paradigms. Before graduation, student participants enhance outreach by bridging disciplinary and institutional divisions and communicating their digital humanities interest to other students and faculty. After graduation, student participants may still contribute by incorporating digital tools and collaborative practices into their professional activities, serving as intermediaries between the center and external partners, and continuing to participate in scholarship through crowdsourcing or other means. 

The IDHMC uses grant funding to support student involvement in the classroom and as employees, and is hoping to secure funding for a pilot internship program. In 2012, through an internal (Tier One Program) grant, Laura Mandell developed an interdisciplinary, stacked (undergraduate and graduate) course that involved students in designing the IDHMC’s Humanities Visualization Space (HVS). That course has now become a permanent offering. But to reach more students from multiple disciplines, the IDHMC invests in student learning beyond targeted digital humanities classes. Mandell’s eMOP (Early Modern OCR Project) Mellon grant includes graduate and undergraduate student workers who have made important contributions to the project and to the digital humanities community (Torabi, Durgan and Tarpley 2013). Most recently, Mandell, Ives and Earhart targeted multiple forms of student engagement in an internal grant in support of the development of ARC (Advanced Research Consortium, idhmc.tamu.edu/projects/arc/) and the HVS. To infuse digital humanities scholarship in the wider curriculum, this grant funds the creation of workshops and class activities that faculty can integrate into existing classes, as well as a research competition for students who have used the ARC data and the HVS in their projects (we will provide links to these materials in our presentation). Finally, IDHMC is piloting an unpaid undergraduate internship program (idhmc.tamu.edu/blog/2013/06/21/idhmc-undergraduate-internships/) through which students can work on any IDHMC affiliated project. Through employment and internships, we are drawing students from departments that do not offer DH coursework or research opportunities, increasing our impact on campus while creating valuable learning experiences for a variety of students. 

To pursue these goals, we continually navigate institutional and disciplinary barriers, including faculty resistance, administrative and curricular roadblocks, and funding issues. The difficulties inherent in adding new courses to the official curriculum make other means of outreach to students especially attractive and valuable. We hope that we will be able to offer stipends to future interns, perhaps ultimately creating something like DePauw’s ITAP (Information Technology Associates Program), an internship program in which liberal arts undergraduates are given a year of technical training and then placed in academic or administrative internships. Programs such as ITAP demonstrate that incorporating undergraduate students into digital humanities research and outreach is a strategy that is neither limited to digital humanities centers such as IDHMC or to research universities, nor dependent upon external grant funding (though there is no doubt that the necessity of finding some source of funding for student researchers is a challenge across the board). Such a strategy does, however, require acceptance of a capacious definition of what “counts” as digital humanities, and resistance to the idea that a valuable student experience can only be obtained through exposure to the kinds of digital humanities work that require heavy institutional investment in equipment and staff support. Ideally, students working at IDHMC will experience a variety of modes of digital humanities research, from digital archives (such as the Cervantes Project), to tool development (via the OCR testing and development that is part of eMOP), to academic instances of social media (the Anachronaut Facebook game for OCR correction), to humanities data visualization. Students working at smaller institutions with fewer resources will not have as many options as we do, but the necessity of limiting hands-on experience to certain kinds of projects does not prevent faculty from exploring other forms of digital scholarship through other means, including collaborative arrangements with other institutions that offer different digital humanities emphases. Regional or national partnerships that facilitate digital project information sharing (something as simple as having faculty involved in a project Skype in to a class) are one way to expand student involvement beyond a single institution’s resources and expertise; over time, more intensive collaborations – a “spring break” research experience at another institution, for example -- might be developed. More important still is providing the kind of digital humanities acculturation that Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair describe, which students learn to “work in interdisciplinary teams, apply digital practices to the humanities, manage projects, [and] explain technology and build community” (Rockwell and Sinclair 2013). The goal of acculturation is one that can be pursued in many ways and across many institutional structures. For the purposes of outreach, it is extremely valuable given its relevance to students’ career paths.

While we work to develop a funded internship program, we offer independent studies to all interns so that they receive formal academic credit for their work. As a general practice, we encourage all affiliated students to present or publish their work and we include them in our own presentations and publications (Ives et al; Earhart; Mandell 2013). We also feature student contributors in publicity for IDHMC and its projects. While many of these practices are (or should be) universal, articulating them is important, both to insure a positive experience for students and to equip them to serve as advocates for IDHMC and digital humanities generally.

The overall goal of our work with students is to enact the values of digital scholarship formulated by Lisa Spiro: openness, collaboration, collegiality and connectedness, diversity, and experimentation (Spiro 2012). We want to instill an ethical perspective that is both specific to digital humanities and generalizable to students’ future careers. Expanding upon studies that emphasize collaboration and cross-disciplinary learning within the classroom (Norcia 2008), we aim at, in Julia Flanders’ words, fostering “a professional academic ecology” that illuminates “the diversity of working roles that contribute to the production of scholarship” (Flanders 307). Our focus on multiple forms of student participation allows us to define the ethos of collaboration broadly, emphasizing respect for and recognition of contributions across disciplinary boundaries as well as educational/professional roles (student, employee, faculty, staff). Successful outreach can be defined in many ways, but the most meaningful measure may well be the extent to which students carry this ethos with them when they leave IDHMC.

References
Brennan, Sheila. (2013). “Four P’s of Digital Project Outreach.” Lot 49. 1 August 2013. www.lotfortynine.org/2013/08/four-ps-of-digital-project-outreach/

Croxall, Brian, et al. (2013) “The Future of Undergraduate Digital Humanities.”  17 July 2013. dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-292.html

Earhart, Amy.  “Alex Haley’s Malcolm X: ‘The Malcolm X I Knew’ and notecards from The Autobiography of Malcolm X,” an introduction and edition, forthcoming in Scholarly Editing.

Flanders, Julia. (2012) “Time, Labor, and “Alternate Careers in Digital Humanities Knowledge Work.” Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew Gold. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota P. 292-308

IDHMC Undergraduate Internships (21 June 2013). idhmc.tamu.edu/blog/2013/06/21/idhmc-undergraduate-internships

Information Technology Associated Program. www.depauw.edu/it/ita

Ives, Maura; Del Hierro, Victor; Kelsey, Bailey; Smith, Laura Catherine and Christina Sumners. (2013) “Encoding the Discipline: English Graduate Student Reflections on Working with TEI.”  Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative: Selected Papers from the 2012 TEI Conference. Issue 6, December 2013. jtei.revues.org/88

Mandell, Laura. (2013). Rev. of Debates in Digital Humanities, ed. Matthew K. Gold, in Information and Culture: A Journal of History, with Matthew Davis, Tess Habbestad, Jacob Heil, Shawn Moore, Laura Perrings, and Katayoun Torabi. 19 March 2013. www.infoculturejournal.org/book_reviews/idhmc_gold_DebatesDH

Mandell, Laura, et al. (2012) Mellon Foundation Grant Proposal: "OCR'ing Early Modern Texts." 30 June 2012. <http://idhmc.tamu.edu/projects/Mellon/eMOPPublic.pdf>.

Mandell, Laura, Maura Ives, and Amy Earhart. (2013) “ARC: Research and Student Engagement in the Digital Humanities.”  Strategic Development Fund Proposal, TAMU. 1 April 2013. 

Nowviskie, B. (2011) “Are You our New Head of Outreach and Consulting?” Scholar’s Lab blog. 23 February 2011. www.scholarslab.org/announcements/head-of-outreach-consulting/

Nowviskie, B. (2010) “Eternal September of the digital humanities.” 15 October 2010. nowviskie.org/2010/eternal-september-of-the-digital-humanities 

eMOP (Early Modern OCR Project). emop.tamu.edu.

Norcia, M.“Out of the Ivory Tower Endlessly Rocking: Collaborating across Disciplines and Professions to Promote Student Learning in the Digital Archive.” Pedagogy 8(1): 91-114. muse.jhu.edu/journals/pedagogy/v008/8.1norcia.pdf.

O’Donnell, James. (2009) “Engaging the Humanities: The Digital Humanities.”  Daedalus 138.1 Winter 2009: 99-104.

Ramsay, Stephen. (2010)  “Centers of Attention.” 27 April 2010. dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-292.html

Rockwell, Geoffrey and Stefan Sinclair (2012). “Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. “  Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Ed. Brett D. Hirsch. Open Book Publishers. openbookpublishers.com/htmlreader/DHP/chap07.html

Spiro, Lisa (2012). “ ‘This is Why we Fight’: Defining the Values of the Digital Humanities.” Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew Gold. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota P. 16-35. dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/

Stephen E. Wiberley, Jr. and William G. Jones (2000). “Time and Technology: A Decade-Long Look at Humanists’ Use of Electronic Information Technology,” College & Research Libraries 61 (Sept. 2000): 421-431.

Torabi, Katayoun, Jessica Durgan, and Bryan Tarpley (2013).  “Early Modern OCR Project (eMOP) at Texas A&M University: Using Aletheia to Train Tesseract.” Paper presented at DocENG 2013, 11 September 2013. www.doceng2013.org/programme
Introduction
Our poster will demonstrate recent work on generating visualizations of codex manuscript structure, and visualizations of reconstructed historical manuscripts known through palimpsest. Next steps, presented at DH2014, will include linking the visualization to digital images of the manuscript pages, and work to parse more complex collation formulas. The purpose is to enable scholars and students to consider the manuscript, as a physical object, in ways not otherwise possible.

Taking manuscripts apart
We have started our collation visualization proof-of-concept work using the collation formulae from The Digital Walters TEI manuscript description files.1 They use a simple subtraction-only system that describes the manuscript as it exists now, but makes no claims for how it came to be that way. This distinguishes it from other manuscript collation formulae, which typically distinguish between leaves added and leaves deleted.2 In the Walters formula added folios are treated as half a sheet, of which the other half has been removed. For example, a manuscript with a leaf added between the second and third quires, and with a leaf removed in the middle of the fourth quire, would be described using this formula:

1(8), 2(10, -1), 3(8), 4(10, -6)

Quire 1 has eight leaves. Quire 2 has nine leaves, with the last leaf added (=the conjoin of the last leaf noted as missing). Quire 3 has eight leaves. Quire 4 has nine leaves, with the sixth leaf missing.

Although it lacks the description found in other formulas developed for manuscripts and printed books, it has the benefit of being simple to parse - perfect for a proof-of-concept.

We find all of the collation formulas in the Digital Walters manuscript descriptions (not all of them include a formula), and then parse the formulas to generate a simple XML file describing the number of quires, number of leaves in each quire, and any "missing" leaves.

<quires>

  <quire n="1" leaves="8"/>

  <quire n="2" leaves="10">

    <less>1</less>

  </quire>

  <quire n="3" leaves="8"/>

  <quire n="4" leaves="10">

    <less>6</less>

  </quire>

</quires>

 We then use this file to generate a set of SVG files, one for each quire. Leaves marked with <less> are currently indicated using outline, which existing leaves are indicated using dark lines.


Fig. 1: Sample quire, missing the first leaf

At this point in the project (October 2013), we have the building blocks we need to begin constructing interactive collation visualizations for the manuscripts in The Digital Walters. Below, we will outline next steps for the project.

Putting manuscripts together
Our work with reconstructing palimpsest manuscripts is within the context of the Sinai Palimpsest Project and was initially presented at the TEI Member's Meeting and Conference, Rome 2013.3 The situation with the Sinai palimpsests is complex. Manuscripts were erased (the ink scraped off) and the pages re-used in other manuscripts. In some cases, fragments from several different historical manuscripts have been stitched together to create new leaves. Some fragments have been re-used more than once, resulting in layers of palimpsest.


Fig. 2: A sample folio from Sinai Arabic NF 8, consisting of four fragments from different historical manuscripts, stitched together for form a new folio.

We are developing a system using TEI to describe both historical manuscripts (the manuscripts from which the palimpsests originated) and the extant manuscripts (the manuscripts as they exist now, with parts of historical manuscripts distributed through them), and linking the two together while also creating visualizations of the historical manuscripts. We are interested not only in reconstructing individual palimpsest folios, but also in reconstructing complete manuscripts (as has already been done for the so-called Archimedes Palimpsest)4. This is the point at which our work taking manuscripts apart and our work putting manuscripts together overlaps: creating visualizations of the physical structure of both existing and historical manuscripts.

Poster session and next steps
At DH2014 we will present our most recent work on both taking manuscripts apart, and on putting them back together. Our poster will highlight the methods we use: how we describe our data, what we use to process the data, and visualization practices. We will also be prepared to demonstrate the methods in real time, particularly the process for translating a collation formula into a visualization.

Next steps will focus on expanding the collation visualization approach to more descriptive collation formulas5

, linking the collation visualization to digital images of the manuscript folios, and presenting the collation visualizations within an interface that would act as a workspace for scholars.

References
1. The Digital Walters, www.thedigitalwalters.org/Data/WaltersManuscripts/ManuscriptDescriptions/

2. Clemens, R. and T. Graham (2007), Introduction to Manuscript Studies (Cornell University Press), pp. 130-131

3. Emery, D. and D. Porter, (2013), "TEI and the Description of the Sinai Palimpsests" presented at The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web, TEI Conference and Member's Meeting 2013, Rome, Italy. digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/teiconf2013/program/papers/abstracts-paper#C140

4. Netz, Reviel et al.The Archimedes Palimpsest Volume 1: Catalogue and Commentary (Cambridge University Press, 2011)

5. Bowers, Fredson. (1962). Principles of Bibliographic Description. New York: Russell & Russell.
1. Introduction
1.1. Overview
El propósito de este póster es proporcionar una demostración del proyecto de etiquetado y edición digital con TEI de los paratextos en obras impresas de escritoras españolas desde el siglo XV al XVIII de BIESES (www.bieses.net). La información contextual que aportan los paratextos sobre sus autoras, el contexto de producción, las motivaciones que impulsaron su escritura, su recepción o su proceso de edición exigen una visión dinámica de la obra literaria mediante su representación digital, no como un producto hecho (work) sino como un acto de producción de sentido (act) que se reactualiza en cada cultura o época y en cada lector ("text in performance" [Bryant, 2002]1).

1.2. Methodology
Partiendo de la experiencia de toda una serie de proyectos de investigación dedicados a la escritura femenina (Brown University Project, African American Women Writers of the 19th Century, British Women Romantic Poet, 1789-1832, Women writer Resource Pages, UNiversidad de Chicago, The Orlando Project, Victorian Women Writers Project, Indiana UNiversity, Emory Women Writer Project)2, estamos fijando esquemas de etiquetado, a partir de un thesaurus de "valores" aplicados a los atributos que definan la posición de las escritoras en el campo literario, sus actitudes ante la escritura y las valoraciones que sus contemporáneos vierten en estos textos preliminares o epilogales.

El codificado de este tipo de textos invierte el esquema tradicional de TEI, que privilegia el desarrollo del "body" frente al "front" y "back", dado que los paratextos ocupan un espacio "marginal" en la obra literaria: portada, preliminares (antes del cuerpo de la obra) y epílogo (después del cuerpo de la obra); además de otro tipo de informaciones paratextuales que se pueden intercalar en el cuerpo del texto y otro tipo de glosas o anotaciones marginales, que también hay que codificar.

2. Getting Started
En nuestro proyecto prescindimos del "body", que queda reducido a un enlace a un texto digitalizado o a una breve mención del inicio o final de la obra literaria en cuestión, y codificamos únicamente los textos reservados a los módulos del "front" y "back" [Burnard-Rahtz 2004: 5-8]3.

Por analogía de temas e intereses seguimos muy de cerca el modelo de customización [Bauman y Flander 2004]4 de Women Writer Project (Brown University), que usa el "ODD language" (véase: www.wwp.brown.edu)5.

En esta primera fase la customización se está centrando en la eliminación de elementos inncesarios y en la definición y establecimiento de valores para atributos, centrados en la caracterización de los enunciadores de estos textos (escritoras y destinatarios) y en las valoraciones sobre el proceso de escritura. A medida que el proceso de customización avance puede resultar necesario cambiar la estructura interna de algunos elementos para representar la realidad textual de los paratextos.

Por todo ello creeemos que, siguiendo los modelos citados de proyectos que ya tiene una amplia andadura, la customización a través de TE IODD que proponemos para los paratextos de obras literarias españolas escritas entre el el siglo XV-XVIII, centrada en los elementos de front y back puede resultar interesante para otros investigadores y proyectos que atiendan a la literatura femenina de este período.

References
1. Bryant, Jonh (2002), The fluid Text: A Theory of Revision and Editing for Book and Screen, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press

2. digital.lib.ucdavis.edu/projects/bwrp/; meet.tge-adonis.fr/projet/roles-et-pouvoirs-des-femmes-au-xvie-siecle-dans-la-france-de-louest; webapp1.dlib.indiana.edu/vwwp/welcome.do;jsessionid=9135BDD19390863752F291EAEA63E22E y https://wiki.dlib.indiana.edu/display/vwwp/Home; www.womenwriters.nl/index.php/Prefaces; womenwriters.library.emory.edu/; www.artsrn.ualberta.ca/orlando/; www.wwp.brown.edu/http://digital.nypl.org/schomburg/writers_aa19/

3. Lou Burnard y Sebastian Rahtz, Relax NG with Son of ODD, Extreme Markup Languague, 2004: citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.124.7139&rep=rep1&type=pdf

4. Bauman, Syd y Flander, Julia, Odd customizations, Extreme Markup Languague, 2004: conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2004/Bauman01/EML2004Bauman01.html

5. www.wwp.brown.edu/research/publications/guide/html/customization.html
Today, scholarly digital editions represent one of the core application areas of the Digital Humanities. Virtual Research Environments (VREs) enable and support the creation, publication, and long-term archiving of such data. Answering an increasing demand for digital and collective research features in the humanities, the joint project TextGrid, funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research has, since its start in 2006 and in continuous exchange with the research community, developed a VRE that aims at mapping the entire research process. 

Whereas the TextGrid Laboratory (TextGridLab)  contains a versatile open source software for editing and generating digital sources collaboratively in a protected virtual environment, and allowing for a differentiated user rights management, the TextGrid Repository (TextGridRep) offers an open, XML/TEI-based long-term research archive, in which both the text and image data generated with the TextGridLab, as well as external digital objects, can be published, browsed, explored, analysed, cited, and archived. 

A crucial factor of a VRE’s success and impact is the use of both technological and semantic standards. The TextGrid architecture supports, amongst common metadata standards, the markup language XML together with the well-established markup data format TEI. They reflect international standards for the sustainable, searchable and reusable mark-up of humanistic sources, especially of digital editions. A differentiated user rights management facilitates collaborative work on a shared project in a non-public environment. Tools, data, and methods can be used mutually, regardless of the operative system, software equipment, or location. 

In addition to the tools and services available in the TextGridLab, the TextGridRep provides the user with the possibility to save, publish, and search a variety of digital resources such as XML/TEI encoded texts, images and databases, therefore supporting the creation of Linked Open Data. Thus, both core components of the VRE, the TextGridLab and the TextGridRep, are aligned for an optimal interaction, interlinkeage, and workflow between and with one another.

Beyond the creation of resources, TextGrid ensures the persistent availability of and access to research data as well as optimal interconnectivity, supporting international standards. Collaborative research is facilitated by e.g. the annotation of images; further annotation features are currently evaluated. 

Thus, TextGrid facilitates the creation of digital editions, from the provision and creation of primary data in XML to published and citable research data; data that can also be made available in an external online portal, or be exported into a print-ready document (PDF).

As of today, TextGrid has approx. 1.500 registered users and approx. 40 research projects from a broad spectrum of humanistic disciplines ranging from philology, cultural studies, medieval studies, jewish and ecclesiastical history to linguistic and musicological studies. Amongst them are single scholars and medium-scale research groups such as "Theodor Fontane's notebooks", as well as large, long-term projects like “Johann Friedrich Blumenbach – online” or “IDIOM – Interdisciplinary Dictionary of Classic Mayan”. 

The poster will display how a complete scholarly workflow can be mapped via a VRE like TextGrid – from collecting and generating primary data through enriching it with metadata and XML/TEI, and finally publishing it in a portal and/or a repository, following sustainable standards and thus allowing for citation, long-term accessibility, further interlinking and scholarly re-use. In this scope, the poster will not only focus on text-based research data, but will also explore technologies allowing for a web based annotation, viewing and publishing of image formats such as Digilib.



References
http://www.textgrid.de/en/

https://www.textgrid.de/en/registrationdownload/download-and-installation/

http://www.textgridrep.de/

http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml

http://www.uni-goettingen.de/en/303691.html

http://www.blumenbach-online.de/index.php?id=2&L=1

http://www.iae.uni-bonn.de/forschung/forschungsprojekte/laufende-projekte/idiom-dictionary-of-classic-mayan/idiom-english-project-description

http://digilib.berlios.de/
Matt Kirschenbaum argues that “the story of writing in the digital age is every bit as messy as the ink-stained rags that would have littered Gutenberg’s print shop or the hot molten lead of the Linotype machine” (Schuessler) but the digital humanities community has paid surprisingly little attention to the interfaces that have impacted digital writing, particularly with respect to the tools that enable text encoding or markup. The field has been founded on an understanding of the value of text markup for encoding, preservation, and interoperability. DH projects employ markup consistently in major text-oriented DH applications ranging from linguistics through the production of critical editions to the production of born-digital scholarship and scholarly journals. Yet DH scholars tend to use alternative tools such as mainstream word processors for extensive scholarly writing. Even for submissions to our annual conference, we do not require our community to submit in the form of TEI-encoded texts, even though months are invested annually preparing the book of abstracts for submission. By contrast, submissions to most conferences in the scientific community are routinely produced by the submitting scholars in LaTeX, minimizing the production costs of publishing the submissions (Gauduel 2006). Furthermore, there has been little extension of awareness into the broader scholarly community of the value of XML in general and the TEI in particular, and consequently little uptake beyond the DH community itself.

This is not because humanities scholars cannot use markup. The pervasive use of wikis, blogging software, and social networking sites that allow limited markup indicate that the principles of markup, at least as they relate to on-screen rendering in HTML, are easily acquired. However, such contexts are conducive neither to an understanding of the nuances and procedural affordances of complex markup nor of how it can structure an entire document; the markup is simply an isolated means to a presentational end. So there is still a considerable gulf between the knowledge base of the mainstream scholarly community and that of the DH community. This situation is exacerbated by the fact that use of XML still demands that users acquire and install editing software that is divorced from the usual contexts of scholarly production and because such packages require a degree of setup that is daunting. Furthermore, the interfaces of XML editing programs tend to be far removed from those with which mainstream scholars are familiar. That of the oXygen XML editing package, for instance, is closer to the look and feel of a Java editor, a programming environment, than it is to a WYSIWYG writing environment. Such applications are not conducive to use by humanities scholars, whose main activities are writing and editing. Members of the DH community have vocally opposed the concept of WYSIWYG XML editors on the grounds that they would undermine a writer’s understanding of the function of markup, although this is not a technical consideration: oXygen’s libraries have been designed to support the production of interfaces that can allow “non technical users to encode information in XML without actually knowing anything about the underlying XML format” (Bina 2013). There thus exists a tension between the requirements of technically adept super-users, who want power from their tools, and the basic usability of editing interfaces with respect to writing, one that has been there from the early days of markup editors (Karney 1995).

The CWRC-Writer is the centerpiece of an online research environment, the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC), designed to support research on the study of writing in and about Canada. It aims at a user base of mainstream literary scholars, and recognizes the gap in knowledge between that community and digital humanists with respect to best practices for digital resource production. The CWRC-Writer is meant to work with the Collaboratory’s other online tools to help bridge that gap by facilitating the production of born-digital scholarship and primary text editions in XML. CWRC will provide an online repository to house digital objects for members of its research community. These will range from bibliographical records, granular chronology entries, profiles of authors and other historical persons, prosopographic data and other entity records, and transcriptions of primary texts, as well as other document types, images, audio and video, although the emphasis remains on writing. CWRC encourages collaboration, whether or not scholars work together formally on a specific project. The CWRC infrastructure supports sharing, reuse, and continual enhancement of scholarly materials, as well as open-access dissemination. Thus one of the most common use cases we anticipate is that someone who is using CWRC for their research sees an error or an opportunity for enhancement within an existing object. We want to make it as easy as possible for that scholar to correct the OCR error, add missing bibliographical information, clarify an ambiguity, or smooth out some infelicitous language. The scholar should not need to download specialized software, but rather move easily from a reading interface to a production interface within the same browsing environment, adding further value to the scholarly resource quickly and easily, in keeping with the realization that we need to overcome siloage between applications (Bradley and Hill 2011).

This is our main use case. Nevertheless, we do have amongst our user community serious textual editors who plan to create digital editions. Our assumption has always been that for heavy-duty markup or transformations one would need to go outside the CWRC-Writer environment to a full-featured XML editor. These advanced users are understandably testing the CWRC-Writer interface from the perspective of their full range of needs. Moreover, since we began publicizing development of the CWRC-Writer, we have received expressions of interest from members of the DH community who want to consider it for use in TEI editing projects, as components of library-based DH tool suites, or for teaching XML. The possible use cases for CWRC-Writer are thus situated along a spectrum ranging from the production of born-digital content or primary text editions from scratch, in which case much of the technical demands of markup application need to be performed within CWRC-Writer itself, through to the quick fixing of errors or editorial revision of existing documents. This spectrum can be elaborated, so that the poles of these two use cases are aligned with the degree of complexity of the interface and indeed of functionality of the editor itself, and the level of expertise expected of the user.

Interface Complexity Expert users Production from scratch	
 

 <------------------->	Interface Simplicity Novice users Quick edits/fixes
Simplicity is also relative and contextual. While the CWRC-Writer does not support advanced XML features, its interface has considerable complexity as a result of its integration with other aspects of the Collaboratory. It is more complicated, for instance, than the newly launched DHwriter designed to facilitate the production of abstracts for the DH conference. Because CWRC aims to support interoperability and discoverability by using Linked Open Data entities for authority control, the interface is complicated by the fact that the editor combines the application of XML markup with the annotation of documents with RDF entities. To make this blended approach as seamless as possible, we have mapped our RDF specifications for named entities onto the equivalent tags within supported XML schemas. Thus users identifying a person’s name within a text are simultaneously applying a <persName> tag, if the document is using a TEI schema, as well as creating an RDF Open Annotation object. This increases the challenge of interface design in a number of ways. For instance, there are some basic conceptual confusions with respect to terminology, since there are two types of “tagging” available within the editor, sometimes operating in tandem and sometimes not. Tagging means different things within technical vocabularies and mainstream folksonomic contexts, so it is a balancing act to bridge from popular literacies to the CWRC-Writer environment while also retaining sufficient accuracy of terminology to help develop digital humanities literacies. The resulting confusion has emerged as a theme in our user testing to date and brings home the extent to which the CWRC-Writer emerges from an expanded understanding of annotations and their potential to support new paradigms of interoperative and interactive digital scholarly environments (Bradley 2012; Grassi 2013).

We last reported on the CWRC-Writer editor in a pre-alpha state, since which it has undergone numerous development iterations and substantial user testing. By DH2014 we will have conducted our most extensive user testing on the beta version, with users ranging from novices to DH experts. Our aim is not only to improve the functionality of the system as an editor, but to try to understand how the interface works as a writing and encoding environment for various types of users, including asking respondents to compare the interface experience to other writing environments, both Web- and PC-based.

The poster will thus do the following:

Provide two computers on which people can test the CWRC-Writer;
Summarize the major affordances of the editor and the concepts behind it;
Summarize the results of the user testing.
The testing results will allow us to situate the CWRC-Writer as a tool within the current editing landscape, along the spectrum outlined above, and to evaluate the use cases for which the CWRC-Writer is best suited. The poster will facilitate dialogue regarding the relationship amongst text encoding, Semantic Web technologies, and mainstream scholarly writing processes. The testing results will provide insights into the tensions in interface design between expert vocabularies and best practices, on the one hand, and mainstream vocabularies and scholarly pragmatics on the other. We hope to make a contribution to “ways of seeing” (Kirschenbaum 2004) markup environments and relation to digital scholarly production on the Web.

References
Bina, George (2013). “Customizing a General Purpose XML Editor: oXygen's Authoring Environment.” Proceedings of the International Symposium on Native XML User Interfaces, 2013. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol11/html/Bina01/BalisageVol11-Bina01.html

Bradley, John (2012). “Towards a Richer Sense of Digital Annotation: Moving Beyond a ‘Media’ Orientation of the Annotation of Digital Objects.” DHQ 6.2 (2012).

Bradley, John and Timothy Hill (2011). “When WordHoard Met Pliny: Breaking Down of Interaction Silos Between Applications.” Digital Humanities 2011, Stanford University, June 19– 22, 2011. http://pliny.cch.kcl.ac.uk/docs/Stanford-Poster.pdf

Brown, Susan (n.d.). “Scaling Up Collaboration Online: Towards a Collaboratory for Research on Canadian Writing.” International Journal of Canadian Studies. Forthcoming.

Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory. www.cwrc.ca CWRC-Writer. https://github.com/cwrc/CWRC-Writer DHwriter. dhwriter.org

Gaudeul, Alexia (2006). “Do Open Source Developers Respond to Competition?: The (La)TeX Case Study.” (March 27, 2006). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=908946 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.908946

Grassi, Marco, Simone Fonda, and Franceso Piazza (2013). “Pundit: augmenting web contents with semantics.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 28.4 (2013).

Karney, James (1995). “Author/Editor.” PC Magazine 7 February 1995. 153ff.

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. (2004). “‘So the Colors Cover the Wires’: Interface, Aesthetics, and Usability.” A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth. Oxford: Blackwell. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/

Rockwell, Geoffrey, Susan Brown, James Chartrand, and Susan Hesemeier. (2012). “CWRC- Writer: An In-Browser XML Editor.” Digital Humanities 2012 Conference, Hamburg, July 16–22. Digital Humanities 2012 Conference Abstracts. Hamburg University.

Schussler, Jennifer (2011). “The Muses of Insert, Delete and Execute.” New York Times, 25 December 2011.
1. Introduction
The Initiative for Digital Humanities, Media, and Culture at Texas A&M University received a $734,000 grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation in 2012 to make machine readable 45 million pages of data1. By partnering with Gale and Proquest, eMOP will combine open source OCR (Optical Character Recognition) software and book history in order to improve the accuracy of

OCR for early modern (1473-1800) texts2. The Early Modern OCR Project (eMOP) aims to publish an open source OCR workflow, improve the visibility of early modern texts by making them fully searchable3, and form a community of scholars and institutions interested in the digital preservation of these texts4. Our goal is to foster collaboration among various disciplines, and, in doing so, cultivate inter-institutional and international relationships that make possible new kinds of humanities research.

2. Poster Description
Our workflow (see images below for two early drafts of our workflow, subject to change) blends the disciplines of book history, digital humanities, textual analysis, and machine learning in order to create a corpus of keyed texts that are far more correct than is now possible with the current set of tools. These keyed texts will improve access to early modern texts that are currently only searchable through “dirty” OCR or metadata alone. The open source OCR workflow will contain, among other things, access to an early modern font database, customization guidelines for the Tesseract OCR engine, post-processing and diagnostic algorithms, and crowdsourcing correction tools.


Fig. 1: Two versions of the eMOP workflow from October 2012 and February 2014, respectively.

In addition to presenting a detailed and accurate representation of our OCR workflow for early modern texts, we intend to present the following aspects of eMOP: 

Information on how to obtain the open source code for all of the tools, software, and workflows that eMOP has produced. 
How our tools and software can be used by individual scholars, instructors, and institutions in the classroom, for an OCR project, or for personal research. 
3. Demonstration Description
We intend to go beyond presenting an overview of the project; instead our poster and demonstration will communicate the concrete solutions found and software available to address the "OCR problem" from a Digital Humanities perspective. To this end, we will demo our our five crowdsourcing and scholar-sourcing correction tools for conference attendees. These demonstrations of the tools will be operating in production with our eMOP OCR output of the EEBO ECCO datasets (45 million pages).

The Franken+ tool, developed by Bryan Tarpley at Texas A&M, enables the creation of an “ideal” typeface using glyphs identified in scanned images of documents from the early modern period. Franken+ also exports these typefaces to a training library for the open-source OCR engine Tesseract5.
Aletheia Layout Editor (ALE), developed by PRImA at the University of Salford, is a crowd-sourced correction tool for re-drawing regions on problematic OCR’d pages, such as Title pages, multi-columned texts, image-heavy documents, and more.
The TypeWright software, developed by Performant Software Solutions and 18thConnect, enables users to correct the “dirty” OCR of an entire early modern document, and our partnership with ECCO allows 18thConnect to release fully corrected documents to their scholar-editors in plain text and TEI-A formats.
The Cobre tool, developed by Dr. Anton DuPlessis and Cushing Memorial Library at Texas A&M, enables scholar-experts to compare, re-order pages, and annotate the metadata for multiple printings of documents in the eMOP dataset. 
The Anachronaut tool, developed by a team of undergraduates and Dr. Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna at Texas A&M, is a Facebook game that uses the power of Facebook (and many layers of user confidence testing) to correct single words and phrases.
References
1. Mandell, Laura. Mellon Foundation Grant Proposal: "OCR'ing Early Modern Texts." Grant Proposal. 30 Jun 2012.

2. Heil, Jacob and Todd Samuelson.Book History in the Early Modern OCR Project, or, Bringing Balance to the Force. Journal for Early Modern Cultural Studies 13.4 (2013): 90-103. Web. 30 Oct 2013.

3. Mandell, Laura.Digitizing the Archive: The Necessity of an 'Early Modern' Period. Journal for Early Modern Cultural Studies 13.2 (2013): 83-92.

4. European Commission: The Comité des Sages.The New Renaissance: Report of the comité des sages on bringing Eu rope’s cultural heritage online. By Elizabeth Niggemann, et al. 10 Jan 2011.

5. Katayoun, Torabi, Jessica Durgan and Bryan Tarpley.Early modern OCR project (eMOP) at Texas A&M University: using Aletheia to train Tesseract. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM symposium on Document Engineering. New York: ACM, 2013.
The Open Philology Project (OPP) at the University of Leipzig aspires to re-assert the value of philology in its broadest sense and has been designed with the hope that it can contribute to any historical language that survives within the human record. It includes three different yet interdependent tasks:

(1) Open Greek and Latin Project (OGL): OGL is currently collecting and scanning editions of classical texts in an effort to build the largest and most comprehensive open-source library of classical philology to date, concurrently contributing to the expansion of Google Books. Where existing corpora of Greek and Latin have generally included one edition of a work, the OGL corpus is designed to manage multiple, copyright-free editions and translations.

The digitization workflow involves OCR, correction and encoding in EpiDoc-compliant XML. The large volume of data we aim to generate requires significant computational power and task management, thus entreating a partnership with two Data Entry companies who carry out each operation under the supervision of the Leipzig team. While performed by our contractors, OCR correction is facilitated and partly automated thanks to a proofreading tool jointly developed by Leipzig, Mount Allison University and the CNR (Bruce Robertson of Mount Allison University, Canada, and Federico Boschetti of the CNR, Italy) Works currently under conversion include, amongst others, the Patrologia Latina, the Patrologia Graeca, the Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca.

Moreover, Leipzig has established international collaborations aiming at creating open-source, curated collections and electronic editions of Greek and Latin literature. Editorial projects include the Digital Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorumproject, Digital Athenaeus, and Bibliotheca Aeschylea. Furthermore, collaborations with Croatia, Bulgaria and Georgia will yield machine-actionable versions of translations of classical literature in these languages, thus opening-up research into less-explored textual heritage.

(2) Historical Languages e-Learning Project (eLP): the development of dynamic textbooks that use richly annotated corpora to teach the vocabulary and grammar of texts that learners have chosen to read, and at the same time engage users in collaboratively producing new annotated data. eLPis developing computationally customized learning materials for historical languages, beginning with Ancient Greek. The text selected for the pilot is the Pentecontaetia, part of Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War. Users learn through active engagement with the text and through the contribution of their own annotations. Future work will extend the system to accommodate other corpora.

At the core of eLP lies increasing the accessibility and enjoyability of the morphosyntactic and semantic annotation of text (e.g. treebanking), including that deriving from the OGL corpus. The creation of such a richly annotated and searchable text repository will serve a variety of purposes, including research in philology, Natural Language Processing (NLP), historical linguistics, and second language acquisition (SLA).

The production of automated queries to support this dynamic, customized, and localized interface relies upon the backend storage of complex textual data. The chosen graph model meets the broad requirements of the e-Learning application while retaining features of the real world objects represented by the data. The absence of schemas within graph databases enables extensibility, while maintaining a stable experience for users through the use of REST APIs.3 The web interface takes the data and adapts its presentation to individual needs and access devices. HTML5, CSS3, and responsive technologies provide an appropriate experience to users regardless of how they access the system, while templating systems allow for resources that are structurally accessible via any first language.

(3) Open Publications and Data Revenue Models: OPP is establishing a new model of scholarly publication in a born digital environment. Such a task is accomplished through Perseids, which is a collaborative platform for annotating TEI XML documents in Classics, including inscriptions and manuscripts. The main publication model within the OPP is the Leipzig Open Fragmentary Texts Series, whose goal is to establish open editions of ancient works that survive through quotations and re-uses in later texts. Such editions are fundamentally hypertexts and the effort is to produce a dynamic infrastructure for a full representation of relationships between sources, quotations, and annotations about them.

With open data meaning by definition free access for all users, the OPP team has already begun thinking of ways for it to be financially sustainable for years to come. The team intends to devise business models to sustain and maintain distributed open source learning and discourse. The core principle is to move away from charging for monopoly access to data, to charging instead for services that allow users to identify, analyze and then contribute to increasingly complex open data, with services for faculties, students and for the interested public set at recognized and affordable price points.

References
Bruce Robertson of Mount Allison University, Canada, and Federico Boschetti of the CNR, Italy.

Digital Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum (DFHG): www.dh.uni-leipzig.de/wo/open-philology-project/the-leipzig-open-fragmentary-texts-series-lofts/digital-fragmenta-historicorum-graecorum-dfhg-project; Digital Athenaeus (with the University of Nebraska and the Perseus Digital Library), Bibliotheca Aeschylea (with researchers based in Leipzig and in Italy).

For more information about REST APIs, see: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer (Accessed: 4 March 2014).
This poster represents the first stage of a larger project on automated genre classification in a collection of a million volumes (the HathiTrust collection of English-language books 1700-1950). Much existing work on genre classification has focused on fine distinctions between subgenres of fiction1 or poetry.2 But in mapping a large digital library, "genre" is a term that has a range of different meanings appropriate to different scales of analysis.3 Before we can even attempt to make subtle discriminations between, say, "the sensation novel" and "detective fiction," we need to create a simpler map of the collection that identifies sections of each volume broadly as "prose fiction" or "drama," or for that matter as "publishers' ads" or a "library bookplate." At the University of Illinois, we've developed an automated workflow that we feel does this initial mapping accurately enough for distant reading. The technique was described at the IEEE Big Humanities workshop in October, 2013,4 with a brief illustration, but we haven't yet presented results across a broad range of genres. That's what this poster will do.

 In an ideal world, structural features of a volume would be coded manually with TEI. But since large digital libraries collect plain text rather than TEI, mining large collections will initially require an automated strategy. Our strategy involves training an ensemble of classifiers to recognize genres and aspects of volume structure at the page level. For instance, we train classifiers to recognize "prose fiction" and "drama," but also "tables of contents," "bookplates," "date due slips," and "publishers' ads." By themselves these classifiers can achieve reasonable accuracy, but we've also found it useful to pair them with another level of machine learning: a hidden Markov model trained on page sequences that implicitly learns about the larger-scale patterns that organize page-level features into volumes. (For instance, indexes are more likely to follow nonfiction than fiction, and not at all likely to precede fiction.)


Fig. 1: Tenfold cross-validation of page-level classification. The top seven rows are F1 measures for individual genres; the bottom two rows reflect macro- and micro- averaged F1 measures for all genres. Green bars indicate raw classification accuracy before smoothing; blue bars reflect gains from hidden Markov smoothing.

A preliminary tenfold cross-validation of this technique is presented in Figure 1. This was based on relatively modest training data (101 volumes); by the time we present in Lausanne we expect to be able to increase the size of the training set by an order of magnitude, and significantly increase accuracy. But even with an F1 metric in the range of 85-90%, the technique is accurate enough to illuminate the broad outlines of book history, revealing roughly what proportion of the collection is devoted to nonfiction, or fiction, or (as illustrated in Fig. 2) publisher's advertisements. Here we've focused specifically on publishers' advertisements in volumes of fiction, and graphed their prevalence as a percentage of words in the fiction corpus.


Fig. 2: The yearly percentage of words devoted to publishers' advertisements, in 5000 volumes of fiction selected randomly from a larger corpus of 32,200.

In the poster we will include a streamgraph visualizing the relative sizes of major literary genres across time (for instance, verse drama, lyric poetry, narrative poetry, prose fiction), as well as smaller graphs that visualize the history of particular structural features within volumes (for instance, for the prose footnotes that occupy a great deal of space in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century volumes of poetry).5

References
1. S. Allison, R. Heuser, M. Jockers, F. Moretti and M. Witmore. (2011) Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment, Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlet Series. [Online]. Available: litlab.stanford.edu/?page id=255

2. B. Yu. (2008) An Evaluation of Text Classification Methods for Literary Study, in Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23 (2008): 327-343.

3. M. Santini. (2004) State-of-the-Art on Automatic Genre Identification, Information Technology Research Institute Technical Report Series, ITRI, University of Brighton, Jan. 2004.

4. T. Underwood, M. L. Black, L. Auvil, and B. Capitanu (2013). Mapping Mutable Genres in Structurally Complex Volumes. Proceedings of IEEE Big Data 2013. arxiv.org/abs/1309.3323

5. This poster reflects work by Shawn Ballard, a graduate student in English at the University of Illinois, who may be added as co-author in the final version. The project has also been supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the American Council of Learned Societies.
Introduction: Difficulties in Working with Handwritten Manuscripts 
Some of historically important manuscripts, especially those written in the modern age, are hard to read due to their authors' unclear handwriting. Transcription processes for these manuscripts tend to be more time-consuming, eventually decreasing historians' productivity. When manuscripts are written in East-Asian languages such as Japanese, which have a vast number of characters, transcriptions are even harder. Because historians of the modern age face the challenge of studying a large number of documents, these difficulties can be crucial to them. 

SMART-GS, a system for image-based historical studies, has been developed by Japanese historians and developers since 2006 to help historians work on such manuscripts, and has been successfully applied to six historical research projects1. It is written in Java, and runs on Windows, OS X, and Linux. Its source code is distributed on sourceforge.jp under the GPL 2.0 license2. In this paper, we will discuss the approach the SMART-GS project has taken, and its applications to historical studies of handwritten documents. 

Project Background
SMART-GS was originally developed by Susumu Hayashi for his study of the history of 19th century mathematics. It was first built for helping the analysis of the mathematical notebooks of the prominent mathematician David Hilbert. These notebooks consist of short notes, each expressing Hilbert's mathematical ideas. In order to identify the time of writing of the notes, Hayashi developed a system that supports image-and-text markup, one-to-many links between markups, search of handwritten texts, and so on. Later the system, named SMART-GS, turned out to be applicable to other historical studies and has been adopted so far by six research programs for the analysis of handwritten manuscripts. 

There are a number of applications and web services which look similar to SMART-GS, such as Image-Markup-Tool3 and T-PEN4. However, they are mainly aimed at creating transcriptions or annotations for archival purposes, whereas SMART-GS is designed for a different purpose: to streamline historians' work flows, making them more productive.

Supported Features
One of the most basic features of SMART-GS is its markup system for texts and images. SMART-GS can markup an image region in various ways: selecting it with a rectangle or polygon shape, putting comments on it, drawing an arrow from one region to another, and so on (See Fig. 1). This markup information will be stored in an XML file separately from the original images. Therefore a user only has to exchange a small XML file to share his or her project with others; provided they have the same image files. In addition, it's possible to create a bidirectional and one-to-many link between any two markups. This feature enables users to make correspondences between an image region and its transcribed text. 


Fig. 1: Markups for image and text

For deciphering illegible words in manuscripts SMART-GS features an image search function. Using this feature users can easily find a word or phrase that has a similar shape to the query image (See Fig. 2). Also, SMART-GS supports adaptive-repetitive search, in which users can recursively increase the relevance of search results.


Fig. 2: Search results for an image query "Scheler", a German philosopher's name

For team-based projects SMART-GS offers resource sharing through the Internet. Metadata added on documents and their revision histories can be uploaded to and saved in the subversion-like version control server HCP (Humanities Cyber Platform), so that the project members can work together on the same documents (further cloud collaboration support is planned). 

Conclusion
Historical studies based on handwritten texts generally require considerable time and experiences. SMART-GS' features such as image-and-text markup, image search, and project sharing through the Internet, can streamline historians' workflows so that they can focus on the analysis of the content in the manuscripts. 

Currently we are implementing two other features into SMART-GS: a built-in TEI editor and automatic mass transcription function. Since at present SMART-GS only supports relatively simple HTML markup for texts, the semantic richness of TEI will bring more power of expression to its markup and link system. The automatic mass transcription will be realized as an application of SMART-GS' image search function. This feature will make it much more efficient to transcribe texts to which OCR is not applicable.

References
1. SMART-GS was for the first time presented in Hayashi, S. (2007). SMART-GS Project: a tool for seaching, marking up, and linking historical documents. A talk delivered in the 3rd international symposium of Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research Areas "Japanese Technological Innovations". sts.kahaku.go.jp/tokutei/intforumprogram_No2.php (Japanese)

2. en.sourceforge.jp/projects/smart-gs/

3. tapor.uvic.ca/~mholmes/image_markup/

4. t-pen.org/TPEN/
1. The SyMoGIH project and linked data
The SyMoGIH project has created an open modular platform for storing geo-historical information. The benefit of the platform is to allow researchers to share their data and texts in a collaborative environment. Up to now, about fifty students and scholars are contributing or contributed to the information collection, and ten research projects are using the platform to store data concerning different domains, such as intellectual, economic, social, institutional or religious history. The richness and heterogeneity of the shared information requires a generic data model which was designed with Merise (ERD) modeling method (cf. Beretta, Vernus 2012) and implemented in a relational postgreSQL database, to which users can connect via a user friendly AJAX web application (cf. Beretta, Vernus & Hours 2012). In parallel, we have recently proposed an environment using eXist-db to share XML/TEI encoded texts. The semantic annotation of named entities and knowledge units (i.e. informations) that we find in the texts is achieved by linking the semantic tags to the resources defined in the relational database.

In carrying out the latter, we realized the importance of identifying the database objects using URIs. In addition to the websites we offer for publishing the different datasets related to specific projects (for instance www.patronsdefrance.fr), we also created a generic website to deliver to the public the whole of our authority files and the knowledge units which the participating scholars decided to make public (www.symogih.org). As a first step, this website provides dereferencing of our URIs in form of a web page with the description of the resource (e.g. www.symogih.org/resource/Actr195 for Johannes Kepler) but it raises the issue of providing dereferencement in form of RDF data and, more widely, of connecting our data to those produced elsewhere. For this purpose, we made an ontology that suits our needs. 

2. From a project-specific ontology to a generic semantic model for historians
The generic nature of the SyMoGIH data model allows to easily transpose it to an OWL DL ontology. This project-specific ontology is designed to publish our data and it is based on four main classes : Object, KnowledgeUnit, Role and Sourcing (cf. Image 1). An Object can be a person, a place, a concept, a bibliographical object, etc. and can be linked to a KnowledgeUnit through a Role. A superclass AssociatedObject gathers Objects and KnowledgeUnits: this allows a KnowledgeUnit to be associated to another one as if it was an object. KnowledgeUnits are divided in two subclasses: an Information expresses knowledge as it is constructed by the historian using critical method and extracting it from different sources; a Content reproduces knowledge as it was meant by one and only one source, even if we know the source is wrong about an event date or circumstances. In both cases, Sourcing provides the origin of each knowledge unit. Specific KnowledgeUnits' and Roles' types appear as instances of the KnowledgeUnitType and RoleType classes: this means that the ontology is versatile, can be gradually expanded and virtually handles any type of knowledge.


Fig. 1: Classes and properties of the Symogih ontology (An instance like “Johannes Kepler (1571-1594)” belongs to the class http://symogih.org/ontology/Actor)

The SyMoGIH ontology bears close resemblance to similar ontologies elaborated by historians and scholars interested in the development of prosopographical databases, particularly the “factoïd” data model developed in King's College Department of Digital Humanities, London (Bradley/Pasin, 2013) and the “Aspekte” data model developed by the Personendaten-Repositorium (http://pdr.bbaw.de/) (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften). Although independently conceived, the SyMoGIH ontology shows also close similarities to the Simple Event Model ontology (van Hage et al. 2011) and the TemporalEntity in CIDOC-CRM (Doerr, 2003). This convergence of different semantic models treating time-related information has recently risen a discussion between their designers about the definition of a common ontology for publishing and sharing data produced by historical research.

3. Publishing and querying linked data
Pending the achievement of this very important discussion, we used our ontology to create an RDF view on our collaborative database. The implementation uses D2RQ1 to create a SPARQL endpoint by means of a term map realized according to the RDB2RDF principles2 that rewrites the database structure according to the SyMoGIH ontology. To increase the SPARQL endpoint performance and allow more sophisticated queries, we periodically dump the available data from D2RQ to an OpenLink Virtuoso triple store3 and we use OntoWiki4 for a visual presentation of the dataset. This project is still in experimental phase: at the moment, we are manually interlinking our resources with the one's found in DBPedia, IDRef5, etc. and we are testing federated queries to visualize and compare informations coming from different datasets. We are also testing semi-automatic interlinking with other data providers, like DBPedia or GND6. This will allow us not only to publish our data on the semantic web but also to compare the quality of available datasets and enrich them, offering new interesting perspectives to researchers in history (cf. Meroño-Peñuela et al 2013).

References
Beretta, F., & Vernus, P. (2012). Le projet SyMoGIH et la modélisation de l’information: une opération scientifique au service de l’histoire. Les Carnets du LARHRA, (1), 81–107. (http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00677658)

Beretta, F., Vernus, P., & Hours, B. (2012). Le Système modulaire de gestion de l’information historique (SyMoGIH): une plateforme collaborative et cumulative de stockage et d’exploitation de l’information géo-historique. Presented at the Digital Humanities 2012 in Hamburg (http://larhra.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr/iDocuments/SyMoGIH/Poster_SYMOGIH3_jpg.pdf). 

Michele Pasin and John Bradley (2013), Factoid-based prosopography and computer ontologies: Towards an integrated approach, Literary and Linguistic Computing Advance Access published June 29, 2013.

Doerr, M. (2003). The CIDOC CRM - An ontological approach to semantic interoperability of metadata. AI Magazine, 24, 2003. 

Meroño-Peñuela, A., van Erp, M., Breure, L., Scharnhorst, A., Schlobach, S., & van Harmelen, F. (2013). Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey.Semantic Web journal. 

van Hage, W. R., Malaisé, V., Segers, R., Hollink, L., & Schreiber, G. (2011). Design and use of the Simple Event Model (SEM). Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 9(2), 128–136. doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.03.003 

Vernus, P. (2009). ANR Système d’information: “Patrons et patronat français - XIXe - XXe siècles” (SIPPAF). Retrieved from http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00474109 

http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/

http://www.idref.fr/autorites/autorites.html

http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/rdb2rdf/r2rml/

http://d2rq.org/

http://pdr.bbaw.de/

http:// www.patronsdefrance.fr

http://www.loa.istc.cnr.it/DOLCE.html

http://symogih.org/ontology/Actor

http://www.dnb.de/EN/gnd
The Workspace for Collaborative Editing is a project funded by the AHRC (UK) and DFG (Germany) between September 2010 and December 2013. It has the goal of creating an online workspace to support the production of the Editio Critica Maiorof the Greek New Testament by teams based in Birmingham, Münster and Wuppertal and collaborators dispersed all over the world.1 The edition has been in progress since the 1990s, but the obsolescence of key tools and encodings have led to this ambitious project to connect all the different stages of the editorial process through online interfaces and shared databases. 

The production of a critical edition involves the identification and selection of manuscripts to be included, the acquisition of images, the creation of full-text electronic transcriptions (which are themselves published as separate electronic editions, linked to the electronic apparatus, enabling further research in related fields), the automatic comparison of these transcriptions to generate a critical apparatus of all variant readings, the editing of this apparatus by scholarly editors to filter out ‘noise’ and prepare the data for analysis using genealogical tools, the addition of evidence from early translations and biblical quotations and the publication of the material in electronic and printed form.

The aim of the Workspace project has been to adopt existing standards and open-source solutions in order to create a lightweight architecture capable of being easily renewed and updated, so that both the data and software created may be reused by other projects. The result is an open-source browser-based environment written in Python and Javascript. The core software consists of a MongoDB database and the asynchronous web application framework MAGPY. Data is stored in JSON and made available via a RESTful interface. On top of this is a layer of applications which call the relevant data objects for the individual editing processes. The goal of transparency at every level of the editing process means that a record is kept of each object at each stage of the process, and any modifications introduced are treated as additional records rather than replacing existing data.2

The Greek New Testament provides a very specific use-case, with a large amount of data already created and highly developed editorial principles. In addition, ongoing work by existing editorial teams offers the opportunity for immediate testing in real-life situations. Developing in these circumstances can be a challenge, with the evolution of guidelines, changes of editorial practice and 'creeping featurism'. The system needed to make existing legacy data compatible with the much more detailed XML encoding developed by the project and cater for as many known and potential scenarios as practicable. The dispersed team of editors was often called upon to codify their procedures and reach a common mind on problems presented by live data, including agreeing changes in policy. As a result, the creation of the Workspace has proceeded hand in hand with the development of different stages of the edition as a whole. 

The two principal areas in which the Workspace meets a pressing need are the development of a transcription editor, which produces and allows the editing of valid XML in a WYSIWYG environment, and a collation editor which enables the scholarly creation of a critical apparatus. Both of these are browser-based, in order to enable dispersed collaborators to work with differing operating systems and contribute directly to the central data store.

The Transcription Editor has been created by team members at the Trier Center for Digital Humanities and released as open-source at the end of the project.3 Its basis is the platform independent TinyMCE package.4 A set of options for mark-up was then developed through a series of menus and shortcuts (cf. Figure 1). The aim is to allow student and volunteer transcribers not familiar with XML to work in an environment which matches as closely as possible the format of the transcriptions already published in the system. The mark-up in the browser uses HTML encoding. An export function converts this into XML matching the specifications developed by the project.5 Likewise, an import function is required in order to support the editing of existing transcriptions. Some of the problems include the encoding and display of paratextual information, normally located in the margins of a manuscript. The dialogue box for entering this information has to have the same functionality as the main transcription interface for recording unclear or supplied text, corrections and so on. The concept has therefore been developed of the “editor-within-an-editor” which makes this possible. A problem with the import of existing transcriptions is the sequence within which elements were nested within the XML. As a result, it has been necessary to establish a system of tag sequences supported by the editor. The standalone nature of the Transcription Editor and its use of an agreed set of TEI encoding means that it can be installed as a plug-in to different environments, including the New Testament Virtual Manuscript Room (NTVMR 2.0)6 as well as the Workspace for the production of the critical edition.


Fig. 1: The Transcription Editor in the NTVMR environment. Based on the selection different menu options for breaks, corrections, deficiency, ornamentation, abbreviations, marginals, notes and punctuation are offered. Mouseovers and different colours help the users to identify different structures.

The Collation Editor provides an interface to the CollateX engine developed by the INTEREDITION project, the successor to the COLLATE program by Peter Robinson.7 This software performs one of the most mechanical and error-prone tasks in an edition, namely the comparison of all witnesses in each variation unit to build up a critical apparatus. Each file is aligned using an algorithm taking into account not just spelling variations, additions, omissions and substitutions, but also transpositions within each block of text. However, the output still requires considerable input from scholars in order to clean up the raw data for publication as a critical apparatus. The first stage is regularisation, the elimination of insignificant variations such as spelling errors. The variant readings are set out underneath a base text, with the witnesses attesting each reading visible in a mouseover box (see Figure 2). An interface built using the redips drag-and-drop library allows editors to drag-and-drop the readings for regularisation onto the correct form.8 For each regularisation, a dialogue box requires users to state the scope of the regularisation and also its nature. Once this is completed, the regularisation is marked in grey and a rule is saved to the database. The ‘recollate’ button sends the data back through CollateX, preferring the regularised token to the original form where present. This means that a different configuration of readings may appear in each column, as the data is cleaned up and a better match is made by the collation algorithm. The second stage involves setting the length of each variant unit, again implemented through a user-friendly drag-and-drop interface for combining or splitting neighbouring columns. One of the dangers with this interface is changing the overall sequence of words in a manuscript by combining different units and repositioning readings. A checking mechanism has therefore been developed which warns the user as soon as the sequence of any manuscript has been disrupted. On some occasions, the data is best displayed as two units of different lengths. By right-clicking on the relevant reading, it can be sent to a line below as an “overlapping variant”, which can then be combined and manipulated like the other columns. One further complication is that an overlapping variant such as a lengthy transposition of words may also contain a reading which should cited in the main sequence. The system therefore makes it possible to duplicate such readings. The final stage is the ordering of variant readings within each unit and assigning the appropriate reading identifier. From here, the apparatus can be output in a number of forms, such as a positive or negative plain text apparatus, an XML encoded apparatus, or a set of values for incorporation into a database for phylogenetic analysis. The information added in the regularisation dialogue box makes it possible to generate automatically the lists of original forms for orthographic variants and erroneous readings which are printed in an Appendix in the Editio Critica Maior.


Fig. 2: The regularisation interface with the dialogue box displayed.

The presentation will briefly demonstrate the Workspace, especially the two interfaces described above. We will discuss some of the problems encountered during its development, along with their solutions. Although the scope of the original project was specifically to support an edition of the Greek New Testament, a pilot project to customise the environment for an edition of Avestan texts will be outlined: from here, we hope that it will be possible to develop the Workspace for use with other textual traditions.

 

 

References
For the history of the ECM project, see Klaus Wachtel, Editing the Greek New Testament on the Threshold of the Twenty-first Century” Literary and Linguistic Computing 15 (2000), 43–50; D.C. Parker and Klaus Wachtel, The Joint IGNTP/INTF Editio Critica Maior of the Gospel of John: its goals and their significance for New Testament scholarship, presented at the Annual Meeting of SNTS, August 2-6, 2005, Halle. epapers.bham.ac.uk/754/.

2. For documentation, see zeth.github.io/magpy/index.html. The source code may be downloaded from github.com/zeth/magpy.

3. sourceforge.net/projects/wfce-ote/

4. www.tinymce.com/

5. H.A.G. Houghton, The Electronic Scriptorium: Markup for New Testament Manuscripts, in Claire Clivaz, Andrew Gregory and David Hamidovic (edd.), Digital Humanities in Biblical, Early Jewish and Early Christian Studies, Leiden: Brill (2013), pp. 31–60; the latest version of the specifications is at epapers.bham.ac.uk/1727.

6. ntvmr.uni-muenster.de/en_GB/transcribing

7. P.M.W. Robinson (1994), Collate: Interactive Collation of Large Textual Traditions, Version 2. Computer Program distributed by the Oxford University Centre for Humanities Computing, Oxford. The history of Collate is described by Robinson in a 2007 blog post at: www.sd-editions.com/blog/?p=15. For CollateX, see www.interedition.eu/. The source code is available from collatex.net/.

8. www.redips.net/javascript/drag-and-drop-table-content/
Transcribo is a graphical editor for transcribing and annotating textual witnesses, which is being developed at Trier Center for Digital Humanities and Bergische Universität Wuppertal for the project Arthur Schnitzler: Digitale historisch-kritische Edition (Werke 1905–1931 . While it will be available as an independent stand-alone version, it forms the basis of the project's virtual edition platform which significantly expands its functionality.
Project and Requirements

Funded by the Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaften and collaborating with Deutsches Literaturarchiv Marbach, our long-time project aims to create a digital critical edition that makes available both printed works and Schnitzler's estate in an up-to-date and philologically dependable form.
Next to the edited text, the focus will be equally on the materiality and the genetic dimension of the work, which involves various methodological challenges. Along with the complexity and sheer size of the underlying material (> 12000 pages to transcribe) it became obvious very soon that the objectives were not to be attained with existing software solutions (being mostly optimized for the reworking of existing transcripts).
Transcribo was therefore developed from scratch for the efficient creation of large amounts of differentiated, deeply annotated transcriptions, which is reflected in its entire layout.
Transcribo: Features and Interface

The graphical user interface is centered around the digital facsimile, usually the scanned physical witness. This facsimile is duplicated, so that the original can always be viewed unobstructed, while all processing steps take place on the slightly grayed duplicate. This arrangement accommodates the use of multiple monitors and particularly saves a time-consuming jumping back and forth between the image and editor window. Thus, selections in rectangle or polygon shape can be drawn topographically precisely above the graphic and the transcribed text can be entered directly. This also simplifies, if desired, to proceed in a non-linear way and create the transcripts in any order, for instance to treat graphically related, but spatially separated locations in one step.Furthermore, an OCR (with optional image optimization such as contrast and color adjustment) is integrated for the detection of typescripts, providing a raw transcription for the editors to build upon
In doing so, it is essential that any recorded unit can be commented and that philologically and genetically relevant phenomena can be annotated in a uniform way. This is achieved by context menus with a wide and project-specific choice of options. So far, this includes different variants of corrections and changes inserted by author or editors, the labeling of unsafe readings or unidentified graphs, the marking of graphical elements or global attributes of witness and writing instruments. This selection can be extended at will and will be adapted to the textual requirements over the entire course of the project.
Also, transcribed units can be combined into sequences, whether to document comprehensive semantic or genetic correlations such as combined changes or, in case of extensive overrides and insertions, to mark the resulting textual order.
 Since each facsimile is a separate unit, no cross-page connections can be documented in the stand-alone version of the software, a shortcoming that is remedied by its connecting to a database system.

Fig. 1: Transcribing and annotating a manuscript
Transcribo and FuD: Extending the Reach

At this point, however, a basic methodological problem arises: The superposition of a semantic, genetic, and material-documentary perspective creates different levels of description which overlap and intersect. Such configurations are very cumbersome to handle by exclusively XML-based data structures or software solutions. This is one of the reasons why the developers refrained from letting the users work directly in an XML environment. Instead, the program is based on an internal data structure, the complexity of which is attenuated by the graphical interface, while the results can be exported at any time to XML/TEI.
Moreover, it allows for a seamless integration into an existing environment, the Research Network and Database System “FuD”[i].
Transferring the content into a centralized database system and associated infrastructure further expands the capabilities. The existing options for annotation can thus be extended to sequences of any size, independently of given material or logical units. Furthermore there are already proven tools for the managing of metadata and marking of related motifs. Also, auxiliary functions such as a graphematic search can be implemented: if an editor is uncertain about a specific transcription, all previously recognized graphical equivalents to a given sequence of letters can be displayed. As outlined in our last year’s contribution, further program modules are currently being developed which allow the visualization and the comparison of writing stages.
References

www.arthur-schnitzler.de (will go online on Nov. 15th, 2013).
For details, see also: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-412.html.
Forschungsnetzwerk und Datenbanksystem: fud.uni-trier.de.
We may see, in a TEI transcription of an old book, the lines:
 
<pb n="[iii]"/> <p>Quaestiones, quae ad mathematicae fundamenta pertinent, etsi hisce temporibus a multis tractatae, satisfacienti solutione et adhuc carent.
 
What do they mean? How do we know what they mean? Can we model their meaning formally?
Formalizing the meaning of arbitrary natural-language utterances remains intractable today. But markup languages, being formally defined artificial languages, appear more approachable. So we may be able to explain what the <pb> and <p> elements mean, even if the sense of the Latin eludes formalization. Some propose to explicate the meaning of markup by specifying, for each construct in a markup vocabulary, a sentence schema in a natural language, with blanks to be filled in with data from the document 1; others make a similar proposal but allow sentence schemata in formal languages like first-order predicate logic as well 2. This appears straightforward, although far from trivial, for metadata 3and perhaps even for born-digital texts, but how shall the meaning of <p> be formalized in a markup language which defines it as containing a transcription of a text block in a manuscript? What does it mean for a document to be a transcription of another document? Can we formalize that?
Earlier work has explored the nature of the similarity between transcripts and their exemplars. Perhaps it consists simply in their containing the same sequence of characters? This can be formalized but proves disappointing, partly because it omits text structures like division into paragraphs and partly because it offers no way of describing disagreements among transcribers about how to read the exemplar, or which character distinctions (e.g. i/j, u/v, s/ſ) to retain and which to level. It is also wrong: few transcripts have exactly the same character sequence as their exemplar 4. Later work extends the analysis from characters to higher-level textual structures and models transcriber agreement and disagreement explicitly 5 6. (Paul Caton has built on this idea to propose pure transcriptional markup as an approach to the problems of transcription semantics 7.) By treating higher-level constructs as tokens of higher-level types and using the sentence schemata mentioned earlier, we believe one can formalize the meaning of tokens (characters, words, and XML elements like <p> and <pb> alike) in transcriptions.
Clearly, however, the meaning of tokens in a transcription depends on the transcription conventions adopted, which vary. There is hardly any universal transcription practice: for every generalization we find exceptions 8 9 1011 . Is everything in the exemplar transcribed? Not when deletions and irrelevant material are excluded. Does everything in the transcription reproduce some word or character in the exemplar? Not when line breaks are marked explicitly with vertical bars, or notes are added. Many scholarly editions account for variations like these in an explicit statement of transcription practice. Such statements typically describe ways in which practice varies from the usual practice, but rarely the ways in which it exemplifies normal practice. In any community of scholarship, some common practice is typically felt to be so obvious that it needs no mention or explanation.
One job of formalization is to make explicit practices and assumptions otherwise passed over in silence.
We propose a notion we shall call transcriptional implicature, denoting a set of rules which apply by default but which may be overridden in particular cases, analogous to the rules of conversational implicature proposed by H. P. Grice as a way of explicating the logic of everyday conversation12. The operational definition of transcriptional implicature for a given community is “the set of rules no one in the community bothers to mention explicitly”.
Different communities of transcription practice have different sets of tacit assumptions and thus different rules of transcriptional implicature. Is there a common core of transcriptional practice shared by all communities? Maybe; it's an empirical question. A serious answer would require detailed study of a wide variety of communities of practice. We postulate, however, that the transcriptional implicature of any community of practice can be described with reference to some default set of rules for transcriptional implicature.
The transcriptional practice of any given project is commonly documented by listing its deviations from the transcriptional implicature of the relevant community. If that transcriptional implicature can (as postulated) be described as a set of deviations from the default transcriptional implicature, then it follows that any project's transcription practice can be described with reference to the default transcriptional implicature, by merging the two lists of differences.
We propose to identify this hypothetical default transcriptional implicature with the rules outlined below. In the formalizations, “T” denotes a transcript, “E” its exemplar.
Adopting the extended use of the type/token distinction mentioned above, the default transcriptional implicature can be summed up in a single rule:
1. A transcript and its exemplar have the same type. Formally:
type(T) = type(E)
In interesting cases, E will have a complex type consisting of some structure of smaller types (which in turn consist of smaller ones still), instantiated by a complex token which similarly consists of smaller tokens. It is a consequence of (1) that:
2. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the tokens of a transcript and the tokens of its exemplar, such that every pair of corresponding tokens have the same type.  
Formally, this is a second-order statement, but we can approximate it using the following first-order sentence, which assumes a function tokens which maps from a document to the set of tokens contained in that document, and the relations RET (mapping from tokens(E) to tokens(T)) and RTE (the other way round).
(∀ t1 : tokens(E))    (∃1 t2 : tokens(T))      (t2 = RET(t1)) ∧ (∀ t1 : tokens(T))    (∃1 t2 :tokens(E))      (t2 = RTE(t1)) ∧ (∀ t1 : tokens(E), t2 : tokens(T))    (t2 = RET(t1) ⇔ t1 = RTE(t2)    ∧ type(t1) = type(RET(t1)))
It is easier to relate variations in transcription practices to the default transcriptional implicature if we paraphrase (2) as a conjunction of simpler rules (3) - (6):
3. For every token in the exemplar there is exactly one corresponding token in the transcript.
(∀ t1 : tokens(E)) (∃1 t2 : tokens(T)) (t2 = RTE(t1))
Applied to the example with which this document begins, this means: each token in the exemplar maps to a token in the transcript. We can infer that the sentence quoted does not contain the word non, because otherwise non would appear in the transcript.
4. For every token in the transcript there is exactly one corresponding token in the exemplar.
(∀ t1 : tokens(T)) (∃1 t2 : tokens(E)) (t2 = RET(t1))
Applied to the example: each token in the transcript maps to some token in the exemplar. We can infer that the exemplar contains some token corresponding to the word Quaestiones in the transcript.
5. The relations identified in rules (3) and (4) are inverses: that is, for every pair of tokens t1 in the exemplar and t2 in the transcript, if t2 corresponds to t1 as described in rule (3), then t1 corresponds to t2 as described in rule (4).
(∀ t1 : tokens(E), t2 : tokens(T)) (t2 = RET(t1) ⇔ t1 = RTE(t2))
6. In every pair of corresponding tokens, the two tokens are tokens of the same type.
(∀ t1 : tokens(E)) (type(t1) = type(RET(t1)))
Applied to the example: we can infer that the token in the exemplar which corresponds to the word Quaestiones in the transcript is itself a token of the same word type.
We observe that many, perhaps all, variations in transcription practice can be classified by which rule they override.
Silent expansion of abbreviations and normalization of spelling exclude some individual characters in E and T from the scope of rules (3) and (4); those rules typically still apply to words and higher-level tokens.
Expansion of abbreviations in brackets can preserve the character-level mapping, but introduces characters in T which are exceptions to rule (4), since they lack corresponding characters in E. The use of vertical bars (|) in T to record line breaks in E is also an exception to rule (4).
Omission of selected material (deleted words, additions from a second hand, ...) modifies rule (3) by identifying tokens in E which are not represented in T.
Both transcriptions which distinguish archaic allographs (i/j, u/v, s/ſ) and those which level non-graphemic distinctions obey rule (6), but they read the document with different type systems.
The principle of charity (“in cases of doubt assume E is correct”) can also be interpreted as a further elaboration of rule (6).
The full paper will explore these and further ways in which the practice of transcription can deviate from the default rules of transcriptional implicature as we proposed to define them, and show how the variations in practice can be described formally.
References

1. Marcoux, Yves (2006). A natural-language approach to modeling: Why is some XML so difficult to write? Paper given at Extreme Markup Languages, Montréal. Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages 2006. On the Web at conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2006/Marcoux01/EML2006Marcoux01.html.
2. Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Claus Huitfeldt, and Allen Renear (2001). Meaning and interpretation of markup. Markup Languages: Theory & Practice 2.3: 215–234. On the Web at cmsmcq.com/2000/mim.html
3. Wickett, Karen M., and Allen Renear (2009). A first order theory of bibliographic objects. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 46.1: 1–8. On the Web at onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/meet.2009.1450460378/full (subscription required).
4. Huitfeldt, Claus, and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2008). What is transcription? Literary & Linguistic Computing 23.3: 295-310.
5. Sperberg-McQueen, C. M.. Claus Huitfeldt, and Yves Marcoux (2009). What is transcription? Part 2. Talk given at Digital Humanities, College Park, Maryland. Slides on the Web at blackmesatech.com/2009/06/dh2009.
6. Huitfeldt, Claus, Yves Marcoux, and C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (2010). Extension of the type/token distinction to document structure. Paper presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010, Montréal, Canada, August 3 - 6, 2010. In Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 5. doi:10.4242/BalisageVol5.Huitfeldt01. On the Web at www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol5/html/Huitfeldt01/BalisageVol5-Huitfeldt01.html.
7. Caton, Paul (2013). Pure transcriptional encoding. Paper given at Digital Humanities 2013, Lincoln, Nebraska.
8. Carter, Clarence E. Historical editing. Bulletins of the national archives, Number 7. [Washington, DC]: National Archives and Records Service, August 1952. National Archives publication number 53-4.
9. Tanselle, G. Thomas (1989). A Rationale of Textual Criticism Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 104 pp.
10. Vander Meulen, David, and G. Thomas Tanselle (1999), A system of manuscript transcription Studies in Bibliography 52: 201-212.
11. Robinson, Peter, and Elizabeth Solopova (2006), Guidelines for Transcription of the Manuscripts of The Wife of Bath's Prologue. 18 March 2006. On the Web at www.canterburytalesproject.org/pubs/transguide-MI.pdf.
12. Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and Conversation, Syntax and Semantics, vol.3 edited by P. Cole and J. Morgan, Academic Press. Reprinted as ch.2 of his Studies in the Way of Words (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), pp. 22–40.

1. Introduction

From the earliest e-Text centers at Oxford1 and the University of Virginia 2, through the development of the TEI in the late 1980s3, to the publication of image-based editions in projects like The William Blake Archive 4, digital editing projects have long been a core activity of the Digital Humanities. Until very recently, though, the limitations of reliably available technology and complicated intellectual property laws have kept all but the most adventurous editors from venturing beyond the media of text and image to multimodal editions that incorporated video and audio recordings. Over the past year, however, the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts has released two new digital editing projects: an online tool for producing editions of dance video and a mobile app for publishing multimodal, variorum editions of musical theater libretti. This paper will examine both projects and what they imply for the future of critical edition building in the 21st century.
2. Antecedents

Although most digital editions produced by digital humanities scholars have presented only text and image, over the past two decades, a few pioneers attempted to produce multimodal texts of various kinds. In the 1993s the Voyager Company produced a series of Hypercard and CD-ROM based multimodal editions (such as a Companion to Beethoven’s 9th Symphony) 5. A 2002 project led by Janet Murray produced a critical digital edition of the film, Casablanca 6.  More recently, the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities, Music Theatre Online, produced with an NEH Digital Humanities Startup grant by the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities, linked several libretti of the 2008 musical Glory Days to mp3 files from live performances7.  Although each was an interesting experiment that advanced the field of digital editing, the Voyager CD-ROMs were never financially successful 8 , copyright restrictions prevented the widespread release of Murray's Casablanca edition, and Music Theater Online never found a large audience.
Over the last five years, though, several new technologies have emerged which have made the production and dissemination of multimodal editions much easier. The now widely adopted, video-and-audio-friendly HTML 5 specification and code libraries like Popcorn.js have made it much easier to embed and control audio and moving image recordings on web pages without relying on external plugins like Adobe's Flash or Microsoft's Shockwave. Cloud-based streaming services with public APIs such as Rdio9 and YouTube10 allow digital editors to make use of content hosted by third parties (making rights clearance less of a concern). Further, the ever accelerating migration of users from desktops and laptops to mobile devices and their app-based ecosystem makes it possible to publish these editions on hardware that has become a comfortable technology for long-form reading (thereby overcoming some of the ergonomic obstacles that prevented wide-spread adoption of many earlier digital editions).
3. Our projects


Fig. 1: Two video synchronized and shown together

Fig. 2: The editing environment
In October of 2013, the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts released a collection of over 1000 hours of video of dance performance via a new web-based collections portal. In addition, we released a web-based video editor, based on the JavaScript library Popcorn.js, which allows users to synchronize different videos of the same event (or work) together to be watched side-by-side (thereby creating a kind of multimodal variorum edition) [see figure A].  The tool also allows segments of multiple videos from various sources (e.g. NYPL Archives and YouTube) to be edited together into a playlist and annotated (either with text or additional videos) to create a video critical edition [see figure B]. The individual elements of any "edition" created with this tool will only be played in locations where rights agreements allow (for instance, in one of the 88 branches of New York Public Library), but any publicly viewable content and textual annotations can be seen anywhere in the world.

Fig. 3: Libretto: The Android App
In February of 2014, the Library will also release an NEH-funded eBook app (provisionally titled Libretto) for Android operating systems capable of presenting variorum editions of texts linked to audio recordings. Readers will be able to switch among variant versions of the same text, and (through an implementation of the new ePub 3.0 ebook standard) click portions of the text to hear associated audio (e.g. music associated with lyrics in an opera libretto) [see figure C].  In most cases, the music should be bundled with the text, but, in cases where obtaining a license to redistribute the music proves impossible, the editor may link the reader to an online store (such as Amazon.com) to purchase recordings which will automatically be synched to the text based on timestamps included in the editorial metadata.
4. Analysis

It is our hypothesis that scholarly users of the multimodal editions created for these environments will find the multichannel approach we have taken useful. However, relatively little research has been done in exactly this context. The Voyager company's CD-ROMS and the Casablanca edition were similar, but designed only for desktops and optical media, and so represented a different experience than we hope to provide with both our mobile eBook reader and the web-based video editor. However, by July, the video editing tool will have be public for nine months and Android app will have been public for about five.  During this period we will track usage of both, and in this short paper will report on the response of both editors and “readers” of these new tools for multimodal editions and what it suggests for the scholarly editors of the future.
References

1. IT Services, 13 Banbury Road. The University of Oxford Text Archive. Text. ota.ahds.ac.uk/Web. 28 Oct. 2013.
2. About The Etext Center | University of Virginia Library Digital Curation Services.www.digitalcurationservices.org/digital-stewardship-services/etext Web. 28 Oct. 2013.
3. TEI guidelines. www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
4. The William Blake Archive Homepage.www.blakearchive.org/blake/ Web. 28 Oct. 2013.
5. Brown, Geoffrey. Developing Virtual CD-ROM Collections: The Voyager Company Publications. International Journal of Digital Curation 7.2 (2012): 3–20. www.ijdc.net. Web. 28 Oct. 2013.
6. Here’s Looking at Casablanca. National Endowment for the Humanities. Accessed October 28, 2013. www.neh.gov/humanities/2005/septemberoctober/feature/here%E2%80%99s-looking-casablanca.
7. Music Theatre Online.mith.umd.edu/mto Web. 28 Oct. 2013.
8. Reid, Calvin. Voyager Shakeup: In Wake of Stein’s Exit, It’s up for Grabs. Publishers Weekly, November 18, 1996. General OneFile.
9. Rdio - Welcome to the Rdio API. Accessed October 28, 2013. developer.rdio.com.
10. YouTube JavaScript Player API Reference - YouTube — Google Developers. Accessed October 28, 2013. developers.google.com/youtube/js_api_reference.

1 Introduction

The GeoBib project is constructing a georeferenced online bibliography of early Holocaust and camp literature published between 1933 and 1949 (Entrup et al. 2013a). Our immediate objectives include identifying the texts of interest in the first place, composing abstracts for them, researching their history, and annotating relevant places and times. Relations between persons, texts, and places will be visualized using digital maps and GIS software as an integral part of the resulting GeoBib information portal.
The combination of diverse data from varying sources not only enriches our knowledge of these otherwise mostly forgotten texts; it also confronts us with vague, uncertain or even conflicting information. This situation yields challenges for all researchers involved – historians, literary scholars, geographers and computer scientists alike. While the project operates at the intersection of historical and literary studies, the involved computer scientists are in charge of providing a working environment (Entrup et al. 2013b) and processing the collected information in a way that is formalized yet capable of dealing with inevitable vagueness, uncertainty and contradictions. In this paper we focus on the problems and opportunities of encoding and processing fuzzy data.
2 The uncertainty about uncertainty: How to model and represent it

The data collected in our project concerns such different entities as texts, persons and places and is compiled from different sources and different scholarly perspectives. The project is entirely interdisciplinary: besides literary scholars and historians, also geographers and computer scientists are involved. Students and researchers from literary and historical studies are our target audience for whom the resulting online platform shall provide an attractive research tool. Hence, the collected data does not only lie in the intersection of research interests of these fields, but extends to the sum of these interests. The platform is supposed to help answer questions that arise in the field of literature, e.g. finding texts concerned with certain places in a given time period, but also to support historians in finding possible eye witness reports of the crimes of Nazi Germany. Accordingly, information of various kinds is collected with the intention of supporting such diverse use cases. The different scholarly perspectives also determine the amount and kind of data we collect, and their information needs can hardly be covered by a single formalism or predefined ontology. We need a flexible yet coherent formalization that is adaptable to our objectives.
Our workflow and approach to collecting data is one of divide et impera: Instead of proposing one format that does it all, we distinguish between different kinds of information depending on the entities concerned. Information collected on the authors of the holocaust texts and relevant places is stored in a user friendly MediaWiki system, while information on these texts is stored in TEI/XML files. Both systems are interconnected and geographical references are integrated as well (cf. Entrup et al. 2013b). The resulting information portal will be backed by an object-relational database.
2.1 Persons and places: Capturing FUZZY information in a Wiki System

Within the field of prosopography the combination of different, possibly contradicting sources is a well-known problem. Pasin and Bradley (2013) offered insights on how such alternative views on historical events could be described using an underlying ontology. Software libraries intended to support processing of prosopographic data are also being developed (e.g. Barabucci and Zingoni, 2013). The GeoBib project collects information and short biographies of authors – a task that bears resemblance to prosopographic research. Many of those authors only published one text. Researching their personal information often leads to ambiguous results, such as different names used, differing information on birth or death dates as well as other personal data.
We extended the MediaWiki system that we use to collect information on persons and places with a set of templates that help to ensure that such information is added in a coherent way, while allowing the data to be vague or apparently contradictory. The Wiki allows the editors to add uncertain information into proposed fields, so that, for instance, different names can be added to one person. Furthermore, the short biographical texts we compose for most of the authors can be used to communicate dissent between different sources.
2.2 TEI/XML: Encoding uncertainty in literary annotations 

Literary texts, and as such especially autobiographies and memoires, are not collections of historical facts arranged in an exact chronology. Especially the early Holocaust texts are emotionalizing (cf. Feuchert, 2012, Hickethier 1986) and “conveying the experience made with the National Socialist terror system in a literary, or better, literarised way” (Feuchert, 2012, p. 218). But even apparently factual accounts of events carry a certain degree of vagueness, which leads both historians and literary scholars to interesting research questions, and poses a challenge for data modeling and database design.
Vagueness already occurs when collecting formal metadata. For each holocaust text under consideration we try to identify the first published edition. Yet looking at some more widely known texts of that era, we find multiple editions that differ in such basic information as publisher, year of publication, editor, or even the title. Such phenomena are familiar to those concerned with bibliographic information. Special care is required when formalizing such inconsistent data. In our collection of TEI/XML files, every single edition is represented by one XML file. These files contain the bibliographic information in the TEI header, and they are linked to the corresponding other editions.
TEI provides the @cert attribute for indicating (un)certainty of information given in an XML node. While this strategy allows us to indicate possible vagueness in a machine-readable way, we also need to find ways of communicating this uncertainty to the human user of our information portal. For that purpose, uncertainty regarding the plot or the history of reception of a literary work is captured in literary annotations, i.e. running text, which is an effective and straight-forward way of communicating uncertainty to human readers. In this context, we also allow adding <note> elements to be used by our editors for supplying small texts that will be presented to the user describing the kind of uncertainty involved (cf. Bradley and Short, 2005). The combined use of both elements allows conveying uncertainty to the human user while keeping it encoded in a machine-readable (or machine-traceable) way.
2.3 Modeling Uncertainty in a Database

The GeoBib information portal will rest on a PostgreSQL database (Scherbaum 2009) [4], where we use object relations for the description of certainty and note elements. Our first example represents a person (see Figure 1a). There are three different names associated with the entity: a birth name, the name after her wedding, and a pseudonym.

Fig. 1: Exemplary database entries for a person : a) person entity model

Fig. 2: Exemplary database entries for a person : b) simplified perso object

Fig. 3: Exemplary database entries for a person : c) related alternative/additional information
While a person entity has certain fields that can be filled in (see Fig. 1b), we use object relations (Fig. 1c) to add alternative information and related values of certainty and/or a note.
The second example describes a literary work with an uncertain year of publication. A relational database would require intermediate tables for all attributes of one entity, which may have uncertainties and/or notes attached (cf. Bradley and Short, 2005). In an object relational database using one special entity is sufficient in such a case.

Fig. 4: Work entity and related certainty field "pub_date"
As shown in Fig. 2, the table includes the object ID, the table name, the relevant column name, and the alternative content. Each dataset may contain a certainty attribute and/or a note. The certainty field is defined, in accordance with TEI, as either {high, medium, low, unknown} and the note field is a text that will be presented to the user and is meant to explain the uncertainty[6]. In the example above (Fig. 2) a year of publication is given but its certainty is marked as “low”. Such relations can be added for every field of every entity in the database.
3 Discussion and Outlook: Surely more uncertainty

We have just presented our approach of encoding uncertainty in our database. Such information can be used, for instance, to rank search results or to increase recall on certain queries and parameter settings. But we still see more challenges ahead: The encoded uncertainty has to be communicated effectively to the human user. Accordingly, the visualization of uncertainty, and especially the presentation of search results based on uncertain or divergent information will be among our next concerns. A similar problem of visualizing uncertainty arises in the forthcoming georeferencing and geotagging: Literary texts are no geographical maps. They constitute themselves in their geographical space but might encode this information in a way hard to decipher (cf. Reuschel et al., 2013). Fictional place names can sometimes be identified with actual places on a map, but sometimes it is impossible to do so. Geographical locations may be referred to by metaphors, old or forgotten names, local identifiers or nicknames. Such informal references frequently remain geographically imprecise and require interpretation (cf. Hill, 2006, p. 28f). The textual material that our editors provide could also be used to test and improve automatic methods of geographical relation extraction (e.g. Blessing and Schütze, 2010). Still, automatic georesolving is hindered by the limited (historical) coverage of contemporary gazetteers, spelling changes and changing administrative boundaries (Tobin et al., 2010, p. 8). Such limitations also pertain to prisons and camps, those places of high interest in our domain, whose exact geographical locations have to be reconstructed manually before adding them to our databases.  
4 Acknowledgements

Funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, BMBF) from July 2012 to June 2015 (FKZ: 01UG1238A-B).
References

Barabucci, Gioele and Jacopo Zingoni (2013). PROSO: prosopographic records. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Collaborative Annotations in Shared Environments: metadata, vocabularies and techniques in the Digital Humanities, DH CASE ’13. September 10 2013, Florence, Italy <doi:10.1145/2517978.2517982>
Blessing, Andre and Hinrich Schütze (2010). Self-annotation for fine-grained geospatial relation extraction. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics pp. 80-88. dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1873781.1873791
Bradley, John, and Harold Short (2005). Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of New-Style Prosopography. In: Literary and Linguistic Computing, 20 (2005), 3–24 <doi:10.1093/llc/fqi022>
Entrup, Bastian, Maja Bärenfänger, Frank Binder and Henning Lobin(2013a): Introducing GeoBib: An Annotated and Geo-referenced Online Bibliography of Early German and Polish Holocaust and Camp Literature (1933–1949). Digital Humanities 2013, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, 16-19 July 2013. dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-229.html
Entrup, Bastian, Frank Binder and Henning Lobin (2013b): Extending the possibilities for collaborative work with TEI/XML through the usage of a wiki-system. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Collaborative Annotations in Shared Environments: metadata, vocabularies and techniques in the Digital Humanities, DH CASE ’13. September 10 2013, Florence, Italy. <doi:10.1145/2517978.2517988>.
Feuchert, Sascha (2012). Fundstücke: Bemerkungen zu Darstellungskonventionen und paratextuellen Präsentationsformen früher Texte deutschsprachiger Holocaustliteratur. In: Günter Butzer / Joachim Jacob (Hg.): Berührungen. Komparatistische Perspektiven auf die frühe deutsche Nachkriegsliteratur. München: Wilhelm Fink 2012, pp. 217-230.
Hickethier, Knut (2006). Biographie, Autobiographie, Memoirenliteratur. In Ludwig Fischer (eds), Literatur in der Bundesrepublik bis 1967. München 1986, pp. 574–584.
Hill, Linda L. (2006). Georeferencing. The Geographic Associations of Information, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Pasin, Michele, John Bradley (2013). Factoid-based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies: towards an integrated approach. In: Literary and Linguistic Computing (2013). <doi:10.1093/llc/fqt037>
Reuschel, Anne-Kathrin, Barbara Piatti and Lorenz Hurni (2013). Modelling Uncertain Geodata for the Literary Atlas of Europe. In: K. Kritz et al. (eds.) Understanding Different Geographies. Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography, <doi:10.1007/978-3-642-29770-0_11>
Scherbaum, Andreas (2009). PostgreSQL – Datanbankpraxis für Anwender, Administratoren und Entwickler. Open Source Press. München, 2009.
Tobin, Richard, Claire Grover, Kate Byrne, James Reid and Jo Walsh (2010). Evaluation of georeferencing. In: Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval, GIR '10, Zurich, Switzerland, <doi:10.1145/1722080.1722089>
As of December 2013 the GeoBib project has identified and collected bibliographical information on 670 texts of early Holocaust and camp literature and produced 130 annotation documents so far. These include references to 620 authors, 550 locations, 230 camps and 45 ghettos.
See for instance svario.it/factoid
German original: „Bereits seit 1933 sind, vor allem im Ausland, Texte erschienen, die Erfahrungen mit dem nationalsozialistischen Terrorsystem literarisch oder besser: literarisiert vermitteln“ (Feuchert, 2012, p. 218)
http://www.postgresql.org/about/
We do not use the PostgreSQL entity parameter “WITH OIDS”, because of the high memory requirements (cf. Scherbaum 2009, p. 161f). Our OID (object identifiers) are composed of the entity id and name. 
Alternatively, the note field could also contain additional information.

In A Companion to Digital Humanities1, Willard McCarty cites Nelson Goodman in saying that the term 'model' can be used to denote "almost anything from a naked blonde to a quadratic equation". Indeed the terms 'model' and 'modeling' seem almost painfully polysemous. Nevertheless within Digital Humanities we cannot ignore the terms or the concepts behind them—the notions are inextricably linked to what is one of the core objectives of humanities computing2, namely to render humanities data computationally tractable3 and processable45 to enhance our abilities for analysis. 
In light of the renewed debate on modeling in Digital Humanities6 this panel proposes to investigate how humanists currently understand the role and meaning of modeling, and how we may arrive at an understanding of the term appropriate for humanities research and pedagogy.
McCarty stated a decade ago that the humanities lack a disciplined way of talking about modeling7 which makes it extremely difficult to define the properties and uses of appropriate models for humanities research. Modeling is a commonplace implicit activity in digital humanities, yet our modeling activities are almost never explicitly discussed as such, and it is rarely pointed out that many of our results are in fact models: charts, probabilistic methods, interfaces to the information we structure in databases. This implicitness is attested by our language use. We do not speak of "modeling an analogy" or of "modeling a chart". We "make" or "create" them as concrete representations of an implicit and abstract model.
Yet, given the concrete applications and results that can already be seen within the humanities, modeling needs to be a humanities praxis to the same extent as it already is in other scientific fields such as biology and physics. As the social sciences –more specifically the ethnography practices in Science & Technology Studies for instance– show us, praxis by definition can be studied and interrogated for its properties by observing and following its practitioners8. This panel provides a first step in such observant interrogation. 
In the computational domain modeling can be delineated in a narrow mathematical sense where model theory9 defines Turing complete languages as models or instantiations of logic constructed from formulas (i.e. syntax or rules) and signatures (i.e. vocabulary or objects). Thus, computer languages are themselves mathematical models of logic. They provide a layer of expressive logic that in turn allows us to compositionally model data, objects and their relations10. Analogous to the statement made by Peter Robinson about interfaces11, we can argue that such a composition or model expresses an intellectual argument about the real world entities and relations they mimic, capture, or simulate—an intellectual argument that is made on several levels through the computational model and that eventually is communicated to an observer (or user) by way of its interface.
In recent years we find most notably the application of modeling in order to create maps, graphs, trees1213, analogies, diagrams, charts, simulations14, and stylometric analyses15, as well as in discourse analysis, topic modeling, and narrative modeling16. If the successful computational analytical models are quantitatively and statistically founded, does that mean that humanities modeling must necessarily be anchored in the somewhat narrowly defined models that are generally associated with quantification and computer science
More generally, must the concepts of ‘model’ and ‘modeling’ appropriate for Digital Humanities be bound solely by parameters of the mathematical foundations of binary logic? Modeling as activity and concept applies more widely to the humanities than merely in its computational applications. Is it possible to turn around the dynamic of the computational 'stack', so that rather than having mathematics drive humanities computability, the properties of humanistic problems and the data behind them might drive models of computation? We can argue that the goal of any computational approach within the humanities is to render computable the complexity, the abstraction, the ambiguity, the subjectivity, and multiplicity of perspective of the humanities17. Similarly: how do we encompass aspects of modeling present in simulation and (serious) gaming18 of which the humanistic aspects seem to transcend the narrow mathematical connotation of ‘model’? And how does modeling relate to the continuing history of developing and redeveloping digital humanities tools that–rather than merely representing infrastructure–creates a record of intellectual theorizing humanistic computational models?19 How do we break out of the mathematical sandbox defined by first-order logic to do justice to the modalities of humanities? Does this require completely new models for data, logic, and representation? Does it require a general theory of modeling? Even a new symbolic language inspired by the humanities?
This panel brings together some of the most visible practitioners of computational methods within the humanities who have captured analytic models in software code, as well as some of the most influential figures of what might be called 'tacit modeling theory in digital humanities'. We invite them to consider the characteristics of humanities modeling and how those contrast with computational modeling and mathematical modeling, so as to determine what idiosyncrasies modeling might have in a humanities domain. Do these idiosyncrasies allow us to delineate a computationally tractable vocabulary at all? To investigate these questions the panel will discuss and reflect on matters such as…
How do we address the role of modeling and models in the humanities?
How do we ensure that existing mathematical logic does not confine our ability to represent and manipulate humanistic evidence?
What benefits does a definition of modeling appropriated for the humanities hold?
What would a symbolic language for the humanities look like?
What are the standards of evaluation in modeling and do we need specific ones in the Humanities?
What is a useful vocabulary to talk about modeling in a humanities sense?
Panelists

Joris van Zundert (Chair) is in charge of methodological research at the Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands. Next to his research in computational humanities he is interested in exchanges between digital humanities and science and technology studies (STS).
Tara L. Andrews has implemented a digital workbench for the fully computational stemmatic analysis of text traditions (http://www.digitalbyzantinist.org/2012/09/announcing-stemmaweb.html). As an assistant professor of digital humanities she is currently developing and teaching a curriculum that emphasizes modeling and algorithmic approaches to humanistic analysis
Johanna Drucker vehemently called attention to the properties of humanities data that are normally neglected by mathematical and conventional computational models and analyses. She has argued that all data are in fact capta and that naïve approaches to statistics are at risk of defining all data as intrinsically quantitative
Fotis Jannidis is developing a white paper on modeling in digital humanities, a version of which will be included in the new edition of the Companion to Digital Humanities. He is a  member of the TEI consortium–most notably as the Chair of the Genetic Edition Encoding Special Interest Group. TEI can be designated the only de facto standard for text structure modeling and encoding
Mike Kestemont specializes in stylometry and together with the Computational Stylistics Group (https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/home) has developed "Stylo", a software package in the R statistical programming language. He is an expert of statistical models expressed through computer algorithms and applied to literature stud
Geoffrey Rockwell conceptualized a number of highly visible tools for text analyses (e.g. Voyant: http://voyant-tools.org). He is finalizing a book demonstrating amongst others how the hermeneutic and theoretical aspects of text analysis models in the form of tool development transcends mere IT mathematics and infrastructure.
Michael Sperberg-McQueen is a markup specialist by profession and was co-editor of the Extensible Markup Language (XML) specification, chair of the XML Schema working group, as well as heavily involved with the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
Ted Underwood works at the interface of literary history and machine learning and is particularly interested in using Bayesian statistics to develop models that reason about uncertainty in a principled way. He maintains an influential blog on his experiences in computational humanities (http://tedunderwood.com/).  
Organization of the panel

The primary selection criterion for the panelists is their expertise, but care has been taken to balance the panel as much as possible for age, gender, field, and region. The panel session will be organized as follows
The Chair will introduce the panel’s topic, discussion questions, and the panelists (10 minutes);
Each of the panelists will give a definition of modeling as a 1 minute provocative pitch (10 minutes);
An open forum between the panelists and the audience follows (60 minutes);
A circular setting of seats with panelists distributed among the attendees will be used to enhance audience participation in the discussion;
The panel discussion will be audio recorded, concise conclusions will be published to the web.
Further Reading

Checkland, P. & Holwell, S., 1998. Information, Systems, and Information Systems: Making Sense of the Field. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Davis, M., 2012. The Universal Computer: The Road From Leibniz to Turing. New York: CRC Press.
Mahoney, M.S., 2011. Histories of Computing. T. Haigh (ed.),Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hayles, K.N., 2012. How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ramsay, Stephen, 2011. Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism (Topics in the Digital Humanities). Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
References

1. Schreibman, Susan, Raymond George Siemens, and John M. Unsworth (2004). A Companion to Digital Humanities. Wiley-Blackwell.
2. Unsworth, J., (2002). What Is Humanities Computing And What Is Not? G. Braungart, P. Gendolla, & F. Jannidis, eds. Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, 4. Available at: computerphilologie.digital-humanities.de/jg02/unsworth.html (Accessed July 8, 2013).
3. Mccarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing, New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
4. Unsworth, J., (2002). What Is Humanities Computing And What Is Not? G. Braungart, P. Gendolla, & F. Jannidis, eds. Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, 4. Available at: computerphilologie.digital-humanities.de/jg02/unsworth.html (Accessed July 8, 2013).
5. Orlandi, T., The Scholarly Environment of Humanities Computing, A Reaction to Willard McCarty’s talk on The computational transformation of the humanities. Available at: rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/mccarty1.html (Accessed May 7, 2012).
6. Flanders, J. & Jannidis, F., (2012). Panel Discussion: Data Models in Humanities Theory and Practice, Providence (US). Available at: youtu.be/lHJmPT-VjPE (Accessed November 1, 2013).
7. McCarty, W., (2004). Modeling: A Study in Words and Meanings. In S. Schreibman, R. Siemens, & J. Unsworth, eds. A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell. Available at: www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/.
8. Kaptelinin, V. & Nardi, B.A., (2006). Acting with technology: activity theory and interaction design, Cambridge, MA, USA/London UK: MIT Press.
9. Rautenberg, W., (2009). A Concise Introduction to Mathematical Logic 3rd ed., Available at: page.mi.fu-berlin.de/raut/logic3/announce.pdf.
10. Forbus, K.D., (2008). Qualitative Modeling. In F. van Harmelen, V. Lifschitz, & B. Porter, eds. Handbook of Knowledge Representation. Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Amsterdam, Boston, Heidelberg etc.: Elsevier, pp. 361–394.
11. Robinson, P., (2013). Five desiderata for scholarly editions in digital form. In Digital Humanities Conference 2013. Lincoln (NB, USA). Available at: dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-314.html.
12. Moretti, F. (2007). Maps, Graphs, and Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. London: Verso.
13. Jockers, M. (2013). Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press.
14. Mccarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing, New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
15. Hoover, D.L., (2012). The Excel Text-Analysis Page: A Collection of Microsoft Excel © spreadsheets with macros, in the service of text-analysis. Available at: files.nyu.edu/dh3/public/The%20Excel%20Text-Analysis%20Pages.html (Accessed October 14, 2013).
16. Meister, J.C. & Gertz, M., (2013). heureCLÉA, collaborative literature exploration & annotation. heureCLÉA | Tools. Available at: heureclea.de/tools/.
17. Drucker, J., (2011). Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5(1). Available at: digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html (Accessed August 24, 2012).
18. Bogdanovych, A., Cohen, A. & Roper, M., (2009). The City of Uruk: Virtual Instituions in Cultural Heritage. In Proceedings of the HCSNet 2009 Workshop on Interacting with Intelligent Virtual Characters. HCSNet 2009 Workshop on Interacting with Intelligent Virtual Characters. Sydney. Available at: www-staff.it.uts.edu.au/~anton/Publications/HCSNet09.pdf.
19. Ramsay, S. & Rockwell, G., (2012). Developing Things: Notes toward an Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities. In Debates in Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press. Available at: dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/11.
Contrasting digital studies programs in the United States and Middle East highlight the impact of digitization, open access and digital collaboration on not only users’ cultures in these and other areas, but also the traditional scholarly culture. Early Islamic and Christian manuscripts offer invaluable opportunities to understand and analyze the transfer of mathematics, science and history through ancient texts. Digitization, online scholarship and open sharing offer opportunities for broader access to manuscripts that are at increased risk in some libraries in the Middle East, with free access for citizens and scholars. This open access empowers digital study by scholars and the public in the region and around the globe, while challenging traditional proprietary manuscript research and institutional traditions of protected access and exclusive study. These digital studies also empower communities of the Middle East – Christian and Islamic – to access their cultural history and artifacts, while highlighting the vulnerability of collections and the need to protect and preserve the digital data.
In 2009, teams of scholars and technical personnel began three major manuscript digital scholarship initiatives:
The Walters Art Museum began digitization and online cataloging of Islamic and Western texts for free access, with the support of three successive National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) grants.1
An integrated team of scientists, engineers, scholars and technical experts used privately funded spectral imaging to reveal the medical undertext of the Syriac Galen Palimpsest for free access in support of ongoing studies.2
St. Catherine’s Monastery in the Sinai Desert allowed the first large-scale spectral imaging of almost 200 palimpsests from the Monastery library by the Early Manuscripts Electronic Library (EMEL) for scholarly study, under Monastery access controls with support from Arcadia.3
These programs have had to address institutional, cultural and social challenges associated not just with the open study and access to large amounts of data, but amidst cultural upheaval and revolutions. The intellectual property requirements of the owners and institutions also reflect different cultures – from that of a private owner and institution eager to share their collections with the world, to an ancient monastery contemplating how to transition their 1400-year tradition of protecting manuscripts held for centuries within their walls.
Hosting Christian, Islamic and secular texts online highlights the challenges faced in addressing the cultural requirements of different religious and nonreligious traditions – not to mention the challenges of capturing, transferring and accessing data in a hostile region amidst kidnappings and multiple revolutions.4 This also poses significant challenges with ongoing global transitions within scholarship and institutions:
Institutions grappling with shifts from restricted pay-for-access models – based on physical protection of manuscripts – to free-access models with system maintenance costs.
New generations of scholars capitalizing on digital access with cataloging/data integration tools, while others with limited technical expertise need mediated access with technical support.
Scholars and institutions struggling with loss of control of their perceived patrimony and/or raison d'être.
The Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, supported by the NEH, is continuing its program to digitize their collection of medieval manuscripts.5 This started with digitization of their Islamic Manuscripts and continues by language and manuscript type with their Western Manuscripts.6 All data is hosted at thedigitalwalters.org, with new data uploaded regularly.7 The data includes “complete sets of high-resolution archival images of manuscripts from the collection of the Walters Art Museum, along with machine-readable TEI P5 descriptions and technical metadata, released for free under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported license8 for anyone who wants to use them.” A workflow with virtual cataloging of the manuscripts from the posted images ensures this information is captured in the metadata. Scholars provide cataloging information for each codex and leaf, which is then entered under their name into the digital record of the manuscript. Uses of the data range from the Stanford University Mirador viewer study tool and online Searchworks catalog9 to the World Digital Library10, as well as Flickr11 – where images are used by global members to support a variety of interests. The manuscripts have been downloaded by institutions around the globe, including in the Middle East.
The under text of the Syriac Palimpsest proved to be Galen’s medical treatise On the Mixtures and Powers of Simple Drugs in a linguistic transition from Greek to Arabic. The bound manuscript is an eleventh-century liturgical text that is also very important for the study of the hymns in its upper text.12 The private owner made all the image data and metadata available for free access at digitalgalen.net13, with license for use under Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Access Rights.14 This has enabled transcriptions and studies of the Galen text15, as well as an integrated study of herbals in ancient medicine with analyses of Galen’s work in the context of other texts. It served as a catalyst for the “Floriental studies” by a group of technically savvy scholars who are analyzing works ranging from early cuneiform writings to Galen.16 With this open access, Dr. Grigory Kessel of Philipps-Universität Marburg was able to compare images of the Galen Palimpsest with other Syriac texts and find an additional four missing leaves. Two of these have now been spectrally imaged and are now freely available online1718, while the search continues for more.
With the open access and collaboration that has developed around humanities data, including from the privately owned Galen Palimpsest and public Walters Art Museum manuscript collection, Archbishop Damianos and the monks of St. Catherine’s Monastery are assessing the potential and challenges of digital technology. They currently retain full control of the research data collected by EMEL with UCLA support, and a subset of the data is planned for public web release under the auspices of the Monastery.19 The Archbishop noted in a project workshop in October 2013: “Digitization offers opportunities for continued preservation of the data on various diverse geographical servers around the globe in the event of a catastrophe.”20 This is highlighted by the political situation in Egypt. The Archbishop also cited the importance of combining digitization and scientific/scholarly study, but with income for the monastery from digital images. To meet the Monastery’s wishes, access for initial scholarly study of the data is limited to a team of 20 eminent scholars in the 10 ancient languages found in the palimpsest undertexts, with information shared in an open-source cataloging tool. This changes the study methods of a generation of scholars who have traditionally conducted long-term, in-depth studies of texts with sole access. Currently this requires balancing the requirements for limited scholarly access with those for preservation and accessibility.
Each of these programs is addressing the impact that freely accessible data sharing is having on scholarly study. The integration of technologies and work processes to enhance digital scholarship and collections requires the following capabilities:
Virtual collaboration with dynamic online cataloging to host and update scholarly findings and shared research with user-friendly tools. Global teams of scholars digitally capture their latest findings and research in standardized catalogs of the Walters’ Art Museum and St. Catherine’s Monastery manuscripts.
Broadly accepted standards for integration of data and metadata to ensure digitization of and online access to dispersed collection objects. This supports the digital reunification of diaspora manuscripts, such as the Galen Palimpsest originally from St. Catherine’s Monastery.
Licensed Access to allow appropriate control over global sharing and access, while offering confidence to institutions and scholars that their intellectual property will be protected. This allows the monks of St. Catherine’s to share data from manuscripts they have protected for centuries21, yet flexibility for institutions to ease into broader access – as demonstrated by the Walters’ shift to less restrictive Creative Commons licenses.
Integrated teams of scholars and technical experts ensure scholarly needs are addressed in development of technology and data management. Embedding technically savvy scholars with each of these project teams has ensured analytical and academic research needs are addressed in all project phases, from data and metadata collection through hosting and access to the data.22 Open data pose challenges for an older generation of scholars who have traditionally held onto data until they complete their studies, while empowering a newer generation of scholars capable of collaborating with this data, including in conjunction with other data and tools.23 Including more technically facile scholars and students on project teams also provides support for the generation of scholars who lack needed technical skills to access and study digital data with appropriate technical tools.24
More important than the cloistered challenges posed by traditional academia are the challenges of preserving the cultural information and patrimony of communities at risk in the Middle East. These three projects highlight the new opportunities digitization and digital scholarship offer for research and analysis around the globe. This is especially true in the Middle East, where they contribute to understanding of long-standing Christian and Islamic communities and traditions. These traditions and cultures are at risk from secular, religious, economic and social conflict, as are the manuscripts that have supported their development. With data hosted in the United States, the Middle East or elsewhere, free data access and proliferation help ensure preservation of the cultural patrimony, while also supporting communication within and across cultures.

Fig. 1: Galen Syriac Palimpsest Leaf 166r-171v Pseudocolor Image
References

1. D. Emery, M.B. Toth, and W. Noel, The convergence of information technology and data management for digital imaging in museums, Museum Management and Curatorship, 24: 4, 337 — 356 (2009)
2. S. Bhayro, R. Hawley, G. Kessel, and P. E. Pormann, Collaborative Research on the Digital Syriac Galen Palimpsest, Semitica et Classica 5 (2012), pp. 261-264
3. Father Justin Sinaites (St. Catherine's Monastery), M. B. Toth , Spectral Imaging at the Library of St. Catherine's Monastery Reveals Ancient Texts, Library of Congress, Nov 19, 2012 www.loc.gov/preservation/outreach/tops/ancient_text/ancient_text.html, 30 Oct, 2013
4. M. Shrope, In the Sinai, a global team is revolutionizing the preservation of ancient manuscripts, Washington Post, Magazine, www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/magazine/in-the-sinai-a-global-team-is-revolutionizing-the-preservation-of-ancient-manuscripts/2012/08/30/1c203ef4-ca1f-11e1-aea8-34e2e47d1571_story.html, 9 September, 2012
5. National Endowment for the Humanities, Making Medieval Modern - Digitizing medieval manuscripts at the Walters Art Museum, Division of Preservation and Access Featured Project, www.neh.gov/divisions/preservation/featured-project/making-medieval-modern, 9 April, 2012
6. Walters Art Museum, The Walters Art Museum Receives $265,000 NEH Grant to Digitize Over 100 Flemish Manuscripts, Press Room, thewalters.org/news/pressdetail.aspx?e_id=365, 30 Oct, 2013
7. Walters Art Museum, The Digital Walters, www.thedigitalwalters.org/, 30 Oct, 2013
8. Creative Commons, Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License, creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en, 30 Oct, 2013
9. C. Haven, Walters Art Museum manuscript collection makes a virtual move to Stanford, Stanford Report, news.stanford.edu/news/2013/may/walters-digital-repository-050913.html, 9 May, 2013
10. World Digital Library, Institution: Walters Art Museum, www.wdl.org/en/search/?institution=walters-art-museum, 30 Oct, 201
11. Walters Art Museum, Walters Art Museum Illuminated Manuscripts, Flickr, Photostream, www.flickr.com/photos/medmss/with/5790214510/, 30 Oct, 2012
12. S. Bhayro, P. E. Pormann, and W. I. Sellers, Imaging the Syriac Galen Palimpsest: Preliminary Analysis and Future Prospects, Semitica et Classica 6 (2013), pp. 299-302
13. The Digital Galen Syriac Palimpsest, digitalgalen.net, 30 Oct, 2013
14. Creative Commons, Attribution 3.0 Unported License, creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/, 30 Oct, 2013
15. S. Bhayro and S. Brock, The Syriac Galen Palimpsest and the Role of Syriac in the Transmission of Greek Medicine in the Orient, Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester 89 Supplement (2012/2013), Ancient Medical and Healing Systems: Their Legacy to Western Medicine (ed. R. David), pp. 25-43
16. R. Hawley, Floriental - From Babylon to Baghdad: Toward a History of the “Herbal” in the Near East, European Research Council, ERC-2010-StG-263783, 2010
17. The Digital Galen Syriac Palimpsest, MS 172, digitalgalen.net/Data/Syriac_MS_172r, 30 Oct, 2013
18. The Digital Galen Syriac Palimpsest, SyrNR Frg65, digitalgalen.net/Data/SyrNF-Frg65_001r_50-001/, 3 Jan, 2014
19. Universität Wien, Sinai Palimpsest Project: Alte Schriften neu entdecken, 17 Oct. 2013, medienportal.univie.ac.at/uniview/veranstaltungen/detailansicht/artikel/sinai-palimpsest-project-alte-schriften-neu-entdecken/, 30 Oct, 2013
20. Universität Wien, The Sinai Palimpsests Project – International Workshop, 25-27 Oct. 2013, medienportal.univie.ac.at/fileadmin/user_upload/medienportal/uni_view/PDF/PDF-Einladungen_allg/Program.pdf, 30 Oct, 2013
21. The Digital Galen Syriac Palimpsest, SyrNF-Frg65 001r, digitalgalen.net/Data/SyrNF-Frg65_001r_50-001/LICENSE.txt, 5 Feb, 2014
22. M. B. Toth, Integrating Technologies and Work Processes for Effective Digital Imaging, Proceedings of the Eikonopoiia Symposium on Digital imaging of Ancient Textual Heritage, Helsinki, Finland, Oct. 2010, pp. 198-210
23. F.G. France, W. Christens-Barry, M.B. Toth, K. Boydston, Advanced Image Analysis for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage, 22nd Annual IS&T/SPIE Symposium on Electronic Imaging, San Jose Convention Center, California, Jan (2010)
24. S. Bhayro, R. Hawley, G. Kessel, and P. E. Pormann, The Syriac Galen Palimpsest: Progress, Prospects and Problems, Journal of Semitic Studies 58 (2013), pp. 131-148
Introduction/Motivation

Also in the age of electronic publishing print publications often remain the points of reference. While many humanities' projects finally build on XML and in particular TEI 1 and embrace electronic publications, they still want or need to target print publications as one or even the main form of sharing the results of their scholarship with the community. Paper remains the principal scholarly format accepted in many circles and in spite of all activities on long-term digital archiving 23, it remains a central medium to disseminate and conserve patrimonial content over the decades and centuries.However, how can you combine an XML-based workflow with the need to publish high-quality, multilingual print output respecting the often arcane typesetting requirements of scholarly texts in humanities publishing and notably in the realm of critical editions? While there are commercial 45 and free 6 78 products out there that can help for some parts of the job, they are too expensive or too difficult to use in most humanities projects. This was the starting point of the DFG-funded XML-Print, an Open Source project that tackles the typesetting requirements for multilingual critical editions while offering a user-friendly frontend.XML-Print has already been presented to the DH community in two well-received short papers 910 on specific aspects of the project's progress and technical challenges. In this long paper we present the project’s overall results.
Typesetting Features

XML-Print consists of two components:
an interactive graphical user interface (GUI) based on Eclipse, to define the rules for typesetting the XML texts in direct interaction with the source XML text
a command-line typesetting engine, written from bottom up in F#, to actually transform the XML text into pdf for print 
Normally scholars will interact with the GUI to map their XML structures on layout rules. The typesetting engine is then transparent to them. However, more automated workflows can integrate the engine directly. In section 5 we present examples for both scenarios. Beyond most standard typesetting functionalities of XSL-FO 1112 XML-Print supports in particular the following three requirements specific for publishing in humanities scholarship:
Columns

A page always consists of different rectangular regions to add header/footer, marginals and the main text. However, this main text is often not limited to a one-column layout, but rather flows in multiple columns. As XSL-FO lacks in this requirement, XSL-FO+ adds a special interface to set-up arbitrary complex column-layouts, even mixed on one page. Each column has its own width and writing direction (left-to-right vs. right-to-left) allowing even “exotic” layouts to be applied within XML-Print.
Cross references

When using cross-references we must use placeholders, not only in the main text, but also for the header and footer of a page, where page number and sectioning information are commonly used, and for apparatus’ entries, where typographic information like referenced line numbers can change during the editorial process.

Fig. 1: Two user-defined reference systems for an edition
XML-Print incorporates a concept of “reference fields” to define structural and typographic elements to be counted. This way the user can even combine these two types, e.g. for having a global line count and a local one being reset at a specific XML structure. In addition the corresponding “title” of an reference field can as well be made available.
Apparatuses

Based on reference fields users can define “referencing schemas” to be used in apparatuses. Predefined typographic elements like a global page, column and line numbering can be combined with user-defined fields, arbitrary fixed strings and special characters, e.g. a non-breakable space.As the concrete output of the schema might depend on previous apparatus’ entries, exceptions with regard to repeated items, e.g. same chapter, can be formulated as well.
General Architecture and Technologies

Standards

Modern functional programming languages reusing established frameworks and libraries allow to build a high-quality, multilingual typesetting engine generating archiving-ready PDF/A-1 13  much faster than even a decade ago. With a comparatively small development team we have been able to meet the project’s major objectives within the funding period.
 XML-Print builds on Open Standards, especially on XML as the input language, XSL-FO to express formatting and XSLT to transform data from XML to XSL-FO. The project has extended XSL-FO to cover features such as apparatus and advanced referencing not currently supported by the specification (XSL-FO+).For the typesetting engine the project uses the .NET functional language F# 14, running on the cross-platform Open Source .NET implementation mono. To handle OpenType 15 fonts and generate pdf we have settled on the Open Source library iText 16 that exists for both .NET and Java. We contributed to the library's support for some of advanced OpenType features such as “real” small caps and aspects of bidirectional scripts.
Algorithms

A major advantage of functional programming languages is the lack of mutable variables and states. Algorithms are commonly more compact and easier to parallelize without mutable variables to share across multiple threads. The XML-Print backend for example parallelizes the parsing of certain XSL-FO elements and the rendering of chapters respectively page sequences. 
 Initially the rendering module was mainly based on the iText library. Now we are replacing all iText algorithms by our self-developed algorithms. They are specialized on the requirements of XML-Print and so are more efficient and easier to extend. We also decided to develop an own line-breaking algorithm. Going beyond the algorithm by Knuth and Plass 17, we take advantage of today’s hardware capacities.
 The line breaking algorithm creates a tree structure for all possible line combinations of an entire paragraph. The best path in this tree structure is calculated by taking several characteristics into account, e.g. interword spaces, hyphenations, etc. The final implementation will be parallelized and produce a tree structure with “cross-connected” nodes, i.e. nodes that represent identical paragraph sections are reduced and replaced by additional arcs, thus increasing the efficiency by avoiding redundant line combinations. Figure 1 illustrates the process of line breaking. Each node represents a possible line. The numbers at the arcs represent the processing order. Equal numbers on the same level mean a parallelized section. The bolded path represents the final paragraph, consisting of the nodes Line_1^2, Line_2^5, Line_3^2 and Line_4^4.

Fig. 2: Line breaking algorithm
Graphical User Interface

XML-Print addresses beginners as well as expert users. For the latter the GUI has to offer enough details while the former should not be overwhelmed by too many information at first. To achieve this goal XML-Print categorizes functionality and provides a basic and an expert layer.

Fig. 3: GUI for XML-Print
We face, however, one inherent problem. To guarantee a high-quality output the typesetting incorporates a rich repertoire of typesetting logic and features which the user expects to appear somewhere in the graphical user interface. It is not always possible to shield users from these inherent complexities, while mapping all possible options onto GUI elements.
Apart from defining formats and declaring "mappings" between XML elements and corresponding formats, the GUI offers several possibilities to modify aspects of typesetting, from preprocessing the XML source to altering the PDF output format, from configuring the page size to influencing hyphenation.
Use Case Examples

Edition “Kurt Schwitters: Wie Kritik zu Kunst wird”

During the starting phase of the XML-Print project, staff members of the editorial project “Kurt Schwitters: Wie Kritik zu Kunst wird” 18 already used recent version of the software to proofread their XML transcriptions. At a later stage, formats and mappings for critical and commentary apparatus were added.
Dictionaries: The “Trierer Wörterbuchnetz”

The “Deutsche Wörterbuch von Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm” is a digitized version of the leading German Dictionary with more than 300.000 entries stored as XML inside a database. The pdf is a byproduct, creating pdf files on the fly is the only effective approach. The XML-Print typesetting engine was wrapped via a simple webservice interface, allowing remote access. Decoupling typesetting engine and GUI improves on flexibility and scalability, as it adds the options of cluster-processing and batch processing to the standard interactive processing. 
Outlook

To ensure the long-term viability of the project beyond the end of funding in May 2014 XML-Print integrates with TextGrid 19 to complement the current stand-alone mode. In parallel we build up a community on SourceForge http://sourceforge.net/projects/xml-print/, reaching even now more than 50 monthly downloads on average.Further development of XML-Print is also intimately linked to the needs of its customers, especially the critical editions using it, evolving in response to specific requirements.XML-Print is there to play a key role in creating, sharing and preserving our digital and non-digital textual cultural heritage and humanities digital resources on one of the most durable media yet known to humankind – paper.
References

1. Burnard, Lou, and Syd Bauman. (2007). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Text Encoding Initiative.
2. Hedges, M, A Jordanous, S Dunn, C Roueche, Marc Wilhelm Küster, Thomas Selig, M Bittorf, and W Artes. (2012). New Models for Collaborative Textual Scholarship. In 6th IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems Technologies (DEST), 1–6. doi:10.1109/DEST.2012.6227933.
3. Neuroth, Heike. (2009). Nestor Handbuch.
4. Global Publishing Solution. (2013). 3B2 (Aka APP, Arbortext Print Publisher). 2013 ed. Accessed November 29. www.3b2.com/3b2/.
5. Adobe- 2013. Desktop Publishing (DTP), Digital Publishing | Adobe InDesign CC, www.adobe.com/lu_de/products/indesign.html, accessed: 29-Oct-2013.
6. Knuth, D E. 1986. The TEXbook (Computers & Typesetting Volume a).
7. Apache Foundation. (2013). Apache FOP - a Print Formatter Driven by XSL Formatting Objects and an Output Independent Formatter. Xmlgraphics.Apache.org. xmlgraphics.apache.org/fop/.
8. Lamport, Leslie. (1986). LaTeX: User's Guide & Reference Manual. Addison-Wesley 1986.
9. Burch, Thomas, Martin Sievers, Marc Wilhelm Küster, Claudine Moulin, Roland Schwarz, and Yu Gan. (2012). XML-Print: an Ergonomic Typesetting System for Complex Text Structures. In Abstracts of Digital Humanities 2012, 375–379. Hamburg. www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/HamburgUP_dh2012_BoA.pdf.
10. Küster, Marc Wilhelm, Thomas Selig, Lukas Georgieff, Martin Sievers, and M Bittorf. (2013). XML-Print: Addressing Challenges for Scholarly Typesetting. In Abstracts for Digital Humanities 2013, 269–272. Lincoln, NE. dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/files/downloads/DH2013_conference_abstracts_print.pdf.
11. Berglund, Anders, ed. (2006). Extensible Stylesheet Language (XSL) Version 1.1. W3C. www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xsl11-20061205/.
12. Pawson, D. (2002). XSL-FO: Making XML Look Good in Print.
13. ISO, and ISO TC 171 SC 2. (2005). ISO 19005-1:2005 Document Management -- Electronic Document File Format for Long-Term Preservation -- Part 1: Use of PDF 1.4 (PDF/a-1). 19005. 1st ed. ISO.
14. Smith, Chris. 82012). Programming F# 3.0. 2nd ed. O'Reilly Media. www.amazon.de/Programming-F-3-0-Chris-Smith/dp/1449320295.
15. Microsoft, Adobe. 2009. “Microsoft Typography - OpenType Specification.” Microsoft.com. 21.09.2009. www.microsoft.com/typography/otspec/default.htm. Accessed 2013-10-29.
16. “iText Core | iText Software.” 2013. “iText Core | iText Software.” Itextpdf.com. itextpdf.com/product/itext. Accessed: 2013-10-29.
17. Stanford University. Computer Science Dept, D E Knuth, and M F Plass. (1980). Breaking Paragraphs Into Lines.
18. Kocher, Ursula, and Isabel Schultz. (2013). Wie Kritik Zu Kunst Wird: Kurt Schwitters' Strategien Der Produktiven Rezeption. Avl.Uni-Wuppertal.De. www.avl.uni-wuppertal.de/forschung/projekte/wie-kritik-zu-kunst-wird.html.
19. TextGrid Konsortium. (2010). TextGrid: Über TextGrid.www.textgrid.de/ueber-textgrid.html.


    
        
            
                '"Everything on Paper Will Be Used Against Me": Quantifying Kissinger'
                
                    
                        Kaufman
                        Micki
                    
                    CUNY Graduate Center, United States of America
                    mkaufman@gc.cuny.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    diplomatic history
                    sentiment analysis
                    topic modeling
                    visualization
                    network analysis
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    historical studies
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    metadata
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    semantic analysis
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    visualisation
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                    rhetorical studies
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Fixed in the public consciousness by countless appearances and interviews, and intimately associated with a wide range of affairs of state during the 1970s, including the US invasion of Cambodia, withdrawal from Vietnam, ‘opening to China’, détente with the Soviet Union, and the Watergate affair, the public persona of former national security advisor (1969–1975) and US secretary of state (1973–1977) Henry A. Kissinger has consistently fascinated historians.
                1 A decidedly emotional champion of dispassionate ‘realpolitik’, a Cold Warrior and ‘secret swinger’,
                2 questions about Kissinger’s fascinating paradoxes and internal contradictions have been a significant focus of the study of ‘Kissingerology’ (Hanhimaki 2003).
            
            Trying to understand what at first glance can appear to be apparently incompatible motives and behavior, historians soon encounter a second problem—one of scale. A classic ‘big data’ catch-22, the extensive and vast array of documents, diplomatic cables, transcripts, and other correspondence available for study greatly complicates the task of historically situating and interpreting Kissinger. This deluge of information is an increasingly common frustration for historians of the 20th century, and as larger and larger archives of human cultural output are accumulated, scholars are beginning to adapt, develop, and employ tools, methods, and interpretive frameworks from fields like computational linguistics, visual design, and textual studies that can overcome ‘information overload’ and facilitate new historical interpretations of ‘big data’ archival collections. 
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    A topic model of the DNSA Kissinger ‘memcons’. In this force-directed diagram, the documents are distributed according to their weight in the topic model and colored according to their former classification status. Formerly ‘Top Secret’ documents are colored blue, ‘Secret’ documents are colored yellow, and ‘Confidential’ are colored magenta. The size of the circles represents the number of participants.
                
            
            As detailed on the website http://www.quantifyingkissinger.com, this project is an historical interpretation of the DNSA (Digital National Security Archive)’s Kissinger Collection, using techniques like data visualization, topic modeling, sentiment analysis, and word frequency and collocation analysis to facilitate a mix of ‘distant reading,’ ‘networked reading’, and ‘close reading’. The DNSA’s Kissinger Collection is a small but substantial subset of the vast volume of material generated by the Nixon administration, a collection comprising over 18,000 declassified meeting memoranda (‘memcons’) and teleconference transcripts (‘telcons’) detailing Kissinger's correspondence during the period 1969–1977, including a wide range of extremely useful archivist-supplied metadata (e.g., date, classification status, origin, etc.) that facilitates more detailed and nuanced explorations into the text analytics.
            Faced with the seemingly impossible task of truly understanding a man who appears to embody a host of mutually exclusive dichotomies, historians who grapple with some of the more paradoxical aspects and events of Kissinger’s policies and persona often seek to explain inconsistencies and/or emotionality as either a logical failure of his political philosophy or as irrational divergence from an otherwise ubiquitous, calculating rationality. Countering the decentralized, ‘accidental’ view of emotionalism in most of the historiography, historian Barbara Keys’ ‘The Emotional Statesman’ places Kissinger’s emotionality in the center of her analysis, arguing that it was often the rhetorical and political flexibility emotionality offered that led Kissinger to such behavior. 
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 1. Scatter plot graph: Frequency of words found in colocation with the word ‘laughter’ in the Kissinger memcons, in order of frequency (x-axis), by colocation (Mutual Information) score (y-axis).
                
            
            Exploring Kissinger’s ‘predispositions’ towards a Soviet-preponderant worldview as a ‘natural’ emotional reaction resulting from his intense personal relationship with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin (as detailed by Keys), the project’s word collocation analysis of the phrase ‘[laughter]’
                3 surfaces evidence of the unique and complex nature of their friendship. To Keys, this relationship was a compelling emotional factor in Kissinger’s seeming unwillingness to view the Vietnam War as anything other than a Cold War conflict, one that nevertheless served an emotional purpose: reinforcing a sense that matters remained in his and Dobrynin’s capable hands to resolve no matter how arduous and unpleasant the peace talks with North Vietnamese envoy Le Duc Tho became. 
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Figure 2. Force-directed diagram: ‘Bombing’ word correlation/collocation in telcons (yellow) and memcons (blue). Words colorized by hand relate to Vietnam (green) and other countries in Indochina (red).
                
            
            In addition to analyzing the impact of Kissinger’s social relationships on his geopolitical outlook and outcomes, the project examines also his attitudes towards matters of secrecy and violence. A number of word collocation analyses reveal patterns suggestive of a highly selective, event-driven use of the ‘private’ telcons (which Kissinger expected to remain within his possession after his departure from the White House) versus a more diffuse, persistent use of the official, redacted memcons—as, for example, when both the word ‘bombing’ and one of a number of names for various countries in Indochina were found. 
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Figure 3. Line/scatter plot graph: Frequency of ‘[Cc]ambodia’ and ‘bombing’ word collocation with collocation distance) on a timeline.
                
            
            The initial text analysis data averages word frequencies irrespective of the timeline, and more detailed word frequency analysis along a timeline facilitated a ‘networked reading’ approach
                4 in which documents are identified for closer reading and subsequent analysis through the text analysis data, and related according to commonalities in date, word frequency, topic weight, and/or subject and participant metadata. 
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Figure 4. A selected ‘network’ of a group of conversations and memos from 1970 in which ‘[Cc]ambodia’ and ‘bombing’ are found in collocation, connected by participant. Edges are labeled with the date of each individual’s participation.
                
            
            A complete historical understanding must by necessity include this sort of close reading of relevant documents, but a few interesting bits of possible evidence from the project’s distant and networked reading already call for further analysis: hints of ‘triangular diplomacy’ written in the proximity of graphed nodes relating to negotiations over Indochina with the Soviet Union and China, and clustering of various ‘secrecy’ topics highly suggestive of a classification scheme based upon both national security priorities and/or those of Henry Kissinger himself. Topic clusters in the model represent SALT Negotiations between the USSR and the US, Nixon’s journey to China, the Paris Peace Talks to end the war in Vietnam, the OPEC oil embargo, crises in the Mideast and shuttle diplomacy, the coup in Greece and subsequent invasion of Cyprus by Turkey, and the Rhodesian Bush War. 
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Figure 5. A section of the topic model visualization of the ‘memcons’. In this force-directed diagram, the documents are distributed according to their weight in the topic model and colored according to their former classification status. Formerly ‘Top Secret’ documents are colored blue, ‘Secret’ documents are colored yellow, and ‘Confidential’ are colored magenta.
                
            
            The examinations of this project have not been limited to historiographical inquiries of Kissinger’s foreign policy, nor to his personal/emotional motivations. By combining computational and emotional history approaches, insights about the man and the geopolitical focus of the administration he served emerge—new avenues for understanding themes of seduction, secrecy, humor, and violence. Beyond detailing and exploring existing field conversations about former US secretary of state Henry Kissinger, the project has begun to surface deeper understandings and new questions—about how this new kind of distant knowledge is formed, and the possible ramifications for historical research in general. This application of computational techniques to the study of 20th-century US diplomatic history has generated useful finding aids for researchers, provided essential testing grounds for new historical methodologies, provoked new questions, and prompted new interpretations of Kissinger and the individuals with whom he corresponded. 
            Notes
            1. Kissinger was the only official ever to hold both offices simultaneously, from 22 September 1973 to 3 November 1975.
            2. 
                LIFE magazine, 28 January 1972
                , https://books.google.com/books?id=D0AEAAAAMBAJ&amp;pg=PA70.
            
            3. As well as related (but different) search and wildcard phrases like ‘[laughs]’, ‘[laugh*],’ etc.
            4. An approach described by Dr. Lisa Marie Rhody.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Hanhimaki, J. (2003). ‘Dr. Kissinger’ or ‘Mr. Henry’? Kissingerology, Thirty Years and Counting*. 
                        Diplomatic History,
                        27(5) (November).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                _CATview_ - Supporting The Investigation Of Text Genesis Of Large Manuscripts By An Overall Interactive Visualization Tool
                
                    
                        Pöckelmann
                        Marcus
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    marcus.poeckelmann@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Medek
                        André
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    andre.medek@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Molitor
                        Paul
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    paul.molitor@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Ritter
                        Jörg
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    joerg.ritter@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    visualization
                    alignment
                    collation
                    text genesis
                    text evolution
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    interface and user experience design
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    french studies
                    internet / world wide web
                    content analysis
                    programming
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Manuscripts that went through many editions being revised, augmented, or shortened from time to time are of special interest for historians, sociologists, and philologists. Identifying the text passages that have been changed and presenting them in a synoptic view or in critical editions plays a central role in these fields. In order to support the investigation of text genesis, appropriate information technology tools should be available. In addition to flexible and effective implementations for comparing variants of a manuscript (e.g., see Medek et al., 2015), the text differences found by such tools should be visualized in an appropriate way, allowing scholars to effectively navigate and explore the differences. With the 
                Colored &amp; Aligned Texts view (
                CATview) we present such an interactive visualization tool in this paper. Starting with a general map of the text witnesses’ aligned segments, scholars can search, find, and zoom to specific text passages of interest, which are colored according to their grade of revision or highlighted as striking, depending on the user settings. In collaboration with a synoptic presentation of the text variants, 
                CATview is a useful add-on both for web-based editions and frameworks for the editing process.
            
            Motivation of the Work
            
                CATview is motivated by an ongoing investigation of Abbé Raynal’s 
                Histoire philosophique et politique des établissements et du commerce des Européens dans les deux Indes, a text about the negative influence of European civilization during the colonization of the East and West Indies. The first edition was published in 1770 (Amsterdam). After the manuscript was forbidden, Raynal released expanded editions in 1774 (The Hague) and 1780 (Geneva). A last edition appeared post mortem in 1820; Book 6, for instance, consists of 52,372 words whereas the edition of 1770 features 28,451 words.
            
            The work is part of the project SaDA—Semi-automatic Difference Analysis of Complex Text Variants
                1 funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). The visualization tool presented in this paper is embedded in an overall framework for text comparison that acts according to the following workflow. First, each of the given witnesses of a text is divided into segments, either paragraphs or sentences. Then, fingerprints of the segments are computed, allowing an assignment between them—that is, an alignment of the segments. Finally, the aligned segments are compared in detail and presented in a synoptic manner with apparatus.
            
            
                CATview is an additional component built on top of this workflow to lighten the navigation within the synopsis and facilitate the investigation of text differences by preparing the collected data in a clear manner.
            
            Previous Work
            The visualization of text differences and structure with aspects of navigation is already handled by several web-based tools. One example is the navigation bar of the Perseus Digital Library.
                2 It illustrates the text structure by a set of iconic bars, e.g., for books, sections, or verses. The individual bars are divided into segments whose lengths indicate the lengths of the text passages they represent and to which they are linked.
            
            The histogram view of Juxta
                3 exceeds the pure aspect of navigation. This small pop-up dialog allows scholars exploring ‘the overall rate of change across the witnesses’
                4 of a manuscript, but only works for the comparison of one specific witness against others.
            
            In Ben Fry’s remarkable visualization of ‘On the Origin of Species’ (2009), the text structure is abstracted for an overall view, and multiple witnesses’ revisions are visualized by colors. This is done in a fixed animation. At any point merely the latest revision is shown for each word. The text itself will pop up as dialog above the mouse cursor without a steady representation. Thus, the text cannot be searched, and frequent mouse moving is necessary for reading longer portions. Besides control elements for the animation there is no user interactivity such as zooming or further options to manipulate the presentation.
            
                Features of 
                CATview
            
            In the first place, 
                CATview illustrates the aligned segments in a tabular manner. Each text witness is represented by one row. Their segments are abstractly represented as rectangles. If two segments of different witnesses are aligned by step 2 of the workflow described above, they share the same column. The differences of the aligned segments found in the following step are visualized in an aggregated form by the intensity of the rectangles’ color. To lighten navigation, the rectangles are also links that will scroll the synoptic view to the corresponding segment when clicking on a rectangle. On the other hand the current position within the synopsis is represented in 
                CATview with a marking. Additional markings to highlight search results and further information with respect to the alignment can be displayed.
            
            Illustrating the Alignment
            The presentation of the alignment in a tabular manner helps in reviewing the overall structure to see patterns of revisions (Figure 1). It is also useful to evaluate the alignment in order to improve the underlying algorithms as it calls attention, e.g., to falsely aligned segments. To see more details, the user can zoom in and out with the mouse wheel and slide the currently selected excerpt by dragging it with the mouse (Figure 2). Thereby, the option to change the order of the rows—i.e., the witnesses—and a consecutive numbering of the columns lighten the orientation. This basic functionality allows easy identification of relevant portions of text that have been added or removed during the authors’ revisions. Figure 2 illustrates this feature: one paragraph was added to witness H20 (which denotes the 1820 edition) between the aligned paragraphs at columns 59 and 61, where paragraphs of all four witnesses are aligned.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
                CATviews’ general map of aligned paragraphs for the four witnesses of the 
                Histoire des deux Indes (book 6).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. A smaller excerpt of the alignment seen in Figure 1 by using the built-in zoom.
            Coloring of Rectangles
            The intensity of colors assigned to individual rectangles denotes the degree of similarity between the corresponding aligned segments and can be determined, for instance, by the ratio of the segments’ number of differences to the amount of text. The color ranges from a standard light blue, which indicates similarity, up to a strong dark blue for rather extensive revisions of the text. This additional information effectively helps locating hot spots of revisions. Figures 3 and 4 show 
                CATview with enabled colors for two levels of zooming.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. The general map of Figure 1 automatically enriched by colors for the paragraphs, based on the aggregated information gathered by a detailed difference analysis.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. An excerpt of Figure 3 on a higher zooming level: columns in light blue express a strong similarity between the aligned paragraphs, whereas the dark blue at the columns 47, 51, and 54 indicate a strong difference. In column 54 a major revision first appeared in witness of 1780 with siglum H80.
            Benefits of Additional Markings
            Another feature of 
                CATview is to connect rectangles of different witnesses with a line if the corresponding segments are supposed to be similar but cannot be aligned due to a conflicting data situation. This situation occurs if the alignment is blocked by an assignment of other segments, e.g., in case of transposed or merged segments. The additional lines lighten the identification of such cases for a closer look.
            
            Furthermore, the tool can display search results by highlighting single rectangles or full columns that contain the search phrase with a colored background. This feature helps in effectively estimating the distribution of a subject within all witnesses. Figure 5 illustrates the described markings.
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Additional markings in 
                CATview: the bar at column 54 indicates the current scroll position in the corresponding synoptic view. Search results for the key word ‘Colomb’ (French for ‘Columbus’) are highlighted by a colored background (columns 43, 45, 47, 48, 58, 59, 61, and 62). The lines from 45 to 47 show paragraphs supposed to be similar that could not be aligned, as in H80 Raynal split paragraph 47 of H74 into two paragraphs (45 and 47) and added an additional paragraph in between.
            
            Other Planned Features
            There are further features currently under discussion. The height of rectangles could present the size of the corresponding segments, displaying the original page numbers for each witness on higher zooming levels could lighten the orientation, and multiple aligned segments could be aggregated on lower zooming levels, to name a few.
            Technical Remarks
            
                CATview is designed for web applications and implemented in JavaScript as a Singleton Object. Thereby the functionality of the JavaScript libraries D3.js
                5 and jQuery
                6 is used to generate and manipulate the SVG-Image, which contains the graphical elements described above. A publication of the finalized tool as open source is planned.
            
            Summary
            In this paper we present an interactive visualization tool, a useful add-on for web-based editions and frameworks for the editing process, to effectively navigate and explore the differences of multiple text variants in a graphical overview. Despite its relative simplicity, our tool named 
                Colored &amp; Aligned Texts view (
                CATview) has universal applications in the field of text comparison according to the available data. Starting with a general map of the text witnesses’ aligned segments, scholars can search, find, and zoom to specific text passages of interest, which are colored corresponding to the grade of revision or highlighted as striking, depending on the user settings. In collaboration with a synoptic representation of the text, 
                CATview effectively supports scholars in the investigation of differences between several variants or the full genesis of a text, as well as improving the underlying algorithms for text comparison.
            
            Funding
            This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) [grant number 01UG1247] as part of the project Semi-automatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten, under the direction of Professor Dr Thomas Bremer, Professor Dr Paul Molitor, Dr Jörg Ritter, and Professor Dr Hans-Joachim Solms.
            Notes
            1. SaDA—Semi-automatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten, http://www.informatik.uni-halle.de/sada.
            2. Perseus Digital Library, http://www.perseus.tufts.edu.
            3. Juxta—Compare–Collate–Discover, http://www.juxtasoftware.org.
            4. Juxta Commons, http://www.juxtacommons.org.
            5. D3—Data-Driven Documents, http://d3js.org.
            6. jQuery—Write Less, Do More, http://jquery.com.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Fry, B. (2009). On the Origin of Species: The Preservation of Favoured Traces. http://www.benfry.com/traces.
                    
                    
                        Medek, A., Pöckelmann, M., Bremer, T., Solms, H. J., Molitor, P. and Ritter. J. (2015). Differenzanalyse komplexer Textvarianten: Diskussion und Werkzeuge. In Henrich, A. and Heyer, G. (eds), 
                        Datenbank-Spektrum, Themenheft ‘Informationsmanagement für Digital Humanities’.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                ‘Nothing That Is Not There and The Nothing That Is’: Tracking the Digital Echoes between Churchyard and Theatre in Shakespeare’s London
                
                    
                        Dabbs
                        Thomas Winn
                    
                    Aoyama Gakuin University, Tokyo, Japan
                    tdabbs@cl.aoyama.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Shakespeare
                    Paul's Cross Churchyard
                    Virtual Paul's Cross Project
                
                
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This talk considers one of the ways in which various digital tools can be used in an integrated fashion to map the public reception of new print and drama during the Elizabethan period. Using the final line from Wallace Stevens’ ‘The Snow Man’ as a prompt, the paper extolls the virtue of using digital technology to make new assumptions about human consciousness in historic times and places that were once ‘there’ even if they are currently or ostensibly ‘not there’. This paper also acknowledges the limits of digital reconstruction and its use in interrogating the past. Indeed, finding nothing may mean that there is nothing to be found. 
            The thesis forwarded here is that the stage plays that were performed in Elizabethan public amphitheatres were inundated with formally crafted echoes, not only of recent print, but also the public reception of recent print. This public reception is most immediately apparent within the St Paul’s precinct in the City of London and would be next to impossible to re-create without the search capabilities of 
                EEBO-TCP,
                 ESTC,
                 Lost Plays Database, and other digital platforms. When reconstructing the relationship between stage performances and the public reception of printed work, we are able to see how a publicly performed play—say, one about the tragic outcomes of Romeo and Juliet—echoed recent public discourse and action in early modern London, discourse and action that was fueled by new print. 
            
            In particular, the cultural environment of Paul’s Cross Churchyard, at that time located on the northeast side of St Paul’s cathedral, is ground zero for this public discourse community. This area of the cathedral is lost to history, not there anymore, but with the digital reconstructions of the 
                Virtual Paul’s Cross Project, it can now be visualized again. The churchyard featured the Paul’s Cross pulpit, and this unique public space echoed with Reformed church sermons from the beginning of the Elizabethan period. Bookshops increasingly flanked this area during the Elizabethan period, making the churchyard the center of the book-selling industry before and during Shakespeare’s time. Controversial and often dramatic sermons from Paul’s Cross echoed religious print held by these enclosing bookshops and, in turn, were at times formed into print editions and sold from the same stores. 
            
            Decades ago, it was speculated that Paul’s Cross, with its surrounding bookshops, was a physical prototype for the Elizabethan public amphitheatres that appeared nearby before and during Shakespeare’s time. The challenge of this particular project is to examine another prototype—that is, the prototype of consciousness that developed in the churchyard and that made popular amphitheatre performances possible and indeed helped to sustain the public theatre for a period. The key to drawing the public to the theatre was to stage plays that echoed popular print and public discourse, specifically in the Paul’s Cross Churchyard and in the cathedral nave, Paul’s Walk. 
            From the records that remain of lost Elizabethan plays before Shakespeare, those plays that are not there but that in some ways are, we can find clues to indicate the relationship between churchyard culture and public theatres. From information that can quickly be accessed at 
                Lost Plays Database, it is abundantly clear that Elizabethan dramatists before Shakespeare drew from popular stories and themes that were on sale in courtyard bookshops in order to craft plays for the early public amphitheatres. From the 1590s onward, an increasing number of plays were preserved in print, and of course from these editions we can link specific references echoed within amphitheatre performances more acutely to courtyard culture. For instance, through 
                EEBO-TCP and 
                ESTC searches, the relationship between churchyard and public stage can be established quickly and with more certainty.
            
            Shakespeare’s 
                Romeo and Juliet follows from the set formula for drawing dramatic titles from popular print editions in Paul’s Cross Churchyard. Looking more closely at the text, in Shakespeare’s version, Mercutio in particular makes a number of seemingly haphazard references that have kept textual scholars busy and sometimes vexed for ages. With digital searches, Mercutio’s references, for instance, to the names of classical and romantic heroines in lyric poems, the further references to sword fighting and to Tybalt’s continental pretentions, can all be directly linked to print editions held in churchyard bookshops and to the presumed reception of these editions among young gallants even within the church precinct. These links occur in many cases no more than two or three years before the performance of the play, first at the Theatre playhouse and then at the Globe. The there-ness of such relationships become uncertain when we attempt to link Mercutio’s description of Tybalt to what we know about the behavior of young gallants in the St Paul’s precinct, although such considerations are intriguing. Digital searches also tempt us to hear the echoes of Thomas Nashe’s satiric attacks on Robert Green in Mercutio’s character. The attempt to use digital searches and re-creations to determine the extent that Tybalt might be a caricature of an actual person, though, might quickly lead us into the nothing that is really not there.
            
            Current search methodologies and visual re-creations could be supplemented by small digital platforms that mine and input information and that eventually give us the ability to access bookstore and other information quickly. Among several suggestions for a small data digital effort that would not require the enormous amount of data input that burdens larger efforts would be a project that makes a searchable database of the ownerships, leases, and primary holdings of select courtyard bookshops specifically during the 1590s. This type of resource would be enormously helpful to scholars and editors, particularly if the database could be corroborated with references to popular discourse and to stage plays that were performed during or close to that decade. 
        
    



    
        
            
                “…a writer essential to the others…” ∗: further reflections towards a methodology and case study of a potential exemplar of Shakespeare’s hand in annotations to an edition of the Eirenarcha (c1605?)
                
                    
                        Cohen
                        Hart
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    h.cohen@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Short
                        Harold
                    
                    Department of Digital Humanities, Kings, London, UK
                    h.short@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Cohen
                        Gerald
                    
                    Independent Scholar, Montreal Quebec Canada
                    cohens@videotron.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    Shakespeare
                    Eirenarcha
                    Common Law
                    Lambarde
                    Annotations
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    content analysis
                    renaissance studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Introduction
            The panel will offer 3 papers that focus on different aspects of a research project relating to the analysis of handwritten annotations found in an original but unrecorded edition of Lambarde’s Eirenarcha (1605?). The engagement with this material brings to the fore questions of methodology in the ideas and affordances provided within digital research and scholarship.
            Title: “…a writer essential to the others…” 
                ∗: further reflections towards a methodology and case study of a potential exemplar of Shakespeare’s hand in annotations to an edition of the Eirenarcha (c1605?)*
            
            
                *(McMillin, Scott, (1987). 
                The Elizabethan Theatre and the "Book of Sir Thomas More". Cornell University Press. P. 159.)
            
            The full sentence reads: “What can be said about the authors’ identities strengthens these assertions but is not necessary to them: let Munday, Chettle and Shakespeare be collaborators on the original version [of Sir Thomas More] let Dekker, Heywood and perhaps Chettle be the revisers a decade later; 
                let Hand C be present on both occasions – a writer essential to the others; [our emphasis] and these names fit easily into the pattern of theatrical characteristics.”
            
            ABSTRACT
            “…a writer essential to the others…” 
                ∗: further reflections towards a methodology and case study of a potential exemplar of Shakespeare’s hand in annotations to an edition of the Eirenarcha (c1605?)
            
            
                Gerald Cohen
            
            Paper 1 develops the research set out in Cohen &amp; Cohen (SAA: 2013).
                1 Our subsequent digitization of the full text of a copy of the Eirenarcha reveals further annotations, marginalia and other markings, all of which seem to add support, in the form of palaeographic and literary evidence, to our initial provisional attribution of the entire corpus of markings to Shakespeare. These include:
            
            1. Marginalia: ‘H3 the law in Latin’ – referencing ‘Justicer’ and ‘Jusitciar,’ which appear in print lower down on the page (ref. King Lear);
            2. Marginalia: ‘Night Watches’ (ref. Hamlet, Much Ado);
            3. Faintly marked: a poem excerpt from Martial: (ref. King Lear); Inter raucos ultimus Rogatores, Ores caminae panis improbibuccas. And ranged last among the roaring rogues, In vaine a morsel may he begge of bread, so bad, as hungry dogs disdaine to byte.
            4. Annotation: ‘Testymonyal of a Roge 190 193’ – the Testimonial reads: “…and he is limited to be at 
                Sale aforesaid, within tenne daies, now next ensuing at his peril.” (ref. King Lear);
            
            5. Annotation: [beside ‘sermo Iosuae ad Achan’] ‘the Chapter [ie, 7, in print,
            below]: 19 Verse’ (ref. King Lear);
            6. Underlined: ‘shoale’ (ref. Macbeth);
            7. Underlined: ‘Common duetie in Charitie’ (ref. King Lear);
            8. Marked in margin: ‘burning in the hand’ (ref. Richard II);
            9. Marked in margin: ‘The grace and dispensation of the prince may not be strained beyond the words.’ (ref. Merchant of Venice).
            10. 
                Ink smudge near ‘if a common Player of Interludes (other than as belong to a
            
            
                Baron) has wandered abroad’.
            
            As the growing preponderance of evidence appears to tip the attribution of these annotations toward William Shakespeare of Stratford, it may be reasonable (even at this early stage) to speculate on some direct implications for critical research. Based on this potential evidence, Part I of this paper will bring to the fore heretofore unexplored dimensions and characterizations of Shakespeare’s literary and dramatic technique, focussing specifically on one structural element, viz., Shakespeare’s apparent selection, adaptation, and staging of choice legal-lexical items contained in this unrecorded copy of Lambarde’s Eirenarcha. Inasmuch as the source text (the Common Law) comprises material firmly rooted in the living social context of Shakespeare’s day, I will present 
            arguments touching upon Shakespeare’s assumed broader purpose of furthering legal equity.
            
                Associate Professor Hart Cohen 
            
            Building on Cohen &amp; Cohen (SAA: 2013), the second paper reflects on the potential for modelling a database approach to the textual analysis of the seminal text in the research case. This section begins with a reflection on the evolution of medium theory, its concern with the technical and material properties of different media and its ability to amplify memory and experience (McLuhan: 1964). The emergence of digital technologies introduces re-mediation (Bolter and Grusin: 2000) and in this way opens up questions about the incorporation of texts into new contexts of audiences, narratives and distribution. The impact of the digital has now outstripped the initial projections of re- mediation with a quantified data model for both culture and the self. Mediation has adapted to a different form of memorialisation and this has foregrounded the 
                interface (Galloway: 2012) defined as “…traces of the past coming to appear in an ever expanding present…” My intention is to bring this kind of analysis to the annotations, marginalia and markings found in this volume of the Eirenarcha. These materialisations are beyond textual representations in the usual sense but rather are the media of sensation – what Parikka refers to as 
                geo-media – where the materiality is like stored energy whose “…intensities, affordances and tendencies are not just passive, waiting for the activity of form(ing) by the human…” (Parikka 2012:84).
                2 In our earlier paper, I referred to Stephen Greenblatt’s use of the concept of 
                energia (ενέργεια)
                , and his further development of this concept into 
                social energy to characterise the motivated and contingently made works of Shakespeare. In combining Parikka’s new materiality of media with the social energy referred to by Greenblatt, this may lead the way to a methodology that is a non- representational form of mediation – something more akin to algorithmic and database determinations of the annotations and markings found on this edition of the Eirenarcha. The layers of mediation are located at the interface, where the new temporalities and the affordances of digital infrastructure open the text to its own materialities.
            
            
                Professor Harold Short
            
            The third paper will develop the Digital Humanities context as the most appropriate one to further develop the analysis of this research case. Digital Humanities is broadly conceived as a collaborative space between computational methods developed in fields such as computer science and the arts and humanities disciplines.
                3 Its history goes back several decades, but recognition of its potential and importance has been growing rapidly in recent years. Shakespeare scholars have been very active in this arena for a long time, and there is no reason to doubt their continuing engagements and the importance of their work, both for Shakespeare studies and for the digital humanities.
            
            The most visible work to date, and arguably the most influential, has been to do with online scholarly editions and an increasingly wide range of support and contextual materials, including not only facsimiles of source material and scholarly commentaries and essays, but also tools for retrieval and analysis that encourage
            and enable any user, whether academic or pursuing general interests, to engage
            with Shakespeare in new and previously unimaginable ways. Foremost among these
            are such sites as Michael Best's Internet Shakespeare Editions
                4 and the Folger Digital Texts
                5 but there are numerous others. There has also been an increasing engagement with performance, and projects such as The MIT Global Shakespeare Project
                6 seek to include a range of photographic and video materials in what is made available online to the researcher. The British Universities Film &amp; Video Council's International Database of Shakespeare on Film, Television and Radio gives primacy to records of performance. The number of websites and the range of materials offered appear to increase almost daily!
            
            Another major strand of digital Shakespeare scholarship has been in the field of stylometry and authorship attribution. Among many others, one prominent scholar in this field is Hugh Craig of Newcastle, New South Wales, who has published extensively on his work over many years using statistically-­‐based analytical methods developed by and in collaboration with John Burrows. 
                7
            
            The research presented in this session fits comfortably within the general tradition of scholarly digital research in Shakespeare studies, and also draws to some extent on the methods developed by scholars such as Craig and Burrows, particularly in the development and use for analytical purposes of databases (corpora) of texts written by Shakespeare and his contemporaries. As, however, with the case of Koppelman and Wechsler and their copy of John Baret’s Alvearie
                8, additional methods are needed, for example detailed paleographic analysis.
                9 Here we are adapting methods developed in a somewhat different field of humanities research – Anglo-­‐Saxon manuscript studies. The DigiPal Project at King’s College London
                10 developed methods based on high resolution scans of manuscripts and the creation of
            
            databases of individual character forms as well as character groups, along with
            analytical tools to aid detailed comparisons to be made. DigiPal is a very recent project – completed mid-­‐2014 – and represents an important new approach to digital scholarship. The demonstration of its relevance in a different scholarly context takes it a stage further.
            
                1 Cohen G., and Cohen H., (2013) “…a writer essential to the others…” 
                ∗: further
            
            
                2 Parikka, J., (2012) What is Media Archaeology? Polity: Cambridge.
            
            
                3 McCarty, W, 
                Humanities Computing, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, chapter 3 ‘Discipline’ pp.114-­‐157, and esp. diagram p. 119.
            
            
                4
                http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/
            
            
                5
                http://www.folgerdigitaltexts.org/
            
            
                6
                http://globalshakespeares.mit.edu/#
            
            
                7 Craig DH, Kinney AF, 
                Shakespeare, Computers and the Mystery of Authorship, Cambridge University Press, 2009
            
            
                8
                http://shakespearesbeehive.com
            
            
                9 As suggested by Michael Witmore and Heather Wolfe:
            
            
                http://collation.folger.edu/2014/04/buzz-­‐or-­‐honey-­‐shakespeares-­‐beehive-­‐raises-­‐questions
            
            10 http:/ 
                jwww.digipal.eu
            
        
    



    
        
            
                '88milSMS', A New Digital Corpus Resource Of French Text Messages: Why We Chose To Exclude Full Transcoding And Standardised Tagging.
                
                    
                        Panckhurst
                        Rachel
                    
                    Praxiling UMR 5267 CNRS, Université Paul-Valéry Montpellier France
                    rachel.panckhurst@univ-montp3.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    SMS
                    French text messages
                    digital corpus resource
                    authentic data
                    mediated electronic discourse.
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    french studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2011, six academics gathered over 90,000 authentic text messages in French from the general public, in compliance with French law.
                1 The SMS ‘donors’ were also invited to fill out a sociolinguistic questionnaire (http://sud4science.org; Panckhurst et al.
                , 2013). The project is part of a vast international initiative titled sms4science (http://www.sms4science.org/; Fairon et al., 2006; Cougnon and Fairon, 2014; Cougnon, 2015) that aims to build a worldwide database and analyse authentic text messages. After the sud4science SMS data collection, a pre-processing phase of checking and eliminating any spurious information and a three-step semi-automatic anonymisation phase were conducted (Accorsi et al., 2014; Patel et al., 2013). Two extracts were transcoded into standardised French (1,000 SMS) and annotated (100 SMS). The finalised digital resource of 88,000 anonymised French text messages, the ‘88milSMS’ corpus, the extracts, and the sociolinguistic questionnaire data are currently available for all to download, via a user free-of-charge licence agreement, from the Huma-Num web service (http://88milsms.huma-num.fr; Panckhurst et al., 2014). 
            
            Why decide to 
                exclude full transcoding and annotation tagging phases? 
            
            Transcoding ‘raw’ text messages into ‘standardised’ French means that morpho-syntactic parsers and other natural language processing tools can ultimately analyse them. Checking spelling and grammar facilitates comprehension, but 
                no supplementary information should be ‘injected’. What if a texter tries to simulate a certain form of oral French, for instance, by using an apostrophe, or through agglutination (‘j’sais’ = ‘je sais’, ‘chuis’ = ‘je suis’)? Should these items be transcoded or not? What about punctuation, often absent in text messages? Should one re-introduce this systematically? Researchers may have differing theoretical viewpoints. 
            
            Another issue is tagging the corpus. After much scientific debate about previous experiences with other sms4science members, eight tags were chosen for ‘88milSMS’: TYP(ography), MOD(ificiation), GRA(mmar), BIN(ettes, smileys/emojis), ABS(ence), LAN(guage), ORT(hography, spelling), DIV(erse). Like the previous transcoding phase, annotation is a source of theoretical disagreement. To highlight this, it may be difficult to decide which tag to use, and double tagging may be necessary: 
                Bone journé. The ‘scriptor’ may have voluntarily modified the two words (‘Bonne journée’ [have a nice day]) or may have lacked spelling knowledge. So should ‘MOD’ and/or ‘ORT’ be used? In another example, in the statement, ‘Il es rentrer a 22h30 et jai eu ldroii au: jsui fatiguer, jai mal a la tete jvai me coucher’ (He came home at 10:30pm and I got to hear: I’m tired, I have a headache, I’m going to bed), ‘rentrer’ (‘Il est rentré’) could be either a grammatical mistake (GRA), or the scriptor may have preferred using an ‘r’ (MOD) instead of pressing the ‘e’ to access the acute accent (on a smartphone). It is extremely difficult to provide satisfactory standardised tagging. 
            
            We decided to limit the processing to two extracts. Our (rare) choice to exclude full transcoding and tagging is a theoretical position: annotation is far from neutral. It is directly linked to an interpretative framework. A true consensus on how to standardise the transcoding and annotation does not exist, owing to differing/varying theoretical, (pluri)disciplinary, and scientific stances. We believe that no additional mark-up initiatives should be imposed upon researchers (other researchers disagree; see Chanier et al., 2014); it seems more relevant to let them conduct their own annotation bearing their specific scientific questioning in mind, without being trapped within a unique theoretical framework. 
            The 88milSMS resource will provide inspiration for many years to come. Our corpus can be used to analyse contemporary mediated electronic discourse, build knowledge on SMS writing forms (Panckhurst, 2009), and let algorithms learn from this: alignment methods for facilitating automatic transcoding are currently being explored (Lopez et al., 2014), as are methods for classifying ‘unknown’ items for use in automatically identifying lexical ‘creativity’ within 88milSMS and also to improve electronic dictionary approaches. The resource also sheds light on ‘corpus-driven’ and ‘corpus-based’ approaches (Panckhurst 2013; Panckhurst et al., 2015). XML encoding means that the resource will be eligible for long-term archiving with the CINES (https://www.cines.fr/). Perhaps in the future, people will look back and explore these ‘snapshot’ resources and understand more about the evolution of scriptural practices and usages in the 21st century.
            Note
            1. Many thanks to my colleagues, Catherine Détrie, Cédric Lopez, Claudine Moïse, Mathieu Roche, Bertrand Verine; our 13 students, who all contributed to sud4science; Nicolas Hvoinsky, legal expert (CIL); and MSH-M, CNRS, and DGLFLF for funding.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Accorsi, P., Patel, N., Lopez, C., Panckhurst, R. and Roche, M. (2014). Seek&amp;Hide: Anonymising a French SMS Corpus Using Natural Language Processing Techniques. In Cougnon, L.-A. and Fairon, C.
                         (eds), SMS Communication. A Linguistic Approach. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 11–28.
                        
                        Chanier, T., Poudat, C., Sagot, B., Antoniadis, G., Wigham, C. R., Hriba, L. Longhi, J. and Seddah, D. (2014). The CoMeRe Corpus for French: Structuring and Annotating Heterogeneous CMC Genres. 
                        JLCL (Journal of Language Technology and Computational Linguistics), special issue on Building and Annotating Corpora of Computer-Mediated Discourse: Issues and Challenges at the Interface of Corpus and Computational Linguistics, http://www.jlcl.org/2014_Heft2/Heft2-2014.pdf, 1–31.
                    
                    
                        Cougnon, L.-A. (2015). 
                        Langage et sms. Une étude internationale des pratiques actuelles. Presses universitaires de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve.
                    
                    
                        Cougnon, L.-A. and Fairon, C. (eds). (2014). 
                        SMS Communication. A Linguistic Approach. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
                        Fairon, C., Klein, J.-R. and Paumier S. (2006). 
                        SMS pour la science. Corpus de 30.000 SMS et logiciel de consultation. Presses universitaires de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve; Manual + CD-Rom, http://www.smspourlascience.be/. 
                    
                    
                        Lopez, C., Bestandji, R., Roche, M. and Panckhurst, R. (2014). Towards Electronic SMS Dictionary Construction: An Alignment-Based Approach. 
                        Proceedings, LREC (Language Resources and Evaluation Conference), Reykjavik, Iceland, 26–31 May 2014, pp. 2833–38.
                    
                    
                        Panckhurst, R. (2009). Short Message Service (SMS): typologie et problématiques futures. In Arnavielle, T. (coord.), 
                        Polyphonies, pour Michelle Lanvin, Université Paul-Valéry Montpellier, pp. 33–52.
                    
                    
                        Panckhurst, R., Détrie, C., Lopez, C., Moïse, C., Roche, M. and Verine B. (2013). Sud4science, de l’acquisition d’un grand corpus de SMS en français à l’analyse de l’écriture SMS. 
                        Épistémè—revue internationale de sciences sociales appliquées,
                        9, Des usages numériques aux pratiques scripturales électroniques: 107–38.
                    
                    
                        Panckhurst, R., Détrie, C., Lopez, C., Moïse, C., Roche, M. and Verine, B. (2014). 88milSMS. A Corpus of Authentic Text Messages in French. Produced by the University Paul-Valéry Montpellier and the CNRS, in collaboration with the Catholic University of Louvain, funded with support from the MSH-M and the Ministry of Culture (General Delegation for the French Language and the Languages of France) and with the financial participation of Praxiling, Lirmm, Lidilem, Tetis, Viseo, 
                    
                    http://88milsms.huma-num.fr/, ISLRN: 024-713-187-947-8.
                    
                        Panckhurst, R., Roche, M. and Lopez C. (2015). Données authentiques: un grand corpus de SMS en français. In 
                        Proceedings, SHESL-HTL 2015 Colloquium, Corpus et constitution des savoirs linguistiques, Paris, 30–31 January 2015, pp. 33–35.
                    
                    
                        Patel, N., Accorsi, P., Inkpen, D., Lopez, C. and Roche, M. (2013). Approaches of Anonymisation of an SMS Corpus. 
                        Proceedings of CICLING (Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics), LNCS, University of the Aegean, Samos, Greece, 24–30 March 2013, Springer Verlag, pp. 77–88.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A 3D Model Of The Venetian Galeazza
                
                    
                        Cavinato
                        Alessandro
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    alessandro.cavinato@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Geissmann
                        Beat
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    beat.geissmann@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Vandevelde
                        Konrad Robert
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    konrad.vandevelde@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Dalang
                        Olivier
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    olivier.dalang@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Rodighiero
                        Dario
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    dario.rodighiero@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    3D modeling
                    CAD
                    Galeazza
                    Render
                    Venice
                
                
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    knowledge representation
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            During its thousand-year life span, the Republic of Venice played a leading role in Mediterranean commercial activity, with a trading empire that spanned from the lagoons of the northern Adriatic Sea to the shores of Syria and Lebanon. The secret of the Venetian domain on the eastern Mediterranean was certainly the power of the Serenissima’s fleet, provided with ships that were efficient in commerce and battle. Among the most successful vessels of the Venetian fleet is the Galeazza, which represents the masterpiece of the shipping technology of the 16th and 17th centuries, and is the symbol of the Venetian domain on the Mediterranean Sea during this period. 
            In order to explain the secrets of the Galeazza’s success, we built a detailed CAD model of this ship, including interior and exterior design. The completion of the model allowed us to produce realistic renderings of the galleass, as well as to obtain quantitative results that might be appealing to naval experts and the digital humanities community. In this poster we show the steps that we have followed to develop the 3D model, as well as some renderings of different parts of the galleass. Moreover, we report the quantitative result estimated with CAD and naval simulation software. Finally, we offer an interactive live demonstration where users will have the chance to explore the 3D model and have a taste of life on such a ship.
            Materials and Methods
            In order to model the Galeazza in detail, we gathered information from history books specializing in the Venetian nautical field. In particular, we found eleven detailed drawings that served as the primary source of information for the construction of the main structure of the ship (Associazione Navimodellisti Bolognese, n.d.), as well as other books about the history and the evolution of the Venetian galleass during the different epochs of the Republic of Venice (Ercole, 2008; 2010). 
            With this documentation we started the modeling procedure, which has been carried out entirely in Rhino 3D. This software allowed us to model the main components of the ship by extruding the 2D profiles that were reported on the eleven drawings of the Galeazza .
            Once all the main components were modeled, we started the assembly process by combining together all the 3D objects. We could deduce the exact position of each piece by looking at the plans of the galleass and at the original ancient drawings contained in Penzo (2000). Once the main shape of the ship was defined, we could start to embellish the model with more specific components and, at the same time, model the interior of the ship. The information that we needed for this step was gathered after an extensive inspection of the ancient drawings contained in Penzo (2000) and Ercole (2010).
            In parallel with the modeling of the last parts, we started the rendering process. In order to produce a final result as realistic as possible, we selected each piece of the galleass and consulted the literature to identify the material it was made of. The proper texture was applied with Maxwell Render, allowing for a great level of detail, especially in the reflectance and light scattering of the different surfaces.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Complete CAD model of the Galeazza.
            Results
            Besides the realistic renderings, the detailed CAD model of the ship allowed us to come out with quantitative results that might be useful for further studies in maritime history. We performed computations of the center of gravity and waterline position by exploiting a naval simulation tool called Orca3D. Thus, by analyzing the distribution of weights, we could estimate the arrangement of the ballast, the placement of the ammunition magazine, the displacement and the total amount of potable water that was carried during a trip. Finally, we estimated the internal volumes that could be used as warehouse to store cannonballs, merchandise, food, and weapons. These results might be useful not only to comprehend the properties of the galleass itself but also to investigate the characteristics that led to the success of the Venetian fleet on the Mediterranean Sea.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Associazione Navimodellisti Bolognesi. (n.d.). 
                        1351—GALEAZZA VENETA l.f.t. 71,50 m–1:50, http://www.anb-online.it/navi-mercantili-e-navi-antiche/dagli-inizi-della-navigazione-al-1800-circa/1351-galeazza-veneta-l-f-t-7150-m-150/?lang=en.
                    
                    
                        Ercole, G. (2008). 
                        Duri i banchi. Gruppo Modellisticio Trentino.
                    
                    
                        Ercole, G. (2010). 
                        Galeazze, un sogno veneziano. Gruppo Modellistico Trentino.
                    
                    
                        http://netwar.wordpress.com/2007/08/15/the-battle-of-lepanto/.
                    
                    
                        http://www.shipstamps.co.uk.
                    
                    
                        Penzo, G. (2000). 
                        Navi Veneziane. Lint.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Closer Look: Developing Mobile Applications to Reveal Hidden Meanings of Art
                
                    
                        Downing
                        Laura Kathryn
                    
                    Glasgow School of Art, United Kingdom; Trinity College Dublin
                    downing.laura@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Lawless
                        Séamus
                    
                    Trinity College Dublin
                    seamus.lawless@scss.tcd.ie
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    art
                    mobile applications
                    museums
                    learning
                    Bulgaria
                
                
                    art history
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Art is immensely complex by its very nature. Conceptual meanings and storied existences make art objects and cultural heritage sites valuable learning tools. Yet the very essence that transforms these precious materials from mere objects to fascinating, priceless cultural heritage artifacts often cannot be understood by present-day viewers through observation alone. Art objects are reliant on external sources to communicate their messages and meanings for them, to reveal their hidden stories to the world. The transformative potential of digital mobile technology as a new means to engage global public audiences with art and cultural heritage sites is changing the nature of how ongoing visitor learning problems are addressed. 
                Museums are now developing mobile applications to provide more in-depth and interactive learning experiences, which help users generally become more comfortable interacting with art and expand museums’ audiences to include entirely virtual visitors from around the globe. Mobile applications can build meaningful context around art resources using the vast expert knowledge held by museums while allowing users more control over their learning as they develop their own understanding and personal relationships with art (Hartig, 2013; Lewis, 2013). 
            
            This paper will investigate how mobile applications designed to reveal hidden meanings of art effectively enhance user learning processes for understanding art. This paper will present the findings from a critical state-of-the-art survey conducted on five illustrative location-generic mobile applications produced by leading international art museums that focus on revealing hidden meanings in art within informal learning contexts that would most likely take place off-site from the museum. State-of-the-art practices, outstanding best-practice examples, as well as current design weaknesses will be discussed. Additionally, this paper will also present a new prototype mobile application about Bulgarian Orthodox art, which was created from a series of requirements that were derived from the state-of-the-art survey results. 
            Mobile applications are constructivist learning tools by nature because of their focus on contextual learning, making connections and building relationships, and allowing the learner to control their own learning process (Hein 1991; 1999; Ravenscroft in Sharples et al., 2000, 7). Location-generic mobile applications allow users to learn outside traditional space and time constraints and are most effective and broadly appealing in informal, relaxed learning situations (Kukulska-Hulme, 2013). 
                The adaptability of mobile devices’ abilities to present practically limitless multimedia information from numerous information sources, voices, and perspectives is also transforming learning possibilities (Helal et al., 2013). One could speculate that being able to study works of art on a mobile device anywhere, in private, can have a transformative positive impact on learning through intimately interacting with digitized works of art, especially for audiences unable to view them in person as well as those who may feel intimidated going to museums because they are less comfortable, knowledgeable, or familiar with art.
            
            The surveyed mobile applications reveal the often deceptively complex and subtle nature of the artistic process and enhance visual details of art objects that would otherwise go unnoticed to the untrained eye or are physically inaccessible because they are hidden or no longer exist. Numerous histories and other fascinating tidbits of knowledge are also given new life by being reintroduced to broad audiences. 
            These objectives are commonly carried out by strategically combining new digital visual content with archival information to illustrate the human and nuanced nature of the myriad stories underpinning works of art. Museum practices are also becoming more transparent through digital methods, which helps raise the public profile of museums as research and educational institutions. Digital technology provides innovative and cost-effective methods for museums to publish research and explain curatorial, art conservation, and other behind-the-scenes practices with broad public audiences and create new ways of learning unlike ever before. 
            Synthesized results indicate the most pedagogically successful guides presented the content in such a way that the works of art came to life in the mind: art topics became stories; paintings became settings; and artists, subjects, and museum workers became characters in a vivid narrative explored in the diverse content of the application. One could speculate these are the stories that the user will remember long after the digital experience is over. Survey results indicate that when users control their learning environment and are guided to actively uncover hidden layers and meanings of art in an interactive environment, it helps users actively learn about art objects’ individual histories and significance while encouraging users to develop their own personal meanings and relationships with art. Housen (2014) and Yenawine (1997) emphasize these are equally important to objective understandings of art. 
            Complex spatio-temporal concepts that would be difficult to otherwise explain to general audiences are easily understood through digitally enhanced methods. Interactive design capabilities of mobile devices, including sophisticated native multimedia and multisensory features, allow the user to manipulate, construct, compare, augment, and respond to the environment in a fluid continuum in both physical and virtual space. Survey results indicate that giving the user the ability to watch works of art transmogrify as a direct result of their actions and being able to see them in extremely close detail helps the user better understand the nuanced beauty, the emotional resonance, the personal artistic touches that demonstrate the deceivingly sophisticated nature of these works. These digitally enhanced features uniquely enhance users’ critical visual investigative and comparison abilities, which are critical for constructing meanings of art (Alexander and Goeser, 2013; Housen, 2007; 2014; Isaacson et al., 2011; 2012; Rubino, 2011, 9). 
                In some cases content created for mobile devices provides opportunities for better user-driven visual analysis and personal study of art objects than what is publicly viewable in the galleries or anywhere else. This makes them universally appealing for everyone, from those only casually interested in art, to students and educators, and even professionals, including curators, conservators, and other researchers. 
            
            Results of the state-of-the-art survey suggest the challenging nature of designing mobile applications because of the delicate balance that must be achieved between a number of factors in a dynamic digital environment. Weaknesses in content, design, and navigation in several mobile applications indicate their negative influence on learning and user experience. 
            * * *
            
                Where Heaven Meets Earth: A Visual Guide for Understanding Bulgarian Orthodox Art is the first known attempt to help new audiences learn about Bulgarian Orthodox art with a mobile application. It exemplifies a practical solution to a common interpretive problem that many museums and historic sites face: providing sufficient didactic and innovative interpretive material to its visitors without interrupting the aesthetic experience on site. It is location generic by design, so it can also be used to prepare or reflect on a site visit or exclusively by virtual visitors who may never have the chance to physically visit a Bulgarian Orthodox heritage site. It was developed based on a set of requirements that were derived from the formative results of the state-of-the-art survey, and it is an example of a low-cost and efficient method of producing an educational mobile application featuring extensible design without advanced technical skills.
            
            According to Avgerinou and Pettersson’s Theory of Visual Literacy, each person’s ability to interpret art is constrained by one’s reasoning skills along with one’s existing knowledge, context clues, and readily available resources, because the visual language, symbols, and prescribed meanings encoded within works of art are culturally specific and therefore not universally understood (2011). Generally speaking, the Christian Eastern Orthodox religion and its artistic traditions, which the Bulgarian Orthodox Church is a part of, are not well understood by audiences outside countries where it is a dominant religion. Many tourists come to Bulgaria without much knowledge of Orthodox art, but are eager to learn more about it. However, most religious sites in Bulgaria do not have didactic and interpretive information available to help visitors understand and interpret the rich visual iconographic language and layers of symbolic biblical and cultural meanings that are hidden within Orthodox art because they are foremost working churches and monasteries. Without didactic information available on-site, many visitors cannot fully engage, understand, and appreciate the artistic and religious value of Bulgarian Orthodox art or its significance in broader Christian, Bulgarian, Balkan, Slavic, world religions, and global cultural heritage. 
                Where Heaven Meets Earth provides mostly basic explanatory historic, artistic, and identification information for pre-literate Orthodox art audiences, which they can then use to construct more informed objective and personal meanings of Bulgarian Orthodox art (Yenawine, 1997). 
            
            The paper will conclude with a list of actionable recommendations collated from research, the survey, and lessons learned during the mobile application development process to help practitioners get started on their first mobile application project. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alexander, J. B. and Goeser, C. (2013). Transforming the Art Museum Experience: Gallery One. In Proctor, N. and Cherry, R. (eds), 
                        Museums and the Web 2013: Proceedings. Silver Spring, MD: Museums and the Web.
                    
                    
                        Avgerinou, M. D. and Pettersson, R. (2011). Toward a Cohesive Theory of Visual Literacy. 
                        Journal of Visual Literacy,
                        30(2): 1–19.
                    
                    
                        Hartig, K. (2013). Communicating the Museum: From Digital Strategy to Plan of Action—Two Years Down the Road. In Proctor, N. and Cherry, R. (eds), 
                        Museums and the Web 2013: Proceedings. Silver Spring, MD: Museums and the Web.
                    
                    
                        Hein, G. (1991). Constructivist Learning Theory: The Museum and the Needs of People. 
                        The Museum and the Needs of the People. CECA International Committee of Museum Educators Conference, Jerusalem, 15–22 October 1991.
                    
                    
                        Hein, G. E. (1999). Is Meaning Making Constructivism? Is Constructivism Meaning Making? 
                        The Exhibitionist, 
                        18(2): 15-18.
                    
                    
                        Helal, D., Ancelet, J. and Maxson, H. (2013). Lessons Learned: Evaluating the Whitney’s Multimedia Guide. In Proctor, N. and Cherry, R. (eds), 
                        Museums and the Web 2013: Proceedings. Silver Spring, MD: Museums and the Web.
                    
                    
                        Housen, A. (2007). Art Viewing and Aesthetic Development: Designing for the Viewer. 
                        From Periphery to Center: Art Museum Education in the 21st Century.
                    
                    
                        Housen, A. (2014). Aesthetic Development. 
                        Visual Thinking Strategies.
                    
                    
                        Isaacson, A., et al. (2011). Enhancing Group Tours with the iPad: A Case Study.” AAM, 5 August. 
                    
                    
                        Isaacson, A., et al. (2012). Enhancing Group Tours with the iPad: 2012 Updates and Discoveries. AAM, 12 October.
                    
                    
                        Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2013). Limelight on Mobile Learning: Integrating Education and Innovation. 
                        Harvard International Review, 
                        34(4): 12–16.
                    
                    
                        Lewis, A. (2013). What Do Visitors Say about Using Mobile Devices in Museums? Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 13 March, http://www.vam.ac.uk/blog/digital-media/museum-visitors-using-mobile (accessed 30 March 2015).
                    
                    
                        Rubino, I. (2011). iPads for Museums: Serving Visitors and Professional Communities. Powerhouse Museum, Sydney, Australia. 
                    
                    
                        Sharples, M., et al. (2007). A Theory of Learning for the Mobile Age. In Andrews R. and Haythornthwaite, C. (eds), 
                        The Sage Handbook of eLearning. London: Sage, pp. 1–23.
                    
                    
                        Yenawine, P. (1997). Thoughts on Visual Literacy. In Flood, J., Heath, S. B. and Lapp, D. (eds),
                         Handbook of Research on Teaching Literacy through the Communicative and Visual Arts. Macmillan, New York.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Collaborative Interdisciplinary Knowledge-Base for the Art Conservation Community
                
                    
                        Hunter
                        Jane
                    
                    The University of Queensland, Australia
                    j.hunter@uq.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Odat
                        Suleiman
                    
                    The University of Queensland, Australia
                    s.odat@uq.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Drennan
                        John
                    
                    The University of Queensland, Australia
                    j.drennan@uq.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    art conservation
                    knowledge base
                    decision support
                    federated search
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    knowledge representation
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Due to increasing access to sophisticated analytical techniques, painting conservation has evolved into a highly interdisciplinary research area that requires the integration of knowledge and ‘big data’ about art history (artists, artistic techniques, art provenance), the physical and chemical properties of paint and pigments, the chemical processes associated with treatment and cleaning methods, and advanced high-resolution characterization techniques. The ultimate aim is to determine the precise cause of the degradation or discoloration that is occurring in a particular artwork or across a set of paintings and the optimum methods for treating and preventing it.
            The challenge is that the data and information required by art conservators to inform decision making are highly heterogeneous and distributed across databases, scholarly publications, and the Web. Expertise is also distributed across art galleries, conservation centres, and universities around the globe. Although it is possible to find some concentrated authoritative collections of information on the Web (e.g., 
                
                
                Journal of the American Institute of Conservation, Smithsonian Museum Conservation Institute [MCI], Getty Conservation and Research Institutes, CAMEO materials database, and Forbes Pigment database), the information is often embedded within databases or is highly unstructured data hidden in textual documents. Relevant information may exist, but it is difficult to find, extract, re-use, interpret, correlate, or compare.
            
            For example, it is very difficult for art conservators to find other past examples of conservation issues that most closely match the problem they are trying to solve. Moreover, the experimental data underpinning publications that describe the long-term effects of different environmental conditions (humidity, temperature, UV light) on different paints and pigments is not accessible, verifiable, or re-usable. Typically, the raw data (FTIR, spectrographs, X-ray diffraction images, SEM/TEM images) associated with the analysis of a particular painting or paint samples are not available even if described within a related publication. Our community of conservators, curators, and scientists want a Web-based search interface that provides answers to questions such as
             • What is the best way to treat zinc oxides occurring in paintings by Rover Thomas?
             • What are the factors that cause or accelerate the occurrence of lead soaps in paintings by R. Godfrey Rivers?
             • What is the best solvent for removing varnish from the painting ‘Epiphany’?
            In order to answer such questions, a broad range of provenance information, characterisation data, publications, and experimental results need to be aggregated and synthesized. Hence, a key objective of the Twentieth Century in Paint project
                1 was to investigate the IT infrastructure and services required to provide decision support tools to an online network of art conservators (APTCAARN—the Asia Pacific Twentieth Century Conservation Art Research Network). An initial analysis of the user requirements of APTCAARN members identified a growing demand for the following:
            
             • An online repository where experiments and experimental results can be described, stored, shared, and discussed.
             • A search interface that provides seamless access to publically available databases about paints and pigments.
             • Tools to enable the extraction of structured data from publications about art conservation issues.
             • A SPARQL query interface that supports querying across all of the above.
            This paper will describe the architecture, ontology, repository, and services that constitute the Art Conservation Knowledge-base. It will describe the OPPRA (Ontology for the Preservation of Art) ontology, the experimental data capture interface and archive, the mapping tools (that map external databases to OPPRA), and the GATE pipeline (that integrates a Named Entity Recognition [NER] tool for tagging concepts and named entities within paint conservation publications, with a Relation Extraction classifier for identifying OPPRA-based relations between named entities) to extract structured data from a corpus of key publications on art conservation. We will also give a demo of the ontology-based federated search interface, designed to support the queries described above. Finally, the results of evaluating the system both from a user endpoint and empirically will be presented.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Modelling and extracting structured data from a publication about experiments on lead soaps in a painting by Van Gogh.
            Note
            1. http://www.20thcpaint.org/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hunter, J. and Odat, S. (2011). Building a Semantic Knowledge-Base for Painting Conservators. In 
                        2011 IEEE 7th International Conference on e-Science. IEEE, pp. 173–80.
                    
                    
                        Odat, S., Groza, T. and Hunter, J. (2014). Extracting Structured Data from Publications in the Art Conservation Domain. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqu002.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Computational Bibliography Of Two Plays From The Shakespeare Folio
                
                    
                        Craig
                        Hugh
                    
                    University of Newcastle, Australia
                    hugh.craig@newcastle.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    computational stylistics
                    Shakespeare
                    bibliogrpahy
                    chronology
                
                
                    literary studies
                    scholarly editing
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    english studies
                    renaissance studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The 1623 Shakespeare Folio may well be the most important single book we have for the study of literature in English. It contains 18 plays that do not survive anywhere else, 
                Macbeth, 
                Twelfth Night, and 
                Julius Caesar among them, and includes what are generally held to be superior texts of 18 plays by Shakespeare that had already been printed, or at least valuable alternative texts for them. 
            
            Establishing sound texts for the plays continues to occupy the attention of a large group of scholars worldwide, with new editions appearing every few years. Where multiple varying early texts exist, choices must be made, but this can only be done if we understand the patterns of transmission that gave rise to them—their bibliography. This remains a problem because the plays were printed in a marketplace where copyright was vested in printers rather than authors, and was in any case not well developed, and no one in the chain extending from authors to book buyers was concerned with keeping records for posterity. Work on these problems goes back to the 18th century, and we now know a lot about theatres, companies, writers, printers, booksellers, and book buyers in general, but in the form of general tendencies, not hard-and-fast rules, and rarely enough about particular cases. Here we are compelled to rely on scanty documentary evidence, extended with ingenious speculation, guided by general knowledge of the practices of the day, and on close scrutiny of particular passages. 
            The paper will introduce a new line of evidence about the bibliography of these plays from computational stylistics. The methods are comparative and cumulative, subject to the checks against bias and the estimates of underlying reliability provided by statistical models. This provides ways of arbitrating between existing explanations, and some entirely new perspectives as well, such as systematically comparing degrees of likeness between versions. 
            The oldest and perhaps still dominant theory about the place of the Folio in the Shakespeare textual constellation is that the compilers of the volume, John Heminges and Henry Condell—close associates of Shakespeare, and both mentioned in his will—were able to collect fair-copy authorial manuscripts of the plays for their venture. Heminges and Condell in the preface to the Folio contend that earlier versions were nothing but ‘diuerse stolne and surreptitious copies, maimed, and deformed by frauds and stealthes of iniurious impostors’, whereas in their volume, Shakespeare’s works are ‘offer’d to your view cured, and perfect of their limbes; and all the rest, absolute in their numbers as he conceived them’.
            Many scholars have followed Heminges and Condell’s lead on the illegitimacy of quarto versions of the plays, arguing that these texts derive from actors or audience members reconstructing dialogue from memory or from shorthand notes. Others have proposed that the non-Folio versions are distinct early authorial versions, pirated manuscript copies, acting versions as opposed to the reading versions printed in the Folio, or versions by other dramatists later adapted by Shakespeare for the Folio version. In this paper I focus on two of the Folio plays with earlier printed analogues, applying computational-stylistic methods to test rival theories about the nature of the Folio text and its relationship to earlier versions.
            In applying computational stylistics to bibliographical questions in Shakespearean drama the study follows a chapter by Arthur F. Kinney (2009) and a book by Lene B. Petersen (2010). Kinney showed that changes between the Folio and Quarto versions of 
                King Lear in uses of some alternative forms such as 
                which and 
                that were persistent and consistent, indicating close and purposeful revision, most likely authorial. This finding supports the most significant proposal in Shakespeare textual studies of the past 50 years, the separation of Quarto and Folio versions of 
                King Lear into an early and revised state, challenging the earlier view that these were two partial witnesses to a single lost original (Taylor and Warren, 1987). Petersen aims to show patterns in some quartos that reflect memorial reconstruction, such as simplification, repetition, and transposition, but as reviews have pointed out, she fails to account for the inherent variability of her data and only rarely offers results that pass significance tests (Egan et al., 2012).
            
            Henry VI, Part 3
            
                Henry VI, Part 3 is one of the more extreme cases of uncertainty in the Shakespeare canon. We have a prima facie likelihood that Shakespeare was at least one of the authors, given that the play is included in the Folio—titled unequivocally 
                Mr William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, &amp; Tragedies—but scholars continue to disagree on internal, stylistic grounds about whether he wrote the whole of it, or if only part, which part, and who were his fellow authors. 
            
            As well as the Folio we have an early Octavo edition from 1595, which is different enough from the Folio version to have led some scholars to suggest that it is in fact by a different author, and should be regarded as a source for the Folio rather than an alternative version. Another group of scholars has argued that the Octavo is a memorial reconstruction of the play by actors, whereas the Folio derives from authorial ‘foul papers’ or working drafts. The latest Arden edition casts doubt on both the memorial construction and the foul papers theories, finding that neither of the two texts altogether fits its proposed category (Cox and Rasmussen, 2001, 176). 
            I will present findings that the 1595 Octavo is by the same author or authors as the 1623 Folio version, but the nature and extent of the differences vary greatly from act to act, with the two versions of Act IV in particular being as far apart as any two versions of an act of any of the Folio-Quarto pairs tested to date. The first two components of a Principal Component Analysis with very common words as variables and a large background set of plays in segments as observations will be used to establish a two-dimensional space as a basis for calculating distances between different versions of the same act. 
            Hamlet
            Up to the early 19th century, only one Quarto of 
                Hamlet was known, the one printed in 1604, but in 1823 a second separate printing was discovered, from 1603, half as long as Q2 (1604) but with a hitherto unknown scene and many alternative readings. The consensus view is that this is a memorial reconstruction of the play, but an older view that Q1 represents a much earlier authorial version of the play is revived in a recent book by Terri Bourus. She argues the case from stage history, printing history, and comparative readings of the various versions. 
            
            Computational stylistics offers an opportunity to bring some entirely different evidence to bear. Competing views put the date of composition of Q1 in the late 1580s or the late 1590s. Stylistic analysis is effective in classifying plays by date over this sort of span; the language of the drama changed quickly in this period, consistently and collectively, to the point that plays can be reliably assigned between half-decades separated by a half-decade (Craig, 2013). In later plays, words like 
                very and 
                most are suddenly more common, as is the indefinite article, and words like 
                doth, 
                hath, and 
                thou forms retreat. In this paper I will show the results of dating classification tests with function-words data, lexical-words data, and word n-grams. 
            
            A late 1580s date for Q1 would undermine the idea that 
                Hamlet is part of the moment of transformation in Shakespeare’s drama in 1599–1600, which is central to a number of accounts of his development and of the development of early modern culture more generally (Shapiro, 2005; Bloom, 1998; Kermode, 2000). A late 1590s dating would lend weight to the idea that an earlier lost version of the Hamlet story existed but by a different author, possibly Thomas Kyd. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bloom, H. (1998). 
                        Shakespeare and the Invention of the Human. Riverhead Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Bourus, T. (2014). 
                        Young Shakespeare’s Young Hamlet: Print, Piracy, and Performance. Palgrave Macmillan, New York. 
                    
                    
                        Cox, J. D. and Rasmussen, E. (eds). (2001). 
                        King Henry VI, Part 3. In 
                        The Arden Shakespeare, 3rd series. Methuen Drama, London.
                    
                    
                        Craig, H. (2013). ‘The Date of 
                        Sir Thomas More’. 
                        Shakespeare Survey,
                        66: 38–54. 
                    
                    
                        Egan, G., et al. (2012). ‘VI. Shakespeare’. 
                        The Year’s Work in English Studies,
                        91: 328–507.
                    
                    
                        Kermode, F. (2000). 
                        Shakespeare’s Language. Allen Lane, London.
                    
                    
                        Kinney, A. F. (2009). ‘Transforming King Lear’. In Craig, H., and Kinney, A. F. (eds), 
                        Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of Authorship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–201.
                    
                    
                        Petersen, L. B. (2010). 
                        Shakespeare’s Errant Texts: Textual Form and Linguistic Style in Shakespearean ‘Bad’ Quartos and Co-Authored Plays. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Shakespeare, W. (1623). 
                        Mr William Shakespeares Comedies, Histories, &amp; Tragedies. London.
                    
                    
                        Shapiro, J. (2005). 
                        1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare. Faber, London.
                    
                    
                        Taylor, G. and Warren, M. (eds). (1987). 
                        The Division of the Kingdoms: Shakespeare’s Two Versions of ‘King Lear’. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Digital Humanities GIS Ontology: Tweetflickertubing James Joyce’s "Ulysses" (1922)
                
                    
                        Travis
                        Charles Bartlett
                    
                    Long Room Hub, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
                    ctravis@tcd.ie
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    GIS
                    Ulysses
                    social media
                    literature
                    history.
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    historical studies
                    interface and user experience design
                    literary studies
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    text analysis
                    text generation
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    internet / world wide web
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    social media
                    crowdsourcing
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    maps and mapping
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This Digital Humanities GIS (DHGSI) model cross-pollinates literary and social media practices to engage in a participatory, performative, and augmented reality survey of the relations between James Joyce’s novel 
                Ulysses (1922) and digital eco-system productions of dialogical and social space (Goodchild, 2009; Sieber, Wellen, and Yuan 2011; Priem, 2011; Young and Gilmore, 2013; Graham and Zook, 2013; Lin, 2013). Joyce famously boasted that the aim of 
                Ulysses (which kaleidoscopically relates the urban journeys of student Stephen Dedalus and advertising salesman Leopold Bloom on 16 June 1904) was ‘to give a picture of Dublin so complete that if the city one day suddenly disappeared from the earth it could be reconstructed out of my book’ (Budgen, 1972, 69). The model integrates a 
                Ulysses schema outline with live geo-spatially enabled Twitter, Flickr, and YouTube posts to map the language operating in a Bloomsday-generated digital eco-system to re-create the discourse of a virtual Joycean Dublin during the annual celebration of the novel. Consequently the ‘Joycean’ neologism 
                tweetflickertubing was coined to describe the ontological shift indicated by the HGIS model’s methodology. 
            
            
                Creating the Model
            
            In 1920 Joyce drafted a schema outlining 
                Ulysses’ eighteen Homeric episodes for the Italian critic Carlo Linati, to whom he wrote, ‘in view of the enormous bulk and the more than enormous complexity of my damned monster-novel it would be better to send . . . a sort of summary-key-skeleton schema’ (Ellman, 1974, 187). The schema’s grid designates episode title, time, color, people, science/art, meaning, technic, organ, and symbols. To create the model an Excel spreadsheet (Figure 1) was populated with this data and geo-coded according to GPS-designated decimal degree locations of the 18 Homeric episode sites in Dublin. These sites were identified through the 1904 
                Thom’s Map of Dublin, Ian Gunn and Clive Hart’s 
                James Joyce’s Dublin: A Topographical Guide (2004), and GIS ‘ground-truthing’ methods, and checked against the ‘what’s here’ function of the Google Maps app. 
            
            Site centroids were approximately identified to concrete locations described in 
                Ulysses because the various characters’ movements and locations within the novel (such as the Wandering Rocks episode) occur simultaneously and at multiple sites within and beyond the geographical and temporal boundaries distinguishing each episode in the schema. The Excel database was imported into Google Fusion and visualized through its Google Maps function. The database was also converted to a CSV file and imported into the ArcGIS Online platform and integrated with a live social media map layer. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1: Fragments of the Carlo Linati schema, Google Fusion map, and Excel/CVS Geo database. 
            Surveying Bloomsday Digital Ecosystem 
            Surveys were taken on 16 June 2014 at hourly intervals, based upon the chronology from the Linati schema, and were divided into two categories: local (Dublin) and global, weighed by the indices of site and time, respectively. Several keywords—such as ‘James Joyce’, ‘Ulysses’, and ‘Bloomsday’, as well as character and episode names from the novel—were tested in the model’s Twitter, Flickr, and YouTube search engines. ‘Bloomsday’ received the highest number of hits and became the main survey keyword. 
            The local survey focused on activity around Homeric episode sites in Dublin, and found that Davy Byrne’s Pub on Duke Street and Joyce’s Martello Tower associated with the 
                Lestrygonians and 
                Telemachus episodes attracted the most posts. Tweet postings did not, however, correspond with the chronology of 
                Ulysses’ narrative outlined in the schema, illustrating that social media activity aggregated around site location rather than novelistic time. A Tweeted image (Figure 2) captures throngs of people in funny hats assembled around Byrne’s pub, and it seems that Joyce’s identification of the ‘Oesophagus’ as the body organ symbol for this episode was indeed apt. The National Library site was originally geo-coded as the centroid of the 
                Lestrygonians episode; however, survey results suggest that perhaps because of the social gravity indicated by the number of social media posts, the centroid should be re-located to the site of the pub, illustrating the iterative process integral to Neogeographical mapping practices. In the case of the global survey, Tweets blossomed across Europe, the Middle East, Asia, Australia-Pacific, North America, and Latin America during the entire chronology of the Linati schema. ‘Orphan’ Tweets (corresponding outside of the hourly periods not included in the schema) were placed either in preceding episode time slots or in the Penelope episode—whose time indices encompass ‘Infinity’ (see Bloomsday Tweet Schema in poster). 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Live social media map integrated with the Linati schema geo-database. 
            Surveys taken before, on, and following Bloomsday 2014 illustrate that Flickr and YouTube postings with time lags, and reflecting activity over the course of a year, exhibited the most aggregated social media activity. However, over the course of the 16 June 2014 survey, it became apparent that dominant social media ecosystem activity on Bloomsday occurred in Twitter. The following verbal snapshot reflects a parsing of language activity (see Bloomsday Tweet Schema in poster) articulated in this digital eco-system: ‘People in Dublin are wearing funny hats because it is Bloomsday and elderly ladies are getting rowdy in Davy Byrne’s Pub; a wedding anniversary is observed in Glasnevin, North Dublin, while a Spanish tweeter celebrates with a Domino’s Pizza and the latest 
                X-Men film. Individuals in Dublin, Paris and Washington D.C. resolve to again attempt to read 
                Ulysses, and a tweeter in Uruguay mentions Bloomsday to her Irish boyfriend, who asks if the day has anything to do with flowers. A few literary minded types post Joycean lines from the novel, while two individuals from Dublin get suited up in Edwardian clothes to face the day; one tweeter reflecting on the day after the night before, asks if Bloomsday was a joke brought up in a drinking session. A tweeter from Mexico City advertises online translations of Joyce’s “lascivious” letters to his wife Nora Barnacle. The celebration of 
                Ulysses converges with perhaps a larger global event to provoke a Dublin tweeter to state that there is “Nothing like a combo of World Cup and bloomsday to hear people who don’t like either Joyce or football talk about both”. One wry observation from the Bronx asks if “Bloomsday is Paddy’s Day for posh people?” And two more tweets from the USA proclaim “I’m pretty sure Joyce would love hashtags”, and “To paraphrase Laurie Anderson: 
                Ulysses? Never read it”’. 
            
            A corollary can be made between Joyce’s writing technique in 
                Ulysses and the use of language in this Twitter-based digital ecosystem. Joyce’s stream-of-consciousness technique mimicked the various ways in which the human mind ‘speaks’ to itself, through complex fluid patterns, random interruptions, incomplete thoughts, half words, and tangents (Norris and Flint, 2000, 126). Tweets, limited to a certain number of characters, reflect Joyce’s technique by conveying both focused and random thoughts, and illuminate Graham and Zook’s (2013, 78) contention that the ‘digital dimensions of places are fractured along a number of axes such as location, language, and social networks with correspondingly splintered representations customized to individuals’ unique sets of abilities and backgrounds’. The DHGIS model illuminates how literary and historical tropes can aid in contextualizing and mapping social media activity through the creation of interpretive schemas to study interactions between language, behaviour, time, and place. 
            
            
                DHGIS Implications 
            
            Re-conceptualizing J. B. Harley’s observation that ‘text’ is a better metaphor for maps than the mirror of nature through the lens of the digital humanities, it can be seen that HGIS-generated ‘maps are a cultural text. By accepting their textuality we are able to embrace a number of different interpretative possibilities’ (1989, 4). The DHGIS model enabled digital inter-textual relationships between 
                Ulysses, the Linati schema, and the dialogical and social space reflected in the Bloomsday social media eco-system. Subsequently, digital humanities methodologies of 
                deformance and 
                ergodicity were applied as interpretative techniques. By translating one ontological form of discourse to another, 
                deformance applies 
                scientia to 
                poeisis and seeks to explain unitary and unique phenomena (such as the language activity in the Bloomsday social media ecosystem) rather than establish a set of general rules or laws (McGann and Samuels, 1999). 
                Ergodicity involves an interactive type of labor between the GIS practitioner/author/coder, reader/viewer, and mapping subject to create the potential multiple narrative paths composing a digital text. 
                Ergodic applications of GIS create non-linear narratives that converge and disrupt both quotidian and epochal chronologies of time and space. As a literary tool, this DHGIS model synchronizes the resulting layers of images, words, and vectors into contrapuntal, multi-dimensional digital narratives, providing the means to ‘reconnect the representational spaces of literary texts not only to material spaces they depict, but also reverse the moment’ (Staley, 2007; Thacker, 2005, 63). Lastly, DHGIS, digital, spatial, and heohumanities modelling techniques, integrated with radical statistics holds the potential to engage Qualitative &amp; Critical GIS / GIScience studies with reflexive epistemologies to address the situatedness and positionality of Big Data as it relates to sustainability initiatives, smart city planning, transport and public health, disaster preparedness, and social and regional conflict (Cope and Elwood, 2009; Aitken and Craine, 2009; Bodenhamer et al., 2010; Dear et al., 2011; Meir, 2011; Elwood et al., 2012; Kwan and Schwanen, 2012; Leventala, 2012; Kitchin, 2014; Travis, 2014). 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Aitken, S. and Craine, J. (2009). Into the Image and Beyond: Affective Visual Geographies and GIScience. In Elwood, S. A. and Cope, M. (eds), 
                        Qualitative GIS: A Mixed-Methods Approach. London: Sage. 
                    
                    
                        Bodenhamer, D., Corrigan, J. and Harris, T. M. (2010). 
                        The Spatial Humanities. Indiana University Press, Bloomington. 
                    
                    
                        Budgen, F. (1972). 
                        James Joyce and the Making of ‘Ulysses’. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
                    
                    
                        Bulson, E. (2001–2002). Joyce’s Geodesy. 
                        Journal of Modern Literature,
                        25(2): 80–96. 
                    
                    
                        Cope, M. and Elwood, S. A. (2009). 
                        Qualitative GIS: A Mixed-Methods Approach. Sage, London. 
                    
                    
                        Dear, M., Ketchum, J., Luria, S. and Richardson, D. (2011). 
                        Geohumanities: Art, History, Text at the Edge of Place. Routledge, New York. 
                    
                    
                        Ellman, R. (1974). 
                        Ulysses on the Liffey. Faber &amp; Faber, London. 
                    
                    
                        Elwood, S. Goodchild, M. and Sui, D.
                        (2012). Researching Volunteered Geographic Information: Spatial Data, Geographic Research, and New Social Practice.
                        Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 
                        10
                        (2): 1–20.
                    
                    
                        Goodchild, M. (2009). NeoGeography and the Nature of Geographic Expertise. 
                        Journal of Location Based Service,
                        3(2): 82–96.
                    
                    
                        Graham, M., and Zook, M. (2013). Augmented Realities and Uneven Geographies: Exploring the Geo-Linguistic Contours of the Web. 
                        Environment and Planning A,
                        45: 77–99. 
                    
                    
                        Gunn, I. and Hart, C. (2004). 
                        James Joyce’s Dublin: A Topographical Guide. Thames and Hudson, London. 
                    
                    
                        Harley, J. B. (1989). Deconstructing the Map. 
                        Cartographica,
                        26(2): 1–20. 
                    
                    
                        Kitchin, R. (2014). Big Data, New Epistemologies and Paradigm Shifts. 
                        Big Data and Society,
                        1: 1–12. 
                    
                    
                        Kwan, M.-P. and Schwanen, T. (2012). Critical Space-Time Geographies. In Schwanen, T. and Kwan, M.-P. (eds), 
                        Environment and Planning A, 
                        44(9): 2043–48.
                    
                    
                        Leventala, S. (2012). A New Geospatial Services Framework: How Disaster Preparedness Efforts Should Integrate Neogeography. 
                        Journal of Map &amp; Geography Libraries: Advances in Geospatial Information, Collections &amp; Archives,
                        8(2): 134–62. 
                    
                    
                        Lin, W. (2013). Situating Performative Neogeography: Tracing, Mapping, and Performing ‘Everyone’s East Lake’. 
                        Environment and Planning A,
                        45: 37–54.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. and Samuels, L. (1999). Deformance and Interpretation. 
                        New Literary History,
                        30(1): 25–56. 
                    
                    
                        Meir, P. (2011). New Information Technologies and Their Impact on the Humanitarian Sector. 
                        International Review of the Red Cross,
                        93(884): 1239–63.
                    
                    
                        Norris, D. and Flint, C. (2000). 
                        Introducing Joyce. Icon Books, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Priem, J. (2011). As Scholars Undertake a Great Migration to Online Publishing, Altmetrics Stands to Provide an Academic Measurement of Twitter and Other Online Activity. 
                        Impact of Social Science, http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2011/11/21/altmetrics-twitter/. 
                    
                    
                        Sieber, R. E., Wellen, C. C. and Yuan, J. (2011). Spatial Cyberinfrastructures, Ontologies, and the Humanities. 
                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
                        108(14): 5504–9. 
                    
                    
                        Staley, D. J. (2007). Finding Narratives of Time and Space. In Sinton, D. S. and Lund, J. J. (eds), 
                        Understanding Place: GIS and Mapping Across the Curriculum. Redlands: Esri Press, pp. 35–48.
                    
                    
                        Thacker, A. (2005). The Idea of a Critical Literary Geography. 
                        New Formations,
                        57(6): 56–73. 
                    
                    
                        Travis, C. (2014). Transcending the Cube: Translating GIScience Time and Space Perspectives in a Humanities GIS. Special Issue on Space-Time Research in GIScience. 
                        International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
                        28(5): 1149–64.
                    
                    
                        Young, J. C. and Gilmore, M. P. (2013). The Spatial Politics of Affect and Emotion in Participatory GIS. 
                        Annals of the AAG, 
                        103(4): 808–23. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Distant Reading Visualization for Variant Graphs
                
                    
                        Jänicke
                        Stefan
                    
                    Leipzig University, Germany
                    stjaenicke@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Geßner
                        Annette
                    
                    Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities, University of Göttingen, Germany
                    annette.gessner@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Variant Graph
                    Distant Reading
                    Bible Visualization
                
                
                    text analysis
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Motivation
            A Variant Graph is a data structure that can be used to model the similarities and differences among various editions of a text (Schmidt et al., 2009). Last year we presented a set of design rules for Variant Graphs (Jänicke et al., 2014) that are implemented by the web-based tool TRAViz.
                1 Figure 1 shows a Variant Graph for 24 different English translations of 
                Genesis 1:1.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
                Genesis 1:1 in 24 English translations.
            
            Designing the graph that way, the humanist is able to analyze similarities and differences among various text editions on verse level. Although TRAViz can also be utilized for larger text entities such as sections or chapters, the resultant visualizations are hardly readable, and an analysis of the Variant Graphs becomes a laborious task. Therefore, TRAViz remains a close reading visualization tool only to be used when the user has a specific research question for a desired text part, such as the analysis of numerous different translations of the Sixth Commandment, commonly recited as, ‘You shall not kill’ (Jänicke et al., 2015). Research questions like, ‘For which Bible books are the various translations most similar?’ or ‘For which chapters of book X do the rather similar translations A, B, and C differ most and why?’ cannot be answered with TRAViz. As Moretti suggests, such kind of questions require distant reading approaches to be answered (2005). This paper proposes a visualization that offers a distant view on Variant Graphs calculated for each Bible verse in order to support the humanists in detecting and analyzing occurring patterns on higher text hierarchy levels (the entire Bible, books, chapters) as provided by TRAViz (verses).
            The Bible Corpus
            The Bible is a very good use-case for the purpose of designing a distant reading visualization for Variant Graphs. First, it is a very influential and well-known text, which supports easy evaluation of results. Second, its structure includes a four-level hierarchy that makes views of varying distance on the text possible: the whole Bible (level 1) consists of books, each book (level 2) is divided into chapters, and each chapter (level 3) is composed of verses. Each verse (level 4) can be visualized utilizing a close reading visualization like TRAViz, but all other hierarchy levels require a distant reading solution.
            The Bible corpus of our project consists of 24 English Bible translations spanning a period from the 14th (Wycliffe Bible) to the 21st centuries (e.g., Catholic Public Domain Version). It includes editions in Middle and Modern English, a great variety of translation dependencies (e.g., editions based on the King James Version) as well as a diversity of translation motivations (e.g., simplified language in the Bible in Basic English). The versatility of the corpus allows for a multitude of research questions to be asked by the humanists of our project. One of their use-cases is outlined below.
            Visualization Design
            Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the system that our humanists work with. Arranged in columns, the top panel lists all available Bible editions either sorted by year of publication or in alphabetical order. On demand, the user is able to compose a desired set of editions by clicking the corresponding checkboxes. Below the Bible editions, the humanist is able to tweak the visualization dependent on the given research question. In particular, the user can
             • Define a threshold value for the majority of editions.
             • Either highlight text passages that are similar or dissimilar to a certain extent from the predefined majority.
             • Adjust the percentage of words that need to be similar or dissimilar regarding the majority to highlight a text passage.
            The bottom panel visualizes a ‘(dis-)similarity fingerprint’ for all 24 editions of the Bible on level 1; the user can interactively navigate between the various hierarchy levels. Each Bible book receives a rectangular block with its width reflecting the number of chapters. According to the configuration in this example, a tiny rectangle for a chapter of an edition is drawn in its assigned color,
                2 if at least 50% of its contained words differ from the majority of at least 10 editions. The resultant pattern reflects, e.g., three salient editions for the New Testament, which reveals individual translation styles: the Wycliffe Bible (1380, dark yellow) is the only translation in Middle English, whereas the God’s Word Translation (1995, blue) and the Bible in Basic English (1949, light green) aim to be understood very easily nowadays and, thus, choose to deviate from other editions that tend to be more antiquated and sophisticated in language and style.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Distant reading of 24 Bible editions.
            A Use Case
            Concentrating on similarity (80% similarity, majority of seven) highlights Bible editions that are very similar in almost all chapters of all books (Figure 3). Most of these editions are based on the King James Version, which is known as the most influential translation (Ryken, 2011). But surprisingly, albeit claiming to be ‘as exact a translation as possible’
                3 in Modern English from the original languages Hebrew and Greek, the Darby Bible (1890, light blue) is also highlighted as very similar. 
            
            To determine the role of the Darby Bible, we remove all Bible editions not (apparently) connected to the King James Version. Now, clicking the book 
                Matthew and highlighting dissimilarity (50% dissimilarity, majority of seven), we detect a cluster of derivations for verses 16–18 of chapter 7 (Figure 4). As implied on the book-level, the chapter-level confirms the Darby-deviations by highlighting the corresponding passages in the individual verses based upon a majority of four (Figure 5).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. The whole Bible (level 1) visualizing similarity.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Dissimilarity of selected editions in 
                Matthew (level 2).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Dissimilarity of selected editions in 
                Matthew 7 (level 3).
            
            Indeed in 
                Matthew 7:16 (Figure 6), Darby and some other editions differ in word order (but not so much in the translations); among others he chooses the elder word ‘ye’ instead of ‘you’ and as the only translation he writes ‘a bunch of grapes’ instead of ‘grapes’ and instead of ‘figs of thistles’ he writes ‘thistles figs’ (?). In 
                Matthew 7:17 (Figure 7) and 
                Matthew 7:18 (Figure 8), the main structure of the sentence remains in Darby, but some words are translated differently: instead of ‘bring forth’, Darby uses the word ‘produce’ (followed by World English Bible [2000, brown] and A Voice in the Wilderness [2004, purple]), the word ‘nor’ instead of ‘neither’ (followed by A Voice in the Wilderness), and when fruit are described, Darby uses the not morally associated adjective ‘bad’ instead of ‘evil’, and ‘worthless’ instead of ‘corrupt’.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6. 
                Matthew 7:16 (level 4).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 7. 
                Matthew 7:17 (level 4).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 8. 
                Matthew 7:18 (level 4).
            
            All in all, with this setting, even when choosing passages marked as dissimilar, the close view confirms what the distant view implied, which is, how close the Darby Bible sticks to the other editions concerning word order, language, and most of the words themselves. Most deviations are single words that are substituted by synonyms or something similar.
            Nevertheless, the Darby variations tend to be the very obvious ones, next to those of A Voice in the Wilderness, but rarely seem to change the meaning of the text in a significant way. Thus, it seems that the Darby Bible, which tried to translate the ancient languages as exactly as possible, may have had a significant impact on later translations based (not only) on the King James Version.
            Conclusion
            In contrast to projects dealing with a rather small number of text editions on a close reading basis,
                4 the presented novel technique provides a distant reading of Variant Graphs for a potential high number of editions. Just reading 24 translations of the Bible would require a huge amount of time, and comparing those editions would take even longer. Being able to see similarity and dissimilarity on various text hierarchy levels enables the user not only to save time by directing to passages that could be of interest, but it can even raise new and worthy research questions. This way of visualizing bears even the potential to cause serendipity by showing relations that have not yet been seen.
            
            In the future, we plan to provide an Open Source library to enable the application of the visualization for other hierarchically structured texts. Visualizing the (dis-)similarity between various editions of Homer’s epics could be one of the interesting examples. Being an important work for philologists, we could also extend the visualization to display the occurring transposed verses.
            Acknowledgements
            The authors like to thank the Baker Publishing Group for the permission to include the God’s Word Translation in our database. This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
            Notes
            1. http://www.traviz.vizcovery.org/.
            2. The fixed edition order simplified the crucial task of selecting colors. Following the suggestions made by Harrower et al. (2003), we defined a set of 24 varying colors ordered by alternating hue and saturation intensity, so that visually similar colors are not placed next to each other.
            3. According to the introduction to the 1890 edition, which can be found online at
            http://www.ccel.org/bible/jnd/darby.htm#2.
            4. Other projects also provide solutions for the visualization of textual variance. CollateX (http://collatex.net/), primarily focused on developing alignment algorithms for text editions, uses the GraphViz library (http://www.graphviz.org/) to visualize rather small texts analogous to TRAViz. Some web-based platforms allow reading of parallel texts in the browser. Juxta Commons (http://juxtacommons.org/) shows variant patterns between two texts, and with Versioning Machine (http://v-machine.org/), multiple editions are displayed next to each other. Both tools support only close reading for a small number of text editions.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Harrower, M. and Brewer, C. A. (2003). ColorBrewer.org: An Online Tool for Selecting Colour Schemes for Maps. 
                        Cartographic Journal,
                        40(1): 27–37.
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S., Geßner, A., Büchler, M. and Scheuermann, G. (2014a). 5 Design Rules for Visualizing Text Variant Graphs. In
                         Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2014.
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S., Geßner, A., Franzini, G., Terras, M., Mahony, S. and Scheuermann, G. (2015). TRAViz: A Visualization for Variant Graphs. To appear in 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                        , 2015.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2005). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. Verso.
                    
                    
                        Ryken, L. (2011). 
                        The Legacy of the King James Bible: Celebrating 400 Years of the Most Influential English Translation. Crossway.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. and Colomb, R. (2009). A Data Structure for Representing Multi-Version Texts Online. 
                        International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
                        67(6): 497–514.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Longitudinal Analysis of Knowledge Integration in Digital Humanities Using Co-citation Analysis
                
                    
                        Tang
                        Muh-Chyun
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    muhchyun.tang@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Cheng
                        Yun-Jen
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    yjcheng0314@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Chen
                        Kuang-hua
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    khchen@ntu.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Hsiang
                        Jieh
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    hsiang@csie.ntu.edu.tw
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    digital humanities
                    co-citation analysis
                    interdisciplinarity
                    cohesion
                    diversity
                
                
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Although digital humanities continues to expand and become more inclusive, little is known about the extent to which its published knowledge is integrated. A longitudinal co-citation analysis of publications in digital humanities was conducted to examine the degree of cohesion of its published knowledge over time (1989–2014). The measurement of cohesion was performed at source and individual article levels. The results show that, while the publications in digital humanities continue to grow, its diversity and coherence, two hallmarks of interdisciplinarity, remain robust. Betweenness centrality was used to identify the nodes that contribute most significantly to the cohesion of the source and individual networks.
            * * *
            One crucial aspect of Interdisciplinarity is the integration of different bodies of knowledge into a coherent enterprise (Rafols and Meyer, 2010; Porter et al., 2007). As an emerging field that draws research interests from multiple fields, DH provides a fertile ground for the study of whether and how different bodies of knowledge are integrated. The cognitive integration of concepts, theories, methods, and/or results from diverse fields is considered as the hallmark of interdisciplinary research. Such knowledge integration is much easier to observe at the micro level, where the diversity of authorship and cited references present within an individual article are often taken as evidences of interdisciplinarity. The level of integration at the macro level, which can be measured by the degree of interconnectedness among published works within a field, is not as readily accessible. While research initiatives in DH often share the common methodological outlook, there is little empirical study regarding whether DH as a research field has consolidated or remained fragmented. Taking a bibliometrics approach, this study aims to fill the gap. We used a co-citation network to examine the degree of interdisciplinarity in the published knowledge in DH. Three types of bibliographic elements resulting from the co-citation network were examined: keywords, publication sources, and individual articles. Social network analytical methods were applied to measure the diversity and interconnectedness of these elements, as well as the most prominent actors in these networks. 
            
                Data Collection Procedures 
            
            The publications of DH were identified by both keywords search and journals with an explicit digital humanities orientation. Keyword search with Scopus resulted in a set of 1,967 articles and book chapters. As publications in DH do not necessarily have those keywords, a complementary set of articles was created by retrieving all the articles published in the six journals published by the members of 
                the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO). The union of the two sets constitutes the target set (N = 2509) from which article co-citation networks were formed and analyzed. 
            
            To generate the co-citation networks, pair-wise matching of all the articles’ received citations has to be conducted. This is done by using Google Scholar’s citation tracing function. The citations received by every article in our target set were identified and downloaded; then pair-wise matching was performed to identify shared citation. To study the co-citation network over time, a five-year overlapping time slice was used to divide our target set into 22 co-citation networks. 
            Results
            Figure 1 shows the growth of articles and number of nodes in the co-citation networks over time. The graph indicates that the interests in DH took off in early 2000 and has continued to grow to this date. Notice also that there is a significant gap between the number of total articles and nodes in the co-citation network in our target set, indicating a large proportion of isolates in the whole network. 
                
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The growth of publications and size of the co-citation network over time.
            We used author assigned keywords as the representation of subjects treated in the articles. The keywords thus extracted were then normalized manually. Gini index was then applied to measure the balance of the subjects covered in our target set over time. High Gini index of the keyword distribution signals the existence of few dominant keywords. Figure 2 shows a gradual rising of Gini indexing over time, which might be interpreted as a gradual consolidation of research efforts. Yet notice that even with the gently rising slope, the degree of concentration remains low at below .35, which suggests rather disperse research interests in DH. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Gini index of keyword distribution over time. 
            Figure 3 shows the long-term trend of cited articles remained in the giant component. A jump of the percentage of nodes in the giant component can be observed in the early 2000s; it then gradually levelled off. The dip in recent years might be more likely due to the citation window for recent publications than a sign of disintegration. Another two measures, average geodesic distance and clustering coefficient that often associate with the ‘small world’ phenomenon, also showed similar patterns. Figure 4 shows a rather short average distance between nodes in the giant component, hovering around 4. The cluster coefficient stayed steadily high at 60 percent, indicating dense local clustering, which, coupled with the short average distance, fit a typical small-world model. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Percent of nodes within the giant components.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Clustering coefficient.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Average geodesic distance.
            Another way to assess the cohesion or integration of a network is through degree centralization, as it measures the degree to which network cohesion is hinged on particular focal importance (Borgatti et al., 2013). High degree centralization signals inequality of node importance. Figure 6 traces the trends of degree and betweenness centralization of nodes in the co-citation main component over time. Both degree and betweenness centralization leveled off gradually from their peaks in the mid-1990s, when the idea of DH was first introduced by a few seminal works. The degree concentration, however, has since declined gradually, which echoes our previous findings, suggesting the presence of many local clusters that represents a wide variety of specialized interests. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Degree and betweenness centrality of the giant components over time. 
            Among all the centrality measure, betweenness centrality is arguably the most closely related to network cohesion. Table 5 ranked the top 40 sources in our target set by their betweenness centrality, accompanied by their degree centrality. Of particular interest are the sources able to achieve high betweenness centrality despite relatively low degree centrality as they play a significant ‘bridging’ role in the network that contributes the most to the network cohesion. 
            
                
            
            Table 1. Top 40 sources with highest between centrality. 
            We visualized the source co-citation network using MDS where the distance between nodes signifies the similarity of their co-citation profiles (Figure 7). The size of the nodes represents betweenness centrality, while different colors group frequently co-cited sources using fraction algorithm. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 7. MDS representation of source co-citation profiles. Stress value = 0.417.
            To identify individual works that contribute most to the cohesion of the network, we performed the betweenness centrality on the article co-citation network. The works that have a particularly strong bridging character relative to their degrees were highlighted.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Table 2. To 40 works with highest betweenness centrality.
            Discussion and Conclusion 
            In this study we applied social analytical methods to measure the degree of knowledge diversity and cohesion of the bibliographic elements extracted from the article co-citation network. The results show that the degree of knowledge diversity is high, as demonstrated by the evenness of the keyword distribution, as well as the presence of publication sources from diverse disciplines. It was shown that DH has gradually evolved into a diverse yet cohesive area of research, where, despite high degree of local research interests, the reachability remains high globally. 
                 A longitudinal approach allows us to observe the evolving of the knowledge integration and the shifting of research topics in an area of research. There are obviously also several limitations to our study. First, even though we have tried to be inclusive in our selection to target set, some of the important works are inevitably missed, especially those published in non-English languages. Using Google Scholar as the source of co-citation data also entails inherent bias. Currently our interpretation of the visualization of the field is quite preliminary due to the lack of domain knowledge in DH. In the future, author co-citation network will also be constructed, which, with the help of expert inputs, will help us better interpret the sub-domains and their relationships in DH. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G. and Johnson, J. C. (2013).
                         
                        Analyzing Social Networks. SAGE.
                    
                    Porter, A. L., Cohen, A. S., Roessner, J. D. and Perreault, M. (2007). Measuring
                    Researcher Interdisciplinarity.
                         
                        Scientometrics,
                         72(1): 117–47.
                    
                    Rafols, I. and Meyer, M. (2010). Diversity and Network Coherence as Indicators of Interdisciplinarity: Case Studies in Bionanoscience.
                         
                        Scientometrics,
                         82(2): 263–87.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A plea for a method-driven agenda in the Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Kuhn
                        Jonas
                    
                    University of Stuttgart, Germany
                    jonas.kuhn@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Reiter
                        Nils
                    
                    University of Stuttgart, Germany
                    nils.reiter@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    methodology
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
This position paper advocates joint efforts towards establishing a modular architecture for "deep" analytical approaches to DH collections such as text corpora. The core idea is to augment a typical DH project agenda with an element of project-independent and interdisciplinary bootstrapping, aiming to identify analytical subtasks beyond standard processing steps, which can be used as building blocks across different complex DH modeling processes (adopting McCarty's (2005) concept of modeling as a transition through temporary, provisional stages). Our discussion focuses on text-oriented DH projects.
The guiding hypothesis is that despite the fundamentally different characteristics that the overall models may have across projects and disciplines, they can be broken down into modular steps many of which can be shared and/or developed in a joint effort. E.g., the detection of persona mentions (e.g., the teacher) in texts is a non-trivial task that is a necessary pre-step for, among others, social network extraction or intertextual relation detection. This task is related to standard Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Named Entity Recognition, coreference resolution), but it targets no inherently linguistic category and a proper treatment requires insights from the humanities disciplines (here literary studies, but similar concepts underly network analysis in history/political science). We envisage a collaborative bootstrapping process of refining a persona identification module, taking into account its applicability in different higher-level research questions.
Inspired by a well-established experimental methodology from computational linguistics, annotated test data and evaluation metrics should be fixed as operational prototype specification -- possibly starting with a temporary initial specification, whose role in the overall module structure is subsequently adjusted through bootstrapping. Such specifications foster the exploration of technical modeling alternatives on the computational side and provide the basis for critical reflection (cf. Gibbs, 2011) of the analytical possibilities and limitations on the humanities side, which can subsequently lead to revised characterizations.
Although the goal of re-usable cross-disciplinary modules is very obvious -- from an engineering point of view -- a typical pattern in many DH venues focuses on the application and one-time adjustment of tools, thus underexploiting the true potential of modularization in DH projects. Some prominent interdisciplinary projects building service-oriented architectures have failed to connect with scholars (cf. Dombrowski, 2014), and experience shows that one of the hardest interdisciplinary challenges is to establish a mutual understanding about the strengths and limitations of some modeling component -- yet, when this has been achieved systematically, the potential for further developments is enormous.
To reach an effective sharing of modeling components, methodological commonalities have to be identified across projects and the adequacy of an approach has to be assessed in a replicable fashion: we argue that a simple, but effective way for this is to highlight the relevant (and only the relevant) dimensions in reference annotations for some dataset(s) -- even if some related dimensions are yet ill-understood. This way of thinking is natural to computational linguists, but takes some getting used to for humanities scholars: The initial "sharable" version of a subtask appears trivial and/or insufficiently justified from theory. Our plea is to set these reservations aside and engage in a cyclic process advancing towards a modular toolbox of deeper and more complex notions.
Ideally, this will lead to growing collections of shared reference datasets highlighting particular expectations for submodules; a project with slightly novel working assumptions may well add datasets with deviant characteristics (as long as decisions are well-documented at the meta-level). Methodologically, a rich collection covering a broad, interleaved space is the most helpful and may feed "shared task" initiatives for computational modeling (which have been highly influential, e.g., at the Conference on Natural Language Learning). Based on such data collections, methodological innovations can be tested systematically across projects and disciplines.
            
            
                The Issue
                At first glance, the situation seems to be perfect: Independently developed tools and models from NLP (integrated, e.g., by European infrastructure initiatives like CLARIN and DARIAH) can be applied to DH text corpora, facilitating the scaling up of research methods beyond the classical ‘analogous’ approach. This scenario comes with a rewarding division of labor: NLP developers can provide and adapt tools; trained scholars in the humanities have full competence to apply the analytical machinery in their research.
                Often, however, project constellations are different: Available methods require non-trivial adjustments, data preprocessing poses considerable challenges, and/or analytical questions are addressed for which no tools are available. Although such constellations bear great potential for innovative ideas, practical issues often dominate the collaborative work. The time-consuming preprocessing and tool adjustment steps are often not publishable in the computational communities, and if the adjustments are successful, leading to new algorithmic approaches to scholarly questions, often most of the funding period has passed, so there is no time to work out and advertise the general methodological contribution. 
                Any predominantly content-oriented characterization of a collaborative DH project (otherwise surely the best justification of an agenda) walks a thin line of sacrificing methodological generality to respond to specific issues. Somewhat unfortunately, aspects that make a project interesting and challenging from a humanities perspective (exploration of new corpora / taking a different perspective than previous work) act against the objectives of systematic method development, which has to emphasize replicable results and modularization. 
            
            
                Addressing the Methodological Bottleneck
                We argue that the potential in advanced computational models and modular task definitions is underexploited in DH. So far, our considerations seem to imply that only dedicated mid- to long-term DH projects can overcome this status quo. However, we’d rather draw a different conclusion that works for smaller projects in a lively community: Rather than characterizing a DH project’s analytical questions top-down and relative to the specific data situation-which implies that the actual implementation cannot happen until after preprocessing and adaptation-characteristic methodological facets are anticipated early on, using prototypical manual annotation of reference data for 
                    preliminary specification. Ideally, such specifications are based on reference data that are considered well-understood in the humanities disciplines and have known structural properties. 
                
                Incidentally, this is the workflow that is behind NLP modules that are now broadly applied: Early linguistic corpus annotation activities in the 1980/90s (which to this date provide the training data, e.g., for part-of-speech tagging and parsing tools) had to make theoretically loaded, controversial decisions, and a long and methodologically diverse process followed. Few people would have anticipated the usefulness of syntactic parsing tools, well beyond NLP standard tasks (and syntactic theoreticians would probably have vetoed many design decisions if they had been in charge).
                It is important to note that we do not assume that all ‘modules’ are working fully automatically. The collection of building blocks developed in the DH community may well include manual validation and hermeneutic interpretation steps. This ensures that the method-driven, modularization-friendly agenda that we advocate bears no implication about the characteristics of the composite DH model for a particular project. But for the non-computational building blocks, comparison and critical exchange across disciplines is just as helpful.
            
            
                Discussion
                To some ears, our proposal may sound like a blunt attempt of computational linguistics to superimpose its purely method-oriented view on humanities scholars, who take their ultimate incentive from questions about content and interpretation. We have no intention to question established DH methodologies. Yet from conversations we had with researchers from a broad range of text-oriented DH initiatives, the picture arises that there is a great interest in tools solving problems similar to NLP problems, but so far there is no established methodological framework within DH for critically reflected development of such tools. The researchers we talked to tend to agree that community efforts towards a sharing of reference datasets and insights about the use of modular components for higher-level questions would be a very good complementation of the established DH methodology.
                Seeing the specification of partial tasks for computational modeling as a cyclic, collaborative effort also avoids the detachment of scholars in the role of a mere ‘user’ of custom-tailored tools. Instead the DH scholar is 
                    empowered to influence crucial properties of the improved model by reacting to experiences from earlier stages.
                
            
            
                Notes
                1. We acknowledge that this paper has been inspired by various methodological discussions about DH (including the Dagstuhl Seminar on 
                    Computational Humanities in July 2014 and the Leipzig workshop ‘Informatik und die Digital Humanities’ on 3 November 2014), involving a considerable number of researchers.
                
                2. We consciously picked a sample task for which the beginnings of the methodology have already been established: Jannidis et al. (2015) present ongoing work on an approach for persona detection that expands the established Named Entity recognition framework. Bamman et al. (2014) is an example of advanced modeling in computational linguistics that takes literary characters into account. Reiter (2014) presents an approach to discover structural similarities over narrative texts that builds on the detection of characters/personae.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bamman, D., Underwood, T. and Smith, N. (2014). A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary Character. 
                        Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 370-79. 
                    
                    
                        Dombrowski, Q. (2014). Whatever Happened to Project Bamboo? 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        29(3): 326-39.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. (2011). Critical Discourse in Digital Humanities. 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities,
                        1(1).
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F., Krug, M., Reger, I., Toepfer, M., Weimer, L. and Puppe, F. (2015). Automatische Erkennung von Figuren in deutschsprachigen Romanen. 
                        Conference Presentation at Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum, Graz, February 2015.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2005). 
                        Humanities Computing. Palgrave, London.
                    
                    
                        Reiter, N. (2014). Discovering Structural Similarities in Narrative Texts Using Event Alignment Algorithms. Doctoral dissertation, Heidelberg University.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Quantitative Analysis for the Authorship of Saikaku’s Posthumous Works Compared with Dansui’s works
                
                    
                        Uesaka
                        Ayaka
                    
                    Doshisha University, Japan
                    ayaka.u26@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Murakami
                        Masakatsu
                    
                    Doshisha University, Japan
                    mamuraka@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Authorship problem
                    Japanese early modern literatures
                    Saikaku Ihara
                    Dansui Houjyou
                    Principal component analysis
                
                
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Saikaku Ihara (c. 1642–1693
                ) is one of the most famous writers of the Edo period (1603–1868) in Japan.
                1 After publishing the maiden works of 
                Kousyoku ichidai otoko (The Life of an Amorous Man, 1682), he became the leading author of 
                Ukiyozoushi,
                2 which was a realistic literature from the Edo period. Saikaku’s works are known for their significance in developing Japanese novels today (Emoto and Taniwaki, 1996). 
            
            It is said that he wrote 24 works in 10 years. However, with the exception of 
                Kousyoku ichidai otoko, those achievements have not been fully verified, due to some doubts in their authorship. For instance, Saikaku only wrote 
                Kousyoku ichidai otoko, while the other works were written by either Saikaku’s student Dansui Houjyou (1663–1711) or a collaboration of Dansui and Saikaku (Mori, 1955).
            
            Saikaku researchers have tried to identify his works by investigating their history, content, format, and so on. However, it remains unclear which works are really written by Saikaku. Accordingly, we decided to use a quantitative approach to inspect Saikaku’s authorship problems, because the potential of quantitative analysis of textual data has dramatically advanced. That method can provide new knowledge about the authorship problem of Saikaku’s works. Moreover, this research will be a good example in using a quantitative approach for the Japanese classical literature research domain because the quantitative approach is not common in that domain. 
            Purpose of This Study
            In this paper, we focus on Saikaku’s posthumous works because many of Saikaku’s researchers have raised questions about their authorship. Saikaku’s posthumous works were edited and published from 1693 to 1699 by his student Dansui (Table 1). Therefore, there are claims that Dansui may have modified Saikaku’s work. 
            We have compared Saikaku’s posthumous works and other Saikaku works for differences (Uesaka and Murakami, 2013; 2014). If we try to resolve the authorship problems of Saikaku, Dansui is the most suspect writer of Saikaku’s work; therefore, Dansui’s text should be analyzed also.
            
                Database of Saikaku’s Works
            
            Since Japanese morphological analyzers are not applicable for early modern Japanese texts (Ogiso et al., 2013), we developed a database of Saikaku’s works with his researchers, who are editors of 
                Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu (Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu Henshu Inkai, 2000). Figures 1 and 2 show a page from the book. Moreover, we used Dansui’s database for an analysis, which was developed by Banno and Mizutani, who are Saikaku and Dansui researchers, based on 
                Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu. In this research, we use 
                Shikidou otsuzumi (1687), 
                Chuya youjin ki (1707), and 
                Budou hariai okagami (1709)
                , because these works’ digital text and database were finished developing. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Saikaku’s publication.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Table 1. Saikaku’s posthumous works.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Modern form of Japanese language.
            Table 2 shows a list of works in our database and the number of words in each work. According to our database, there are 583,934 words contained in 24 of Saikaku’s works and 55,504 words contained in three of Dansui’s works.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Table 2. Work name and the number of words.
            Table 3 is a part of the database from Saikaku’s works used for this analysis. Since Japanese sentences are not separated by spaces, we added spaces between the words in all of the sentences. In addition, information was added for the analysis. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Table 3. Database of Saikaku’s works.
            
                Analysis and Results
            
            We compared Saikaku’s works (
                Kousyoku ichidai otoko, which has been verified to be a work of Saikaku, and five posthumous works) to Dansui’s three works (
                Shikidou otsuzumi, 
                Chuya youjin ki, and 
                Budou hariai okagami) using principal component analysis (PCA). PCA reduces the dimensionality of a dataset consisting of a large number of interrelated variables, while retaining as much as possible of the variation present in the dataset (Jolliffe, 2002). When applied to the frequencies of high-frequency items in texts, PCA often successfully reveals the authorial structure in a dataset (Kestemont et al., 2013).
            
            At first, we examined the appearance rate of the seven principal grammatical categories: nouns, particles, verbs, auxiliary verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and adnominal adjectives. Grammatical categories were the basic information for authorship attribution. The study of 
                Tale of Genji (Murakami, 2002) and 
                Sandai hiho bonsyoji (Itou and Murakami, 1992) adopted the stylometry research using grammatical categories, and these help to identify the author. 
            
            Figure 3 shows the results of the analysis on grammatical categories, using the PCA with a correlation matrix. The horizontal axis shows the importance of the first principal component, and the vertical axis shows the second. The proportion of variance of the first principal component is 0.4031, while it is 0.29088 for the second; the cumulative proportion up to the second principal component is 0.69398. In this figure, indicating differences are revealed by PCA, Saikaku’s works are on the lower left and Dansui’s works on the upper middle.
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                    Kousyoku ichidai otoko
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    Saikaku’s works
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    Dansui’s works
                
            
            Figure 3. The PCA results (these circles drawn on the figure are 95% confidence ellipse).
            Next, we examined the appearance rate of the eight principal particles: ‘no’ (の), ‘ni’ (に), ‘wo’ (を), ‘te’ (て), ‘ha’ (は), ‘to’ (と), ‘mo’ (も), and ‘ba’ (ば). Particles have a high appearance frequency and do not relate to the contents of a work. That kind of information identifies an authorship attribution very well (Murakami, 1994).
            Figure 4 shows the results of the analysis on the appearance rate of the eight principal particles using the PCA. The proportion of variance of the first principal component is 0.3688, while it is 0.29204 for the second; the cumulative proportion up to the second principal component is 0.66084. In this figure, indicating differences are revealed by PCA; Saikaku’s works are on the lower right, and Dansui’s works are on the upper left. From these results, the second principal component identifies Saikaku’s works and Dansui’s works. 
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                    Kousyoku ichidai otoko
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    Saikaku’s works
                
            
            Figure 4. The PCA results (these circles drawn on the figure are 95% confidence ellipse).
            Conclusion
            We conduct the analysis of Saikaku’s works and Dansui’s works using a quantitative approach. This result revealed that Saikaku’s works and Dansui’s works differ in grammatical categories and particles (Figures 3 and 4).
            However, the possibility remains that Dansui modified a greater or lesser proportion of the work. Thus, we need to consider this issue from other perspectives and using other works and variables.
            Acknowledgments
            We would like to thank Professor Banno Hidekatsu and Professor Mizutani Takayuki for their help on our research.
            Notes
            1. In the late 18th century there was a Saikaku revival, inspiring Santo Kyoden and other fiction writers. Saikaku is generally considered the greatest fiction writer of the Edo period, and his works have influenced many modern Japanese writers (Shirane, 2004).
            2. The term 
                Ukiyozoushi refers to a vernacular fictional genre that originated in the Kyoto-Osaka area and spanned a 100-year period from the publication in 1682 of Ihara Saikaku’s 
                Kousyoku ichidai otoko to the late 18th century (Shirane, 2004).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Emoto, Y. and Taniwaki, M. (1996). 
                        Saikaku Jiten. Ouhu.
                    
                    
                        Itou, Z. and Murakami, M. (1992). 
                        Sandai hihou bonjouji no keiryoubunkengaku teki shin kenkyu. Osaki hakuhou, no. 148.
                    
                    
                        Jolliffe, I. T. (2002). 
                        Principal Component Analysis. Springer, New York.
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M., Moens, S. and Deploige, J. (2013). Collaborative Authorship in the Twelfth Century: A Stylometric Study of Hildegard of Bingen and Guibert of Gembloux. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqt063.
                    
                    
                        Mori, S. (1955). 
                        Saikaku to Saikaku bon. Motomoto sha.
                    
                    
                        Murakami, M. (1994). 
                        Shingan no kagaku-keiryou bunkengaku nyumon. Asakura shoten. 
                    
                    
                        Murakami, M. (2002). 
                        Bunka wo hakaru–bunka keiryougaku josetsu–. Asakura shoten.
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Ichimura, T. and Kono, T. (2013). Preliminary Study of Morphological Analysis of Early Modern Japanese. 
                        The 4th Workshop of Corpus Japanese Language, National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, pp. 145–50.
                    
                    
                        Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu Henshu Inkai. (2000). 
                        Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu. Bensei shuppan.
                    
                    
                        Shirane, H. (2004). 
                        Early Modern Japanese Literature: An Anthology, 1600–1900. Columbia University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Uesaka, A. and Murakami, M. (2013). Authorship Problem of Japanese Early Modern Literatures in the Seventeenth Century. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013, pp. 449–51.
                    
                    
                        Uesaka, A. and Murakami, M. (2014). A Quantitative Analysis for the Authorship of Saikaku’s Posthumous Works in the Seventeenth Century. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014, 547–49.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Story of Design Research: Initiating a change network for Western Sydney
                
                    
                        Mellick Lopes
                        Abby
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    a.lopes@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Gill
                        Alison
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    a.gill@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    design
                    research
                    network
                    community
                    Western Sydney.
                
                
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Visual communication design employs the unique languages of visualization and imagery for making sense and telling compelling stories. This poster will tell the story of a digitally facilitated design research network and a symposium held at the University of Western Sydney, Australia. The objective of the poster is to showcase research-based design practice that contributes to change initiatives across sectors of society and culture, with relevance to Western Sydney. It will outline the key design components that supported the formation of a network of researchers interested in amplifying the change agency of visual communications design. 
            In brief, the poster tells a story about how design compellingly tells stories to support and model change. A keynote speaker, Italian information designer Angela Morelli, described her practice as info-graphic digital storytelling that doesn’t simply transform data into meaningful information but engages audiences in knowledge about which they care. Considered in the context of Donald Schön’s (1983) reflective practitioner, Morelli’s challenge is to develop storytelling as an effective genre for the translation of research into visualization and for exploring visualization 
                as knowledge. The symposium enabled participants to share research methods and their own design practices such as visualization strategies, storyboards, information graphics, fieldwork, and mapping techniques used to generate meaningful dialogues and knowledge about supporting community change. 
            
            The poster aims to provide a snapshot of six components that gave birth to and support this network. 
            1. 
                A research symposium event.
            
            Initiating Change by Design (ICD) was an interdisciplinary postgraduate research symposium that aimed to explore the unique capacity for research-based design to contribute to change initiatives across many sectors of society at a time when we face the unprecedented challenges of a climate-changed future and a matching demand for creative thinking. It was particularly focused on Western Sydney, as a contested biophysical, social, and cultural landscape with a rapidly developing urban fringe. ICD gathered a small group of international and local practice-based and theoretical design researchers, and postgraduate students to discuss their projects and share methodological approaches that can be brought to social change in the Western Sydney region. 
            2. 
                Workshop brief.
            
            Participants enrolled in workshops that addressed the question: 
                How can design activate public engagement in the commons in Riverlands, Western Sydney? The focus of this brief was on how visual communications design may be brought to the project of making and sharing the commons—
                commoning in Gibson-Graham et al.’s (2013) terms—in Riverlands, Sydney. 
            
            The brief sought to explore what and where the commons are in Western Sydney, and how they are seen and negotiated by communities both inside and outside of the region. One of the most regionally distinctive and important commons in Western Sydney is its rivers. A map of Western Sydney is veined by extensive river systems. The Nepean and Hawkesbury Rivers, Parramatta River, and South Creek catchment traverse the region and exist in relation to extensive parklands and recreational areas. Equally, Western Sydney is layered by social and cultural landscapes that may not be as apparent to the naked eye. At present Western Sydney is defined by its relation to the Sydney CBD and often, intentionally or not, in a subordinate role. A further binary exists between the famous harbour and coastline and the rivers, which have their own unique ecologies (and are bereft of the cooling sea breezes enjoyed by coastal cities). In fact, there are myriad binaries that delineate Western Sydney as an imagined and experienced environment. ICD Workshop groups were invited to consider recoding Western Sydney as ‘Riverlands, Sydney’. 
            3. 
                Engagement with UWS design students and the award-winning Rabbit Hole studio to brand the event and build a website presence.
            
            We collaborated with Rabbit Hole coordinators to create a brief in keeping with the intent of ICD to harness the unique language of the image for making sense and creating ‘new knowledge’. The resulting designs were carefully considered and commensurate with the intent of the event, enabling a collaborative opportunity at the nexus of research and teaching. 
            4. 
                The identification of community partners with which to engage in conversation about regional and community change.
            
            Existing and potential partners were asked a range of questions about how they see the current problems and future opportunities for the region. Their responses supported the relevance and value of the brief and the role of visual communications design in envisioning possible futures for ‘the Riverlands’. 
            5. 
                Online host site for research network, resources, and community partners: http://icd2014.wordpress.com/symposium/.
            
            6. 
                Online journal publication: Special issue of 
                Global Media Journal (Australian edition). 
            
            The journal includes the research outputs of the network, such as peer-reviewed articles from keynote speakers, academic articles from postgraduates, interviews, transcripts, and commentaries on the workshops. As a materialization of the research network, it intends to capture the unique nature of design research and the dynamic process of the workshops in an online publication that includes visual essays, information design, and video, in order to bring this design special issue to life. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gibson-Graham, J. K., Cameron, J. and Healy, S.
                         (2013). 
                        Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for Transforming Our Communities.
                         University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
                    
                    
                        Schön, D. A. (
                        1983).
                        
                             
                        
                        The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action.
                         Basic Books, New York. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A Study of Symbolic Element Network in National Emblems
                
                    
                        Liu
                        Jyi-Shane
                    
                    Natioanl Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    jyishane.liu@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Ning
                        Ke-Chi
                    
                    Natioanl Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    floater.xkernel@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Huang
                        Tze-Jung
                    
                    Natioanl Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    4happistar@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    social network analysis application
                    sybolism
                    similarity and divergence
                
                
                    content analysis
                    anthropology
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Human social life is a repository of symbols in various forms to mark, celebrate, and glorify social groups (Durkheim, 1976). Following the development of modern nationalism, national symbols are devised to identify attachment to specific territories and forge a national unity of particular ethnic and cultural heritage (Smith, 1999). The political, cultural, and ideological identity of an independent country is mostly proclaimed by three symbols: the national flag, the national anthem, and the national emblem (Firth, 1973; Geisler, 2005). The universal adoption of these ethno-cultural identity signifiers provides a great research opportunity to understand the global and regional characteristics of group symbolism in humanity (Butz, 2009; Elgenius, 2011).
            In this paper, we study the similarity and divergence of symbolic elements in ethno-cultural identity with a focus on national emblems. We apply the data analytic method of social network analysis to a total of 205 national emblems such that relational characteristics of symbolic elements and human communities are examined at multiple levels of composite granularity. We conduct exploratory functionalities of the symbolic analytic framework. The results indicate the potential of fruitful discovery in deciphering symbolism in humanity. As a case of application, this study shows the value of digital humanities research in complementing traditional methods of sampled observation and subjective induction.
            National Emblems and Data Model 
            A national emblem is an abstract or representational pictorial pattern that signifies the history, myth, or value of a nation and is regarded as one of the core national symbols. This pictorial pattern is designed to reflect and project a nation’s image with a layout of elementary entities in a set of colors. Every nation and state in the modern world has adopted a national emblem—sometimes also called a great seal or an official coat of arms—of its own for both domestic and international use, such as on the cover of a national passport. Compared to national flags, national emblems, in most cases, seem to contain more elements that encode rich anthropological and ethnic features. For example, the national flag of France (see Figure 1a), is a tri-color layout featuring three vertical bands in blue, white, and red, while the coat of arms of France (Figure 1b) is designed with stronger historical and cultural ingredients and attached with vivid symbolic meaning.
            
                
            
            Figure 1a. French national flag.
            
                
            
            Figure 1b. French national emblem.
            A national emblem is a graphical form of expression that encodes information both at the syntactic and semantic levels. At the syntactic level, we observe the surface forms of the elementary entities and the colors. The French national emblem is composed of entities such as an ax, a rod, an oak branch, a laurel branch, a lion’s head, an eagle’s head, a shield, and a monogram, in yellow (golden) and brown. These elementary entities symbolize justice, wisdom, victory, and name at the semantic level. We retrieve descriptive data of the national emblems of a total of 205 countries from Wikipedia. Each record includes the syntactic data of elementary entities with colors and the semantic data of symbolic meaning. The syntactic data of entities are further aggregated into class and meta-class to provide a three-level granularity of data analysis. For example, ‘ax’ and ‘sword’ at the entity level are aggregated into ‘weapon’ at the class level and ‘man-made objects’ at the meta-class level. Similarly, individual countries are also aggregated into region and continent levels. Table 1 outlines the three levels of data classification, the corresponding data size, and partial data content. 
             Table 1. Syntactic Data Model of National Emblems
            
                
                    Data Type
                    Data Level
                    Data Size
                    Data List
                
                
                    Symbolic Element
                    Meta-class
                    6
                    animal, plant, natural/physical objects, human, man-made objects, human ideas
                
                
                    
                    Class
                    32
                    amphibian, quadruped, bird, celestial body, crop, tree, text, weapon, . . . , etc.
                
                
                    
                    Entity
                    308
                    eagle, lion, sun, moon, star, rice, torch, ribbon, knight, dragon, diamond, . . . , etc.
                
                
                    Color
                    —
                    9
                    black, white, grey, red, blue, green, yellow, orange, brown
                
                
                    Human Community
                    Continent
                    5
                    Africa, Asia, America, Europe, Oceania
                
                
                    
                    Region
                    20
                    East Asia, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, South Asia, Western Asia, North America, Central America, . . . , etc.
                
                
                    
                    Country
                    205
                    Malaysia, Cambodia, Venezuela, Finland, Niger, Oman, Fiji, . . . , etc.
                
            
            Applying Social Network Analysis 
            
                Affiliation Network Model
            
            Social network analysis is a data analytic model that encodes relations among a set of entities and reveals the structural characteristics of their interaction pattern (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). For the national emblem data, social network analysis provides a systematic mechanism to explore and analyze the ideological and cultural relations among human communities. The current study focuses on syntactic data and separates the syntactic variables of symbolic element and color. In network modeling, we construct affiliation networks consisting of a set of symbolic elements (or colors) and a set of human communities. A symbolic element (or color) is linked to a community based on membership in national emblem composition. For dual perspectives, this two-mode bipartite network can also be projected or reduced to two one-mode networks (Newman, 2001; Zhou et al., 2007). One is the element (or color) co-membership network where elements are connected to each other when they share membership of a national emblem composition. The other one-mode network is the community affinity network, where ties represent mutual adoption of the same element (color) in national emblems. All ties in either two-mode or one-mode networks are valued by occurrence frequency to reflect the strength of the relationship. 
            Network Indicators 
            Social network can be analyzed at different levels for inspecting the embedded relations among entities. Among the many proposed network measurements, we adopt a set of core indicators to observe the essential characteristics of similarity and divergence of self-projected ideology and values among global human communities. The calculation of these network indicators and the network visualization are done with Gephi, a network analysis software package developed by Gephi Consortium. 
             • Node level: 
                Degree centrality measures the extent to which a node is involved in extensive relationship. 
                Betweenness centrality estimates how much a node lies on the paths between any two other nodes. Node ranking by both centrality indicators helps classify a node’s location as core, peripheral, or intermediary in the network. 
            
             • Sub-group level: 
                Modularity is a clustering measurement that detects sub-groups where there are more intensive links between nodes within than among the rest of the network (Newman, 2006). This indicator may be useful in identifying families of ideological elements and human communities at different levels. 
            
            Analytical Results
            The integration of a flexible analytical framework of social network analysis and the size and depth of the emblem symbolic data obviously provide a wide horizon of relational characteristics. For example, based on the syntactic data model of Table 1, we can construct two affiliation networks, color-human_community, and symbolic_ element-human_community, one at 1 x 3 and the other at 3 x 3 composite granularity levels. Each affiliation network can also be projected into two one-mode networks. This will result in a total of 36 networks that encode different aspects and various granularities of relational information. Limited by the space of this paper, we demonstrate two distinct analytic functions and present the results of a few interesting discoveries. 
            Discovery by Observation
            We first observe how the nine primary colors are used in national emblems across the world. Figure 2a shows the color-country affiliation network where the size of color nodes is proportional to its degree (frequency of use by country). The top three colors are yellow (149), white (133), and red (129), followed by blue (107), green (73), and black (41). All other colors are significantly minor. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2a. Overview of color-country affiliation network.
            
                
            
            Figure 2b. Unique and strong association of color-region.
            Next we examine the color and region relations and apply the modularity measurement to approximate the separation of cohesive sub-groups (Barber, 2007). As shown in Figure 2b, several unique associative patterns between region and color are identified that provide interesting information. For example, the color blue is a common symbol of Northern Europe, Western Europe, and the Caribbean, while the color green uniquely represents Western Asia and East Africa. This analytic observation based on systematic data exploration can complement traditional symbolism research in sociology and anthropology (Kolsto, 2006; Podeh, 2011).
            For entity-country affiliation, it is observed that a total of 308 unique element entities are used 1,624 times in 205 national emblems with a long-tailed distribution. The top 10 entities are listed in Table 2 and account for 38.2% of occurrence frequency. When the one-mode entity co-membership network is constructed, several cohesive subgroups are identified. One of the interesting patterns of entity association is shown in Figure 3, with shield, eagle, lion, cross, crown, and spear as members of the primary core, and seems to indicate a strong European flavor. 
            
                
                    
                        Table 2. Symbolic element distribution.
                        
                            
                                Rank
                                Entity
                                Freq.
                                Perc.
                            
                            
                                1
                                ribbon
                                110
                                6.8%
                            
                            
                                2
                                shield
                                109
                                6.7%
                            
                            
                                3
                                motto
                                97
                                6.0%
                            
                            
                                4
                                star
                                64
                                3.9%
                            
                            
                                5
                                sun
                                51
                                3.1%
                            
                            
                                6
                                lion
                                44
                                2.7%
                            
                            
                                7
                                nation name
                                43
                                2.6%
                            
                            
                                8
                                eagle
                                36
                                2.2%
                            
                            
                                9
                                crown
                                34
                                2.1%
                            
                            
                                10
                                mountain
                                33
                                2.0%
                            
                        
                    
                    
                
                
                    
                    
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. A sub-group of entity co-membership with European flavor.
            Discovery by Query
            Another way to decode the embedded information from the various affiliation networks is to conduct a focused exploration for specific questions. Suppose we start with the questions of how regions share the use of similar symbolic elements and what the overall diversity is across regions. An entity-region affiliation network may provide partial answers with appropriate granularity. Results of applying network indicators are shown in Table 3, where 20 regions are divided into nine subgroups based on common use of symbolic entities. Several families of regions emerge that reveal different aspects of similarity and divergence in symbolic expression of humanity. Sub-group 1 share a common cultural heritage, even though North America is geographically separated from other members. Members of sub-group 2 are both geographically distant and culturally independent. This grouping presents an interesting phenomenon and calls for further investigation. Sub-groups 3, 4, and 5 seem to be both geographically and culturally connected, while the remaining sub-groups are more isolated from others. Figures 4a and 4b show the entity-region networks of sub-groups 1 and 2.
            Table 3. Regional grouping by common use of symbolic entities.
            
                
                    
                        Sub-
                        group
                    
                    Region(s)
                    Core Entity
                    Degree Centrality
                    Betweenness Centrality
                
                
                    1
                    Southern Europe, North America, Western Europe, Central Europe
                    ribbon
                    18
                    2313.8
                
                
                    
                    
                    shield
                    18
                    2174.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    eagle
                    15
                    1310.0
                
                
                    
                    
                    spear
                    12
                    1032.0
                
                
                    
                    
                    olive
                    11
                    972.4
                
                
                    2
                    South Asia, Northern Europe, North Africa
                    star
                    18
                    2344.3
                
                
                    
                    
                    motto
                    16
                    1930.7
                
                
                    
                    
                    lion
                    17
                    1831.2
                
                
                    
                    
                    moon
                    12
                    990.1
                
                
                    
                    
                    sword
                    12
                    927.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    crown
                    13
                    819.9
                
                
                    3
                    
                        Southeast Asia, Central Asia, 
                        East Asia
                    
                    sun
                    16
                    1838.7
                
                
                    
                    
                    nation name
                    15
                    1736.1
                
                
                    
                    
                    mountain
                    13
                    1280.2
                
                
                    
                    
                    wheat
                    10
                    609.3
                
                
                    
                    
                    river
                    9
                    512.4
                
                
                    4
                    
                        West Africa, 
                        East Africa, Central Africa
                    
                    flag
                    13
                    1250.8
                
                
                    
                    
                    palm (tree)
                    10
                    875.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    ship
                    10
                    734.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    helmet
                    9
                    656.6
                
                
                    5
                    Western Asia, Eastern Europe
                    sea
                    10
                    737.0
                
                
                    
                    
                    arrow
                    7
                    368.3
                
                
                    
                    
                    oak
                    8
                    357.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    horse
                    7
                    270.1
                
                
                    6
                    Caribbean, Oceania
                    chain
                    7
                    375.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    stripe
                    5
                    194.8
                
                
                    7
                    Central America
                    triangle
                    6
                    260.2
                
                
                    
                    
                    cogwheel
                    6
                    258.1
                
                
                    8
                    Southern Africa
                    man
                    6
                    357.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    rifle
                    4
                    130.9
                
                
                    
                    
                    sheep
                    4
                    77.5
                
                
                    9
                    South America
                    bow
                    5
                    270.1
                
                
                    
                    
                    ax
                    5
                    241.2
                
                
                    
                    
                    coffee
                    5
                    185.2
                
            
            Discussion and Conclusion 
            Symbolism is a fundamental form of humanity expression. While a national emblem forms an integral context of correlated symbolic elements, we believe that a single symbolic element is itself a unit of idea expression and can be examined by an objective data analysis. It is the interpretation of analytic results that needs to take into account the contextual information. In this proposal, our purpose is to show the methodological process of analyzing the inter-relations among symbolic elements while cautiously refrain from making conclusive interpretation. 
                Through the co-occurrence of the lexical and geographical presence of the emblem symbols, we utilize social network analysis as an effective tool to reveal the emergent information. 
            
            This study demonstrates the great potential of employing a data analytic framework for explorative discovery in sociology and anthropology. 
                Our approach helps unlock the less than obvious information in the symbol-location relationship by presenting a lexical-based concept in a non-linear fashion, opening it up for interpretations that are not so readily available via standard appearance of materials. Furthermore, it allows the lexical-based concept to speak in its multiplicity. The initial results seem to provide rich implications for better understanding global humanity’s similarities and divergences. Our future work includes interdisciplinary research with sociologists and/or anthropologists for more in-depth investigation and interpretation, as well as an extension to analyzing the relations of symbolic semantic meaning in national emblems. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4a. Entity-region network of sub-group 1.
            
                
            
            Figure 4a. Entity-region network of sub-group 2.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barber, M. J. (2007). Modularity and Community Detection in Bipartite Networks. 
                        Physical Review E,
                        76(6): 066102.
                    
                    
                        Butz, D. A. (2009). National Symbols as Agents of Psychological and Social Changes. 
                        Political Psychology,
                        30(3): 779–804.
                    
                    
                        Durkheim, E. (1976). 
                        The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. 2nd ed. George Allen and Unwin, London.
                    
                    
                        Elgenius, G. (2011). The Politics of Recognition: Symbols, Nation-Building and Rival Nationalism. 
                        Nations and Nationalism,
                        17(2): 396–418.
                    
                    
                        Firth, R. (1973). 
                        Symbols: Public and Private. George Allen and Unwin, London.
                    
                    
                        Geisler, M. E. (2005). What Are National Symbols—and What Do They Do to Us? In Geisler, M. E. (ed.), 
                        National Symbols, Fractured Identities: Contesting the National Narrative. Middlebury, VT: Middlebury College Press, pp. XIII–XLII.
                    
                    
                        Kolsto, P. (2006). National Symbols as Signs of Unity and Division. 
                        Ethnic and Racial Studies,
                        29(4): 676–701.
                    
                    
                        Newman, M. E. (2001). Scientific Collaboration Networks. II. Shortest Paths, Weighted Networks, and Centrality. 
                        Physical Review E,
                        64(1): 016132.
                    
                    
                        Newman, M. E. (2006). Modularity and Community Structure in Networks. 
                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
                        103(23): 8577–82.
                    
                    
                        Podeh, E. (2011). The Symbolism of the Arab Flag in Modern Arab States: Between Commonality and Uniqueness. 
                        Nations and Nationalism,
                        17(2): 410–22.
                    
                    
                        Smith, A. D. (1999). 
                        Myths and Memories of the Nation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
                    
                    
                        Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). 
                        Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
                    
                    
                        Zhou, T., Ren, J., Medo, M., and Zhang, Y. C. (2007). Bipartite Network Projection and Personal Recommendation. 
                        Physical Review E,
                        76(4): 046115. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                A System for the Textual Inheritance Relation of Chinese Historical Classics "Comprehensive Mirror", "Grand Tortoise" and "Standard Histories"
                
                    
                        Pang
                        Wai-Him
                    
                    University of Macao
                    b96129@csie.ntu.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Hsiang
                        Jieh
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    jhsiang@ntu.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Tu
                        Hsieh-Chang
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    hsieh.chang@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Chen
                        Lihua
                    
                    Academia Sinica, Taiwan
                    lhchen101@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    textual inheritance
                    Chinese historiography
                    classics
                    Zizhi Tongjian
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    historical studies
                    asian studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In Chinese historical writings, an event may be recorded in different classics and paraphrased in others. How an event was written also reflected the view of the historian (Zhou, 1986). In order to check different versions of the same event, a scholar needs to spend a great deal of time collecting all related writings from different books. This paper describes an automated method to establish the inheritance relationship of texts in different classics about the same event. 
            The historical writings studied in this paper are Zizhi Tongjian (ZT, 資治通鑑, 
                Comprehensive Mirror to Aid in Governance), Cefu Yuangui (CY, 冊府元龜, 
                Grand Tortoise in the Imperial Treasury of Books), Zhengshi (ZS, 正史, 
                Standard Histories), and Tongjian Jishi Benmo (JB, 通鑑紀事本末, 
                Narratives from Beginning to End in the Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Governance). While these four epics cover about the same period in Chinese history, they represent four most important yet different styles of Chinese historical writings. ZT, written by Sima Guang (1019–1086) in 1084, considered among the greatest Chinese historiographical achievements, is in chronological style and covers the time from 403 BC to AD 959, the end of Wudai.
                1 CY, compiled by Wang Qinruo in 1013, covers the same period as ZT and was organized in the 
                leishu style.
                2 Although CY is four times as large as ZT, it is held in much less esteem (Sung, 2010). ZS is the collection of Standard Histories, one from each dynasty. Standard Histories are written in the Biographies and Monographs style (紀傳體). ZT used 19 Standard Histories, from Shiji (史記) to Wudaishi (五代史). CY used 17. In 1173 Yuan shu (1131–1205) transformed ZT into an event-based book, JB, by compiling ZT into 239 events. JB opened the door of a third Chinese history-writing style, Narrative of Events (紀事本末體). 
            
            Our studies try to build a system to study the textual inheritance relation of these four tomes. After processing the texts (such as identifying entries and aligning dates), we then extract keywords from them. This is done by combining the 
                Pointwise Mutual Information method (Pang et al., 2014) with a dictionary (Shi and Shen, 1994). This results in the following number of names extracted: 
            
            
                Person names
                Location names
                Office titles
            
            ZT 18,893 10,085 13,888 
            CY 12,351 8,625 8,952 
            ZS 15,975 10,484 10,846 
            Estimating textual inheritance requires the comparison of texts, for which we used two different algorithms. Since CY followed the text closely when copying from ZS, we used the 
                longest common subsequence method (Nakatsu et al., 1982) to find the textual inheritance from ZS to CY. ZT, on the other hand, 
                paraphrased from ZS. In this case we employ the 
                inverse document frequency (Salton et al., 1983) method, using common keywords to find similar texts. We discovered that of the 69,906 entries of CY (71,047 including the prefaces), approximately 13,662 (~20%) are taken from ZS. Of the 21,854 paragraphs in ZT, approximately 7,369 (~34%) have similar texts in ZS. Furthermore, about 2,477 paragraphs (~11%) of ZT have similar entries in CY. What might also be interesting is that although JB recompiled the original paragraphs of ZT into 239 events, it has actually only used 16,374 paragraphs, roughly 75% of the material of ZT. 
            
            We have built a digital archive system containing these four corpuses. In addition to full-text search and retrieval, we have provided functions such as post-query multifacet analysis, text inheritance analysis, term frequency and co-occurrence analysis, relevance factor of a term to a query, and prefix-suffix analysis. The system is flexible enough to host other similar corpuses easily.
                3
            
            Chinese history classics often contain several million words. Digital archive systems provide a way to view and compare these classics that would not have been possible before. The method presented in this paper explores the important relation of textual inheritance in historical writings. It should provide a new way for scholars to study how Chinese history writings were constructed, how events were formulated and described by different historians, and the development of Chinese historiography. 
            Notes
            1. It was based on 19 Standard Histories of previous dynasties and referenced 322 other historical writings (Du, 1993, 3:79).
            2. An ancient Chinese form of reference books, with a classification of knowledge each of whose subjects is attached with related entries copied from older books.
            3. We have indeed used the same shell to create context discovery retrieval systems for scores of corpuses. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Du Weiyun. (1993). 
                        Chinese Historiography.
                    
                    
                        Nakatsu, N., Kambayashi, Y. and Yajima, S. (1982). A Longest Common Subsequence Algorithm Suitable for Similar Text Strings. 
                        Acta Informatica,
                        18(2): 171–79. 
                    
                    
                        Pang, W., Liu, S.-G., Tu, H. C., Weng, G. A. and Hsiang, J. (2014). Automated Name-Extraction in Chinese Classics: Applying PMI Segmentation to Zizhi Tongjian. In Hsiang, J. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities and Craft: Technological Change, Taipei: NTU Press, pp. 139–66. 
                    
                    
                        Salton, G., Fox, E. and Wu, H. (1983). Extended Boolean Information Retrieval. 
                        CACM,
                        26(11): 1022–36. 
                    
                    
                        Shi, T. and Shen, Z. H. (1994). 
                        Grand Dictionary of Zizhi Tongjian. Jilin People’s Press. 
                    
                    
                        Sung, C.-F. (2010). Between Tortoise and Mirror: Historians and Historiography in Eleventh-Century China. Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University. 
                    
                    
                        Zhou Zhenfu. (1986). 
                        Writing Techniques of Ancient Writers. People’s Press, Beijing.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Accidental Discovery, Intentional Inquiry: Leveraging Linked Data to Uncover the Women of Jazz
                
                    
                        Pattuelli
                        M. Cristina
                    
                    Pratt Institute, United States of America
                    mpattuel@pratt.edu
                
                
                    
                        Miller
                        Matthew
                    
                    New York Public Library, United States of America
                    matthewmiller@nypl.org
                
                
                    
                        Hwang
                        Karen
                    
                    Pratt Institute, United States of America
                    khwang3@pratt.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Linked Open Data
                    Digital Archives
                    Gender Studies
                    Jazz History
                    Knowledge Representation
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    gender studies
                    metadata
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    music
                    ontologies
                    philosophy
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    semantic analysis
                    knowledge representation
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    programming
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    crowdsourcing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    cultural infrastructure
                    semantic web
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                We only see what we have interest in. 
            
            —Paul Nougé, 
                Birth of the Object (The Subversion of Images), 1929–1930
            
            In this paper we discuss the heuristic capabilities that the process of creating cultural heritage linked data may afford and the potential of integrating linked open datasets to facilitate and augment arts and humanities research. More specifically, we address the paths to a linked data-driven investigation in the history of women in jazz. The research context is provided by Linked Jazz (linkedjazz.org), an evolving project that experiments with applying linked open data principles and techniques to cultural heritage materials. The project currently uses oral histories from digital archives of jazz history as the main source of named entities to be represented as linked open data. Interview transcripts are processed through open-source applications developed in-house that employ automated and manual methods for name extraction, matching, and quality control. A linked open dataset has been created that includes over 9,000 proper names of musicians as well as the personal and social relationships connecting them. The dataset supports the creation and visualization of interactive social graphs for representing the highly interconnected community of jazz musicians (Pattuelli et al., 2013).
            While the Linked Jazz tools and data services are intended to support data discovery and analysis, the development process itself has proven conducive to research inquiry by revealing unanticipated paths to discovery and engagement with heritage data. One of the initial steps in producing the dataset for Linked Jazz involved creating a directory of proper names to be leveraged in automated text analysis and extraction activities. To this end, a domain-specific vocabulary of personal names was built by extracting and filtering data from the US version of DBpedia. In line with linked open data best practices, existing URIs were reused whenever possible. As an RDF export of Wikipedia data, DBpedia is the largest and most popular hub of linked open data and thus encompasses an extensive array of jazz artist entries, including less prominent figures. For further refinement and consolidation, the names were mapped to VIAF, the international aggregation service of bibliographic name authorities including LC/NAF, the Library of Congress Name Authority File. While VIAF is widely used to disambiguate proper names and enrich the vocabulary with their variant forms, including nicknames and stage names, it contains only name instances derived from bibliographic records, a smaller subset of the pool that can be found in DBpedia. Through automated analysis of interview transcripts, names of musicians mentioned in the text were identified and matched to corresponding names in our directory. Instances occurred when names were recognized in the transcripts but did not have a corresponding match in our inventory. This was mostly due to the lack of an entry in Wikipedia, the source of DBpedia data. When needed, alternative linked open data sources were manually searched, including the music-specific encyclopedia MusicBrainz (https://musicbrainz.org).
            When names were not found in any of the available sources, URIs had to be minted using the Linked Jazz namespace, e.g., http://linkedjazz.org/resource/Lynn_Grissett.
            Based on the random sample of 54 interview transcripts we have processed to date, a total of 219 name instances were newly coined. The tallying of minted URIs showed that 25 out of 219 minted URIs referred to women, and 18 of those women were involved in the jazz scene in various capacities, from less prominent jazz musicians to people otherwise involved in the music industry (producers, managers, educators, etc.). While these individuals were mentioned in our collection of oral histories, they were missing from major encyclopedic knowledge bases, such as Wikipedia and MusicBrainz, as well as from massive repositories of bibliographic name authorities such as LC/NAF and VIAF. 
            The bare data encoding, which is provided by the URI syntax, revealed aspects of the data worthy of further investigation. An obvious finding was that women make up only a tiny percentage of the entities with new identifiers (11%). Even a cursory glance at the entire Linked Jazz dataset shows a significant discrepancy in the ratio between female and male jazz musicians. The missing URIs confirm this trend, but also suggests that the morphology of linked data can serve as a fertile clue and provide threads to new lines of inquiry through the lens of linked open data. 
            These accidental findings have triggered a new stream of development strategies aimed at supporting research in gender representation, an understudied area of jazz (Placksin, 1982; Tucker, 2000). By looking for patterns of the missing data, performing cross-references against interview mentions and conducting data analysis through different data facets including gender, roles, or professional relevance, we expect to be able to expand the array of questions that can be asked of the data.
            We are currently working to associate additional properties, starting with gender and instrument(s) played, to the person entities in the Linked Jazz dataset. This is achieved through data mashups with suitable sets of data from external sources. A key tenet of linked open data development, the integration of heterogeneous datasets is enabled by the design of RDF, a unifying data framework that relies on common modeling constructs such as URIs (Hendler, 2011). Data integration is the strategy that our project has adopted to add new layers of semantics to our set of triples and thus offer new opportunities for analysis and discovery. A dedicated RDF ontology is being developed to harmonize heterogeneous semantics and ease the process of integrating data. The ontology is created by expanding the set of predicates from the Linked Jazz dataset with predicates from selected data sources, resulting in a cohesive and expressive conceptual model. The data enrichment offered by mashing up datasets will bring together a wide range of information from temporal and spatial data (e.g., time periods, dates, events, geographic locations, etc.) to music-specific data (e.g., professional roles, instruments, recordings, music venues, etc.), opening up unanticipated strains of inquiry. A visual representation of a data integration use case is shown in Figure 1. It is based on a test of mashups centered on Ella Fitzgerald.
            
                
            
             Figure 1. Data integration use case.
            Three domain-specific databases will be leveraged to perform mashups: (1) Columbia University’s J-DISC,
                1 (2) Steve Albin’s BRIAN,
                2 and (3) Carnegie Hall’s performance archive database.
                3 The first two are open-source jazz discography databases
                4 that provide granular information including session details with songs, tracks, dates, locations, and artist contributions from the composer to the sideman. The third contains rich and detailed information including types of performer (e.g., singer, instrumentalist, conductor, etc.).
            
            As a condicio sine qua non, however, we have to associate the attribute 
                gender to the jazz musician names throughout the Linked Jazz dataset. Unfortunately, this won’t be a straightforward integration task as gender information, limited to binary 
                male and 
                female, is only recorded in J-DISC, which includes fewer than half of the artists present in BRIAN (and only 313 female jazz musicians). To supplement J-DISC data, we would need to make use of Wikipedia data via DBpedia. Specifically, we will leverage Wikipedia categories 
                women and 
                female as they are the only gender-related qualifiers applied to the jazz domain. The symmetric categories 
                men and 
                male are not specified, but assumed. 
            
            The heuristic capability inherent in the syntax of linked data and the data enrichment derived from knitting together linked open datasets have the potential to shed light on underrepresented contributors to the history of jazz and offer new perspectives to arts and humanities inquiry.
            Notes
            1. http://jdisc.columbia.edu.
            2. http://www.jazzdiscography.com/Brian/.
            3. http://www.carnegiehall.org/PerformanceHistorySearch/#!.
            4. More specifically, Steve Albin’s BRIAN is an application that allows users to create and publish their own discographies.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hendler, J. (2011). The Semantic Web from the Bottom Up. In Batcherer, T. and Coover, R. (eds), 
                        Switching Codes: Thinking through Digital Technology in the Humanities and the Arts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 125–39.
                    
                    
                        Pattuelli, M. C., Miller, M., Lange, L., Fitzell, S. and Li-Madeo, C. (2013). Crafting Linked Open Data for Cultural Heritage: Mapping and Curation Tools for the Linked Jazz Project. 
                        Code4Lib Journal, 
                        21, http://journal.code4lib.org/articles/8670.
                    
                    
                        Placksin, S. (1982). 
                        American Women in Jazz: 1900 to the Present—Their Words, Lives, and Music. Wideview Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Tucker, S. (2000). 
                        Swing Shift: ‘All-Girl’ Bands of the 1940s. Duke University Press, Durham, NC.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Alveo: Software Engineering with Humanities Researchers
                
                    
                        Berghold
                        Jared
                    
                    Intersect, Australia
                    jared@intersect.org.au
                
                
                    
                        Hammond
                        Jeremy
                    
                    Intersect, Australia
                    jeremy@intersect.org.au
                
                
                    
                        Cassidy
                        Steve
                    
                    Macquarie University
                    steve.cassidy@mq.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Estival
                        Dominique
                    
                    University of Western Sydney
                    D.Estival@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Burnham
                        Denis
                    
                    University of Western Sydney
                    Denis.Burnham@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Sefton
                        Peter
                    
                    University of Western Sydney
                    P.Sefton@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    human communication sciences
                    linguistics
                    agile
                    virtual laboratory
                    software development
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    software design and development
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper explores the interactions between software engineers and researchers in developing large-scale digital humanities platforms. In particular, we focus on how a diverse, cross-discipline group contributed to the development and deployment of the Alveo
                1 virtual laboratory (Cassidy et al., 2014). We present an overview of how the tool works, its impact through transforming methodologies within the language sciences, and a summary of what digital technologies underpin its framework. We show the process of the Agile methodology
                2 in a humanities context, good practice for scoping and implementation of highly technical features, and how stakeholder consultation is key to successful software development processes. 
            
            Alveo is an online system designed specifically for research in Human Communication Science (HCS). Human Communication Science encompasses the areas of speech science, speech technology, computer science, language technology, behavioural science, linguistics, music science, phonetics, phonology, and sonics and acoustics. HCS research depends upon datasets (collections) of speech, music, text, video, sounds, and specialised tools by which to search, analyse, and annotate these data. Alveo provides a platform to access these datasets and use the specialised tools. The Alveo system consists of two major components: a data discovery interface and workflow engine. These work independently, but are compatible so that one feeds into the other.
            The data discovery interface gives both a Graphical User Interface (GUI) and an Application Programming Interface (API) that allow for browsing and searching of data, viewing collections and their metadata, and previewing and downloading documents (text documents, audio files, video files, images, etc.). The data discovery interface supports the creation of stable ‘item lists’ that can be shared with other users and transferred to third-party tools for analysis. The workflow engine uses Galaxy,
                3 a scientific workflow platform originally developed by Penn State University for data-intensive biomedical research. Alveo uses Galaxy to provide its users with easy access to a variety of tools for analysing and manipulating human communication datasets. The innovation of the Galaxy component is that it allows for workflow construction independent of data. For example, a researcher builds a workflow that uses PsySound for an acoustic analysis combined with an independent (but linked) analysis using the ParseEval tool on the same language data. The workflow can then be reused on different collections (or selected subsets), shared with collaborators or archived for publication. 
            
            The technical complexity of the project is seen in the range of components that underpin the system. These include: Hydra framework comprised of Blacklight
                4 to provide a discovery interface and Apache Solr
                5 for search; JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) and JSON-LD formatted metadata to build human-readable text to transmit data; and Sesame framework
                6 for storing and accessing metadata that is compliant with the Resource Description Framework (RDF) specifications. A core part of the engineering contribution was to evaluate these technologies, and provide advice and consultancy so that outcomes of the project were achieved with maximal functionality but without undue overheads. 
            
            During the development of the digital laboratory we utilised work practices adhering to the Agile software development process. Specifically, we used the Scrum software development framework.
                7 Scrum is an iterative and incremental process that encourages close collaboration with clients, daily face-to-face communication between team members, and a flexible approach to changing requirements. During the development phase of Alveo, team members met with the major stakeholders on a weekly basis. Meetings alternated between demonstrating the latest version of the system (resulting from the previous two-week period of development) and planning work for the next two weeks. Ad hoc communication with stakeholders took place on an almost daily basis via email, video conference, and an online issue tracking system. By collaborating closely with stakeholders during the development process, there was a greater likelihood that the resulting software system would meet the needs and expectations of those stakeholders. 
            
            We argue that large digital projects have better outcomes when software engineers work not 
                for but 
                with humanities scholars (Teehan and Keating, 2010; Dombrowski, 2014; Bradley, 2009). The contribution of software engineers to digital humanities projects is not only to implement a digital or computational solution to a problem but to also be highly engaged with the discipline, to introduce options and advice, and to react rapidly and flexibly to changing requirements at all stages along a project timeline. 
            
            Notes
            1. http://alveo.edu.au/.
            2. http://agilemethodology.org/.
            3. https://usegalaxy.org/.
            4. http://projectblacklight.org/.
            5. http://lucene.apache.org/solr/.
            6. http://rdf4j.org/.
            7. https://www.scrum.org/Resources/What-is-Scrum.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bradley, J. (2009). What the Developer Saw: An Outsider’s View of Annotation, Interpretation, and Scholarship. 
                        New Paths for Computing Humanists,
                        1(1).
                    
                    
                        Cassidy, S., Estival, D., Jones, T., Burnham, D. and Berghold, J. (2014). The Alveo Virtual Laboratory: A Web-Based Repository API. 
                        9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, 26–31 May 2014.
                    
                    
                        Dombrowski, Q. (2014). What Ever Happened to Project Bamboo? 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        29(3): 326–39, doi:10.1093/llc/fqu026.
                    
                    
                        Teehan, A. and Keating, J. G. (2010). Appropriate Use Case Modeling for Humanities Documents. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        25(4): 381–91, doi:10.1093/llc/fqq026.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                An Efficient Collaborative Web-based Working Environment For The Creation Of A Digital Sanskrit Dictionary
                
                    
                        Heße
                        Sascha
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    sascha.hesse@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Einicke
                        Katrin
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    katrin.einicke@indologie.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Ritter
                        Jörg
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    joerg.ritter@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Sanskrit
                    dictionary
                    working environment
                    input form
                    lemma
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    interface and user experience design
                    lexicography
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    asian studies
                    internet / world wide web
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We present an efficient web-based collaborative working environment for the creation of a new digital Sanskrit dictionary, making it possible to abstract from the structured representation of a dictionary entry and instead focus on content decisions when adding new entries through a convenient input mask. 
            ***
            Sanskrit is, among other things, the liturgical language of Hinduism. With its textual transmission dating back to the 2nd millennium BC and written records in the form of inscriptions dating back as far as the 1st/2nd century AD, Sanskrit texts make up one of the richest cultural and intellectual archives of the pre-modern Asian world. At the end of the 19th century Böhtlingk and Roth published their groundbreaking Sanskrit dictionaries (Böhtlingk, 1855–1875; 1879), creating an indispensable tool in indological research and laying the foundation for modern lexicographical Sanskrit studies. They have since never been superseded. The only comprehensive effort to create an addendum based on the same scientific standards was made by Schmidt (1928). Since then a large number of significant scientific advances in Sanskrit lexicography have since been made. While the portfolio of dedicated large-scale dictionaries is manageable (Böhtlingk, 1855–1875; 1879; Apte, 1957–1959; Grassman, 1873; Monier-Williams, 1899) and largely accessible for research (Kapp and Malten, 1997), the exact opposite holds true for the enormous amount of individual lexicographical accomplishments that have been made over the course of generations. This cumulative knowledge, published in different forms and places (glossaries, specialized dictionaries, articles in journals and anthologies), evades targeted access by being scattered both temporally and editorially, making it nearly impossible to obtain an extensive overview of the current progress of studies of Sanskrit vocabulary and its semantics. In consequence, one has to largely rely on the state of knowledge from 1928 when translating Sanskrit texts. This deficit will most certainly cause indological research to qualitatively fall behind other philologies over time. To counteract this process, a systematic scientific revision of the accumulated advancements made in Sanskrit lexicography since 1928 is urgently needed.
            Our project, Nachtragswörterbuch des Sanskrit (NWS), aims at creating a digital Sanskrit dictionary whose lemmatic content consists of about 150 publications, containing an estimated 11,000 pages worth of scientific collections of Sanskrit vocabulary. The goal is to make this content available in a single digital dictionary with uniform presentation and structure by systematically analyzing each lexicographic collection with academic expertise. This includes identifying, extracting, and transferring relevant content into a new and unified lemmatic structure without adding further information. A transcription is decidedly not part of our project. We identify the key challenges that we have to overcome as follows. 
            First and arguably the biggest challenge is the sheer amount of content. Due to the scientific assessment of the source material on a per-entry basis, an automated approach can be ruled out. Instead, our main priority is to make this workflow of identifying, extracting, and transferring lexicographic content into our dictionary as convenient and efficient as possible by providing a tailored working environment for the indologists on our team. The second challenge is due to the fact that the content of our dictionary consists of various different sources. In order to avoid duplication of information we include only the first (oldest) occurrence of duplicate content. Reviewing the source material by date of publication is one necessity for this; however, the challenge lies in being able to access the live state of the dictionary in order to look up previously entered content under the same headword, keeping in mind that this content may not necessarily have been entered by the same person but could have come from anyone on our team. This brings up the next challenge, which is the fact that multiple users will be working on the dictionary, quite possibly at the same time, needing access not only to the content they are working on themselves but to the whole dictionary in its current state.
            To address these challenges and meet the necessary requirements we opted for a web-based collaborative working environment, enabling us to provide an up-to-date version of the dictionary to all team members. The most important feature of this working environment is the ability to add new entries to the dictionary using a tailor-made web input mask (see Fig
                ure 1). This allows abstracting from the internal deep structured database representation of a dictionary entry and instead working with a specialized user interface. This allows the indologists on our team to focus on the content as well as the actual lemmatic structure instead of how to represent that structure internally. Furthermore we exploit the fact that publications are predominantly being reviewed one at a time from front to back. Using that knowledge we can prevent the need to input repetitive information by automatically filling in certain input elements in the web mask when entering consecutive entries. Whenever we can’t automatically deduce information with certainty, we try to anticipate the input by offering context-sensitive suggestions that update themselves while the user is typing. Using this feature is an invaluable resource when working with scribal abbreviations of Sanskrit texts, which in our case already amount to over 2,400 in total. By starting to type any part of an unabridged Sanskrit texts name one can effectively search for the corresponding abbreviation and accept the correct suggestion only by using a couple of keystrokes. The same feature is also used in different contexts, e.g., when choosing among more than 250 literary references or when entering cross-references. While convenience features are certainly the most notable when using our working environment on a daily basis, another important aspect is the added benefit of automatically validating new entries before they are added to the dictionary.
                1
            
            The most difficult part during development proved to be making the input mask adaptable enough to support the full range of expressiveness of the underlying deep structure of a dictionary entry, while offering a clear, intuitive, and uncluttered user interface. We achieve this by using an approach where the user starts with a basic form, dynamically adding new structural elements whenever needed. This allows for arbitrarily complex entries when needed but provides a minimalistic view by default. While this approach works just fine for the overall structure of the dictionary entry, a different method is needed when it comes to tagging single words or even just characters of a text inside an input field. To this end we developed a feature that allows tagging parts of texts inside an HTML text input field in a way best described as analogous to using a highlighter. By making a text selection using the mouse or keyboard, the user can then tag the selection by using a hotkey combination or clicking a button in a floating context-sensitive toolbar. As Sanskrit is predominantly written in Devanagari, transliteration support including automatic Unicode normalization is another feature built into the input mask. Furthermore, by allowing each user to view dictionary entries in their textual representation and flag them as correct or give a written opinion on why they are incorrect, proofreading becomes a group effort. 
            The structured content of our dictionary is being stored in a relational database whose schema we derived from a subset of the TEI-P5 guidelines on encoding dictionaries.
                2 Exporting to TEI conform XML is therefore possible. Furthermore we use the Ruby on Rails framework to generate different textual representations from the structured database content. This allows us to use a singular data source but have different textual representations of our dictionary entries without duplication of content. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
                    Figure 1. A screenshot of the input mask for new entries shows the autocompletion feature, the floating highlighter toolbar, as well as the personalized bookmarks menu in the top right.
                
            
            Results
            Development of this working environment initially took six months. We started testing our environment under live circumstances in June 2014. What was initially supposed to be a test phase ended up being the beginning of the use of our working environment in production. We have since iteratively integrated new and improved existing features. At the time of writing this, our team of four indologists has been successfully using this environment to review more than 30 sources, creating a total of nearly 10,000 dictionary entries. Looking at the time frame of our project, we are more than confident that this modern working environment will contribute to the timely completion of our digital Sanskrit dictionary. 
            Future Work
            In the future we plan on integrating the content of the Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries
                3 into our dictionary, creating a unified digital Sanskrit dictionary. Furthermore, additional Sanskrit publications could be reviewed and integrated into the NWS as required, creating an even more comprehensive lexicographic Sanskrit resource. The possibility to realize such a project has been established with the development of this working environment. 
            
            Funding
            This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) as part of the Kumulatives Nachtragswörterbuch des Sanskrit project, a cooperation between the Martin-Luther-University Halle and the Philipps-University Marburg under the direction of Prof. Dr. Walter Slaje, Prof. Dr. Jürgen Hanneder, Prof. Dr. Paul Molitor, and Dr. Jörg Ritter. 
            Notes
            1. All literary references and citations are being checked for consistency. We’re currently not using a routine to check the whole entry for typing errors.
            2. Text Encoding Initiative. P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Section 9–Dictionaries.
            3. Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries: http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Apte, V. S. (1957–1959). The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Prasad Prakashan, Poona.
                    
                    
                        Böhtlingk, O. (1855–1875). Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, St. Petersburg. 
                    
                    
                        Böhtlingk, O. (1879–1889). Sanskrit-Wörterbuch in kürzerer Fassung. Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, St. Petersburg. 
                    
                    
                        Grassmann, H. (1873). Wörterbuch zum Rig-Veda. Brockhaus, Leipzig. 
                    
                    
                        Kapp, D. B. and Malten, T. (1997). Report on the Cologne Sanskrit Dictionary Project. 
                        10th International Sanskrit Conference, Bangalore, India.
                    
                    
                        Monier-Williams, M. (1899). 
                        A Sanskrit-English Dictionary: Etymologically and Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European languages. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, R. (1928). Nachträge zum Sanskrit-Wörterbuch In Kürzerer Fassung von Otto Böhtlingk. Harrassowitz Verlag, Leipzig.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                An entity-based approach to interoperability in the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                
                    
                        Brown
                        Susan
                    
                    University of Guelph, Canada; University of Alberta, Canada; Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                    sbrown@uoguelph.ca
                
                
                    
                        Antoniuk
                        Jeffery
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                    jeffery.antoniuk@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Brundin
                        Michael
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                    brundin@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Simpson
                        John
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; INKE Research Group
                    john.simpson@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ilovan
                        Mihaela
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory
                    ilovan@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Warren
                        Robert
                    
                    Carleton University; University of Guelph, Canada
                    rwarren@math.carleton.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    interoperability
                    linked data
                    semantic web
                    entities
                
                
                    metadata
                    ontologies
                    semantic web
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    linking and annotation
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            A lack of interoperability between digital resources for humanists, whether big or small, plagues our research community. The challenge of the ‘Million Books’ problem identified by Gregory Crane (2006) and the opportunity of examining aspects of humanistic phenomena that appear, as Alan Liu (2012) puts it, ‘only at scale’ are lures that drive the digital humanities community forward in developing new tools and exploring emerging modes of enquiry for large datasets. Yet only a small handful of well-funded projects are actually in a position to investigate such phenomena due in part to restrictions on the use of commercially held large data collections but at least as much on the lack of interoperability and barriers to aggregation between open collections, many of which originate in the digital humanities community. This ‘multivarious isolation’, identified by Rebecca Frost Davis and Quinn Dombrowski (2011), stems from a number of intellectual, institutional, and social factors, but a 2011 Research Information Network report found that the biggest obstacle for researchers in our century was incompatible data structures and disparate and scattered data sources. If digital research in the humanities is to be significantly advanced, this problem must be addressed.
            This paper describes the approach to this challenge taken by the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC) (Brown, 2011), a virtual research environment hosting and supporting a range of projects, including ‘seed’ projects with existing data in a wide range of formats. CWRC aims to bridge the gap between the digital humanities community and humanities scholars who lack an understanding of best practices and standards, as well as bridging diverse datasets (Brown, 2011; 2013). We describe the approach to interoperability built into the Collaboratory’s systems and argue that such an approach based on linked data principles supports scaling up beyond the Collaboratory to form a basis for interoperability across disparate and distributed projects with overlapping content. The resulting interoperability is in some senses quite rudimentary, but at the same time constitutes a step towards a more robust ecology of interlinked resources.
            Core to the approach of developing the Collaboratory such that it facilitates interoperability is the entity-based nature of the architecture, as expressed in entity records, entity schemas, and an entity management system. The approach is similar to that employed by the Humanities Networked Infrastructure (HuNI) project, which brings together a large collection of diverse datasets from various Australian providers (Burrows, 2013), and that of the New Zealand Electronic Text Collection’s Entity Authority Tool Set (EATS) (Norrish, 2007). Entity records in the context of CWRC have two purposes: to enable Semantic Web–type linked open data processes and to facilitate traditional authority control and information retrieval in a digital repository. In order to achieve these two purposes, CWRC entities are structured as elemental, atomic units of information, and, specifically, they are modeled as proper noun–named entities in four classes: persons, organizations, places, and titles (works). The core characteristics that are common to all four types of entities are an indication of the preferred or authoritative name, variant names if any, and important administrative data such as record creation date, contributing project or projects, and an access condition statement. Entity schemas are used to model and govern the creation of entity records to ensure consistency among the entities; this is achieved by defining required elements and attributes, content types associated with each element, and the nesting hierarchy of elements. The CWRC XML entity schemas consist of a custom CWRC omnibus entity schema that models the person, organization, and place entities, and the Library of Congress’ MODS schema, which models the title entities; the omnibus entity schema was influenced by concepts from several existing schema standards, including EAC-CPF, FOAF, GeoNames, ISAAR (CPF), MADS, and MODS. Following the codified approach of authority records, the CWRC entity types parallel the Library of Congress person, organization, geographic name, and title name authority files, and the entities’ core structure contains the standard three components of an authority record: authoritative form, cross-variant forms, and administrative notes. These entity records provide the basis for a linked data entity within the Resource Description Framework (RDF), with a dereferencable uniform resource identifier (URI) and associated RDF triples that translate the information about that entity from the schema, as well as some of the information about that entity from elsewhere in CWRC, into an open Semantic Web dataset for use within and beyond the Collaboratory (Simpson and Brown, 2013).
            With the exception of the use of MODS records for bibliographical entities, the CWRC entity schema is deliberately minimalist, more so than the EATS data model for instance, serving as an authority list that brokers between different data formats used by various projects about entities, rather than requiring all projects within CWRC to adopt the same standard for recording detailed information about those entities. For instance, the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada (2015) project led by Constance Crompton and Michelle Schwartz is recording prosopographical information using the Text Encoding Initiative, while the Orlando Project (2015) has a rich bespoke XML schema for encoding prosopographical information, while bibliographical or editing projects may use MODS or METS or EAD. The CWRC approach allows the same person as described by documents using a range of schemas to refer to a common, minimalist entity, while permitting divergent representational practices and individual project autonomy. It also allows us to preserve and make somewhat interoperable existing digital datasets that we can only partially remediate, and to bring together XML materials with materials in other media. The CWRC entities thus facilitate the collocation of a wide range of resources that reference that entity. Rather than acting as receptacles for prosopographical information, they act as authority records across CWRC, but connect using linked data principles to other authoritative and often more detailed records from individual projects, facilitating information retrieval and aggregation. The approach facilitates linking into the Semantic Web more generally; indeed CWRC entities beyond those harvested from our seed projects will only be minted if users cannot locate a linked data identifier for that entity amongst trusted linked data entity collections such as the Virtual International Authority File.
            This pragmatic approach to entities is complementary with, and indeed promotes, a number of existing standards, bridging datasets through a set of linked data that will support interoperability and leverage that bridging into conformity with Semantic Web standards. As Joris van Zundert has argued, the idea of uniformly behaving humanist scholars is a pipe dream; furthermore, he argues, ‘any meaningful humanities research . . . cannot be entirely governed by standards’ (2012, 173). CWRC’s strategy focuses on building interoperability from how scholars with a range of technological expertise and different degrees of willingness to engage with complex standards actually work, not how we think they should work in the best of all possible worlds.
            The paper will demonstrate the user experience that stitches together the entity architecture with other components of the Collaboratory to enable users to incorporate relatively technical tasks into their workflow. The entity management system provides a user interface to create and edit entities, as well as mechanisms to perform entity extraction on source documents and global merging of these extracted entities into the CWRC common pool of core named entities. The centerpiece of CWRC’s interoperability strategy is a web-based XML and RDF Editor called CWRC-Writer (Brown et al., 2014; Rockwell et al., 2012). It aims to integrate the activities of correcting, writing, formatting, and editing a text with managing references to entities so as to minimize the additional work required for disambiguation, merging, and management. Tagging an entity within CWRC-Writer creates XML tags such as persname, orgname, or title, as well as equivalent RDF annotations employing the Open Annotation data model (2013), a practice that makes the project importantly about links rather than simple tagging (Hendler, 2011). Having the user provide the entity linking up front means that the act is informed by their knowledge of the material, and integrating it into the writing interface minimizes the additional time required to enhance the information. The immediate payoff to users will be the creation of links between their materials. This section of the paper demonstrates how entity tagging works within CWRC-Writer and shows our progress towards the cross-project aggregation of materials that entity tagging will support.
            To further support the essential role of entities within the Collaboratory, we are exploring implementing, where possible, supplementary technologies and practices. These include support for the construction of a semiautomated named entity recognition (NER) tool (Barbosa et al., 2012), developing Semantic Web capability through ontology development, the exposure of data through a publicly accessibly triplestore (Brown and Simpson, 2013), and pursuing synergies with other linked data projects in the humanities. 
            The Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory employs entities to showcase the benefits of interoperability while providing immediate benefits to researchers. Our conclusion will touch on the ways in which this approach provides a foundation on which to build more advanced services in the future.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barbosa, D., Brown, S., Home, M. and Moroz, A. (2012). On Semi-Automatic Tools for Annotating Scholarly Material. 
                        Canadian Society for Digital Humanities Annual Meeting at the Congress of the Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Waterloo / Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, 26 May–2 June 2012.
                    
                    
                        Brown, S. (2011). Don’t Mind the Gap: Evolving Digital Modes of Scholarly Production across the Digital-Humanities Divide. In Coleman, D. and Kamboureli S. (eds), 
                        Retooling the Humanities: The Culture of Research in Canadian Universities. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, pp. 203–31, http://hdl.handle.net/10402/era.25382 (open access preprint version).
                    
                    
                        Brown, S. (2014). Scaling Up Collaboration Online: Towards a Collaboratory for Research on Canadian Writing. 
                        International Journal of Canadian Studies,
                        48: 233–51.
                    
                    
                        Brown, S., Brundin, M., Chartrand, J., Knechtel, R., MacDonald, A., Rockwell, G. and Sellmer, M. (2014). The CWRC-Writer Bridge: From Coder to Writer, XML to RDF, DH to Mainstream. 
                        Digital Humanities Conference Abstracts 2014, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7–12 July 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Poster-782.xml.
                    
                    
                        Brown, S., and Simpson, J. (2013). The Curious Identity of Michael Field and Its Implications for Humanities Research with the Semantic Web. 
                        IEEE, Big Data 2013, Humanities and Big Data Workshop, Santa Clara, CA, 6–9 October 2013, pp. 77–85, doi:10.1109/BigData.2013.6691674.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, T. (2013). A Data-Centred ‘Virtual Laboratory’ for the Humanities: Designing the Australian Humanities Networked Infrastructure (HuNI) Service. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(4): 576–81.
                    
                    
                        Crane, G. (2006). What Do You Do with a Million Books? 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        12(3): 1.
                    
                    
                        Davis, R. F. and Dombrowski, Q. (2011). Divided and Conquered: How Multivarious Isolation Is Suppressing Digital Humanities Scholarship. 
                        National Institute for Technology in Liberal Education, http://www.nitle.org/live/files/36-divided-and-conquered.
                    
                    
                        Hendler, J. (2011). Why the Semantic Web Will Never Work. 
                        8th Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC), Heraklion, Crete, 29–30 May 2011, http://videolectures.net/eswc2011_hendler_work/.
                    
                    
                        Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada. (2015). http://www.lglc.ca/.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2012). The State of the Digital Humanities: A Report and a Critique. 
                        Arts and Humanities in Higher Education,
                        11(1): 1–34, http://ahh.sagepub.com/content/early/2011/11/30/1474022211427364.full.pdf+html.
                    
                    
                        Norrish, J. (2007). EATS: An Entity Authority Tool Set. 
                        Australia New Zealand Digital Encyclopedias Group Meeting, Sydney, 7–8 December 2007.
                    
                    
                        Open Annotation Data Model. (2013). http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/.
                    
                    
                        Orlando Project. (2015). http://www.ualberta.ca/orlando.
                    
                    
                        Research Information Network. (2011). 
                        Reinventing Research? Information Practices in the Humanities. Research Information Network Report, April, http://www.rin.ac.uk/system/files/attachments/Humanities_Case_Studies_for_screen_2_0.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Rockwell, G., Brown, S., Chartrand, J., and Hesemeier, S. (2012). CWRC-Writer: An In-Browser XML Editor. 
                        Digital Humanities Conference Abstracts 2012, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 16–22 July 2012,
                         http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/cwrc-writer-an-in-browser-xml-editor/.
                    
                    
                        Simpson, J. and Brown, S. (2013). From XML to RDF in the Orlando Project. 
                        International Conference on Culture and Computing 2013, Kyoto, Japan, 16–18 September 2013, pp. 194–95, doi:10.1109/CultureComputing.2013.61.
                    
                    
                        Zundert, J. van. (2012). ‘If You Build It, Will We Come?’ Large-Scale Digital Infrastructures as a Dead End for Digital Humanities.’ 
                        Historical Social Research–Historische Sozialforschung,
                        37(3): 165–86.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                An Environment for putting Digital Humanities Pedagogy in Place
                
                    
                        Burr
                        Elisabeth
                    
                    Universität Leipzig, Germany
                    elisabeth.burr@uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Potapenko
                        Elena
                    
                    Universität Leipzig, Germany
                    potep@rz.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Kovacs
                        Pascal
                    
                    Universität Leipzig, Germany
                    pascal_kovacs@yahoo.de
                
                
                    
                        Concepción Durán
                        Arámis
                    
                    Universität Leipzig, Germany
                    acduran@uni-leipzig.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Pedagogy
                    Digital Humanities
                    working environment
                    learning-by-project
                    ontology
                    modeling
                
                
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    knowledge representation
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                From Leipzig into the Romania
                In our poster we present a digital working environment that has been built at Leipzig University in the framework of a project on the Neogrammarians and their influence on Romance linguistics. 
                
                    
                        The Project
                    
                    The Neogrammarians were a group of young linguists, mostly based at the University of Leipzig, who in the late 19th century proclaimed the creation of a new school. This so-called 
                        Leipziger Schule (Leipzig School) had a significant impact on linguistics in general. As their so-called Manifesto gave rise to the ‘Lautgesetzestreit’ (debate about the laws of sound change), which divided linguists all over Europe, the Manifesto together with texts written by its critics and defenders were chosen for digitalisation and annotation. At the same time, documents that would allow the positioning of the Neogrammarians were to be collected and integrated into the project. Scholarly works about the Neogrammarians and their importance for Romance linguistics were to be exploited with respect to questions like ‘Who are the members of the Leipzig School?’, ‘What is seen as their contribution to Romance linguistics?’, ‘Which Romance linguists were influenced by this school?’ etc. As the results of the project were to be presented to the public as soon as they became available, a website was to be set up.
                    
                
                
                    
                        (Digital) Pedagogy as Such Was Not Enough
                    
                    The project started in 2007. During the following semesters we had to recognise, however, that text encoding and data modelling as such would not allow our students to understand the rationale behind such an activity (see also Rehbein and Fritze, 2012, 48). Furthermore, it became clear that environments like Moodle would not allow our students to gain experiences of what work on one and the same project over years really means and how their individual contribution could form an organic whole with the contributions of others. 
                
                
                    
                        The Web-Portal—A Collaborative Environment 
                    
                    The situation changed when we could actually start to think about building an environment that would allow us to integrate research, teaching, and learning as well as to present the results to the public. The most central aspect of this environment is TEI-Markup, because it integrates our sources with the information handling of the Portal. 
                    In our poster we will not only explain the four levels where TEI-Markup plays an important role—texts, ontology, citations, and sources—but also demonstrate the administration of the sources (Figure 1):
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 1. Administration of sources.
                    the filtering of sources for relevant information and its extraction (Figure 2): 
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 2. Administration of extracts from sources.
                    and the ordering of such extracted information into knowledge domains and the setting up of relations between them (Figure 3):
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 3. Visualisation of knowledge domains and their relations.
                
            
            
                Conclusion and Future Perspectives
                As this environment not only provides our students with the possibility 
                
                     • To mark up texts collaboratively according to the TEI guidelines, 
                     • To use this markup to link these texts with the information handling of the Web-Portal, 
                     • To order the information extracted from different types of sources into knowledge domains, and
                     • To model the knowledge which is thus being created with respect to the research question, 
                
                but also to exploit the markup and the information gathered for the writing of new TEI-compliant scholarly texts and to publish them in the Web-Portal (Figure 4):
                
                    
                
                Figure 4. Scholarly texts written by the students.
                we feel confident that this environment shows a possible way of how learning to do digital humanities and doing digital humanities research can be integrated, and thus the ‘antagonistic distinction between teaching and research’ that Hirsch talks about (2012, 5), can be overcome.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brier, S. (2012). Where’s the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 390–401.
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, B. D. (2012). &lt;/Parentheses&gt;: Digital Humanities and the Place of Pedagogy. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 3–30.
                    
                    
                        Mahony, S. and Pierazzo, E. (2012). Teaching Skills or Teaching Methodology? In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 215–25.
                    
                    
                        Rehbein, M. and Fritze, Ch. (2012). Hands-On Teaching Digital Humanities: A Didactic Analysis of a Summer School Course on Digital Editing. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 47–78. 
                    
                    
                        Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (2012). Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 177–205.
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C., Terras, M. and Nyhan, J. (eds). (2012). 
                        Digital Humanities in Practice. Facet Publishing, London.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Anatomy of a Drop-Off Reading Curve
                
                    
                        Bornet
                        Cyril
                    
                    DHLAB, EPFL, Switzerland
                    cyril.bornet@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Kaplan
                        Frédéric
                    
                    DHLAB, EPFL, Switzerland
                    frederic.kaplan@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    simulation humaine
                    daniel de roulet
                    J48
                    reading
                    analytics
                
                
                    literary studies
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    text analysis
                    user studies / user needs
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    visualisation
                    crowdsourcing
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Not all readers finish the books they start reading. Electronic media allow us to measure more precisely how this ‘drop-off’ effect unfolds as readers are reading a book. A curve showing how many people have read each chapter of a book is likely to be progressively going down: the more we advance in the book, the less readers got to this point. This article is an initial study about the shape of these ‘drop-off’ reading curves. 
            The data we analyse were gathered from readers of a series of novels of different length written by one single author. During the last twenty years, Daniel de Roulet wrote a nine-book saga about the interleaving stories of two families over a time range of seventy years. In 2014, for the publication of the concluding tenth book, he decided to release an alternative retelling that constituted of a reordering of all the 297 chapters, forming a coherent saga titled 
                La simulation humaine. This new saga was made available free of charge to the general public in the form of a website
                1 and a mobile iOS
                2 and Android
                3 app. It has been composed in a way that is readable from one end to the other. This creates the possibility of reading nine chosen subsequences, each one making for a self-standing story. Each possible reading path is characterised by its number of chapters and is also given a title, as shown in Table 1 below.
            
            
                
                    Story title
                    Number of chapters
                
                
                    Une fleur de cerisier
                    1
                
                
                    Sur les barricades
                    1
                
                
                    Les liquidateurs
                    1
                
                
                    Air Force One
                    4
                
                
                    Fukushima au début
                    5
                
                
                    Le pucelage d’un Helvète
                    10
                
                
                    L’ingénieur et la fillette
                    30
                
                
                    Fissions
                    33
                
                
                    La réalité, mais digitale
                    38
                
                
                    La simulation totale
                    174 to 297
                
            
            Table 1. Stories of 
                La simulation humaine and their respective sizes, in chapters.
            
            
                Methodology
            
            Formally, the collected data are very similar to state-of-the-art website analytics. Every time a chapter is loaded, it is possible to know the precise date, time, and type of device used. Additionally, each reader is uniquely identified using a browser session and a cookie on the website, or a device identifier on the mobile app. 
            Over a period of eight months, a total of 7,000 chapters were read, out of which approximately half were not relatable to regular readers (be it search-engine queries or users refusing to be tracked). For this study, we thus kept the subset of data where at least two chapters were related to the same person. We also left out the paths presenting clear test patterns (for instance, paths consisting of multiple repetitions of the same chapters) or no overall significant reading time. In all, we considered 310 unique reading paths.
            Each path is represented by a chain of tuples (
                c
                i
                ,t
                i), with 
                c
                i being a chapter and 
                t
                i the time the reader spent on it (that is, the interval in seconds between start of 
                c
                i and 
                c
                i
                +1). Given the average reading speed of an educated adult (Kershner et al., 1964) and the relative homogeneity of our corpus, we marked transitions as ‘skipped’ when the said time interval was less than 60 seconds, thus considering the chapter as not having been read. We then aggregated the total number of read chapters and plotted them according to their respective stories’ orderings, resulting in one 
                reading curve for each story.
            
            
                Characterisation of Reading Curves
            
            All reading curves are expected to start with a strong drop-off effect, corresponding to the considerable number of readers who merely peek at the start of the story, but don’t finish it. Of course, this effect is especially noticeable in the context of digital and mobile content (‘Localytics Indexes’, 
                Q3 2014).
                4
            
             The classic ‘drop-off’ reading curve is characterised by an exponential drop-off as illustrated in Figure 1. In our samples, this phase was shown to typically last for the first three or four chapters of the story. Then the rate of the monotonic drop-off can vary depending on the attractiveness of the texts. Figure 1 shows two examples, one with a very high drop-off rate and another one where this effect is present but less important. Notice that not only is the drop lower in the second case but the effect also wears off earlier.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Two examples of exponential drop-offs with different rates/slopes.
            More interestingly, some ‘drop-off reading curves’ are also characterised by a plateau that occurs typically once the first chapters are passed. This could be because readers who reach a certain point in the book are convinced to go on till the end. Figure 2 shows an example of this plateau characterised by an almost null drop-off rate once chapter 6 is passed. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. An example of a curve with a plateau in 
                La réalité, mais digitale.
            
            In some cases, the drop-off reading curves show unexpected gaps in the reading plateau. This case could typically be attributed to readers who skipped one or several chapters (hence resulting in low reading times that were filtered out of our data), but then resumed reading later on in the same story. This ‘skimming gap’ could thus be interpreted as a mild sign of boredom, not sufficiently strong to stop the reading but significant enough to speed it up. This phenomenon can be seen in Figures 2 and 3.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. A skimming gap in 
                L’ingénieur et la fillette.
            
            Moreover, some other stories never achieve the plateau stage and continuously lose readers as the chapters go by. In the example shown in Figure 4, this decrease also features a couple of stop points, which could possibly be interesting starting points to investigate why the subsequent drops occur. 
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Continuously decreasing readers in 
                Fissions. 
            
            From Reading Curves to Chapters Classification
            These simple examples show the potential richness of drop-off curves among the various reading analytics curves. Two reading regimes can be identified from this initial study: the immersion mode, characterised by very small drop-off rate, and the critical mode, characterised by dropping and skimming behavior.
             We segmented the chapters of our corpus using these two categories and trained a machine learning classifier to try to identify key features to predict whether a chapter is immersive or leading to a potential drop-off. We decided to use an implementation of a J48 pruned tree, given the generally good scores obtained by this method in computational linguistics (Pedersen, 2001; Youn and McLeod, 2007) and general purposes classification (Omid, 2011). A visual representation of the resulting tree is shown in Figure 5.
            
                
            
            Figure 5. J48 tree predictor for critical and immersion reading modes.
            This structure yields a 95% correct classification in a 10-fold cross validation on our dataset, which makes it overall a pretty accurate predictor. It basically confirms our empirical observations on the general shape of the reading curves, putting the start of the immersion phase latest after the fourth chapter. Interestingly, it also hints that using shorter chapters in the critical phase could hasten the immersion process. Furthermore, this result shows that the other features characterising the chapters—such as their position in the saga, length in words, or presence of main characters—had no significant influence on the drop-off rate prediction. 
            
                Conclusion and Further Works
            
            We are aware that these preliminary results may be highly linked to the studied corpus and not generalizable. However, the concepts and tools that we proposed in this article could well be extended or adapted to look at more general reading patterns, with or without the active participation of the authors of the texts to be analysed.
             As more people read 
                La simulation humaine, we expect to collect more analytics and be able to refine our results, as well as confirm or falsify our hypotheses with deeper quantitative analyses. Additionally, we’ll aim to propose tools that may detect critical reading phases, suggest improvements to the author, and predict drop-offs for new stories.
            
            
                Acknowledgements
            
            This research was made possible by a very precious and close collaboration with Daniel de Roulet, Swiss architect, computer scientist, and author. This research is supported by the 
                Fondation Jan Michalski pour l’Ecriture et la Littérature.
            
            
                Notes
            
            1. http://www.simulationhumaine.com.
            2. http://appstore.com/la-simulation-humaine.
            3. http://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.simulationhumaine.app.
            4. http://www.localytics.com/resources/app-indexes-q3-2014/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alter, A. (2012). Your E-Book Is Reading You. 
                        Wall Street Journal, 19 July, http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304870304577490950051438304.
                    
                    
                        Kershner, A. M. (1964). Speed of Reading in an Adult Population under Differential Conditions. 
                        Journal of Applied Psychology,
                        48: 25–28, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0047157.
                    
                    
                        Omid, M. (2011). Design of an Expert System for Sorting Pistachio Nuts through Decision Tree and Fuzzy Logic Classifier. 
                        Expert Systems with Applications,
                        38: 4339–47, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.09.103.
                    
                    
                        Pedersen, T. (2001). A Decision Tree of Bigrams Is an Accurate Predictor of Word Sense. 
                        Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–8, http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1073336.1073347.
                    
                    
                        Reading, Literacy &amp; Education Statistics. (n.d.). http://www.readfaster.com/education_stats.asp#literacystatistics.
                    
                    
                        Roulet, D. (2013). 
                        Ecrire la mondialité: Essays. Baconnière, Genève.
                    
                    
                        Youn, S. and McLeod, D. (2007). A Comparative Study for Email Classification. In Elleithy, E. (ed.), 
                        Advances and Innovations in Systems: Computing Sciences and Software Engineering. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 387–91, http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4020-6264-3_67.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Animation of Chinese Characters: the Evolution of the Shapes and Styles
                
                    
                        Wang
                        Ning
                    
                    Beihang University, China, People's Republic of
                    wangningmaya@126.com
                
                
                    
                        Hu
                        Jiajia
                    
                    Beijing Normal University, China, People's Republic of
                    hjj81@126.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Animation
                    the Evolution of Shapes and Styles of Chinese Characters
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Hanzi (Chinese writing) is well known as a representative of an ideographic system. That means each Chinese character was formed according to a word’s meaning, which is called the character’s 
                original meaning. Hanzi is also known as the oldest writing system still in daily use. The earliest confirmed evidence of the Chinese script yet discovered is inscriptions on oracle bones from the Shang dynasty (1600–1100 BC). During the long course of development, the shapes and styles of Chinese characters have undergone great changes, which can be divided into five main stages: oracle bone inscription, bronze inscription, small seal script, clerical script, and regular script. Among them, the variation between small seal script and clerical script was the greatest, which is called the 
                clerical change. Those scripts before the clerical change classified as ancient scripts, while scripts after the clerical change are classified as modern scripts. The clerical change is so great that people today, without teaching, cannot recognize ancient scripts or understand why a Chinese character was formed in that fashion. 
            
            Figure 1 shows the evolution process of the Chinese character ‘
                ’. The ‘
                ’ is the oracle bone inscription of ‘
                ’. It is composed of two ‘
                ’ which looks like as well as means ‘right hand’. So ‘
                ’ means ‘friendship’ clearly by ‘hand in hand’. However, it is difficult today for people to explain why ‘
                ’ means ‘friendship’ just through its shape in regular script.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The evolution of Chinese character ‘
                ’.
            
            The traditional method of teaching a Chinese character’s original meaning and its evolution is to list all the shapes of this character in different stages, as Figure 1 shows. It is today, thanks to modern multimedia and virtual technology, possible to show the process vividly, as a video of Chinese character ‘
                ’ shows.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            The evolution of Chinese character ‘
                ’; see http://pan.baidu.com/s/1c0dCHBM.
            
            As mentioned before, the clerical change, the variation between seal script and clerical script, is complicated. So a teaching system is proposed to illustrate the process of clerical change by using computer morphing technology. Based on ‘Structure Study of Chinese Characters’, Chinese characters are made up of components, and a component comprises strokes (see Figure 2). As a result, the change between the different styles of a Chinese character can be analyzed by the change of strokes. Based on the correspondence between strokes of a character in different styles (see Figure 3), a morphing process can be generated automatically by computer algorithms, like a video for the Chinese character ‘
                ’ shows. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. The structure of the Chinese character ‘
                ’.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. The correspondence between strokes of ‘
                ’ in different styles.
            
            Same color means correspondence.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            The clerical change of Chinese character ‘
                ’; see http://pan.baidu.com/s/1kTonLbD.
            
            Hanzi has a long history and rich content. Learning Chinese characters may be very difficult for native students as well as foreign students. What we want to do is to make the learning process more interesting and understandable by using modern multimedia and virtual technology. This multidisciplinary project required the use of various computer technologies and abundant knowledge of Chinese characters and culture. The initial goal of this project is the animation of top 500 most commonly used Chinese characters, to show their original meanings and evolution.
            This paper is supported by National Key Technology Research &amp; Development Program of China No.2014BAK18B01).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Sun, L., Liu, M., Hu, J. and Liang, X. (2014). A Chinese Character Teaching System Using Structure Theory and Morphing Technology. 
                        PLoS ONE,
                        9(6): e100987.
                    
                    
                        Wang, X., Liang, X., Hu, J. and Sun, L. (2012). Stroke-Based Chinese Character Completion. 
                        8th International Conference on Signal Image Technology and Internet-Based Systems 2012. SITIS 2012r: 281–88. 
                    
                    
                        Yu, B., Liang, X., Hu, J. and Sun, L. (2012). Statistical Structure Modeling and Optimal Combined Strategy-Based Chinese Components Recognition. 
                        8th International Conference on Signal Image Technology and Internet-Based Systems 2012. SITIS 2012r: 238–45.
                    
                    
                        Yue, P., Liang, X., Hu, J. and Guo, Ch. (2012). Knowledge-Based 2D Morphing System for Chinese Characters of Different Styles. 
                        25th Annual Conference on Computer Animation and Social Agents. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Applying a Combined Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis Method to Evaluate the Translatorship of the Fourth Division of the Chinese Translation of the Dīrgha-āgama
                
                    
                        Hung
                        Jen-Jou
                    
                    Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    jenjou.hung@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Translatorship attribution
                    Chinese Translation of the Dīrgha-āgama (Taishō 1)
                    Variable Length N-gram
                    Principle Component Analysis
                    Zhu Fonian
                
                
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    asian studies
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    linguistics
                    translation studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The issue of doubtful and wrong attributions of the great number of Chinese canonical texts that were translated from Indian originals during the Eastern Han dynasty (25–211 C.E.) to the Tang dynasty (618–907 C.E.) has been much debated in the field of Sinological and Buddhist studies over the last few decades, e.g., by Zürcher (1991), Harrison (1993), and Nattier (2008). Scholarship has increasingly become aware of the fact that the authorship—or, more precisely, translatorship—of the early Chinese translations recorded in the canonical catalogues and in a number of historical records is quite often unreliable.
            Although not strictly speaking a case of suspicious translatorship attribution, the content of the fourth division of the Chinese translation of the Indian Dīrgha-āgama (長阿含經, Taishō 1) appears at odds with the rest of the Dīrgha-āgama collection, and scholars of early Buddhist texts have reasons to suspect that this section may have been attached to the rest of the collection at a later stage. The Dīrgha-āgama is a collection of early Buddhist discourses, preserved, in addition to the Chinese version transmitted by the Dharmaguptaka school, in Pali and Sanskrit. The Pali and Sanskrit recensions were transmitted, respectively, by the Tharavāda and (Mūla-)Sarvāstivāda schools. In terms of content, Taishō 1 closely corresponds to its Pali counterpart, the Dīgha-nikāya, and the extant Sanskrit version. There is, however, a major structural discrepancy between the Chinese translation and its parallels, in that the Chinese translation has four main divisions, instead of three. The fourth division is actually a single discourse, DĀ 30 (世記經), in five fascicles, which in terms of content is also out of place in a collection of early Buddhist discourses. In view of the activity record of the main translator of Taishō 1, Zhu Fonian (竺佛念) (Nattier, 2010; Anālayo, 2013; Hung, 2013), it seemed worthy investigating whether the redactor responsible for the addition was Zhu Fonian.
            To investigate this hypothesis, we apply quantitative translatorship analysis methods to analyze the text. The main idea of methods based on quantitative approaches to translatorship analysis is to check whether different texts have similar (translation) style, i.e., similar vocabulary usage pattern(s). After quantitative analysis, we study the translation phrases that have been identified by the algorithm in detail. This qualitative form of analysis is necessary to seek the confirmation of our judgment based on the quantitative testing result. Thus our analysis combines quantitative testing with a qualitative approach to the data.
            Research Method
            The digital text of Taishō 1 is taken from the CBETA 2011 corpus.
                1 The Taishō 1 collection consists of 22 fascicles and contains 30 different discourses. The discourse in question is the last discourse, DĀ 30, which, as mentioned above, consists of the last five fascicles of Taishō 1. For our analysis, we remove from the available digital text the entire markup, front and back matter, as well as all the headings added by the editors. 
            
            In order to extract significant and meaningful units, which are then used as stylometric measurements, the Chinese sentences are first tokenized with Variable Length N-gram algorithm (abbreviated as VL-ngram, cf. Hung et al., 2009). VL-ngram is an enhanced form of traditional n-gram extraction algorithms. In the VL-ngram algorithm, instead of using fixed-length grams, we first generate all possible grams from our texts—i.e., all bi-grams, tri-grams, quad-grams, and so on—up to the longest possible n-gram. Then we remove all non-significant grams from the features set. To do so, we define an arbitrary number of documents, referred to as the ‘document threshold’, within which a gram must appear as a threshold to merit inclusion in the features set. With the proper setting of the document threshold, we are able to avoid the problem of selecting too many content-related words for inclusion in the features set, which would bias the analysis toward content analysis rather style analysis.
            Afterward, we use Principle Component Analysis (PCA) on the extracted profiles. The PCA is a statistical procedure that transforms a number of possibly correlated variables into a smaller number of uncorrelated variables called 
                principal components. We then plot the values of first and second components in 2-d charts and check whether the translation style of the disputed part of, for example, a scriptural collection or a single work is consistent with that of other parts in the same collection or work. 
            
            
                Analysis Results
            
            In the discussion below, ‘F17’ refers to the first 17 fascicles of T 1, and ‘L5’ to the last five fascicles of T 1. Figure 1 shows the analysis result with D, the document threshold, set to 4. In Figure 1, all of the five points in L5 lie in the fourth quadrant. In contrast, the points in the F17 group are spread across the remaining three quadrants. This result shows that the five fascicles in L5 have a similar style but behave very differently compared to the fascicles in the F17 group. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. PCA result of T 1 with D = 4.
            
                
            
            Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the PCA result with D set to 6 and 8, respectively. The results of these two experiments are very similar to those shown in Figure 1.
            Figure 2. PCA Result of T 1 with D = 6.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. PCA Result of T 1 with D = 8.
            In the subsequent analyses, we raise the value of D to 10, 12, and 14 and perform PCA analysis again. The following Figures 4–6 illustrate the result of PCA analyses with three different settings of D.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. PCA Result of T 1 with D = 10.
            
                
            
            Figure 5. PCA Result of T 1 with D = 12.
            
                
            
            Figure 6. PCA Result of T 1 with D = 14.
            To our surprise, from Figures 4, 5, and 6, we notice that the difference between L5 and F17 starts to decrease. When D is set to 14, all points in L5 are enclosed by points in the F17 group, and there is no longer a clear boundary between the L5 and F17 groups. In fact, the results show that the L5 and F17 groups share a very similar pattern of usage of translation phrases, as if they choose the translation phrases from the same pool.
            Because the five fascicles of DĀ 30 belong to the same narrative and are very similar in content, part of our analysis is biased by the high content similarity of DĀ 30. That is, the difference in the preliminary result is very possibly from difference in content, rather than from diverse translation styles. To remove content-dependent conditions of analysis, we examine the constitution of the first and second components, and identify a number of most distinctive grams of DĀ 30. We find out that many of the resulting grams are topic-related. We remove these grams from the features set, and perform the analysis once again. The analysis results are illustrated in Figures 7 and 8 below.
            
                
            
            Figure 7. PCA Result with D = 6, with removing grams that are highly related to the topic of DĀ 30.
            
                
            
            Figure 8. PCA Result with D = 8, with removing grams that are highly related to the topic of DĀ 30.
            In Figures 7 and 8, the points of F17 and L5 are actually clustering so as to belong to a single group. This evidence confirms the previous observation that F17 and L5 are very different in content but very similar in style. At this point, the results become consistent and show no difference between DĀ 30 and the remaining 17 fascicles. This means that in terms of translation style, no significant differences between the first 17 and the last five fascicles have been detected.
             More evidence to support this observation comes from the constitution of the first and second components. Then we notice that there are many long strings that appear both in DĀ 30 and in the remaining 17 fascicles. Notably, as shown in Table 1, some of these strings are very rarely or not at all found outside of T 1. Further, most of them are not constrained to a specified topic. Such a situation is likely to occur when the texts were translated by the same translator or translation team. Also, most of the matched long strings are used in narrative descriptions and clichés that commonly occur in many other early Buddhist discourses. However, these strings are largely only used in T 1. We therefore believe this demonstrates that F17 and L5 are indeed by the same translator, Zhu Fonian.
            
                
                    Text String
                    
                        Fasc. in F17
                    
                    Fasc. in L5
                    
                        Occurr. (excl. T 1)
                    
                
                
                    所以者何？我今如來．至真．等正覺，亦說此
                    13
                    19, 22
                    0
                
                
                    邪婬、兩舌、惡口、妄言、綺語、貪取、嫉妬、邪見
                    7, 15
                    18
                    0
                
                
                    生死已盡，梵行已立，所作已辦，更不受有
                    5, 9
                    22
                    4 (T 190: 1; T 212: 3)
                
                
                    盡壽不殺、不盜、不婬、不欺、不飲酒
                    3, 7, 11, 13, 15, 17
                    20
                    1 (T 125)
                
                
                    遠塵離垢，得法眼淨，猶如淨潔
                    13, 15
                    20
                    0
                
                
                    剃除鬚髮，服三法衣，出家修道
                    1, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
                    19
                    0
                
                
                    身行不善，口行不善，意行不善
                    6, 8
                    22
                    2 (T 1548: 2)
                
                
                    苦聖諦，苦集、苦滅、苦出要諦
                    2, 3
                    20
                    0
                
            
            Table 1. Significant long strings used in both the F17 and L5 groups.
            Note
            1. CBETA (Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association) is a mature, curated digital edition of the widely used Taishō edition of the Buddhist canon.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Anālayo. (2013). Two Versions of the Mahādeva Tale in the Ekottarika-āgama: A Study in the Development of Taishō No. 125. In Dhammadinnā (ed.), 
                        Research on the Ekottarika-āgama (Taishō 125). Taipei: Dharma Drum Publishing Corporation, pp. 1–70.
                    
                    
                        Harrison, P. (1993). The Earliest Chinese Translations of Mahāyāna Buddhist Sūtras: Some Notes on the Works of Lokakṣema. 
                        Buddhist Studies Review,
                        10(2): 135–77.
                    
                    
                        Hung, J., Bingenheimer, M. and Wiles, S. (2009). Quantitative Evidence for a Hypothesis Regarding the Attribution of Early Buddhist Translations. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        25(1): 119–34.
                    
                    
                        Hung, J. (2013). The Second Version of the Mahādeva Tale in the Ekottarika-āgama: Quantitative Text Analysis and Translatorship Attribution. In Dhammadinnā (ed.), 
                        Research on the Ekottarika-āgama (Taishō 125). Taipei: Dharma Drum Publishing Corporation, pp. 107–32.
                    
                    
                        Nattier, J. (2008). 
                        A Guide to the Earliest Chinese Buddhist Translations: Texts from the Eastern Han東漢
                        and Three Kingdoms三國
                        Periods. International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University.
                    
                    
                        Nattier, J. (2010). Re-Evaluating Zhu Fonian’s Shizu duanjie jing (T309): Translation or Forgery? 
                        Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University,
                        13: 231–58.
                    
                    
                        Zürcher, E. (1991). A New Look at the Earliest Chinese Buddhist Texts. In Koichi Shinohara et al. (eds), 
                        From Benares to Beijing: Essays on Buddhism and Chinese Religion in Honour of Prof. Jan Yün-hua. Mosaic Press, pp. 277–304. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Archaeology in the Digital Age: From Paper to Databases
                
                    
                        Melanie-Becquet
                        Frederique
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    frederique.melanie@ens.fr
                
                
                    
                        Ferguth
                        Johan
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    jferguth@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Gruel
                        Katherine
                    
                    AOROC-CNRS, France
                    katherine.gruel@ens.fr
                
                
                    
                        Poibeau
                        Thierry
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    thierry.poibeau@ens.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Archaeology
                    information extraction
                    databases
                
                
                    archaeology
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    metadata
                    natural language processing
                    ontologies
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    knowledge representation
                    internet / world wide web
                    content analysis
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Research units in archaeology often manage large and precious archives containing various documents, including reports on fieldwork, scholarly studies, and reference books. These archives are of course invaluable, recording decades of work, but are generally hard to consult and access. In this context, digitizing full text documents is not enough: information must be formalized, structured, and easy to access, thanks to friendly user interfaces.
            The situation at AOROC, a research unit of Ecole normale supérieure specializing in archaeology, is precisely the one described in the previous paragraph: several decades of research are contained in documents that are hardly accessible, even for people working in the lab. The situation is such that researchers may produce studies largely overlapping with previous work, which remained unknown because of poor accessibility.
            A partnership has thus been established between AOROC and LATTICE—another research unit specializing in digital humanities and natural language processing—to digitize and structure a part of these documents. A pilot study concerned a collection of texts covering excavations related to the Gaul period (
                Cartes Archéologiques de la Gaule [Provost, 1988–]), resuming excavations made in an area encompassing a large part of modern France from the Iron Age to the medieval period, 800 BC to AD 800. One hundred twenty-eight volumes have been published so far, each volume corresponding to one French department; some departments are covered by several volumes. The pilot study concerned three of these volumes, along with other types of documents so as to ensure the genericity of the developed solution. The idea is, of course, not just to digitize and transfer documents online but also to extract key information so as to feed structured databases (Poibeau et al., 2013). The result should be accessible using a standard but powerful query language. 
            
            A first step consists in recognizing the structure of the documents, which mainly consist of notices, each notice corresponding to a specific ‘municipality’ (the structure is not formally encoded in the source documents and may vary from one document to the other). Specific zones inside the notices have to be recognized (see Figure 1). This step can be done by specific programs but also needs some manual cleaning. In our opinion, the most interesting part concerns advanced natural language processing techniques used for information extraction. These include
             • Named entity recognition (i.e., the recognition of proper names, location, dates, etc.).
             • Technical term extraction (i.e., all archaeological terms). 
             • Entity linking (i.e., the recognition of the different variants of a same term or entity and its connection to the same type of object in the database). 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. A typical notice with key information to be recognized.
            Different tools have been used, like TreeTagger (http://www.cis.uni- muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger/) for part-of-speech tagging, Yatea (https://metacpan.org/release/Lingua-YaTeA) for technical term extraction, and TyDI for terminology structuration (http://ciam.inra.fr/logiciels/node/195). In-house solutions have been developed for document structure, namely entity recognition, and entity linking. All the modules are parameterized so that they can be easily adapted to new sources of data. These tools are based on up-to-date natural language processing techniques and have obtained excellent results in recent benchmarks like Semeval (Ruiz and Poibeau, 2015).
            The result of the project made it possible to automatically feed a structured database based on the textual content analysis. Documents are now accessible online with full text facilities, structured indexes, and ontologies (see Figure 2). It is thus possible to interrogate the database with queries dealing with a specific location, a specific series of objects, or a given period of time. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. The original published text, along with some structured outputs after analysis. 
            This work can be compared to other initiatives with a similar goal. In archaeology, one can cite archaeological archiving bodies such as the ADS (http://archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/), tDAR (http://www.tdar.org/about/), or OpenContext (http://opencontext.org/), among others. Research on interoperability between archaeological databases includes, among many others, Binding et al. (2008), Doerr (2003), Jordal et al. (2004), and Vlachidis and Tudhope (2012). Our project is different since it is designed from the outset to deal with texts in different languages, especially French, Germanm and English, with a cross-linguistic perspective. One of the major research issues is the maintenance of an international terminology referring to complex notions that can vary from one country to the other. The system should be flexible enough to be able to match related concepts (even if they vary slightly from one source to the other), but relevant enough so as to provide only relevant information. This goal involves a permanent dialogue between experts of the domain and the maintenance of an up-to-date terminology. The tools and interfaces developed within the project should help to keep this goal a reality as much as possible. 
            Acknowledgements
            This work has received support of Paris Sciences et Lettres (program ‘Investissements d’avenir’ ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL*) and of the laboratoire d’excellence TransferS (ANR-10-LABX‑0099). The project has been realised during the PEPS CNRS-PSL EITAB 2013–2014. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Binding, C., May, K. and Tudhope D. (2008). Semantic Interoperability in Archaeological Datasets: Data Mapping and Extraction Via the CIDOC CRM. In 
                        Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries. LNCS 5173. Berlin: Springer, pp. 280–90. 
                    
                    
                        Doerr, M. (2003). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Module: An Ontological Approach to Semantic Interoperability of Metadata. 
                        AI,
                        24(3): 75–92. 
                    
                    
                        Jordal, E., Holmen, J. and Olsen, S. A. (2004). From XML-Tagged Acquisition Catalogues to an Event-Based Relational Database. In Niccolucci, F. (ed.), 
                        Beyond the Artefact—Proceedings of CAA2004. Archaeolingua, pp. 81–85. 
                    
                    
                        Poibeau, T., Saggion, H., Piskorski, J. and Yangarber, R. (eds). (2013). 
                        Multi-Source, Multilingual Information Extraction and Summarization. Theory and Applications of Natural Language Processing. Springer, Berlin. 
                    
                    
                        Provost, M. (ed.). (1988–). 
                        Cartes archéologiques de la Gaule. FMSH editions, 128 vols. published to date. Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, Paris.
                    
                    
                        Ruiz, P. and Poibeau, T. (2015). Entity Linking Combining Open Source Annotators via Weighted Voting. 
                        Proceedings of Semeval 2015. Boulder.
                    
                    
                        Vlachidis, A. and Tudhope, D. (2012). A Pilot Investigation of Information Extraction in the Semantic Annotation of Archaeological Reports. 
                        International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies Archive,
                        7(3): 222–35. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                At the Crossroads of Data and Wonder: Algorithmic Approaches to Fairy Tales on Television
                
                    
                        McDonald
                        Jarom Lyle
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    jarom_mcdonald@byu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Rudy
                        Jill Terry
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    otheraccount@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    intermedial fairy tales
                    television
                    algorithmic criticism
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    folklore and oral history
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Folktales and fairy tales are very often figured, in literary studies, as texts with sociohistorical and ideological force; for example, a given study might theorize how a particular discourse of fairy tales replicates gender roles, how fairy tales in American life support a Disnified culture industry, and so on. But significantly, fairy tales have also long been studied as data objects; since the 19th century, they have been conceptualized and categorized in terms of genre, origins and historic-geographic distribution, and form and structure—in essence, there is a strong sense that fairy tale scholarship depends on the cataloging of tales into various systems of ontological understanding. 
            In addition to existing in the written records and datatables of cataloguers, fairy tales are quite often associated with many other forms of transmission and dissemination. Certainly, it is common to encounter fairy tales (in many forms) in the context of oral storytelling, but tales also have been performed as plays and ballets, turned into cinematic or televised productions, illustrated in picture books and collections, and in our modern consumer culture, made into toys, dolls, video games, and other products. While the status of tales as texts has been long studied, these different medial iterations of tales have received less attention from scholars trained in literary studies and folklore programs. Yet it’s in this space, beyond the literary representation of fairy tales, where our modern comprehension of their power becomes most fully realized, existing and replicating in a way that Werner Wolf has described as ‘intermedial’. Intermediality, according to Wolf’s conceptualization, encourages attention to semiotic modes (speaking, writing, visually representing) and technological channels (printing presses and books; cameras, projectors, and films; broadcast stations, television sets, and TV shows) (2011). This notion of seeing narrative progress along various media channels is an instantiation of what Marie-Laure Ryan advocates. Ryan has suggested that the studying of narrative occurs best across media because narrative study that is focused only on language leaves out the nuances of different communicative modes and the technologies and social relationships that make such communication possible (2004). In other words, our premise is that studying intermedial forms of fairy tales help us better comprehend how these tales continue to work from telling to telling.
            When it comes to folklore studies, the natural attraction to ontology and catalogue makes the digital humanities an attractive scholarly cohort, and a subfield often labeled ‘digital folklore’ is gaining traction. Because of the inherent ability of digital analysis methodologies to cross media (or deal with texts that exist in multiple media at once), it makes sense that, if we want to study intermedial fairy tales as a new entry point into these texts, then the crossroads of the computational (or ‘data-driven’) and the narrative is the space for fairy tale scholarship in the 21st century. Timothy R. Tangherlini has encouraged the use of algorithmic approaches to help better navigate the complex intermedial spaces of folklore narrative; leveraging the term ‘computational folkloristics’ (as distinct from digital folklore), Tangherlini states the importance of generating ‘algorithmic methods to assist in the interpretation of relationships or structures in the underlying data’ (2012). Indeed, Tangherlini’s efforts in helping give rise to the study of folklore through computational methods is the launching point for our project in looking at intermedial fairy tales;
                1 given the rich history of structural, ontological-based (or perhaps more appropriately termed, for our purposes, metadata-based) approaches to fairy tale study, the power of exploring fairy tales in intermedial spaces, and the concept of applying paradigmatic methodologies from the digital humanities as an analytical tool for analyzing fairy tales today, we have begun to identify relationships between tales, media, history, geography, production and reception, and scholarly and popular audiences in a new light. 
            
            For the bounds of this proposal (which is one piece of a recently awarded SSHRC collaborative grant to look at intermedial fairy tales), we are concerned with the occurrence of fairy tale storytelling in a very specific intermedial space—that of modern American television. For the past 85 years, fairy tales have found their way into television broadcasts in numerous ways, whether it be quick allusions to fairy tales to advance otherwise non–fairy tale narratives; spectacular retellings of tales as live events or made-for-TV ‘specials’; fairy tale contexts for particular episodes of traditional, procedural television; longer-running arcs of serialized shows; or even premises for entire shows constructed on fairy tale tropes. We have begun with a teleography—a metadata-rich bibliography of television fairy tales compiled by Kendra Magnus-Johnston and recently published in 
                Channeling Wonder: Fairy Tales on Television. With over 1,000 data points (individual episodes or TV specials related to a fairy tale in some way), our project will approach this metadata in ways similar to how historical fairy tale scholars have: looking for patterns in terms of narrative similarity, common genre, chronological proximity, and so forth, but doing so with tools and experiments that leverage data processing and visualization methods that have become significant paradigms in digital humanities scholarship.
            
            Our goal in beginning with data modeling is to reposition the existing teleography as a sort of intermedial fairy tale corpus that can be mined and analyzed visually, spatially, and temporally. Through automated text parsing, processing, and categorization; aggregating information both from the teleography as well as from other sources (semantic repositories of linked data such as Freebase.org and other relational datasources such as the crowdsourced website and API thetvdb.org); and generation of our own dynamic dataset (serialized in various forms—tabular CSV and JSON right now), the scholars and students involved in this phase of the project have been better positioned to comprehend the scope of the fairy tale data and metadata, and identify the types of interactions and relationships that might be exposed by different types of visualizations. In many ways, this sort of data structuring is a reimagining of the work done by Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson (of the Aarne-Thompson classification system) or by Hans-Jorg Uther’s 
                ATU Catalogue; in fact, our data model, mastered in a MongoDB instance and published out to a web app, uses a fairy tale’s ATU number as a unique identifier, supplementing missing tales as needed (the current state of the searchable, filterable teleography web app is available at http://fttv.byu.edu/#datatable). This preliminary data work has already demonstrated ways that the medium of television has gone far beyond the traditional animal, magic, and folktales of the ATU ontology; we have found it useful to incorporate into our data such literary “fairy tales” as 
                Peter Pan or 
                The Wizard of Oz, Hans Christian Andersen tales such as ‘The Ugly Duckling’, ‘The Little Mermaid’, and ‘The Snow Queen’, or more abstract references such as ‘princess-ness’, ‘grimm-ness’, and so forth. Our plans for the underlying data source are lofty, as we are continually working to incorporate more and more occurrences of fairy tales on television as well as to augment the data with more metadata, such as broadcast dates, actors involved, broadcast and cable channels where they occur, and so forth.
            
            Of course, given that our goal is to approach the study of fairy tale narratives in an intermedial space, we aren’t satisfied with just developing our own indexed data source; rather, we have begun to analyze its structured form by generating a collection of visual representations of the data (see http://fttv.byu.edu/#visualizations). With everything from simple histograms, charted occurrences of fairy tales on TV over time, and force-directed or matrix-based network graphs built with d3.js (that can juxtapose different metadata variables with our expanded ATU tale-type ontology), we are recognizing new patterns and insights about the tales themselves as well as about the medium in which they’ve appeared. For example, one student, seeing the highest frequency of fairy tale appearances in American television to be ATU 510A (Cinderella), is now investigating the relationship between the narrative of the servant-turned-princess and the national discourse of American exceptionalism. Another is looking at the rise of reality television as a replacement for the traditional fairy tale story, while a third is exploring the many references in a single television series (
                Fractured Fairy Tales, snippets of tale retellings which appeared in 91 different episodes of 
                The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show) as an entry point for understanding commodity capitalism and self-valuation during the late 1950s–early 1960s. 
            
            Cristina Bacchilega has suggested that modern treatment of fairy tales expresses the evolution of human hopes and fears (1997); television’s ability to appropriate, repurpose, or refigure tales confirms this. Combining multiple tales to tell new stories is also leading scholars to look at intertextuality between fairy tales.
            Note
            1. As far as we can tell, there have not yet been any computational approaches to intermedial fairy tale analysis. There are a few projects in which scholars have sought to apply digital humanities methodologies to traditional fairy tale texts such as 
                Grimm’s Fairy Tales; notable among these are Declerck et al., who describe a TEI-based markup format and a tool for semiautomated markup of fairy tale text (2011), and Weingart and Jorgensen, who use algorithmic analysis of European Fairy Tales to discuss conceptualizations of the body (2013).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bacchilega, C. (1997). 
                        Postmodern Fairy Tales: Gender and Narrative Strategies
                        . University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
                    
                    
                        Declerck, T., Scheidel, A. and Lendvai, P. (2011). 
                        Proppian Content Descriptors in an Integrated Annotation Schema for Fairy Tales.
                        Language Technology for Cultural Heritage: Selected Papers from the LaTeCH Workshop Series
                        , Springer, pp. 155–70.
                    
                    
                        Greenhill, P. and Rudy, J. T. (eds.). (2014). 
                        Channeling Wonder: Fairy Tales on Television. Wayne State University Press, Detroit, MI.
                    
                    
                        Ryan, M.-L. (2004). 
                        Narrative across Media: The Languages of Storytelling
                        . University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
                    
                    
                        Tangherlini, T., Abello, J. and Broadwell, P. Computational Folkloristics. 
                        Communications of the ACM,
                        55
                        (7) (2012): 60–70.
                    
                    
                        Weingart, S. and Jorgensen, J. Computational Analysis of the Body in European Fairy Tales. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28
                        (3) (2013): 404–16.
                    
                    
                        Wolf, W.
                        (2011). (Inter)mediality and the Study of Literature. 
                        CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture,
                        13
                        (3) (2011), 
                        
                            http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1789
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Automated Comparison of Narrative and Character Function Similarity Using Graph Theory
                
                    
                        Miller
                        Ben
                    
                    Georgia State University, United States of America
                    miller@gsu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Shrestha
                        Ayush
                    
                    Georgia State University, United States of America
                    ashrestha2@student.gsu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Olive
                        Jennifer
                    
                    Georgia State University, United States of America
                    jolive1@gsu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Gopavaram
                        Shakthidhar
                    
                    Georgia State University, United States of America
                    sgopavaram1@student.gsu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    computational narrative
                    natural language processing
                    graph theory
                    text mining
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    natural language processing
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    linguistics
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Automated comparison of narrative structure facilitates narrative stylometry, cross-document co-reference, and the alignment of events in the retellings of stories from different perspectives. With attention to the second and third outcomes, we introduce a method for the unsupervised population and comparison of graph representations of narrative texts. Populated with extracted story elements drawn from documents, graph substructure similarity analysis techniques are used to measure the similarity of narrative order across stories and for the similarity of character function across those stories. Designed to scale, our first application of this method is against a test corpus of 10 variations of the Aarne-Thompson type 333 story, ‘Little Red Riding Hood’. Preliminary experiments correctly coreferenced differently named entities from story variations and indicated the relative similarity of events in different iterations of the tale despite their appearing in differing order. Next steps include heterogeneous corpora, non-fiction corpora, and more precise comparison.
            * * *
            Navigating graphs of sentence-level grammars has been an achieved goal of natural language processing (NLP), at least in English, since the development of the Penn Treebank and the success of statistical parsers in the mid-1990s (Magerman, 1995). Adapting sentence-level approaches to the problem of higher-level analysis such as cross-document correlations of narrative remains an open challenge. The goal of this research is to advance our prior work in narrative information extraction (Miller et al., 2013) and visualization (Shrestha et al., 2013) for narrative similarity assessment, event alignment, and cross-document coreference.
            Analytical problems of core interest to humanities scholars are not bound to sentential units. They focus on semantics, representation, ideology, influence, pragmatics, narrative—problematics that frequently bridge, fracture, and co-referentially scatter throughout documents and corpora. Discourse analysis (Jørgensen and Phillips, 2002) and textTiling (Hearst, 1997) are two methods used to circumvent sentential boundaries by segmenting documents into logical blocks. As with latent semantic analysis (Dumais, 2004), these blocks can then be characterized in ways that facilitate comparison, extending sentential navigation to macro-level structures. Our position builds on tree-based textual analysis to argue that comparison of the graph representations of narrative documents using techniques from graph theory advances both NLP and humanistic inquiry. This work scales as extraction, lookup, and comparison operate unsupervised. Identifying events described in a document, producing a graph of actors and locations implicated in those events, and comparing the underlying matrices facilitate various types of cross-document narrative analysis. Graph similarity measures provide our primary comparison method to highlight similarities, as exemplified in Figure1.
            Additionally, condensing narrative texts in a manner consistent with narratological theory enables testing of narratological schema. Formal analysis of narrative has been a relatively successful aim of many.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Side-by-side comparison of two simplified iterations of the ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ fairy tale. Linked location, time, and agent units are shown, with red edges indicating change between tellings.
            Structuralist topologies developed by the Russian formalists such as Propp (1968), and later work by Genette (Genette and Lewin, 1983), Bal (1997), and others, yielded many complementary top-down models for organizing narrative. These schema distinguish between fabula and discourse, or events to be retold and the manner in which retelling takes place. Narrative, broadly defined, is the ordering of fabula by discourse. Discourse order is the relationship between the temporality of events and their representation as part of a narrative (Genette and Lewin, 1983). This structural perspective serves humanists well when analyzing single narratives or small corpora.
            Computational models developed from formalist approaches have been the subject of compelling experiments. Like work by Finlayson (2012) on analogical story merging and Fisseni on story comparison (Fisseni and Löwe, 2014), our work presents a bottom-up method to help test formalist top-down narratological schema. Unlike theirs, our work implements unsupervised comparison of narrative graphs, a proxy of narrative structure, across a corpus.
            Narrative graphs facilitate (1) stylometric comparison, (2) clustering of documents according to their event-relationship characteristics, (3) cross-document co-reference, and (4) alignment of event descriptions across narratives. To test three and four, we implemented a method as described below.
            Method
            Computation of similarity between the substructure of the graphs required extraction of entities, creation of the graph, and finally comparison.
            
                
                    
                    lrrh
                    wolf
                    grandmother
                    woodcutters
                    forest
                    gm house
                
                
                    lrrh
                    1
                    0
                    0
                    1
                    1
                    0
                
                
                    wolf
                    0
                    1
                    0
                    0
                    1
                    0
                
                
                    grandmother
                    0
                    0
                    1
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    woodcutter
                    1
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    1
                    0
                
                
                    forest
                    1
                    1
                    0
                    1
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    gm house
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    1
                
            
            Table 1. Adjacency matrix created from one version of ‘Little Red Riding Hood’. An edge in the graph or 1 (in the adjacency matrix) between two entities signifies that these entities interacted within the given set of events.
            1. 
                Extraction. Events were automatically marked in the narratives using the NLP tool, EVITA (Saurí et al., 2005). EVITA increments event tag ID numbers; that sequence proxies discourse order. Sequential narrative discourse order generated from EVITA was used since fiction frequently lacks dates and timestamps—necessary features for temporal taggers like SUTime and GUTime. Entity extraction and classification were accomplished using the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (NER). Each graph includes elements corresponding to event name, event type, actor, location, and discourse order. Extracted events from a given story contain the following information: document 
                ID, event 
                verb, event 
                verblemma, event 
                verbhypergram, event 
                type, entity 1, entity 
                n, entity 1 type, entity 
                n type, event 
                number.
            
            2. 
                Graph creation. Based on changes in topic, the set of events 
                E was divided into 
                k parts. A sub-graph 
                G was created for each event set, 
                e
                0 
                &lt; e
                x 
                &lt; e
                k and was represented as an adjacency matrix as shown in Table 1. An adjacency matrix is a common way of internally representing graphs for computation such that an element 
                a
                ij in the matrix equals 1 if there is an edge between 
                i
                th and 
                j
                th nodes in the graph and 0 otherwise. In our case, the adjacency matrix represents the entity::entity relation as mentioned in the narrative for the set of events 
                e
                x.
            
            3. 
                Similarity analysis. Many domain-specific algorithms to compute similarity have been developed. Most are based on neighborhood analysis. In this paper, we propose our own similarity analysis method inspired by the work of Blondel et al. (2004).
            
            We begin by modeling each narrative as a 3
                D matrix where the first two dimensions represent the adjacency matrix and the third dimension represents the discourse order of the sets of events. Following this model, given two matrices, 
                A
                i,j,k and 
                B
                p,q,r , for comparison, we construct a 3
                D matrix, 
                X, of dimensions 
                p×
                q ×
                φ where 
                φ is the smallest of 
                k and 
                r, initialized to all 1s. We then proportionally shrink the larger timeline to match the smaller one so that 
                k = 
                r.
            
            For each 
                φ, as in the HIT-inspired algorithm (Fackler, 2005) proposed by Kollias et al., we compute
            
            
                X ← 
                BXA
                T + 
                B
                T 
                XA (1)
            
            and normalize 
                X after each iteration. The even iterations converge to a final similarity matrix. To simplify and speed this process, we use the Kronecker product and the vec(.) operator. This results in
            
            
                x ← (
                A
                ⊗
                B + 
                A
                T 
                ⊗
                B
                T )
                x (2)
            
            where 
                x = 
                vec(
                X). These sets of equations give a similarity score frame per scene, which is then aggregated to produce a final similarity score.
            
            Discussion
            For the purposes of testing our methodology, we used 10 of the 58 known iterations of the Aarne-Thompson type 333 story (ATU333), ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ (Lang, 1891; Grimm and Grimm, 1812; Wratislaw, 1889; Schneller, 1867; Ashliman, 2007; Marelles, 1895; Potter, 1908; Bates, 1883; Thurber, 1983; Carter, 1993; Tehrani, 2013). The purpose of using this corpus was to strengthen the possibility of narrative overlap and focus the method on fine-grain distinctions between re-tellings. The primary purpose of the current work is to test our method’s detection of event and character similarities and differences across a given corpus; however, we do not anticipate that our method is dependent on such homogeneous data. By utilizing categories of variables associated with elements of the fabulaic and discourse levels of narrative, we anticipate our method will function similarly with larger, more heterogeneous corpora.
            Via this method, 1,384 events were extracted across 10 story iterations. Numbering 8,450 tokens, including titles and authorship information, the overall density of extracted events to tokens is high. Contrasted to event detection methods reliant on temporal expressions (SUTime identified two events), this density of event detection provides a good basis on which to compare narrative structure. Generalizing event types from specific verb tokens to hypergrams of those verbs (e.g., event 41 from Carter, 1993): ‘armed’ lemmatized to ‘arm’ hypergrammed to ‘supply’) generally retains the function of each event within the story, but abstracts sufficiently to allow for variation such as is introduced by translation to not prevent the recognition of correspondences. The automatically produced matrices for this work are exemplified by Table 2.
            
                
                    undergo,EVENT104
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    perceive,EVENT105
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    undergo,EVENT106
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    perceive,EVENT107
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    undergo,EVENT108
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    seize,EVENT109
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    undergo,EVENT110
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
                
                    consume,EVENT111
                    grandmother
                    wolf
                    lrrh
                
                
                    bed
                    1
                    1
                    1
                
            
            Table 2. Eight matrix layers from 3
                D stack of event matrices.
            
            Table 2 shows eight layers from the 3
                D event matrix stack. It, and the following list, a one-line extract, highlight the generalized form and granular detail of the events this method extracts: 10; prospered; prosper; change state; OCCURRENCE; child, grandmother’s house; person, location; 45. The stack and list correspond to the ‘Oh, grandmother, what big ears you have!’ to ‘[a]nd with that he jumped out of bed, jumped on top of poor Little Red Cap, and ate her up’ sequence from Lang (1891).
            
            Results of functions (1) and (2) on the adjacency matrices are exemplified below in Table 3. Column headings correspond to entities from Grimm and Grimm (1812) for event 3, and row headers correspond to entities from Lang (1891) for event 4. Table 3 shows that the measure of similarity between Little Red Riding Hood (‘lrrh’) and Little Red Cap (‘lrc’), is 0
                .32. Although low, that score was calculated only based on entity-entity connections, the sequence of those connections, and event hypergrams. These preliminary results are encouraging, as the correlation between those characters is high relative to all correlations found. More importantly, as shown by the diagonal symmetry of the measures, the correlation between events is high relative to correlations between that event and others within the stories. Overall correlation between event 3 from one variation and event 4 from another variation suggests that this method can align scenes across variations of the same ATU. Table 4 shows the potential for this method to align characters from different versions based upon their position within the story.
            
            
                
                    
                    lrc
                    wolf
                    grandmother
                    huntsman
                    home
                    woods
                    gm house
                
                
                    lrrh
                    .32
                    .25
                    0
                    .25
                    0
                    .32
                    0
                
                
                    wolf
                    .32
                    .25
                    0
                    .25
                    0
                    .32
                    0
                
                
                    grandmother
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    woodcutters
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    home
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    forest
                    .32
                    .25
                    0
                    .25
                    0
                    .32
                    0
                
                
                    old woman’s house
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
            
            Table 3. Character similarity across ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ and ‘Rothkppchen’.
            
                
                    
                    lrrh
                    wolf
                    gm
                    wc
                    home
                    forest
                    owh
                
                
                    lrc
                    .67
                    .76
                    .31
                    .14
                    .14
                    .48
                    .37
                
                
                    wolf
                    .79
                    .94
                    .42
                    .14
                    .14
                    .56
                    .5
                
                
                    gm
                    .35
                    .47
                    .31
                    0
                    0
                    .16
                    .37
                
                
                    hunts
                    .23
                    .28
                    .18
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    .26
                
                
                    home
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                
                
                    woods
                    .48
                    .53
                    .16
                    .14
                    .14
                    .48
                    .16
                
                
                    gmh
                    .39
                    .52
                    .34
                    0
                    0
                    .16
                    .42
                
            
            Table 4. Character alignment across all events for iterations Lang (1891) and Grimm and Grimm (1812) of ATU 333.
            Table 4 sums all event matrices for two variations of the tale. Version 1 occupies the columns (Little Red Riding Hood, Wolf, Grandmother, Woodcutters, Home, Forest, and Old Woman’s House) and version 2 the rows (Little Red Cap, Wolf, Grandmother, Huntsman, Home, Woods, Grandmother’s House). Name-independent character alignment is demonstrated by the 0
                .96 correspondence between the two wolves. Interestingly, the event matrix suggests that certain characters function dissimilarly between variations: most notably, Grandmother. The corresponding value between the Grandmother characters is only 0
                .31, suggesting that they share some event associations but not as many as are held by other cross-document pairings. That assessment is accurate as, in version 1, the story concludes upon the wolf’s consumption of both Little Red Riding Hood and Grandmother. In story version 2, both survive to boil a second hungry wolf.
            
            Conclusion and Further Work
            This preliminary work resulted in a viable method for automated narrative stylometrics across iterations of stories, for narrative alignment, and for the cross-document coreference of characters bearing different names but similar story functions. The extraction and matrix comparison methods are implemented and tested. Our next stage of this research is to refine the comparison algorithm, apply it to a corpus of dissimilar narratives, explore the fit of structuralist models of narrative to non-fiction, and assess the method’s ability to cluster stories by narrative similarity.
            Acknowledgements
            This work is supported in part by NSF award 1209172.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ashliman, D. L. (2007). Conte de la mre-grand. Website of Bibliothque nationale de France.
                    
                    
                        Bal, M. (1997). Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative. University of Toronto Press.
                    
                    
                        Bates, C. D. (1883). 
                        Little Red Riding-Hood. D. Lothrop and Co.
                    
                    
                        Blondel, V. D., Gajardo, A., Heymans, M., Senellart, P. and Van Dooren, P. (2004). A Measure of Similarity between Graph Vertices: Applications to Synonym Extraction and Web Searching. 
                        SIAM Review,
                        46 (4): 647–66.
                    
                    
                        Carter, A. (1993). The Werewolf. In 
                        The Bloody Chamber. Penguin Books, pp. 108–10.
                    
                    
                        Dumais, S. T. (2004). Latent Semantic Analysis. 
                        Annual Review of Information Science and Technology,
                        38(1): 188–230.
                    
                    
                        Fackler, P. L. (2005). 
                        Notes on Matrix Calculus. North Carolina State University.
                    
                    
                        Finlayson, M. M. A. (2012). 
                        Learning Narrative Structure from Annotated Folktales. PhD dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
                    
                    
                        Fisseni, B. and Löwe, B. (2014). What Makes Stories Similar? Report on a Research Project, 2011–2014 (Invited Report). In Finlayson, M. A., Meister, J. C. and Bruneau, E. G. (eds), 
                        2014 Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, OpenAccess Series in Informatics (OASIcs) no. 41. Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, pp. 9–12, http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2014/4640.
                    
                    
                        Genette, G. and Lewin, J. E. (1983). 
                        Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
                    
                    
                        Grimm, J. and Grimm, W. (1812). Rothkppchen. In Realschulbuchhandlung (ed.), Ashliman, D. L. (trans.), 
                        Kinder-und Hausmrchen, vol. 1, no. 26, pp. 113–18.
                    
                    
                        Hearst, M. A. (1997). Texttiling: Segmenting Text into Multi-Paragraph Subtopic Passages. 
                        Computational Linguistics,
                        23(1): 33–64.
                    
                    
                        Jørgensen, M. W. and Phillips, L. J. (2002). 
                        Discourse Analysis as Theory and Method. Sage.
                    
                    
                        Lang, A. (1891). None Given. In 
                        The Blue Fairy Book, 5th ed. Longmans, Green, and Company, pp. 51–53.
                    
                    
                        Magerman, D. M. (1995). Statistical Decision-Tree Models for Parsing. In 
                        Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 1995, pp. 276–83.
                    
                    
                        Marelles, C. (1895). The True History of Little Golden-Hood. In 
                        The Red Fairy Book. Longmans, Green, and Company, pp. 215–19.
                    
                    
                        Miller, B., Shrestha, A., Derby, J., Olive, J., Umapathy, K., Li, F. and Zhao, Y. (2013). Digging into Human Rights Violations: Data Modelling and Collective Memory. In 
                        Big Data, 2013 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, IEEE, pp. 37–45.
                    
                    
                        Potter, B. (1908). 
                        The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck. Frederick Warne and Company.
                    
                    
                        Propp, V. I. (1968). 
                        Morphology of the Folktale. Vol. 9. University of Texas Press.
                    
                    
                        Saurí, R., Knippen, R., Verhagen, M. and Pustejovsky, J. (2005). Evita: A Robust Event Recognizer for QA Systems. In 
                        Proceedings of the Conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 700–707.
                    
                    
                        Schneller, C. (1867). Mrchen und Sagen aus Wlschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde. In Ashliman, D. L. (trans.), 
                        Verlag der Wagner’schen Universitts-Buchhandlung, ch. Das Rothhtchen, pp. 9–10.
                    
                    
                        Shrestha, A., Zhu, Y., Miller, B., and Zhao, Y. (2013). Storygraph: Telling Stories from Spatio-Temporal Data. In 
                        Advances in Visual Computing. Springer, pp. 693–702.
                    
                    
                        Tehrani, J. J. (2013). The Phylogeny of Little Red Riding Hood. 
                        PloS One,
                        8(11): e78871.
                    
                    
                        Thurber, J. (1983). The Little Girl and the Wolf. In 
                        Fables for Our Time and Famous Poems Illustrated. Harper Collins, p. 3.
                    
                    
                        Wratislaw, A. (1889). Little Red Hood. In Stock, E. (ed.), 
                        Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources, no. 15, pp. 97–100.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                AXES: Researching &amp; Accessing Videos Through Multimodal Analyses
                
                    
                        Kleppe
                        Martijn
                    
                    Erasmus University Rotterdam, Netherlands, The
                    kleppe@eshcc.eur.nl
                
                
                    
                        Kemman
                        Max
                    
                    Erasmus University Rotterdam, Netherlands, The
                    max.kemman@uni.lu
                
                
                    
                        Van der Kreeft
                        Peggy
                    
                    Deutsche Welle
                    peggy.van-der-kreeft@dw.de
                
                
                    
                        Macquarrie
                        Kay
                    
                    Deutsche Welle
                    kay.macquarrie@dw.de
                
                
                    
                        McGuinness
                        Kevin
                    
                    Dublin City University
                    kevin.mcguinness@dcu.ie
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    video
                    multimodal
                    visual search
                    audiovisual sources
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            AXES—Access for Audiovisual Archives is a research project developing tools for new and engaging ways to interact with audiovisual libraries, integrating advanced audio and video analysis technologies. This poster and demo will showcase the system that is developed for academic researchers and journalists. The tool allows them to search and retrieve video segments through metadata and audio analysis, as well as visual concepts and similarity searches. 
            Background
            In the near future, audiovisual material is perhaps the biggest wave of data that will become available for academic researchers (Smith, 2013). This type of material has a big value for the digital humanities as it is multilayered: a single document can provide information regarding language, emotions, speech acts, narrative plots, and references to people, places, and events. This richness provides interesting data for various disciplines and holds the promise of multidisciplinary collaboration between, e.g., computer sciences, social sciences, and the humanities (Ordelman et al., 2014). 
            However, the use of audiovisual data by scholars in the humanities and the application of digital methods for analysis are still in their infancy for several reasons. One of them is the lack of useful systems that help academic researchers search through the large amounts of audiovisual data (De Jong et al., 2011). Given the multimodal nature of audiovisual data, different types of techniques are required to provide access to the data. The overall aim of the research project AXES—Access for Audiovisual Archives is to develop tools that allow novel ways of using digital audiovisual libraries, helping users to discover, browse, navigate, search, and enrich archives.
                1 Within the project, three systems are developed. In this poster and demonstration we will show the AXES RESEARCH system that was developed to cater the needs of humanities scholars and journalists. 
            
            
                AXES RESEARCH System 
            
            Building on several requirements studies amongst humanities scholars (Kemman et al., 2014; 2013a; 2012) and journalists (Kemman et al., 2013b), the AXES RESEARCH system is an advanced search and retrieval system that combines various technologies from computer vision such as face, object, and place recognition; similarity searching; and automatic speech recognition, making it easier for the user to find relevant material, not dependent on available metadata (Van der Kreeft et al., 2014). The strength of the system is a combination of different technologies working in the background. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The AXES RESEARCH start interface provides users with a simple search interface and shows their recently viewed videos and queries. 
            The following key search technologies are used in the AXES RESEARCH system: text/spoken words search, visual search, and similarity search. 
            Text Search / Spoken Words Search
            All metadata of the audiovisual programs and its spoken words are stored and indexed. Spoken words are provided in the form of a transcript originally provided with the audiovisual data or are automatically produced by Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). 
            Visual Search 
            The system uses text-based queries to look for visual objects. This is done in conjunction with an external search engine and uses on-the-fly methods (Parkhi et al., 2012). If a user makes a text search for ‘Brandenburg gate’, the query is sent to a search engine like Google or Bing that produces a sample of the top-n images. From the results, a model is created and used to detect similar objects in the archive. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. AXES RESEARCH thumbnail view of visual search results. Results can also be viewed in detailed view. 
            Generally, the system supports three types of visual search: visual categories (Parkhi et al., 2012), faces (Simonyan et al., 2010), and specific places or logos (Fernando et al., 2013). Furthermore, the user can also search for events. The system recognizes events based on multimodal input, including audio and visual features (Revaud et al., 2013). 
            Similarity Search 
            Instead of entering keywords, a search can also be based on internal or external images, also known as content-based image search (Smeulders, 2000). A similarity search can be done by using one or more images, either a keyframe shown from returned results, or an image uploaded by the user, comparable with the query by image technique as implemented at Google Images.
                2
            
            
                Results: User Testing 
            
            A total of 78 participants were involved in the evaluation sessions of AXES RESEARCH. Overall, participants were very interested in the system that assists them in research practices. In general, the look and feel of the prototype was appreciated, and users concluded that the functionalities of integrating video and audio, including similarity search, worked. User input and suggestions for enhancement served to improve the coming versions of the AXES system that will focus on home users. 
            Conclusion 
            AXES RESEARCH offers academics a novel way of exploring audiovisual content. They can take advantage of a powerful system, without the need to be involved in all the technical intricacies, allowing them to incorporate audiovisual materials in their research practice, which is currently rarely done given the absence of a system like AXES RESEARCH that helps them search through large amount of audiovisual data. 
            Acknowledgment 
            This work is supported by the EU FP7 programme as EU Project FP7 AXES ICT-269980. 
            Notes
            1. www.axes-project.eu.
            2. www.images.google.com.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        De Jong, F., Ordelman, R. and Scagliola, S. (2011). Audio-Visual Collections and the User Needs of Scholars in the Humanities: A Case for Co-Development. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Supporting Digital Humanities (SDH 2011), Copenhagen, Denmark, 17–18 November 2011. 
                    
                    
                        Fernando, B. and Tuytelaars, T. (2013). Mining Multiple Queries for Image Retrieval: On-the-Fly Learning of an Object-Specific Mid-Level Representation. 
                        ICCV, Sydney, Australia, 3–6 December 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Kemman, M., Kleppe, M., Beunders, H. (2012). Who Are the Users of a Video Search System? Classifying a Heterogeneous Group with a Profile Matrix. In 
                        13th International Workshop on Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services, Dublin, Ireland, 23–25 May 2012.
                    
                    
                        Kemman, M., Kleppe, M. and Maarseveen, J. (2013a). Eye Tracking the Use of a Collapsible Facets Panel in a Search Interface. In 
                        Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries. Berlin: Springer, pp. 405–8, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40501-3_47. 
                    
                    
                        Kemman, M., Kleppe, M., Nieman, B. and Beunders, H. (2013b). Dutch Journalism in the Digital Age [El Periodismo Holandés En La Era Digital]. 
                        Icono 14, 
                        11(2): 163–81, doi:10.7195/ri14.v11i2.596.
                    
                    
                        Kemman, M., Kleppe, M. and Scagliola, S. (2014). Just Google It. In Mills, C., Pidd, M. and Ward, E. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities Congress 2012. Sheffield, UK: HRI Online Publications.
                    
                    
                        Ordelman, R., Kemman, M., Kleppe, M. and De Jong, F. (2014). Sound and (Moving Images) in Focus: How to Integrate Audiovisual Material in Digital Humanities Research. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014, 
                        Lausanne, Switzerland, 6–12 July 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Workshops-914.xml.
                    
                    
                        Parkhi, O. M. et al. (2012). “On-the-Fly Specific Person Retrieval.” In 
                        13th International Workshop on Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services, Dublin, Ireland, 23–25 May 2012.
                    
                    
                        Revaud, J., Douze, M., Schmid, C. and Jégou, H. (2013). Event Retrieval in Large Video Collections with Circulant Temporal Encoding. 
                        IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2013, Portland, OR. 
                    
                    
                        Simonyan, K., Parkhi, O. M., Vedaldi, A. and Zisserman, A. (2013). Fisher Vector Faces in the Wild. British Machine Vision Conference, Bristol, UK, 9–13 September 2013.
                    
                    
                        Smeulders, A. W., Worring, M., Santini, S., Gupta, A. and Jain, R. (2000). Content-Based Image Retrieval at the End of the Early Years: Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 
                        IEEE Transactions,
                        22(12): 1349–80. 
                    
                    
                        Smith, J. R. (2013). Riding the Multimedia Big Data Wave. In 
                        Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval—SIGIR ’13. New York: ACM Press, doi:10.1145/2484028.2494492.
                    
                    
                        Van der Kreeft, P., Macquarrie, K., Kemman, M., Kleppe, M. and McGuinness, K. (2014). AXES-RESEARCH: A User-Oriented Tool for Enhanced Multimodal Search and Retrieval in Audiovisual Libraries. In 
                        2014 12th International Workshop on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI), IEEE, Klagenfurt, Austria, 18–20 June 2014, 1–4, doi:10.1109/CBMI.2014.6849852.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Beyond Boundaries: Digital Humanities, Life Sciences and IT research
                
                    
                        Clivaz
                        Claire
                    
                    University of Lausanne (CH), Switzerland
                    claire.clivaz@unil.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Life Sciences
                    epistemology
                    research infrastructure
                    knowledge
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    knowledge representation
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Within the epistemological explorations of the digital humanities, one of the profound phenomena is the parallel movement of institutional infrastructure development and moving boundaries between various academic fields. At times these movements develop with synergism, at other times in isolation; occasionally they are in conflict. Using a specific case at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland as a starting point, this paper seeks to illustrate and explore how digital humanities and life sciences interact epistemologically. The aim is to demonstrate the impact of research infrastructure on the epistemological reconfiguration of academic knowledge, and vice versa. Thus one may regard such an idea in Foucault’s terms: ‘words’ and ‘things’ are interrelated.
            At the beginning of 2015, a new step for DH developments was taken at the University of Lausanne. Collaborations on diverse modes have been developed between the DH team and their bioinformatics colleagues—namely, applications for common projects at Swiss and international levels (research infrastructure, data-life-cycle management, DH applications); publication of a new editorial form, the eTalks;
                1 a common day of training and education on data visualization.
                2 Finally we have enrolled two part-time IT and DH postdocs to create an exchange of knowledge between common projects: one has a doctorate in archeology with a good knowledge of databases, and the other a doctorate in bio-IT bioinformatics with a strong interest in DH. There is much to be learned from the 25-year-old experiment at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
                3 that could shed greater light on the digital humanist turn.
            
            Indeed, the digital humanities adventure started in Switzerland at the University of Lausanne in 2010, with the encouragement of the vice-rector research, Philippe Moreillon, a professor in medicine stating that DH would probably follow an evolution similar to the path taken by bioinformatics. This statement sounded perhaps slightly opaque to certain ears at that time, yet it has become increasingly clarified and useful with regards to elements related to the development of DH at UNIL and in Switzerland. Thus, the digital humanists at the UNIL have begun discussions with the SIB and its IT bioinformatics competence center, VITAL-IT.
                4 In a 2014 lecture in Lille,
                5 I drew some common points between the developments of bioinformatics and digital humanities. Ioannis Xenarios, director of VITAL-IT, has rewritten Claire Warwick’s definition of the digital humanities
                6 for bioinformatics, replacing a few words: ‘Bioinformatics is an important multidisciplinary field, undertaking research at the intersection of digital technologies and biology/medicine. It aims to produce applications and models that make possible new kinds of research, both in the biology/medicine and in computer science and its allied technologies. It also studies the impact of these techniques on knowledge representation, data mining technologies, knowledge-base, archives and digital culture’.
                7
            
            At a national level, Switzerland has started an innovative long-term program of at least eight years (2013–2020). The program, Scientific Information: Access, Processing and Safeguarding,
                8 will attempt to coordinate all the efforts and strategies regarding computing academic challenges. Within this program, all fields are invited to build the new digital world of science. The title of the program, adopted for the years 2017–2020, clearly relates IT services and information to fundamental research: ‘
                Service et information numérique: un nouveau lieu de la recherche’. One of the main themes of this program is ‘data-life-cycle management’, a perspective encompassing entire cycles from the production of primary data to final publications. Currently, it is unknown whether a common protocol of ‘data-life-cycle management’ for humanities and life sciences is possible and adequate: surely it deserves to be investigated. Such data management rationalization efforts might sound uncommon to certain digital humanist ears and minds, but even a milestone DH work such as Franco Moretti’s 
                Graphs, Maps and Trees (2005) is deeply inspired by IT research and what is traditionally referred to as ‘hard sciences’. Not only is this true of its content, but also in its genealogy. Indeed, it was preceded by another Italian book, by Giulio Barsanti, using the same aforementioned title, which explains the emergence of modern sciences: 
                L’Albero, la scala, la mappa (1992).
                9 This genealogy will be examined in this paper.
            
            To better understand what is at stake in such transformations in a specific university and country, we have to look back. Until now, funds for fundamental research and research infrastructure were separate in Switzerland. It is the legacy of what was referred to in 2012 as a ‘blind spot in modernity’ (see Clivaz, 2012, 32): the underestimated influence of writing material on ideas and concepts, as thoroughly demonstrated by Roger Chartier (1995, for example). The climax of printed culture has led to such a situation, as one can observe in the posture adopted by William Osler. In 1919, this famous Canadian physician and professor often described as the ‘father of modern medicine’ (see Fins, 2008),
                 was invited to make a presidential address before the Classical Association at Oxford (Osler, 1919).
                10 He spoke about ‘the old Humanities and the new science’, honoring the classical medical heritage of Hippocrates and Galen, and underlining the role of the humanities as ‘the hormones’ of intellectual life: ‘the men of your guild secrete materials which do for society at large what the thyroid gland does for the individual’ (Osler, 1919, 3). With a deep attachment to humanities, this lecture deplored the fragmentation of knowledge: ‘Specialism, now a necessity, has fragmented the specialties themselves in a way that makes the outlook hazardous’ (Osler, 1919, 5). Yet at the very same time, he belonged to this ‘specialism‘ trend with respect to his work; all his thinking appears congruent with a child of the maximal stage of printed culture. This famous lecture was followed by an exposition (Warner, 2014) of Osler’s rare books; he was a book lover (Osler, 1901). It is evident that the following decades of the 20th century saw the life sciences and humanities increasingly separated, and since then, knowledge has become like a broken mirror. Such a genealogy will be further examined, and will contribute, along with all the previous elements mentioned, to a consideration of the role of the digital humanities and IT research in life sciences within the epistemological knowledge turn we are currently facing. When the boundaries between research and infrastructures throughout all the fields are overcome, a new world can emerge.
            
            Notes
            1. etalk.vital-it.ch/rites-funeraires; etalk.vital-it.ch/dh; etalk.vital-it.ch/mooser (all accessed 1 March 2015).
            2. http://edu.isb-sib.ch/course/view.php?id=195.
            3. http://www.isb-sib.ch/.
            4. See 
                http://www.isb-sib.ch/ and 
                http://www.vital-it.ch/: ‘Vital-IT is a bioinformatics competence center that supports and collaborates with life scientists in Switzerland and beyond. The 
                multi-disciplinary team provides expertise, training and maintains a high-performance computing (HPC) and storage infrastructure, so as to help develop, maintain and extend life science and medical research’.
            
            5. Claire Clivaz, Panorama institutionnel des Digital Humanities à partir du cas suisse: vers la dissémination Digital Humanities?, http://publi.meshs.fr/ressources/panorama-institutionnel-digital-humanities/@@video.
            6. See http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/courses.
            7. Ibid. 
            8. See http://www.swissuniversities.ch/en/organisation/projekte-und-programme/suk-p-2-wissensch-information-zugang-verarbeitung-speicherung/; national strategy English summary: http://www.swissuniversities.ch/fileadmin/swissuniversities/Dokumente/EN/UH/SUK_P-2/SUK_P-2_NationaleStrategie_20140403_EN.pdf. The CUS P2 program is presided over by Prof. Dr. Martin Täuber (rector of the University of Bern), and directed by Dr. Roland Dietlicher (ETHZ) and Gaby Schneider (University of Basel).
            9. Thank you to my sociologist colleague Franco Panese for this reference.
            10. Thank you to the DARIAH colleague who provided me this reference in September 2014 in Rome, and whose name I have unfortunately forgotten.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barsanti, G. (1992). 
                        L’Albero, la scala, la mappa, Sansoni, Florence. 
                    
                    
                        Chartier, R. (1995). Lecteurs dans la longue durée: du codex à l’écran [Readers in the long run: From codex to screen]. In Chartier, R. (dir.)., 
                        Histoire de la lecture: un bilan des recherches [History of reading: A research account]. Paris, IMEC éd., Éd. de la maison des sciences de l’homme, pp. 271–83.
                    
                    
                        Clivaz, C. (2012). Common Era 2.0 : Mapping the Digital Era from Antiquity and Modernity. In Clivaz, C., Meizoz, J., Vallotton., F. and Verheyden, J. (eds), with Bertho, B., 
                        Reading Tomorrow: From Ancient Manuscripts to the Digital Era. Lausanne: PPUR, 2012, ebook, pp. 23–60.
                    
                    
                        Fins, J. J. (2008). ‘Humanities Are the Hormones’: Osler, Penfield and ‘Neuroethics’ Revisited. 
                        American Journal of Bioethics,
                        8(1) (2008): 5–8.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2005). 
                        Graphs, Maps, and Trees. London, 2005. 
                    
                    
                        Osler, W.
                         (1901). Books and Men.
                        Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, 
                        144
                        : 60–61.
                    
                    
                        Osler, W. (1919). The Old Humanities and the New Science. 
                        British Medical Journal,
                        2 (5 July): 1–7.
                    
                    
                        Warner, J. H. (2014). The Fielding H. Garrison Lecture: The Aesthetic Grounding of Modern Medicine. 
                        Bulletin of the History of Medicine,
                        88(1): 1–47, 21.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Beyond Pragmatics: Disciplinary Profits of Interdisciplinary Approaches
                
                    
                        Gius
                        Evelyn
                    
                    University of Hamburg, Germany
                    evelyn.gius@uni-hamburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Jacke
                        Janina
                    
                    University of Hamburg, Germany
                    janina.jacke@uni-hamburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Meister
                        Jan Christoph
                    
                    University of Hamburg, Germany
                    j-c-meister@uni-hamburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Bögel
                        Thomas
                    
                    Heidelberg University, Germany
                    thomas.boegel@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
                
                
                    
                        Strötgen
                        Jannik
                    
                    Heidelberg University, Germany
                    jannik.stroetgen@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    narratology
                    machine learning
                    methodology
                    interdisciplinarity
                    text analysis
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    metadata
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    german studies
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            While the mutually beneficial role of interdisciplinarity in DH projects is often highlighted, the impulse to rethink one’s own discipline-centered dogmas and theory as a result of such cooperations is seldom addressed. In heureCLÉA,
                1 a DH project involving a team of literary scholars and a team of computer scientists and machine learning specialists, both parties have encountered this phenomenon. In the following, we would like to demonstrate how interdisciplinary incompatibilities are brought to attention in the DH context, and how this realisation can help to improve a participant theory—in our example, the theory of narrative.
                2
            
            
                The Setting: heureCLÉA
            
            heureCLÉA’s goal is to develop a ‘digital heuristic’: a discovery tool that supports literary scholars in analysing narrative texts. We focus on the generation of automated annotations concerning 
                temporal aspects of novels, short stories, etc.
                3 By automatically identifying time-related phenomena, our digital heuristic-tool shall provide bottom-up support for hermeneutic analyses.
            
            Three steps lead toward this goal:
             1. A small corpus of short stories is manually and collaboratively annotated with the help of a narratological tagset for temporal phenomena.
             2. These annotations are then analysed and modelled in a computational approach that combines rule-based NLP methods with machine learning procedures.
                4
            
             3. Once the automatically generated output meets defined performance criteria, the digital heuristic is implemented as a functional module in the text analysis platform CATMA.
                5
            
            This looks straightforward, but as soon as the first manual annotations were discussed in phase 2, we encountered problems that point to fundamentally different, discipline-specific approaches to text annotation. 
            The Problem: Interdisciplinary Incompatibilities
            To begin, heureCLÉA’s markup ‘philosophy’ is consciously non-prescriptive:
                6 we do not enforce inter-annotator agreement. Instead, we invite human annotators to consider their annotation practice as an interpretive activity rather than a taxonomy-ruled declaration of objective phenomena. This approach is supported by CATMA, our web-based platform for collaborative text annotation.
                7 Accordingly, our annotators made different and even contradictory interpretive decisions when tagging certain text segments. 
            
            From a computer science point of view, this renders parts of the relevant CATMA markup data 
                noisy, i.e., too ambiguous to allow for reliable statistical ML-analysis and prediction. The literary studies’ perspective onto such annotator disagreement, however, is quite the opposite.
                8 Rather than constituting a methodological obstacle, substantially different interpretations of texts derived from incompatible analyses are regarded as a natural consequence of the polyvalence of literary texts (cf. Jannidis et al., 2003), or to phrase it provocatively: by definition, a non-ambiguous text triggering uniform high-level interpretations lacks aesthetic quality (cf. Jakobson, 1979/1960). Of course, such judgement hinges on the definition of ‘high-level’—the interpretation of a text’s philosophical message will certainly fall into this category. But what about statements concerning more formal, seemingly uncontroversial characteristics of narrative, such as their temporal construction both in terms of the 
                what (story) and the 
                how (discourse) of narration?
            
            Two examples:
             1. Standard narratological taxonomy uses the category of 
                order to identify whether a series of events is narrated in its original temporal order, or whether the chronologies of events and narration differ. The following passage was annotated as a 
                prolepsis, i.e., ‘flash forward’, by some annotators: ‘Maybe you expect me there at The Post Inn. Then we go to Ammerland together. It’s going to be a grand trip’ (Wedekind, 
                The Vaccination, our translation).
                9 But not everybody agreed: a second group of annotators did not detect a deviation from the chronological representation of events. 
            
             2. The second example concerns the analysis of 
                duration or 
                speed of the narration: how long does it take to report events in relation to how long it takes for these events to happen? The following passage was sometimes annotated as 
                scene, i.e., very slow narration, and sometimes as 
                summary, i.e., very fast narration: ‘I have gazed outside all night, and methought this was how death must be like, or the after-death: over there and outside an infinite, hollowly roaring darkness. Will a thought, a notion of mine linger and weave on there and eternally hark to the intangible roaring?’ (Mann, 
                Death, our translation).
                10
            
            From an ML perspective these interpretive variances produced 
                noisy annotation data—but how about the humanist’s view: Isn’t this the hallmark of aesthetic 
                originality? Are conflicting annotations not indicative of a semantic richness owed to a narrators’ ability to evoke, e.g., polyvalent temporal orders? If so, the phenomenon would indeed have been adequately encoded 
                in nuce by conflicting manual annotations on the inconspicuous level of narrative form.
                11
            
            To test this hypothesis, we attempted to reconcile the two different annotation-centered methodological perspectives—that of the computer scientist and that of the literary scholar—by taking a decision-tree-inspired look at the human-generated annotation: What exactly had triggered the diverse output? Where were the choice points?
            
                The Solution: Improving Narratological Theory via NLP-Parametrisation 
            
            Revisiting examples of 
                noisy narratological annotation from a humanities perspective, we eventually realised that some did 
                not result from genuine high-level polyvalence of literary texts. Instead, they could be traced back to one of two shortcomings—methodological and/or theoretical:
            
            Ill-Defined Concepts
            Some base-level narratological concepts proved simply ill-defined. Consider example one: The usual definition of the concept 
                prolepsis (flash forward) does not specify whether temporal lookaheads must concern ‘actualized’ events in the fictional world. The annotation of the passage from example 1 thus varies according to how one defines the modal parameter ‘actualized’ vs. ‘hypothetical’. Problems of this kind were resolved by simply ‘pre-parametrising’ the relevant narratological categories so that previously non-explicit theoretical premises were now formally included in the category definition as functional parameters. This usually results in narrower definitions and, respectively, more consistent—less 
                noisy—annotations. As for the definition of 
                prolepsis, we confined this to ‘actualized’ anticipations. Accordingly, example 1 does 
                not contain a prolepsis, for the future events in question—the meeting at the Post Inn, the journey together—are purely hypothetical. 
            
            Undetected Dependencies
            Other contradictory annotations were traced back to opaque dependencies between specific base-level narratological concepts and over-arching theoretical assumptions in narratological theory
                . In a computational view, such non-explicit premises function as hidden parameters. This finding explains our second example: the analysis of 
                duration depends on the underlying notion of what constitutes an 
                event. If only specific occurrences in the fictional ‘outside world’ are considered an event, then the narration speed in example 2 is low. Since only the protagonist’s thoughts are reported here, nothing ‘happens’ empirically in the fictional world; it is only the narration that progresses. If, on the other hand, thoughts are considered events, too, then the narration speed is, of course, very high: a whole night of ‘gazing and thinking’ is narrated in just a few sentences!
            
            To address such cases where annotation variance stemmed from non-explicated theoretical premises, we adopted a less deterministic approach: such incompatible markup decisions are now accepted on condition that their underlying assumptions are explained in the markup. Annotators must, for example, document their notion of 
                event when analysing 
                duration. High-level parametrisation of this type will be implemented in the heuristic module by offering the users to choose their own parameters. Automated markup suggestions will then be adapted to these choices. From a technical perspective, this is realised using transparent machine learning models (such as Decision Trees)—in contrast to less transparent models (e.g., Support Vector Machines). Transparency is reflected in the possibility of being able to retrace and visualise the concrete decision process, i.e., factors that are involved in the prediction, which not only allows for an adaptation of the underlying model based on user-input (so-called interactive or feedback-driven machine learning) but also facilitates a reasoning and discussion over the changes to the model due to user input.
            
            Conclusion and Outlook
            These examples demonstrate how interdisciplinary DH collaboration, apart from the defined project goals, can also yield more general theoretical and methodological insights. Methodological incompatibilities observed in the pragmatic domain can motivate one of the partner disciplines to optimize its elementary taxonomic definitions, and even stimulate theoretical revisions, as the example of inconsistent human annotation and the introduction of pre-parametrisation and flexible parametrisation of categories demonstrates. 
            DH-collaborations are particularly well suited to yield such benefits beyond the pragmatic: on the one hand, we practice the humanities’ hermeneutic approach, a methodology and epistemology that are phenomenological, synthesis-oriented, and historically contingent; on the other hand, we employ the formal approach of computational analysis and mathematical modelling, which strives for an abstract, fully parametrised representation and analysis of data structures and processes. 
            This methodological bifurcation is not a question of enduring a life in 
                two cultures (
                sensu C. P. Snow, cf. Snow [1993]); it is the fundamental and highly productive dialectic of DH’s epistemology and practice.
            
            
                Notes
            
            
                1. heureCLÉA is funded by the German Ministry for Education and Science (BMBF) as part of the eHumanities initiative. For further project details, see www
                .heureclea
                .de. 
            
            
                2. While this paper only addresses narrative theory as a beneficiary discipline, we have also experienced cases demonstrating the opposite constellation. For an illustration of the benefits that the interdisciplinary approach has brought for NLP, see Gius and Jacke (2015) as well as Bögel et al. (2015).
            
            3. In addition to rather basic aspects like 
                tense and 
                dates, we are concerned with more complex temporal phenomena that are constitutive of all types of narrative representation: every narrative features a story, and this story is presented in a specific way. The more complex temporal phenomena with which we are concerned all refer to the temporal relation between story and representation. This relation can be analysed with regards to three aspects: 
                order (when did an event happen? when is it told?), 
                frequency (how often does it happen? how often is it told?), and 
                duration (how long did it take to happen? how long did it take to tell about it?); cf. Genette (1972).
            
            4. For first results concerning automated annotation, cf. Bögel et al. (2014).
            5. Cf. www.digitalhumanities.it/catma.
            6. heureCLÉA—like its markup tool CATMA—is based on the methodological premise of ‘hermeneutic markup’, as described in Piez (2010). 
            7. For CATMA, see www
                .
                catma
                .
                de.
            
            8. For a more theoretical-methodological discussion of this divergence, cf. Gius and Jacke (2015).
            9. ‘Vielleicht erwartet ihr mich dort im Gasthof zur Post. Dann fahren wir zusammen nach Ammerland. Das wird eine prächtige Tour’ (Wedekind, 
                Die Schutzimpfung).
            
            10. ‘Ich habe die ganze Nacht hinausgeblickt, und mich dünkte, so müsse der Tod sein oder das Nach dem Tode: dort drüben und draußen ein unendliches, dumpf brausendes Dunkel. Wird dort ein Gedanke, eine Ahnung von mir fortleben und -weben und ewig auf das unbegreifliche Brausen horchen?’ (Mann, 
                Der Tod).
            
            11. For a more detailed exploration of the phenomenon, see Meister (2003), who explores the resulting combinatorial potential of incrementally more complex and polyvalent action-constructs in Goethe’s novella cycle 
                Unterhaltungen deutscher Ausgewanderten. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bögel, T., Gertz, M., Gius, E., Jacke, J., Meister, J. C., Petris, M. &amp; Strötgen, J. (2015). Gleiche Textdaten, unterschiedliche Erkenntnisziele? Zum Potential vermeintlich widersprüchlicher Zugänge zu Textanalyse. Presented at the 
                        2nd DHd Conference, Graz.
                    
                    
                        Bögel, T., Gertz, M. and Strötgen, J. (2014). Computational Narratology. Extracting Tense Clusters from Narrative Texts. Presented at the 
                        9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC ’14), Reykjavik.
                    
                    
                        Genette, G. (1972). Discours du récit. In 
                        Figures III. Paris, pp. 67–282.
                    
                    
                        Gius, E. and Jacke, J. (2015). Informatik und Hermeneutik. Zum Mehrwert interdisziplinärer Textanalyse. In 
                        ZfDH, 
                        http
                        ://
                        fvmww
                        .
                        diphda
                        .
                        uberspace
                        .
                        de
                        /
                        informatik
                        -
                        und
                        -
                        hermeneutik
                        -
                        zum
                        -
                        mehrwert
                        -
                        interdisziplin
                        %
                        C
                        3%
                        A
                        4rer
                        -textanalyse.
                    
                    
                        Jakobson, R. (1979/1960). Linguistik und Poetik. In Jakobson, R, 
                        Poetik. Ausgewählte Aufsätze, 1921–1971. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp, pp. 83–121.
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F. (2003). Polyvalenz–Konvention–Autonomie. In Jannidis, F., Lauer, G., Martínez, M. and Winko, S. (Hrsg.), 
                        Regeln der Bedeutung. Zur Theorie der Bedeutung literarischer Texte, Vol. 1. Berlin: de Gruyter, pp. 305–28.
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F., Lauer, G., Martínez, M. and Winko, S. (2003). Der Bedeutungsbegriff in der Literaturwissenschaft. Eine historische und systematische Skizze. In Jannidis, F., Lauer, G., Martínez, M. and Winko, S. (Hrsg.), 
                        Regeln der Bedeutung. Zur Theorie der Bedeutung literarischer Texte, Vol. 1. Berlin: de Gruyter, pp. 3–30.
                    
                    
                        Mann, T. (2004). 
                        Der Tod. In Mann, T., 
                        Große kommentierte Frankfurter Ausgabe. Werke–Briefe–Tagebücher, Heinrich Detering et al. (eds), vol. 2.1: Frühe Erzählungen. 1893–1912, Reed, T. J. (ed.). Frankfurt a. M.: S. Fischer. First published 1897.
                    
                    
                        Meister, J. C. (2003). Computing Action. A Narratological Approach. Alastair Matthews (trans.). Foreword by Marie-Laure Ryan. De Gruyter, Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Piez, W. (2010). Towards Hermeneutic Markup: An Architectural Outline. Presented at the 
                        Digital Humanities Conference 2015 (DH2015), London, 
                        http
                        ://piez
                        .
                        org
                        /
                        wendell
                        /
                        papers
                        /
                        dh
                        2010/.
                    
                    
                        Snow, C. P. (1993/1959). 
                        The Two Cultures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Wedekind, F. (1969). 
                        Die Schutzimpfung. In Wedekind, F., 
                        Werke in drei Bänden, Vol. 3: Prosa. Aufbau-Verlag, Berlin, 
                        http
                        ://
                        www
                        .
                        textgridrep.
                        de
                        /
                        browse
                        .
                        html
                        ?
                        id
                        =
                        textgrid
                        :
                        x
                        36
                        s
                        .0. First published 1903.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Beyond the Library Walls: The National Library of Wales Research Programme in Digital Collections
                
                    
                        James
                        Rhian
                    
                    National Library of Wales, United Kingdom
                    rhian.james@llgc.org.uk
                
                
                    
                        McCann
                        Paul
                    
                    National Library of Wales, United Kingdom
                    pmc@llgc.org.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Collaboration
                    Interdisciplinary
                    Co-creation
                    Re-purposing content
                    Cultural heritage
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    information retrieval
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    cultural studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The National Library of Wales (NLW) has been an enthusiastic adopter of digitization and networked technologies since the late 1990s as a means of opening up the nation’s cultural heritage. The digital plays a key role in the Library’s core strategic aim of ‘Knowledge for All’, not only to provide greater access to resources online, but also to enhance our potential impact and help us engage more effectively with our users, both existing and future (NLW, 2014). To address the challenges of delivering effective, usable, and sustainable digital resources, the Library established its own Research Programme in Digital Collections in 2011 to contribute to the development of a more coherent digital agenda.
                1 Adding value and impact to the Library’s digital content and the institution as a whole lies at the heart of what the Programme is seeking to achieve. It can no longer be assumed that digital resources, once built, will be used (Warwick et al., 2008). Attempts have therefore been made to examine potential barriers to the adoption and use of such resources and to better understand issues surrounding their sustainability.
                2 It is within this context that the Programme operates. 
            
            The Programme’s main areas of focus include developing an understanding of the use, value, and impact of the Library’s existing digital content; identifying ways of enhancing this content for research, teaching, and community engagement; and developing new digital content that addresses specific research and educational needs. This work is being realised through collaboration with partner libraries, museums and archives, cultural heritage organisations, universities, and other key stakeholders that cross institutions, collections, and disciplinary traditions, both nationally and internationally, with the aim of bringing tools, methods, and content together to create digital resources that are seamless and open. This paper will examine the work currently ongoing at the Library as part of its digital programme and, in particular, its attempts to foster collaboration in the creation and development of improved environments that enable more effective use, re-use, and linking of its digital content.
            Historical Digital Texts
            The creation of digital text, and especially historical digital text, is hugely challenging. The issues posed by the original text, including issues such as legibility and physical condition, are often exacerbated by attempts to process and subsequently analyse these texts digitally and will inevitably have implications for research. Such issues are demonstrated by problems of accuracy with the underlying OCR in the Library’s 
                Welsh Newspapers Online project
                3—a free, searchable digital archive of over 100 historic newspapers of Wales, both Welsh- and English-language, dating from 1804 to 1919 in the Library’s holdings—which are often caused by blemishes and imperfections on the pages of the original. As Tim Hitchcock has recently argued, underlying issues of the design and structure of digital texts can be hugely problematic for research and algorithm-based searching (2013). Re-use and analysis of such content must, therefore, incorporate these concerns. As such, engaging expert users and curators of the material in the creation of a digital resource and the development of discovery and analysis tools is key. 
            
            Collaboration and Co-Creation
            A collaborative approach was used by the Library in Cymru1914.org,
                4 a JISC-funded project to digitize primary sources relating to the Welsh experience of the First World War and its impact on all aspects of Welsh life, language, and culture. The project has virtually unified fragmented and often difficult-to-access materials from the libraries, archives, museums, and special collections of Wales to form a consolidated digital collection of interest to researchers, students, and the public on life in Wales during this significant period of change. The project was developed as a process of co-creation: a collaboration between the Library; the libraries, archives, museums, and special collections of Wales; and researchers of the literature, history, language, and politics of the period. Their input was used to inform the selection of content, the development of the user interface, and the testing of functionality. This model of active collaboration reunites curatorial and scholarly roles, redressing concerns regarding the gradual segregation of these roles in the current academic and cultural heritage landscapes (Schnapp and Presner, 2009). Such approaches also work towards further embedding digital resources in the life cycle of scholarly research, thus increasing its value, impact, and sustainability in the long term. 
            
            The Library is also looking to explore new collaborative opportunities to enhance its existing digital content through the application of crowdsourcing approaches (Dafis et al., 2014). The Library’s first collaborative crowdsourcing project, Cymru1900Wales,
                5 a classification project to gather the place names of Wales from the georeferenced Ordnance Survey maps of 1900, has been an opportunity for the Library to experiment with crowdsourcing and enable greater engagement with new and remote audiences. These possibilities are being developed through a co-supervised PhD with the University of Wales to assess the feasibility of such approaches for the transcription of the Library’s online collection of Welsh wills and to build virtual communities around the content. There is already significant interest in the wills, especially in family and local history circles. Crowdsourcing is an opportunity for the Library to use this interest in a positive way to add value to its collections and the institution itself, and to engage the community in its work. Such an approach gives the Library the opportunity to build closer links with its users across the world and to encourage connections between academia and the public. It is a way of allowing the public to meaningfully experience and understand their pasts, which, in essence, is the cultural heritage sector’s primary objective (Owens, 2012). 
            
            Analysis and Linking of Content
            Users are becoming more demanding in their expectations of what digital resources can deliver. For these demands to be met and to ensure maximum usage, particularly within scholarship, environments must be created that allow for content to be analysed in more effective and complex ways. This includes resources that facilitate both close and distant readings of texts, allowing for the exceptional to be studied alongside large-scale aggregations of data (Moretti, 2005). The Library has experimented with simple visualisation tools, such as n-grams, giving researchers the opportunity to analyse patterns and trends on larger scales than would be possible in a non-digital environment. The possibilities of linked data are also under consideration as a means of transcending collection boundaries. Enabling links to be more easily made between documents within and across collections in this way would remove the data from its Welsh silo and allow it to be more easily incorporated into a broader, more international context. This would see the Library becoming a truly global institution for and of the Welsh and other Celtic peoples. 
            In keeping with its commitment to providing free and open access, NLW is also in the early stages of facilitating more advanced analysis of its digital content by opening up some of its raw data for others to download and interrogate for their own research purposes. These datasets will come from some of the Library’s biggest collections, including the newspapers, and it will be available during 2015.
                6
            
            Conclusion
            This paper will demonstrate that cultural heritage organisations, such as the Library, are frequently spaces in which research and development in the digital humanities can be nurtured and encouraged, and where collaboration with colleagues within and beyond the humanities and the academy can take place. NLW projects, such as Cymru1914.org, have shown the value in building better connections and partnerships with libraries, archives, and museums, along with researchers and the public more generally. This has enabled the development of digital resources that allow for data to be used and reused, that encourage meaningful engagement with different user communities, and that permit digital outputs to be repurposed for new and unforeseen purposes. We must look to build collaborations that will facilitate the integration of tools and data, and the disassociation of text and data from its platform or delivery mechanism, thus ultimately liberating digital resources and scholarship, and ensuring that our work does more than merely replicate print culture digitally.
            Acknowledgement
            The authors would like to thank Professor Lorna M. Hughes for her assistance in writing this proposal.
            Notes
            1. NLW Research, www.llgc.org.uk/research. 
            2. University College London, 
                The LAIRAH Project: Log Analysis of Internet Resources in the Arts and Humanities, http://www.ucl.ac.uk/infostudies/LAIRAH/
                . Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford. 
                    TIDSR: Toolkit 
                    for
                    the
                     Impact 
                    of
                    Digitised
                    Scholarly
                     Resources, 
                http://microsites.oii.ox.ac.uk/tidsr/welcome
                . 
            
            3. Welsh Newspapers Online, http://welshnewspapers.llgc.org.uk/en/home. 
            4. Cymru1914: The Welsh Experience of the First World War, http://cymru1914.org/. 
            5. Cymru1900Wales, http://www.cymru1900wales.org/. 
            6. The data, when available, will be accessible from 
                http://data.llgc.org.uk
                .
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dafis, L., Hughes, L. and James, R. (2014). What’s Welsh for ‘Crowdsourcing’? Citizen Science and Community Engagement at the National Library of Wales. In Ridge, M. (ed.), 
                        Crowdsourcing our Cultural Heritage. Ashgate, pp. 139–59. 
                    
                    
                        Hitchcock, T. (2013). Confronting the Digital: Or How Academic History Writing Lost the Plot. 
                        Cultural and Social History,
                        10(1): 9–23, http://dx.doi.org/10.2752/147800413X13515292098070.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2005). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. Verso.
                    
                    
                        NLW. (2014). 
                        Knowledge for All: National Library of Wales Strategic Plan 2014–2017. http://www.llgc.org.uk/fileadmin/fileadmin/docs_gwefan/amdanom_ni/dogfennaeth_gorfforaethol/corff_strat_KnowledgeforAll_2014_2017S.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Owens, T. (2012). Crowdsourcing Cultural Heritage: The Objectives Are Upside Down. http://www.trevorowens.org/2012/03/crowdsourcing-cultural-heritage-the-objectives-are-upside-down/.
                    
                    
                        Schnapp, J. and Presner, T. (2009). 
                        The Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0. http://www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pd
                         .
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C
                        ., 
                        Terras, M
                        .,
                        
                             
                        
                        Huntington, P
                        .
                        
                             
                            and 
                        
                        Pappa, N
                        .
                         (2008). If You Build It, Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study: Quantifying the Use of Online Resources in the Arts and Humanities through Statistical Analysis of User Log Data.
                         
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                            2
                        
                        3(1): 85–102, 10.1093/llc/fqm045.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Black Boxed Selves
                
                    
                        Gallagher
                        Rob
                    
                    King's College London, United Kingdom
                    bobcgallagher@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Roach
                        Rebecca
                    
                    King's College London, United Kingdom
                    rebecca.roach@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Apperley
                        Thomas
                    
                    University of New South Wales, Australia
                    t.apperley@unsw.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    surveillance
                    life writing
                    gaming
                    online culture
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    literary studies
                    metadata
                    philosophy
                    internet / world wide web
                    games and meaningful play
                    cultural studies
                    social media
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We are witnessing a rise in the politicization of absence- and presence-oriented themes such as invisibility, opacity, and anonymity, or the relationship between identification and legibility, or the tactics of nonexistence and disappearance, new struggles around prevention, the therapeutics of the body, piracy and contagion, informatic capture and . . . data mining.
            —Alexander R. Galloway, Black Box, Black Bloc
            Taking Galloway’s essay as its point of departure, this panel draws together three papers that work to unpack the idea of ‘the black-boxed self’, addressing some of the ways in which selfhood is understood, articulated, and monetized in an age when networked digital devices are transforming politics, medicine, play, and creative endeavour—not to mention academic research.
            Indeed, we propose that much of the most interesting work proceeding in the humanities today can be understood in terms of the attempt to engage, imagine, or theorize black-boxed selves of one kind or another. We might think, here, of the intentionally opaque or illegible selves addressed in Nicolas de Villiers’ elaboration (2012) of the strategies of ‘opacity’ deployed by those seeking to queer normative models of subjectivity and biography, or of anthropologist Gabriella Coleman’s work (2014) on the amorphous hacker collective Anonymous and their bids to evade online surveillance and censorship; of attempts to render one’s own body less cryptic, whether through the kinds of life-writing analysed by those working in the medical humanities or nascent practices of digital self-quantification and ‘personal informatics’ (see Whitehead, 2013; Schull, 2014); or of research into the ‘data images’ of users captured by technologies like Microsoft’s Xbox 360, a blockbusting videogame console that pioneered modes of covert user surveillance (Cybulski, 2014).
            Like these projects, our papers adopt a multidisciplinary approach, variously taking their cues from literary theory, phenomenology, the medical humanities, media archaeology, platform studies, and affect theory, and drawing too on the new tools and tactics available to scholars working on and with digital media. Between us we address a range of media and practices, from videogaming and Twitter fiction to YouTube roleplay and digital sousveillance. By addressing developments in these specific fields, our panel aims to broach broader questions regarding the ways in which emergent forms of digital black boxing are shaping identity work and self-expression today.
            References
            
                Coleman, G. (2014). 
                Hacker, Hoaxer, Whistleblower, Spy: The Many Faces of Anonymous. Verso, London.
            
            
                Cybulski, A. D. (2014). Enclosures at Play: Surveillance in the Code and Culture of Videogames. 
                Surveillance &amp; Society,
                12(3): 427–32.
            
            
                De Villiers, N. (2012). 
                Opacity and the Closet: Queer Tactics in Foucault, Barthes, and Warhol. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
            
            
                Galloway, A. R. (2011). Black Box, Black Bloc. In Noys, B. (ed.), 
                
                    Communization and Its Discontents: Contestation, Critique and Contemporary Struggles.
                London: Minor Compositions / AK Press, pp. 237–49.
            
            
                Schull, N. D. (2014). Time on Device: Slot Machine Design and the Turn Away from Risk in Gambling. Lecture at McGill University, Montreal. 10 April 2014.
            
            
                Whitehead, A. (2013). The Medical Humanities: A Literary Perspective. In Bates, V., Bleakley, A. and Goodman, S. (eds), 
                Medicine, Health and the Arts Approaches to the Medical Humanities. Hoboken, NJ: Taylor and Francis, pp. 107–27. 
            
            Paper 1
            ASMR Culture and the Reading of the Black-Boxed Self
            Gallagher, R.
            King’s College London
            Autonomous Sensory Meridian Response (ASMR) is a term used by online communities of people who claim to experience states of euphoric, even orgasmic, cranial ‘tingling’ when exposed to certain sensory stimuli. These communities have coalesced via online platforms where participants describe their ASMR experiences and swap media that ‘trigger’ them, typically videos rich in ambient sounds; soft, deliberate speech; meticulous activity, and/or stylized gestures. These sites and practices have in turn spawned a class of ‘ASMRtists’ who produce videos catering to those with the condition, their content ranging from whispered recitations of Eliot’s 
                The Waste Land to role-plays that see them posing as dentists, witches, or librarians.
            
            Perhaps inevitably, the claims made for ASMR (from inducing ecstasy to ameliorating anxiety and insomnia to reversing hair loss) and the dubiously pseudo-scientific discourse that has evolved around it have occasioned scepticism. Here, however, I want to suspend the question of whether ASMR is ‘real’, reasoning that, whether we grant the condition medical legitimacy or not, ASMR 
                culture offers a fascinating lens on the immemorial problem of opening up the ‘black box’ of the individual body to render somatic states and physiological phenomena shareable, and on the ways in which the networked black boxes inhabiting our desks, pockets, and living rooms now factor into this problem.
            
            In short, I am willing to risk ‘black boxing’ ASMR—accepting that, whatever its medical status, the concept now functions as an ‘intermediary’ in a variety of broader conceptual, technological, cultural, and corporeal networks (Latour, 2005, 39)—in order to address what the phenomenon tell us about both the construction of the self and the nature of humanistic research in the era of data mining, search engines, and social media. Galloway argues that ours has become a ‘cybernetic societ[y]’ in which black-boxed systems are not just pervasive but paradigmatic, and that, as a consequence, any account of contemporary culture and politics must address the terms upon which ideas and entities are allowed to appear and disappear; in response, I consider the conditions of ASMR’s appearance, paying particular attention to the fact that the phenomenon is essentially coeval (as term, concept, and claimable identity, if not as experience) with the host of developments connoted by the term ‘Web 2.0’. With the move from a text-centric to a multimodal web, the proliferation of webcams and microphones, and the emergence of blogging platforms, social networks, and content aggregators has come the ability, if not the imperative, to connect, express, sharem and generally ‘Broadcast [One]self’. By demonstrating that the social web can also be a platform for 
                diagnosing oneself, ASMR raises questions about the culture of the Web, and about how we ‘read’ cultural phenomena that seem to resist traditional scholarly approaches, exemplifying an era in which ‘unveil[ing] and decod[ing]’ may have run their course as critical strategies (Galloway, 2011, 243).
            
            My paper responds by identifying three modes of reading that, although I elaborate them in relation to ASMR, might equally serve to illuminate other online cultures. The first involves reading contextually—meaning, in the case of ASMR, drawing on media archaeology and the cultural history of nosology. The former insists that ‘the history of the media is not the product of a predictable and necessary advance from primitive to complex apparatus’ and that ‘instead of looking for obligatory trends, master media, or imperative vanishing points, one should be able to discover individual variations’ (Zielinski, 2006, 7); the latter, meanwhile, teaches us that conditions like green sickness, neurasthenia, and spermathorrea did not have to be real to have very real effects and authorising contexts (e.g., Rosenman, 2003), just as various conditions currently considered medically legitimate were once dismissed or relegated to the status of psychosomatic disorder (Fletcher, 2004). Both point to the importance of considering how online ASMR culture evokes (and sometimes invokes) other media and moments, not to erase differences but to bring specificities into keener focus.
            The second mode of reading involves attending to the terms upon which media texts are instrumentalized. This means reading cultural artefacts in relation to the strategies by way of which they are integrated into and made to facilitate web users’ everyday activities. ASMR video archives tend to tag material as either ‘intentional’ (that is, created for the express purpose of eliciting ASMR) or ‘unintentional’ (material that happens to be conducive to the desired state); ASMRtists’ works can, in turn, elicit suspicion, hilarity, curiosity, and distaste when experienced out of context. If this raises issues of ‘context collapse’ (boyd and Marwick, 2011) indicative of the way media become unmoored from their original circumstances and purposes online, it also raises question of cultural value; from an ASMR perspective, QVC presenters’ demonstrations of kitchenware, fan-made videogame ‘Let’s Play’ videos, and readings of modernist poetry can prove equally valuable means of accomplishing the ‘affective labour’ of modulating moods and physiological states (Andrejevic, 2011, 89). In this respect, ASMR culture asks us to think about the fate and function of cultural artefacts on the Web. Primed by Galloway, we might characterize its approach to cultural artefacts as cybernetic rather than hermeneutic: media become ‘inputs’ judged in terms of their ability to elicit particular affective ‘outputs’ rather than texts to be decoded. Networked digital devices, meanwhile, become tools for modulating and maintaining moods and atmospheres, creating ‘bubbles’ of pleasure, comfort, and belonging within environments otherwise experienced as empty or oppressive. Swapping media, testimonies, theories, and tips, ASMR ‘sufferers’ prompt us to consider the emergence of what Lauren Berlant (2011) calls ‘genres of the present’—discursive formats and cultural practices that enable their exponents to retain a sense of continuity and community in a sociocultural landscape increasingly characterised by anxiety, precarity, and flux. 
            Finally, I propose reading cultural projects in terms of the use they make of the Web’s affordances. From this perspective, we can see ASMR culture as the product of an Internet seeking to transcend text, and it was surely Web 2.0’s move to foster the creation and dissemination of audiovisual content that allowed the varieties of acoustic (rather than, say, haptic or olfactory) experience that ‘sufferers’ recount to come to prominence. At the same time, however, ASMR culture points to the continuing privilege afforded language on a web where even nonverbal content is found and filed by way of text (the gradual rise of image- and speech-based search technologies notwithstanding). Looking back at the blogs and forums across which a discourse of ASMR developed, we can see how the project of forging a common vocabulary was both enabled and constrained by the structures, features, and implicit logics of different online platforms. Blogs’ ‘tag clouds’, for example, now operate as records of participatory etiology at work, showing how certain terms and themes ballooned as consensus built behind them while others were doomed to remain outliers. We see, too, how the ASMR community continues to pursue both personal experiences and public recognition of the condition by making imaginative use of familiar tools. Thus, Reddit’s ‘upvote’ system, conventionally used as an all-purpose measure of appreciation or interest, is, on the r/asmr ‘subreddit’, recast as a means of gauging the efficacy of different media as triggers and so refining the definition of the condition. By introducing new usage conventions, the ASMR community has refunctioned the website’s interface as a tool of definition and quantification. Turning the same black box to innovative new ends, this strategy offers a microcosmic hint as to how other black-boxed systems might be made to yield new and strange cultural outputs.
            References
            
                Andrejevic, M. (2011). Social Network Exploitation. In Papacharissi, Z. (ed.), 
                A Networked Self : Identity, Community and Culture on Social Network Sites. London: Routledge, pp. 82–101.
            
            
                Berlant, L. (2011). 
                Cruel Optimism. Duke University Press, Durham, NC.
            
            
                boyd, D. and Marwick, A. E. (2011). I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience. 
                New Media &amp; Society,
                13: 114–33.
            
            
                Fletcher, C. (2004). Dystopothesia: Emplacing Environmental Sensitivities. In Howes, D. (ed.), 
                Empire of the Senses: The Sensual Culture Reader. Oxford: Berg, pp. 380–98.
            
            
                Galloway, A. R. (2011). Black Box, Black Bloc. In Noys, B. (ed.), 
                
                    Communization and Its Discontents: Contestation, Critique and Contemporary Struggles.
                 London: Minor Compositions / AK Press, pp. 237–49.
            
            
                Latour, B. (2005). 
                Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
            
            
                Rosenman, E. B. (2003). 
                Unauthorized Pleasures: Accounts of Victorian Erotic Experience. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
            
            
                Zielinski, S. (2006). 
                Deep Time of the Media: Toward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
            
            Paper 2
            Literature, E-Health, and the Black-Boxed Self
            Roach, R.
            King’s College London
            It is thus today no longer a question simply of the enemy’s black box, but the black boxing of the self, of any node contained in a network of interaction. The enemy’s machine is not simply a device in a German airplane, it is ourselves: a call center employee, a card reader at a security checkpoint, a piece of software, a genetic sequence, a hospital patient. The black box is no longer a cipher waiting to be unveiled and decoded, it is a function defined exclusively through its inputs and outputs. 
            —Galloway, 2011, 243
            Alexander R. Galloway’s mention of a hospital patient falls at the end of a list, a seemingly casual example among many of the black boxing of the self in contemporary society. It is, however, the patient who forms the basis of this talk, the central figure in an argument that considers the import of Galloway’s notion for the medical humanities today. As e-health becomes a central and mushrooming area for health care, medical research, and patient experience, it is as well that the medical humanities reflect on their own involvement with the digital. Galloway’s description of the ‘black-boxed self’ seems to me a useful place to begin teasing out some of the issues around representations of pain, illness, and the body in an online setting. Explicitly interdisciplinary in its discussion of research in e-health, the medical humanities, life writing, literary studies, and the digital humanities, I use two case studies as a means of focusing my discussion.
            The first, Jennifer Egan’s 2012 tweeted story ‘Black Box’, explores, against the explicit backdrop of government spying, the fusing of technologies of surveillance with the human body. In this piece of serialized digital literature, the female speaker’s body has become the black-box recorder in a theatre of war, complete with ‘universal data port’ and devices implanted in the ear and eye, under the hairline, and between the toes. Fusing body and technology, Egan’s story also emphasizes the ‘Disassociation Technique’, a process for dividing the self from bodily experience and pain. Black boxed though the body may be, Egan seems to suggest the possibility of a self outside of and distinct from the confines of that box. 
            Illuminating contemporary anxieties around surveillance, digital technologies, and the human body, Egan’s story posits a troubling relationship between aesthetics and the biodigital. Technical advances here become a nightmare perpetuation of female objectification, and even the form of the fiction, a series of tweets purportedly offering the narrator’s stream of consciousness, seems perilously close to the serialized outputs of a sousveillance device. While Egan’s story offers an important example of the ambivalence often characterising literary responses to digital advances and the black-boxed self, the denunciation of such technologies and associated conceptualisations is often much less straightforward within a medical setting. 
            Take the example that forms my second case study: epilepsy, and its online, social media, and app provision. The most common serious brain condition worldwide, epilepsy affects 50 million people, with around 80% of patients living in developing countries (WHO, 2012). A chronic condition identified by a tendency to experience seizures, people with epilepsy regularly experience the black boxing of themselves. The event that not only identifies their condition but also frequently stigmatises them in society is (in most forms of the condition) inaccessible to the individual. 
            In addition, while earlier medical approaches emphasized the diagnosis and location of seizure origin in the brain, this has been largely superseded by a black-boxed approach. Managing symptoms, with continued self-monitoring by patients, is now the focus of much epilepsy medicine. This turn has led, not only to research attention being focused on how patients with epilepsy access information, advice, and support via the Web (known to improve well-being) but also to the development of numerous apps designed to aid self-management (Hoch et al., 1999; Shegog et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2012; Koenig et al., 2007; Wicks et al., 2012). These include those that track medications and symptoms, to those that monitor heart rate and breathing, alerting carers if unusual activity suggests that a seizure might be occurring. 
            On the one hand, then, the monitored subject becomes the quintessential black box, reduced to a series of inputs and outputs, with any sense of interiority rendered problematically disrupted or inaccessible. On the other hand, such technologically aided self-management can markedly improve the patients’ experience of their condition, reducing hospital admissions and some of the dangers associated with (clonic-tonic) seizures. Furthermore, this sousveillance offers the subject a form of technologized narrative that might capture those events lost to consciousness. Can, in fact, the black boxing of the self offer the subject a new and potentially useful form of life writing? 
            In reflecting on these issues, I turn to the medical humanities, itself part of a response to the behaviourist understanding of the self (that also models the black box) so dominant in medicine at mid-century. Over the last 30 years, scholars such as Arthur Frank (2013), Arthur Kleinman (1988), Rita Charon (2006), and Kathryn Montgomery (2006) have developed the field of so-called illness narratives. Attending to the ways in which individuals experience, understand, and represent their illnesses, this scholarship has had a significant impact not only on scholars interested in thinking about relations between literature and medicine but also with medicine itself and the generalized move towards patient-centred care. Attempting to respond to and resist the conceptualization of the patient as a series of symptoms or outputs, the behaviourist black box is (theoretically at least) repudiated in favour of narrative-sensitive medicine that is conscious of the individual experience (Vaccarella 2011).
            Yet in the increasingly technologized world of medicine, within the burgeoning field of e-health, how precisely such illness narratives might operate in an online setting becomes a complex question. What, for example, does it mean to tell an illness narrative via sousveillance? Drawing on semi-structured interviews conducted for a qualitative study into epilepsy patients’ self-representation online and on recent work in digital life writing and the medical humanities (O’Riordan, 2011; Waldby, 2000; McLellan, 1997; Arthur, 2009; Zuern, 2003; McNeil, 2012), this paper will reflect on the particularities of writing (epilepsy) lives online. 
            References
            
                Arthur, P. L. (2009). Digital Biography: Capturing Lives Online. 
                A/B,
                24(1): 74–92.
            
            
                Charon, R. (2006). 
                Narrative Medicine: Honoring the Stories of Illness. Oxford University Press, New York.
            
            
                Egan, J. (2012). Black Box. Tweeted 23 May 2012+, @NYerFiction. Also available at New Yorker Online, 4 June 2012, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/06/04/black-box-2.
            
            
                Frank, A. W. (2013). 
                The Wounded Storyteller: Body, Illness, and Ethics. 2nd University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
            
            
                Galloway, A. R. (2011). Black Box, Black Bloc. In Noys, B. (ed.), 
                Communization and Its Discontents: Contestaton, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles. New York: Minor Compositions, pp. 237–49. 
            
            
                Hoch, D. B., Norris, D., Lester, J. E. and Marcus, A. D. (1999). Information Exchange in an Epilepsy Forum on the World Wide Web. 
                Seizure: The Journal of the British Epilepsy Association,
                8(1): 30–34.
            
            
                Kleinman, A. (1988). 
                The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing, and the Human Condition. Basic Books, New York.
            
            
                Koenig, S. A., Dobson, P., Longin, E., Michalec, D., Gerstner, T. and Taylor, J. (2007). Internet-Based Knowledge Management Database for Children and Adults with Epilepsy: A Possible Model Project for Evidence-Based Medicine in the Future. 
                Seizure: The Journal of the British Epilepsy Association,
                16(8): 703–8.
            
            
                McLellan, F. (1997). ‘A Whole Other Story’: The Electronic Narrative of Illness. 
                Literature and Medicine,
                16(1): 88–107.
            
            
                McNeil, K., Brna, P. M. and Gordon, K. E. (2012). Epilepsy in the Twitter Era: A Need to Re-Tweet the Way We Think about Seizures. 
                Epilepsy and Behavior,
                23(2): 127–30.
            
            
                Montgomery, K. (2006). 
                How Doctors Think: Clinical Judgment and the Practice of Medicine. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
            
            
                O’Riordan, K. (2011). Writing Biodigital Life: Personal Genomes and Digital Media. 
                Biography: An Interdisciplinary Quarterly,
                34(1): 119–31.
            
            
                Shegog, R., Bamps, Y., Patel, A., Kakacek, J., Escoffery, C., Johnson, E. K. and Ilozumba, U. O. (2013). Managing Epilepsy Well: Emerging E-Tools for Epilepsy Self-Management. 
                Epilepsy and Behavior,
                29(1): 133–40.
            
            
                Vaccarella, M. (2011). Narrative Epileptology. 
                Lancet,
                377: 460–61.
            
            
                Waldby, C. (2000). Virtual Anatomy: From the Body in the Text to the Body on the Screen. 
                Journal of Medical Humanities,
                21(2): 85–108.
            
            
                Walker, E. R., Bamps, Y., Burdett, A., Rothkopf, J. and Dilorio, C. (2012). Social Support for Self-Management Behaviors among People with Epilepsy: A Content Analysis of the WebEase Program. 
                Epilepsy and Behavior,
                23(3): 285–90.
            
            
                WHO. (2012). Epilepsy
                . Factsheet No. 999, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs999/en/ (accessed 1 September 2014).
            
            
                Wicks, P., Kleininger, D. L., Massagli, M. P., de la Loge, C., Brownstein, C., Isojärvi, J. and Heywood, J. (2012). Perceived Benefits of Sharing Health Data between People with Epilepsy on an Online Platform. 
                Epilepsy and Behavior,
                23(1): 16–23.
            
            
                Zuern, J. (ed). (2003). Online Lives. Special issue of 
                Biography,
                26(1): v–xxv.
            
            Paper 3
            Gestural Excess, Gaming Style, and New Regimes of Surveillance
            Apperley, T.
            University of New South Wales
            Motion gaming was popularized through the release of the Wii in 2006. The wireless Wiimote operated through a combination of a motion sensor and an infrared pointer, as well as the more traditional buttons, directional pad, and trigger. Similar devices were incorporated into the other major consoles: Sony released the PlayStation Move, a motion-sensing controller for the PlayStation 3, in 2010; the add-on Kinect was also released in 2010 for the Microsoft Xbox 360. The Kinect introduced the ‘natural’ user interface to commercial gaming. It is a ‘controller-less’ device that uses a 3D camera advanced enough to allow motion capture and facial recognition. The technologies combine to create a computer interface that can be used intuitively, through a combination of motions, movements, and gestures that are recognised by the Kinect. This device allows people to play games—and use other media—on the Xbox 360 and Windows PC through movement and voice alone, making it the contemporary gaming technology that is most intimately linked to the body. The product is incredibly popular; in the 60 days following its release the Kinect sold 8 million units, becoming the world’s ‘fastest selling consumer electronics device’ (Moses, 2011). 
            These platforms make use of ‘gestural excess’ (Freeman et al., 2012; Simon, 2009), the labour that is produced by the body at the location of play, but is not registered by the digital game as an input. In this gestural excess there is a nascent, but precarious, sense of 
                style that formerly dissipated into everyday life, but is now indexed by popular visual culture. Gestural excess includes movements made unconsciously and those that are made deliberately as an act of ‘style’. Gesture and gestural excess in gaming have existed since the technologies’ inception—and indeed some gestures were possibly inherited from technological precursors like pinball (Huhtamo, 2005) and video art (Wilson, 2004; 2008). However, subsequent to the mass popularity of the Wii, the body of the gamer and gestural excess are increasingly understood by the digital games industry—and in the popular imagination—as an integral part of gaming. New forms of control in gaming that are based on ‘natural’ user interfaces using motion sensing, touch, and voice seem to offer a new potency for gesture. Buttons, for example, rarely mimic ‘natural’ actions or gestures (Parker, 2008; Shinkle, 2008, 908), and it is the limited recognition of human input by systems for which the player essentially remains a black box that establishes the possibility of gestural excess; it doesn’t matter how hard or fast that the button is hit. The ‘natural’ user interface, which operates through an ‘intuitive’ recognition of gesture, signals the possibility for the 
                recuperation of gestural excess. This possibility is considerably enhanced by the shift toward motion-sensing gaming, which has vastly increased the capacities for gesture to be accurately tracked, recorded, and incorporated into play. 
            
            However, while motion gaming offers new possibilities for expression, it also is subject to new regimes of surveillance. This shift is largely centred around gestural excess, the movements and gestures made during play that have no effect on the algorithmic or representational processes of the game, but in advertising materials are ‘represented as the very source of fun and pleasure in the game’ (Simon, 2009, 11). The significance of gestural excess is that it is not registered by the gaming technology; it is in no way programmed or coded (Simon, 2009, 12–13). Yet once gestural excess and the body are acknowledged as significant sites, and rendered spectacular and public, they are vulnerable to new forms of surveillance (Berenhausen, 2007; Millington, 2009), not just by members of the public, but through the ever-increasing accuracy of the black-boxed technologies of gaming themselves.
            Gestural excess opens new possibilities for the body to be incorporated into game play. Gestural excess always operates outside, but in relation to, computational processes, and as these processes become more efficient, and domestic motion-sensing technologies like the Xbox Kinect become more ubiquitous, the operational spaces of gestural excess will become increasingly limited. This is because the smooth operation and everyday implementation of the ‘natural’ user interface that uses the body as a controller 
                requires that gestural excess is understood as a glitch. Thus, the growing significance of motion-sensing controllers suggests both an 
                opening and immanent foreclosure for bodily expression in gaming through gestural excess.
            
            References
            
                Behrenhausen, B. G. (2007) Toward a (Kin)aesthetic of Video Gaming: The Case of Dance Dance Revolution. 
                Games and Culture,
                2(4): 335–54.
            
            
                Freeman, D., Hilliges, O., Sellen, A., O’Hara, K., Izadi, S. &amp; Wood, K. (2012). The Role of Physical Controllers in Motion Video Gaming. In 
                Conference Proceedings of DIS 2012—In the Wild, Newcastle, UK, 23–25 June 2012, http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/168081/msrc_props.pdf.
            
            
                Huhtamo, E. (2005). Slots of Fun, Slots of Trouble: An Archaeology of Arcade Gaming. In Raessens, J. and Goldstein, J. H. (eds), 
                The Handbook of Computer Game Studies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 3–25.
            
            
                Millington, B. (2009). Wii Has Never Been Modern: ‘Active’ Video Games and the ‘Conduct of Conduct’. 
                New Media &amp; Society,
                11(4): 621–40.
            
            
                Moses, A.
                (2011). Microsoft Kinect World Record: Selling Faster Than iPhone, iPad,
                
                     
                
                Sydney Morning Herald
                
                    , 11 March, 
                
                http://www.smh.com.au/digitallife/games/microsoft-kinect-world-record-selling-faster-than-iphone-ipad-20110310-1bokr.html.
            
            
                Parker, J. R. (2008). Buttons, Simplicity and Natural Interfaces. 
                Loading . . . ,
                2(2), http://journals.sfu.ca/loading/index.php/loading/article/view/33/30.
            
            
                Shinkle, E.
                 (2008). Video Games, Emotions, and the Six Senses.
                
                     
                
                Media, Culture &amp; Society, 
                30
                (6): 907–15.
            
            
                Simon, B. (2009). Wii Are Out of Control: Bodies, Game Screens and the Production of Gestural Excess, 
                Loading . . . ,
                3(4): 1–17, http://journals.sfu.ca/loading/index.php/loading/article/view/65/59.
            
            
                Wilson, J. (2004). Games, Video Art, Abstraction and the Problem of Attention. 
                Convergence,
                10(3): 84–101.
            
            
                Wilson, J.
                (2008). ‘Participation TV’: Videogame Archaeology and New Media Art. In
                
                     
                    Swalwell, M. and Wilson, J. (eds), 
                
                The Pleasures of Computer Gaming: Essays on Cultural History, Theory and Aesthetics
                . Jefferson, NC: McFarland, pp. 94–117.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Bridging the Gap between the National Library and the Researchers
                
                    
                        Balk
                        Hildelies
                    
                    Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Netherlands, The
                    hildelies.balk@kb.nl
                
                
                    
                        Wilms
                        Lotte
                    
                    Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Netherlands, The
                    Lotte.wilms@kb.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    embedded researcher
                    national library
                    koninklijke bibliotheek
                    young researchers
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    user studies / user needs
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster presents the new embedded researcher program of the National Library of the Netherlands (KB). To better understand the needs of researchers with regards to our data and services, we wanted to work together with them on short research projects. By doing so, we wished to create opportunities for young researchers to conduct their research and explore the KB content. In return, we hoped to benefit from their (technical) expertise to improve the user experience of the KB services. To achieve this, we set up an embedded researcher programme where we invite researchers from Dutch universities to come work with our data, programmers, and our research lab.
            This poster introduces the program and the pilot projects that were done in the academic year of 2014–2015 with three Dutch universities.
        
    



    
        
            
                Bringing to life the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages
                
                    
                        Bow
                        Cathy
                    
                    Charles Darwin University, Australia
                    cathy.bow@cdu.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Indigenous
                    languages
                    archive
                    engagement
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    linguistics
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Thousands of resources in dozens of Australian Indigenous languages are becoming available online through the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages (www.cdu.edu.au/laal). Many of these resources were developed in bilingual school programs in remote schools across the Northern Territory over several decades, and more materials continue to be added from other communities and languages of this region. This archive provides access to a wealth of written and illustrated texts in endangered languages, many of which were developed from stories told by community elders detailing ancestral knowledge and life, as well as everyday life and contemporary stories, primers, translations from English, instructional materials, memoirs and other genres. These texts are useful as an academic resource for various domains, such as linguistics, anthropology, education, history, natural sciences, Indigenous knowledges, environmental studies, and visual arts. They are also (re)finding their place in the cultural lives of Aboriginal people living on traditional lands, now that there are only a handful of officially sanctioned bilingual programs. The coming to life of this archive opens up significant questions in the field of digital humanities, around postcolonial digital archiving, the curation and uses of cultural heritage materials, the documentation of endangered languages, and studies of the appropriation by Indigenous peoples of digitising technologies for their own ancestral knowledge and culture work. 
                 The creation of the Living Archive has involved the digitisation of thousands of small books, the identification and collation of metadata, the development of a simple interface for search and browse, and efforts to locate the original storytellers and illustrators to seek permission to make these materials public on an openly accessible website (Bow et al., 2014). While the archive serves as an infrastructure for research and other academic work, one challenge was to design a web interface that would also meet the needs of Indigenous community members. The use of a map interface to allow navigation by place or language, and the presentation of books by cover image, both allow the site to be navigated with minimal or no textual input. Standard search and browse functionality, including full-text search, allows more conventional text-based interaction with the materials. User testing included Indigenous users who provided a useful perspective on the website as well as the content and potential uses of the archive. The engagement of the traditional owners of the materials and content has been a key component of developing a generative, agentive archive, rather than simply a storage place for materials. 
            
            
                
            
            Screenshot from the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages website, www.cdu.edu.au/laal.
            The process of bringing the archive to life has involved carefully articulating and enhancing how its liveliness brings communities together with their schools, old people with young, and students and researchers from around the world with knowledge authorities in the communities of origin. It has been important to maintain careful consideration of traditional approaches to ownership of knowledges in terms of negotiating copyright and intellectual property, while balancing ethical issues around privacy and open access. Most of the books were produced for use in schools and contain no secret or sacred knowledge. Copyright for the objects belongs to the organisations that produced them, rather than individuals—for example, copyright for materials produced by schools with bilingual programs belongs to the NT government, which has licensed the digitisation and online display of their materials. Beyond this, however, the project team chose to seek the approval of the original creators of the materials. Identifying and locating these people has been a particular challenge for the project, but was considered important to recognise their moral rights and also involve them (or the families of those who had passed away) in the renewed digital life of their stories and illustrations. 
            To maximise the discoverability of the materials and access to them, additional points of entry to the archive have also been developed. In response to a request for offline access, a mobile app (LAAL Reader)
                1 now allows users to download materials in bulk (for example, from a specific community or language) for storage on local devices to enable their use offline. Schools in southeast Arnhem Land have created libraries on school iPads for classroom use of the materials in local languages using this app. Efforts to ensure interoperability and reusability have involved use of software-independent formats and open-source tools, and long-term security is being negotiated with other archives in case of major disaster. The metadata is available for harvesting through OAI-PMH protocols and accessible through the National Library of Australia’s Trove database; related XML protocols make the materials discoverable through the Open Language Archives Community (OLAC) and the Australian National Data Service (ANDS).
                2 One of the challenges of making the data accessible and interoperable has been the use of ISO 639-3 standards for identification and naming of languages, which do not conform to local classification and nomenclature. A dual-level representation of language names was formulated to balance conformity to an international standard and accurate representation of community preferences for language names. 
            
            Networking with users and potential users is helping the project team to identify various research questions and uses of the archive in different contexts. For example, working with ANU’s Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language to include materials from the Living Archive in a larger corpus of Australian and Papuan languages will facilitate new avenues of inquiry in data mining and corpus analysis. The archive is included in various academic programs, such as training for Aboriginal Education Support workers through the Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education, and the Bachelor of Indigenous Languages and Linguistics degree at the Australian Centre for Indigenous Knowledges and Education. Proposals for research projects are included on the project’s accompanying web site, including evaluation of the site in terms of its usability for educational purposes, the use of resources on the archive for developing language learning programs, and collaborative activities with language owners on the use and revitalisation of stories in communities where language is no longer embedded in the curriculum. The project also maintains a social media profile, in an effort to engage a range of different users in schools, remote communities, and academic contexts.
            The extension of the archive includes the development of an API to give appropriate authorities a ready way of curating, extending, and customising their collections. This will allow for enhancements under the authority of original story owners, such as correcting or extending metadata, associating audio and video materials, and creating appropriate categories and themes for the existing materials. Workshops in communities are training and equipping people to engage with the archive, promoting intergenerational knowledge transmission and collaboration within schools and community groups. Such engagement and its outcomes can inform further research activities in the wider domain of digital humanities.
            The documentation of endangered languages has much to offer the field of digital humanities (Drude et al., 2012). The Living Archive project provides authentic data from minority languages in danger of extinction, on which research techniques and tools developed for major world languages can be tested and extended. The development of computational and statistical methods of analysis, annotation, markup, glossing, and the like can support and enhance the work of language documentation and conservation—for example, by automating some of the manual processes of extracting metadata and improving optical character recognition of minority languages. Data mining, textual analysis, and topic modelling can enhance the content of the archive and provide data for novel research questions for many different disciplines. Besides supporting academic research, such activities should also involve members of the communities where these languages are still important—in collaborative work, skills development, and furthering opportunities to develop digital means of documenting and preserving their linguistic and cultural heritage. 
            The affordances of such a body of literature are yet to be fully explored, and situating the archive within the context of digital humanities exposes it to new research contexts, which should be negotiated under the authority of the appropriate story owners. Curation and storage of cultural material is a contested space, with a number of constraints on access and ownership. This project is negotiating these cultural, technical, and epistemological challenges in its attempt to create a Living Archive rather than simply a storage facility or resting place for these valuable materials.
            Notes
            1. https://www.cdu.edu.au/laal/reader-app/.
            2. Trove: http://trove.nla.gov.au/work/188836876?q&amp;versionId=205468516; OLAC: http://www.language-archives.org/archive/espace.cdu.edu.au; ANDS: http://researchdata.ands.org.au/living-archive-of-aboriginal-languages/316817#.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bow, C., Christie, M. and Devlin, B. (2014). Developing a Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages.
                         
                        Language Documentation &amp; Conservation,
                         
                            8:
                         345–60, http://hdl.handle.net/10125/24612.
                    
                    
                        Drude, S., Trilsbeek, P. and Broeder, D. (2012). Language Documentation and Digital Humanities: The (DoBeS) Language Archive. Presented at 
                        Digital Humanities 2012, Hamburg, http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/language-documentation-and-digital-humanities-the-dobeslanguage-archive.1.html
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Building Better Linked Data &amp; Ontology Visualization Tools
                
                    
                        Simpson
                        John
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    john.simpson@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Brown
                        Susan
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; University of Guelph, Canada
                    sibrown@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Smith Elford
                        Jana
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    smithelf@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Murphy
                        Shawn
                    
                    Semandra, Canada
                    shawn@semandra.com
                
                
                    
                        Brundin
                        Michael
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    brundin@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Warren
                        Robert
                    
                    Carleton University; University of Guelph, Canada
                    rwarren@math.carleton.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Visualization
                    Linked Data
                    Semantic Web
                    Ontologies
                    Tools
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    software design and development
                    knowledge representation
                    internet / world wide web
                    visualisation
                    semantic web
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2012 Google indexed an estimated 46 billion web pages (staticbrain, 2014). Although the Web of linked data was only 3/10,000s this size in the same period (Simpson and Brown, 2014), 15.9 million pages is not an insignificant number (Cheng et al., 2013). Furthermore, as an emerging and burgeoning technological field, we can be certain that these numbers have grown significantly since then. With such a vast amount of data in these two Webs, the increasingly pressing concern is how to understand what is contained within them, particularly when it comes to seeing relationships within the content of each. This remains a problem even with linked data and, when warranted, the ontologies that connect such data, even though such data was built to make relationships explicit and available for exploration. This is a problem that others have articulated as well. For instance, Loskyll et al. ask, ‘How can one represent huge collections of knowledge (e.g. ontologies with over 10 million concepts) as browsable trees in a scalable manner and with a clear user interface?’ (2009, 385). While part of the solution would include appropriately curating the original data, this is not feasible with large datasets, and thus a solution must be borne by improved visualization tools and techniques. While there is a clear interest in using visualizations to navigate this information, there is no generally agreed-upon method to aid in this task. Should we render information that would otherwise need to be inferred ‘actually explicitly visible’ (Howse et al., 2011, 259), provide ontologists with an ‘effective solution’ for understanding ‘relations between existing concepts’ (Kocbek et al., 2013, 34), or any number of other purposes? Balancing these concerns remains a challenge despite the fact that visualizations have played an important role in assisting the retrieval and dissemination of both qualitative and quantitative information for centuries (Tufte, 2006; 2001). In this paper, we ask, 
                What features should a Semantic Web visualization tool have to maximize the discovery of new knowledge?
            
            This paper answers this question in two stages: it provides a review and evaluation of 30 existing Semantic Web–related visualization tools, and it reports on the production of a completed network visualization tool that is now entering the user testing phase. 
            
                Review of Linked Data and Ontology Visualization Tools
            
            Before reviewing the features of the network visualization tool we have produced, we will summarize the results of a review of 30 existing tools or techniques that target visualizations of either linked data or ontologies. While it is the case that surveys of visualization tools for linked data and ontologies have been carried out before,
                1 since 2007 there have been none that we know of and none conducted on this scale. The list of tools or techniques that are included in our review is displayed in Table 1.
            
            
                
                    
                        CropCircles
                        (Wang and Parsia, 2006)
                        
                            Cytoscape http://www.cytoscape.org/
                        
                        D3 (Data-Driven Documents)
                        http://d3js.org/
                        Gephi 
                        http://gephi.org/
                        
                            Google Visualization API with RDF 
                        
                        http://data-gov.tw.rpi.edu/wiki/How_to_use_Google_Visualization_API 
                        
                            GraphViz http://www.graphviz.org
                        
                        HyperTree
                        (Bingham and Sudarsanam, 2000)
                        http://kinase.com/tools/HyperTree.html
                        InfoVis ToolKit 
                        http://philogb.github.com/jit/
                        
                            IsaViz http://www.w3.org/2001/11/IsaViz/
                        
                        
                            Jambalaya (Storey et al., 2001)
                        
                        
                            KC-Viz (NeOn Toolkit Plug-in) 
                        
                        (Motta et al., 2011) http://neon-toolkit.org/wiki/KC-Viz
                    
                    
                        Knoocks
                        (Kriglstein and Wallner, 2010)
                        http://enomisk.net/knoocks/
                        LodLive
                        http://en.lodlive.it/
                        NeOn Toolkit 
                        http://neon-toolkit.org/wiki/Main_Page
                        Networkx
                        http://networkx.github.io/ 
                        
                            OntoViz http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/OntoViz
                        
                        Prefuse
                        http://prefuse.org/
                        ProcessingJS
                        http://processingjs.org/
                        
                            Protégé VOWL Plugin (Lohmann et al., 2014
                            )
                        
                        http://protege.stanford.edu/
                        
                            Protovis http://mbostock.github.com/protovis/
                        
                        
                            RDF Gravity http://semweb.salzburgresearch.at/apps/rdf-gravity/ 
                        
                        
                            RDF2SVG (Rhizomik) http://rhizomik.net/html/redefer/rdf2svg-form/ 
                        
                        Redland
                        http://librdf.org/
                        
                            SIMILE Exhibit / Exhibit 3.0 http://simile-widgets.org/exhibit/ 
                        
                    
                    
                        Sp
                            
                                aceTree
                            
                        
                        (Plaisant et al., 2002)
                        http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/spacetree/
                        
                            Spicy Nodes http://www.spicynodes.org/
                        
                        
                            Tableau Public http://www.tableausoftware.com/public
                        
                        
                            Tom Sawyer Software http://www.tomsawyer.com/home/index.php
                        
                        TopBraid Composer 
                        http://www.topquadrant.com/product/TB_Composer.html
                        
                            Visual Browser http://nlp.fi.muni.cz/projekty/visualbrowser/
                        
                        
                            Visual DataWeb (RelFinder, SemLens, gFacet, and tFacet) http://www.visualdataweb.org/tools.php 
                        
                        
                            Voyage RSS Reader http://rssvoyage.com/
                        
                        
                            Welkin http://simile.mit.edu/welkin/
                        
                        
                            Wiki Map Project http://ickn.org/wikimaps/
                        
                        Yago
                        http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/yago-naga/yago/index.html
                    
                
            
            Table 1. Linked data and ontology visualization tools.
            A New Visualization Tool
            In 2014, Lohman et al. pointed out, ‘While several visualizations for ontologies have been developed in the last couple of years, they either focus on specific ontology aspects or are hard to read for non-expert users. The silver bullet would be an ontology visualization that is equally comprehensive and comprehensible. It must be printable but also provide intuitive ways to interactively explore ontologies’ (395). While the focus of this comment is clearly on ontologies, the same is true of visualizations for linked data in general. This is just one set of criteria that a so-called silver-bullet visualization tool ostensibly should have. Others include key concept extraction, a rich set of navigation and visualization mechanisms, flexible zooming into and hiding of specific parts of an ontology, history browsing, saving and loading of customized ontology views, essential interface customization support, such as graphical zooming, font manipulation, tree layout customization, clear representations of hierarchy and predicates, and the availability of multiple geometrical views (Motta et al., 2011; Sivakumar and Arivoli, 2011). Clearly, there are a lot of expectations to be met.
            In constructing a new visualization tool for ontologies and linked data, our primary goal was a general one: build an interactive visualization tool that can be used by non-expert users to explore linked data. Of course, such general goals are often riddled with complexities when put into practice, and that was certainly the case here as we worked to address many of the criteria felt to be important by other developers (see above) as well as within our own team. The result has been the tool illustrated in Figure 1, which we are tentatively referring to as HuVis (short for Humanities Visualizer). As the figure makes clear, the interface of the tool is broken out into three areas: a central stage; a tabbed command construction history, documentation, and configuration window on the right; and a text-viewing area on the left that displays text to which the triples are linked.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The HuVis tool in action.
            In the center of the display are all the entities of the dataset arranged in a circle around a central visualization stage. Entities, represented as nodes, are colour-coded by type and may be dragged onto the stage or reshelved in the ring by dragging with the mouse. When dragged to the stage, all the nodes immediately connected within the pre-loaded linked dataset to the added entity are also added. Nodes may be removed from consideration by dragging them to a discard area, here shown by the small circle of blue dots in the lower right of the figure. To aid users with navigation, the default display of labels is limited to those attached to nodes that are either in the center stage area or those within the range of the mouse pointer. A circular area around the mouse pointer also acts as a magnifying glass, making it easy to differentiate entities even if they are crowded into the display area.
            The command panel in the upper right of the display is a powerful tool for controlling the content of the visualization. With just a few clicks, users may execute commands to display or hide groupings of nodes from the stage area and control the display of those entities. Such selections may be made in conjunction with direct selections of elements in the stage area or outer ring, based on entity type, or based on the predicates by which entities are connected. Other features, such as general instructions for the tool (the Help function) and the controls for the layout of the stage area (Settings), are available in the same window through a tab interface.
            In the top left of the window is the ‘snippet display’. This area shows portions of the text from which the links in the center display area have been drawn. Snippets are revealed by clicking on a link between the two nodes. These snippets are important so that scholars may examine the criteria by which the connections that they are seeing are justified. 
            Conclusions
            Our paper will report on the results of the user testing conducted in early 2015. We will share our insights, as well as a set of recommendations for ontology and linked-data visualization based on the results of this study.
            Note
            1. The review by Katifori et al. (2007) in particular has been highly influential in terms of ontology visualizations.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bingham, J. and Sudarsanam, S. (2000). Visualizing Large Hierarchical Clusters in Hyperbolic Space. 
                        Bioinformatics,
                        16(7): 660–61, http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/16/7/660.full.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Cheng, G., Liu, M. and Qu, Y. (2013). NJVR: The NanJing Vocabulary Repository. In 
                        Semantic Web and Web Science. Springer, pp. 265–72, http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4614-6880-6_23.
                    
                    
                        Howse, J., Stapleton, G., Taylor, K. and Chapman, P. (2011). Visualizing Ontologies: A Case Study. In Aroyo, L., Welty, C., Alani, H., Taylor, J., Bernstein, A., Kagal, L., Noy, N. and Blomqvist, E. (eds), 
                        The Semantic Web. ISWC 2011. Berlin: Springer, pp. 257–72, http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-25073-6_17.
                    
                    
                        Katifori, A., Halatsis, C., Lepouras, G., Vassilakis, C. and Giannopoulou, E. (2007). Ontology Visualization Methods: A Survey. 
                        ACM Computing Surveys,
                        39(4): 10-es, doi:10.1145/1287620.1287621.
                    
                    
                        Kocbek, S., Kim, J., Perret, J. and Whetzel, P. L. (2013). Visualizing Ontology Mappings to Help Ontology Engineers Identify Relevant Ontologies for Their Reuse. In 
                        ICBO, pp. 34–39. http://bionlp.dbcls.jp/redmine/attachments/download/145/kocbek_icbo%20camera.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Kriglstein, S. and Wallner, G. (2010). Knoocks: A Visualization Approach for OWL Lite Ontologies. 
                        CISIS 2010: 4th International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems, pp. 950–55, doi:10.1109/CISIS.2010.55.
                    
                    
                        Lohmann, S., Negru, S. and Bold, D. (2014). The ProtégéVOWL Plugin: Ontology Visualization for Everyone. In 
                        The Semantic Web. ESWC 2014 Satellite Events. New York: Springer, pp. 395–400, http://2014.eswc-conferences.org/sites/default/files/eswc2014pd_submission_19.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Loskyll, M., Heckmann, D. and Glahn, C. (2009). Visualization of Spatial Knowledge with Ontology Trees and Adaptable Search Result Grids in the Era of Web3. 0. In Tochtermann, K. and Maurer, H (eds), Know’09, 
                        9th International Conference on Knowledge Management and Knowledge Technologies, Graz, Austria, pp. 385–90, http://dspace.learningnetworks.org/handle/1820/2060.
                    
                    
                        Motta, E., Mulholland, P., Peroni, S., d’ Aquin, M., Gomez-Perez, J. M., Mendez, V. and Zablith, F. (2011). A Novel Approach to Visualizing and Navigating Ontologies. 
                        The Semantic Web. 
                        ISWC 2011. Springer, pp. 470–86, http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-25073-6_30.
                    
                    
                        Plaisant, C., Grosjean, J. and Bederson, B. B. (2002). SpaceTree: Supporting Exploration in Large Node Link Tree, Design Evolution and Empirical Evaluation. 
                        INFOVIS 2002: IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pp. 57–64, doi:10.1109/INFVIS.2002.1173148, ftp://ftp.cs.umd.edu/pub/hcil/Reports-Abstracts-Bibliography/2002-05html/2002-05.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Simpson, J. and Brown, S. (2014). Inference and Linking on the Humanist’s Semantic Web. 
                        INKE, Building Partnerships to Transform Scholarly Publishing. Whistler, British Columbia.
                    
                    
                        Sivakumar, R. and Arivoli, P. V. (2011). Ontology Visualization Protégé Tools: A Review. 
                        International Journal of Advanced Information Technology,
                        1(4), https://idc-online.com/technical_references/pdfs/information_technology/ONTOLOGY%20VISUALIZATION.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Staticbrain. (2014). http://www.statisticbrain.com/total-number-of-pages-indexed-by-google/ (accessed 1 March 2015).
                    
                    
                        Storey, M., Musen, M., Silva, J., Best, C., Ernst, N., Ferguson, R. and Noy, N. (2001). Interactive Visualization to Enhance Ontology Authoring and Knowledge Acquisition in Protégé. In 
                        Protégé: Workshop on Interactive Tools for Knowledge Capture (K-CAP-2001), http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.22.8402.
                    
                    
                        Tufte, E. R. (2001). 
                        The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. 2nd ed. Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT.
                    
                    
                        Tufte, E. R. (2006). 
                        Beautiful Evidence. Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT.
                    
                    
                        Wang, T. D. and Parsia, B. (2006). CropCircles: Topology Sensitive Visualization of OWL Class Hierarchies. In 
                        Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Semantic Web, pp. 695–708.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Building Post-disaster Social Capital: A Current State Report on the UC CEISMIC Digital Archive
                
                    
                        Smithies
                        James
                    
                    University of Canterbury, New Zealand
                    james.smithies@canterbury.ac.nz
                
                
                    
                        Millar
                        Paul
                    
                    University of Canterbury, New Zealand
                    paul.millar@canterbury.ac.nz
                
                
                    
                        Thomson
                        Chris
                    
                    University of Canterbury, New Zealand
                    christopher.thomson@canterbury.ac.nz
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    archive
                    repository
                    infrastructure
                    preservation
                    open access
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The UC CEISMIC Digital Archive (Millar et al., n.d.) was developed to store and make publically available digital content produced during the course of a major earthquake sequence, which hit the Canterbury region in the South Island of New Zealand between 2010 and 2012. The project was presented at DH2012, Hamburg, when its key assets had just gone live (Smithies, 2012). This report on the current state of the archive is the most significant to be made at a digital humanities conference since then. It will report on governance, ethics, and technology but, more importantly, reflect on lessons learned and outline plans for the next decade of operation. 
            The Canterbury earthquake sequence has been described as a truly ‘large-scale’ event. It included a devastating 6.3 magnitude tremor on 22 February 2011 that resulted in 185 deaths and caused significant damage to large portions of the city. Over 12,000 aftershocks followed, including 31 greater than magnitude 5 on the Richter scale. Recovery is ongoing, with portions of the inner city only recently opened to the public. Significant infrastructure renewal and building remediation and construction are expected to continue across the city and surrounding areas for another decade (Johnston, 2014). The University of Canterbury, where the UC CEISMIC team is based, is planning for over 1,000 construction workers to be on campus during 2015 to repair earthquake damage and build a significant new science and engineering block. 
            The UC CEISMIC project has been positioned by the University of Canterbury as one of four flagship projects targeted to lead the way towards recovery, and leads a consortium of 11 national organizations that has recently expanded to include scientific as well as cultural heritage agencies. The archive currently stores 80,000 public items with a further 15,000 either embargoed or in process, ranging from audio and video interviews to images and official reports. Tens of thousands more items await ingestion. Significant lessons have been learned about data integration in post-disaster contexts, including but not limited to technical architecture, governance, ingestion process, and human ethics. Team members have recently gained access to almost 1 million historic tweets, which will be subject to computationally intensive analysis (Williford and Henry, 2012). 
            The depth and breadth of the CEISMIC project, and the innovative work it has prompted, are directly attributable to it being a digital humanities project. The archive was modeled on the Center for History and New Media’s September 11 Digital Archive
                1 and conceived, designed, and built by digital humanists. Its operational program office is staffed and managed by humanities and digital humanities graduates. Its core values are derived from principles instilled in all DH graduates: civic responsibility, the value of our digital cultural heritage, deployment of technology to enable research, use of open-source tools, the importance of craft skills and tacit knowledge, the importance of communication and community engagement, and our responsibility to future generations. It presents an excellent model for digital humanities teams faced with the problem of archiving significant post-disaster events. 
            
            The archive has implemented a technical architecture optimized to resolve issues with data integration in post-disaster contexts (Spennemann, 1999). The system relies on a bespoke research-oriented repository built using open-source tools and hosted at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand. It sits on virtualized university infrastructure, including access to New Zealand’s national High Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure and REANNZ high-speed broadband research network. Tiered backup and recovery stores all content on both high-availability disk and off-site tape storage. DigitalNZ, a unit within the New Zealand National Library, performs national metadata aggregation (Oldman et al., 2014). This allows the archive to leverage an extensive range of existing government IT infrastructure; although over 75% of CEISMIC content is hosted at the University of Canterbury, content is contributed from a wide range of government agencies. The federation is bonded at a technical level through DigitalNZ’s modified Dublin Core schema, with each contributing archive responsible for adding additional metadata if possible (Sugimoto et al., 2002). Access is provided through one key and two subsidiary websites, a mobile app, and two Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). Long-term preservation has been outsourced to New Zealand’s National Digital Heritage Archive (NDHA), a government agency responsible for preserving key national digital assets for the long term. 
            Unusually for a digital humanities project, CEISMIC has grown to become a significant ‘enterprise’-level undertaking, with a mature portfolio of services, relationships with peak government agencies from the chief executive level down, integration into the university’s project and technical change management functions, and strategic concerns that intersect not only with university but local and national government policy. Because of its vocal advocacy for digital cultural heritage archiving in the immediate post-disaster context, the project is positioned as a possible future repository of earthquake-related big data of radical size and scope (Spennemann, 1999). It is recognized as one of the success stories of the national earthquake experience; it reflects the development of post-disaster social capital in fundamental terms (Aldrich and Meyer, 2014). 
            Despite this, the CEISMIC project is well known as a community-focused effort with minimal staff and resources, struggling to attract external funding and move key operational staff from temporary to permanent contracts. Although there is awareness of the project at the ministerial level across multiple government departments, the scale of the CEISMIC ecosystem has made it difficult to secure a single business owner outside the research community. This tension is perhaps typical of many digital humanities projects: at once creative and vibrant, and under threat. 
            Despite this, and unlike other digital humanities post-disaster projects (Rivard, 2012), the intention is to keep the CEISMIC project operational for several decades into the future. This is a perhaps radical aspiration that contrasts with the more modest goals of similar projects, but it offers interesting perspectives for the global community. New Zealand has a particular set of cultural values (and institutional characteristics) that make projects like CEISMIC possible. Lack of state boundaries, a small digital GLAM sector, and a tradition of cultural innovation and inter-disciplinary cooperation combine to allow the CEISMIC ecosystem to grow. Unlike other cyber-infrastructure projects, the archive has exceeded its initial goals and is implementing strategies that appear capable of securing it a long-term future. Again, this was due to the application of digital humanities values rather than computer science and engineering values, and achieved because it evolved from the bottom up, rather than being imposed (even with the benefit of significant funding) from the top down (Dombrowski, 2013). For these reasons it presents the global digital humanities community with a useful model that encompasses design, development, ethics, governance, and community engagement. 
            Note
            1. Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media, September 11 Digital Archive, http://911digitalarchive.org.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Aldrich, D. P. and Meyer, M. A. (2014). Social Capital and Community Resilience. 
                        American Behavioral Scientist, 1 October. 
                    
                    
                        Dombrowski, Q. (2013). What Ever Happened to Project Bamboo? 
                        DH2013, Lincoln, NE, 19 July 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Johnston, L. (2014). Transforming the Social Contract for Natural Hazards Risk Management in New Zealand: Influences and Outcomes of Governance and Land Use Decisions Following the Canterbury Earthquakes. 
                        Third International Conference on Urban Disaster Risk Reduction, Boulder, CO, 28 September 2014. 
                    
                    
                        Millar, P., Smithies, J., Thomson, C., et al. (n.d.). 
                        UC CEISMIC Digital Archive. http://www.ceismic.org.nz. 
                    
                    
                        Oldman, D., Doerr, M. d., Jong, G. d., Norton, B. and Wikman, T. (2014). Realizing Lessons of the Last 20 Years: A Manifesto for Data Provisioning and Aggregation Services for the Digital Humanities (A Position Paper) System. 
                        D-Lib Magazine,
                        20(7/8) (July). 
                    
                    
                        Rivard, C. J. (2012). 
                        Archiving Disaster: A Comparative Study of September 11, 2001 and Hurricane Katrina. PhD thesis, University of California, Santa Cruz. 
                    
                    
                        Smithies, J. (2012). Digital Archives and Disaster Recovery: The Role of the Digital Humanities in Post-Earthquake Christchurch. 
                        DH2012, Hamburg, 20 July 2012. 
                    
                    
                        Spennemann, D. H. R. (1999). Cultural Heritage Conservation during Emergency Management: Luxury or Necessity? 
                        International Journal of Public Administration,
                        22(5): 745–804. 
                    
                    
                        Sugimoto, S., Baker, T. and Weibel, S. L. (2002). Dublin Core: Process and Principles. In 
                        Digital Libraries: People, Knowledge, and Technology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 11–25. 
                    
                    
                        Williford, C. and Henry, C. (2012). 
                        One Culture. Computationally Intensive Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences: A Report on the Experiences of First Respondents to the Digging Into Data Challenge. Council on Library and Information Resources, June.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Building The Early Modern Digital University: Using Social Network Analysis and Digital Visualization Tools To Bring The Early Modern Network Of Networks (EMNON) To Life
                
                    
                        Wilson
                        Emma Annette
                    
                    University of Alabama, United States of America
                    eawilson8@ua.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    network analysis
                    visualization
                
                
                    historical studies
                    literary studies
                    philosophy
                    renaissance studies
                    visualisation
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper will present the prototype of EMNON, the Early Modern Network Of Networks, an open-access research resource using social network analysis in tandem with digital visualization techniques to enable modern scholars to access, explore, and participate in the reconstruction of the social network of scholars working in Europe and America between 1500 and 1750 whose intellectual discoveries fuelled literary and historical developments throughout this period. I will discuss how EMNON expands on the work of Findlen et al. (2008–), Elson, Dames, and McKeown (2010), and Piper (2014) by pioneering the combination of NodeXL and VisualEyes to create digital visualizations of different facets of the Early Modern Network Of Networks. In using digital techniques to re-discover early modern social networks, EMNON aims to enable our modern global knowledge network to re-engage with our early modern counterparts in an interactive digital environment, so that we reach new understandings of how social relationships drove intellectual change in this period on a global scale. 
            Critical Background for the Project
            Findlen et al. (2008–) are using network analysis to reconstruct correspondence networks, whilst Elson, Dames, and McKeown (2010) used these techniques to investigate social networks of fictional characters. Turkel’s (2011) use of network analysis examining the NiCHE community is a representative example visualizing a modern knowledge network, whilst Klein’s (2012) engagement with Protovis to explore familial interactions documented in 
                The Papers of Thomas Jefferson provides insight into the utility of network analysis in animating historical social dynamics. One of the most exciting recent applications of network analysis in literary studies has been Piper’s (2014) research creating network graphs visualizing a variety of connections between the literary works of J. W. Goethe. In treating the texts themselves and their lexis as network nodes, Piper’s work is closely aligned to the approach used by EMNON in which not only people but also specific intellectual terms act as nodes within network diagrams. 
            
            Work conducted by the Centre for Early Modern Mapping, News, and Networks and the Centre for Early Modern Exchanges provides crucial early-modern-specific critical contexts. Ahnert’s 6 Degrees of Francis Bacon is a reference point, though EMNON differs from this in reconstructing a very specific early modern network of logicians and their readers. Aranda’s prosopographical study of scientific networks in Spain is also a useful comparison, as, like EMNON, he uses archival research to trace early modern intellectual relationships linking people with one another via the ideas that they promulgated. Likewise, Suzanne Sutherland’s research (2000–) exploring and visualizing the correspondence network of Athanasius Kircher via Palladio offers crucial blueprints for effective data collection and analysis from early modern manuscript materials in particular. These projects are allies with my work in transforming textual data into network visualizations, and by the time of DH 2015 it is my hope to have live dynamic network mapping capabilities on the EMNON website to provide a new approach for this kind of work. I concur that James Secord’s (2004) concept of ‘knowledge in transit’ is key to my project, and I will engage with his.
            EMNON’s Approach: Aims and Method
            Logic was the fundamental ‘
                ars artium, scientia scientiarum’ (art of arts, science of sciences) in the early modern period, providing the tools for creating all forms of written expression and textual analysis, and governing the selection of subject matter and the structuring of discourse. A plethora of logic textbooks were produced across Europe and America from 1500 to 1750, and these texts were used ubiquitously in schools and universities in this period to teach students to read, analyze texts, and write new works. Howell (1956), Kneale and Kneale (1962), and recently Mack (2011) have employed traditional approaches to establish a bibliographic printing history of this field. EMNON expands on this work to contend that intellectual developments in this fundamental ‘art of arts’ were propelled by an extensive global knowledge network of scholars working throughout Europe and America. These scholars operated in diverse confessional, geographic, chronological, and linguistic contexts, and yet it is through their intellectual exchanges and friendships that the early modern ‘art of arts’ evolved. 
            
            Whilst much work is being done using tools specifically designed for historical network analysis, there is a notable lacuna of engagement with software designed to tackle the social elements of social network analysis. EMNON is innovative in highlighting the importance of the sociability of early modern knowledge networks by using software explicitly created for the analysis of social networks via social media, NodeXL. This open-source graphing software enables complex multi-faceted analysis of relationships in a large dataset. NodeXL’s flexible, extendible format allows EMNON to visualize relationships between people and ideas in the early modern network in numerous different ways. In conjunction with the use of NodeXL to reconstruct social relationships within the early modern network of networks, EMNON also engages with the open-source tool VisualEyes developed at the University of Virginia, and used experimentally by Bill Ferster et al. to visualize Jefferson’s travels to England. EMNON is among the first projects to adopt VisualEyes as a tool for the visualization and animation of historical social networks, and in this paper I propose to discuss the benefits of doing so, furnishing examples from the prototype EMNON website, which will be live at DH2015. 
            
                Data Collection
            
            Working in rare book libraries for five years, I transcribed 1.5 million words from logic textbooks and literary works from 1550 to 1700.
                1
            
            Sources include publications by writers and thinkers involved, their manuscript discussions of early modern logic with one another, correspondence, marginalia, pedagogical exercises, university class lists, and records of book loans from private libraries, which combine to illuminate distinctive edges connecting people and ideas in the network.
            EMNON at Work: Examples
            In this paper I wish to show several examples of the utility of using NodeXL and VisualEyes in creating dynamic visualizations that capture the intricate layers of connectivity in a social network. In this proposal I wish to furnish some brief examples to illustrate the early results of the efficacy of these dual approaches, creating graph-based visualizations of the Early Modern Network Of Networks, and animated visualizations of this data bringing digitized primary source materials about this subject to life. 
             The following example documents the birth, genealogy, and migration of the logical term ‘procatarctic’. This term refers to an ‘external’ logical cause, and was coined and adopted by a very specific but diffuse network of scholars whose links had not been appreciated prior to their documentation and discovery within EMNON’s NodeXL graphs. Bartholomaeus Keckermann first uses the term ‘procatarctic’ in 1600. He identifies Galen as the intellectual progenitor of this word, and this engenders two of the first critical connections in the ‘procatarctic’ network: almost half a century earlier, also writing on ‘external cause’, Petrus Ramus references the same part of Galen in his 1543 
                Dialecticae Libri Duo, although without adopting this terminology. This small triadic relationship between two of the titans of early modern logic had been 
            
            unappreciated until discovered via NodeXL’s graph visualizations as follows:
            
                Figure 1. NodeXL visualizes a triadic relationship in EMNON.
            
            Yet the network of intrigue does not end with these three nodes. The term was promulgated through a subset of scholars working in Europe in the 17th century, from English Puritans Zachary Coke and John Milton to Dutch scholars Burgersdijck and Heereboord, who passed the torch to English Presbyterian dissenting academies via Samuel Jones and Charles Morton. Morton in turn used this term and its corresponding logical precepts to teach pupils including Daniel Defoe at the dissenting academy at Newington Green in the 1670s and 1680s, before immigrating to the Massachusetts Bay Colony where he introduced it to students at Harvard and later Yale. NodeXL enables users of EMNON to visualize this network in many different ways, including chronologically (Figure 2) and as a web of influence (Figure 3).
            
            Figure 2: A chronological graph of usage. Figure 3: A graph showing the web of influence and connections between users of this term.
            Alongside these graph representations, EMNON is pioneering the application of the VisualEyes software to bring this early modern social network to life. 
            VisualEyes enables me to animate the spread of ideas through the early modern network, displaying its results in video format with multiple different available views. For example, Figure 4 is a still from EMNON’s moving map, which has traced the geographic spread of the same term ‘procatarctic’ as it moved through Europe and eventually to America:
            
                
            
            Figure 4. EMNON uses VisualEyes to create a moving map tracing the geographic spread of the term ‘procatarctic’.
            In this paper I will also showcase the ways in which EMNON uses the interactive capabilities of VisualEyes to allow users an enriched engagement with this early modern social network. For instance, Figure 5 illustrates what happens if a user clicks on one of the ‘clickable’ waypoints on EMNON’s moving map tracking ‘procatarctic’:
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Interactive map whose ‘clickable’ labels display pictures and text about that particular user of the term ‘procatarctic’.
            VisualEyes enables users to discover multiple pages of additional information about any of the waypoints on EMNON’s moving map, including digitized primary materials and research resources. VisualEyes also has its own graphing capabilities that EMNON can draw upon to enable users to visualize specific subsets of the extensive early modern social network that it documents (Figure 6):
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Concept map showing the nexus of users of the term ‘procatarctic’.
            In pioneering the use of NodeXL and VisualEyes in the context of historical network analysis, EMNON aims to bring the early modern global knowledge network to life so that, in turn, a network of modern scholars can make new discoveries about the accomplishments, trials, and tribulations of the Early Modern Network Of Networks on a pan-European and transatlantic scale.
            Note
            1. Thanks to the following institutions for fellowships that enabled this research: the Rare Book and Manuscript Library at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for the John ‘Bud’ Velde Fellowship, the International Society for the History of Rhetoric for their fellowship award, and the University of St. Andrews for their Russell Trust Award.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ahnert, R. (2012–). Six Degrees of Francis Bacon. http://sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/page/2. 
                    
                    
                        Elson, D. K., Dames, N. and McKeown, K. R. (2010). Extracting Social Networks from Literary Fiction. In 
                        Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2010), Uppsala, Sweden.
                    
                    
                        Findlen, P., et al. (2008–). Mapping the Republic of Letters. https://republicofletters.stanford.edu.
                    
                    
                        Howell, W. S. (1956). 
                        Logic and Rhetoric in England, 1500–1700. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Klein, L. F. (2012). Social Network Analysis and Visualization in ‘The Papers of Thomas Jefferson’. 
                        DH2012, http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/social-network-analysis-and-visualization-in-the-papers-of-thomas-jefferson.1.html.
                    
                    
                        Kneale, W. C. and Kneale, M. (1962). 
                        The Development of Logic. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Mack, P. (2011). 
                        A History of Renaissance Rhetoric, 1380–1620. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        NodeXL. (n.d.). http://nodexl.codeplex.com/. 
                    
                    
                        Piper, A. (2014). 
                        Blue Periods: On Aging and Writing. http://txtlab.org/?p=278. 
                    
                    
                        Secord, J. (2004). Knowledge in Transit. 
                        Isis,
                        95(4) (December): 654–72.
                    
                    
                        Sutherland Duchacek, S. and Gorman, M. J. (2000–). Athanasius Kircher at Stanford. http://web.stanford.edu/group/kircher/cgi-bin/site/. 
                    
                    
                        Turkel, W. J. (2011). Social Network Analysis and Visualization. http://williamjturkel.net/2011/08/02/social-network-analysis-and-visualization/. 
                    
                    
                        VisualEyes. (n.d.). http://viseyes.org/. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Capturing Virtual Verse: A Needs Assessment for Access and Preservation of Online-Only Literature
                
                    
                        Green
                        Harriett Elizabeth
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    green19@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Fleming-May
                        Rachel
                    
                    University of Tennessee at Knoxville, United States of America
                    r-fm@utk.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    electronic literature
                    digital preservation
                    writing
                    digital publishing
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    internet / world wide web
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital tools have transformed the small press and little magazine literary publishing industry in fundamental ways. Poet Sandra Beasley (2009) observed, ‘As glossy magazines die by the dozen and blogs become increasingly influential, we face the reality that print venues . . . are rapidly ceding ground to Web-based publishing’ (1). Online literary journals, e-zines, and print publications’ websites have enabled literary works to disseminate beyond cultural, ethnic, and nationalistic boundaries, and have broadened the possibilities for incorporating these works into research and education efforts. 
            But while online literary publishing has expanded the availability of literary works, discovery and documentation of online-only or ‘born-digital’ literature is extremely limited: Many online-only works can only be accessed by browsing individual publications or searching for specific works or authors. Furthermore, increasing numbers of print journals publish some works only on their websites, but these works are typically not indexed in the same manner as those published in the publications’ print issues.
            In light of this issue, the authors launched a year-long investigation into access and discoverability of online-only literature, with a focus on online-only poetry, with support of an Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) National Leadership Planning Grant. This long paper discusses the analyzed results of surveys and interviews conducted with creative writing faculty, literary publishers, and librarians, and examines how digital publishing and electronic literature have transformed the research environments and professional practices of literary publishers and scholars alike.
            
                Background
            
            N. Katherine Hayles (2007) defines electronic literature as ’digital born’, a first-generation digital object created on a computer and (usually) meant to be read on a computer’. Online literary magazines descended from the zine culture of the mid-20th century, as photocopiers and mimeograph printing gave way in the 1990s to desktop computer publishing, and digital media already was being utilized in works of hypertext fiction and electronic literature created beginning in the 1980s (Wright, 2001; Hayles, 2007). Existing initiatives for documenting electronic literature include the Electronic Literature Organization’s ELO Directory (http://directory.eliterature.org/) and its Preservation, Archiving, and Dissemination study; the ELMCIP Electronic Literature Knowledge Database (http://elmcip.net/knowledgebase); the Australian Directory of Electronic Literature and Text-based Art repository (ADELTA); nt2 of Canada; as well as the work of the Consortium for Electronic Literature (CELL). 
            Despite these cataclysmic changes in the literary landscape, relatively little has been written about the impact of digital technologies and changing information behaviors in the literary arts. Paling conducted a series of studies examining uses of information technologies by literary publishers and writers, and also proposed a possible metadata schema for organizing literary works (Paling and Nilan, 2006; Paling 2008; Paling and Martin 2011; Paling 2011). Stevens and McCord (2005) also examined the preservation of e-zines and correlative factors for stability of e-zines. Green (2014) also recently explored the publishing behaviors of creative writing faculty members via a citation analysis of print and digital literary magazines. 
            But this is the first study to comprehensively explore the needs for access, curation, and preservation of online literary publishing via direct engagement with writers and publishers on the impact of digital technologies on research and professional practices in the literary arts.
            Data and Methodology
            This study examines poetry exclusively published on web-based media—ranging from static text on simple web pages to complex multimedia works—and for the purposes of this study is termed ‘online-only poetry’. The authors chose to focus on poetry, as it is one of the most prolific genres published on the Web, and the technologies used to create online poetic works are diverse and used for other literary genres as well. 
            To collect data input from stakeholders, the authors utilized a mixed methods approach of three online surveys and a subsequent series of nineteen individual interviews. The surveys and interviews were conducted with the three primary stakeholder groups identified by the authors: creative writing faculty, humanities librarians, and literary publishers. The respondent pool was gathered via several methods: For faculty, the authors identified institutions with graduate programs in creative writing with the Association of Writers and Writing Programs’ database; for literary publishers, the authors used the Poets &amp; Writers Magazine Database to identify online journals and their editors; and the librarians were solicited via the listserv for the Literatures in English section of the Association of College and Research Libraries.
            The authors received a total of nearly 200 responses to the surveys: approximately 960 writing faculty members in creative writing programs and departments were surveyed, with a response rate of 12.5%; approximately 152 humanities librarians were surveyed with a response rate of 58%; and approximately 945 literary journal editors and publishers were surveyed with a response rate of 13.4%. These response rates are on par with standard response rates to surveys. In follow-up interviews, the authors conducted seven interviews with creative writing faculty and professional writers, five with journal editors and publishers, and seven interviews with librarians. The surveys and interviews queried all respondents about their experiences in discovery, access, use, and preservation of online-only poetry, as well as publication practices with online journals and engagement with students, colleagues, and library users around online poetry.
            Analysis
            In the analysis of the survey and interview data, a significant number of writers and publishers observed that their poetic works had far broader accessibility, exposure, and impact from online publications than in print, and that online access had transformed their own reading practices as well. For example, survey respondents were asked to report on their online behavior regarding discovering and reading poetry, two activities that the authors regarded as connected but distinct for purposes of the survey. Respondents indicated that they visit the Web to read poetry with great frequency: 71% indicated they did so either daily (36%) or weekly (35%). Virtually all survey respondents (99%) reported using the Internet to read poetry, even if they were among the respondents who preferred print or expressed skepticism about the overall quality of work published online. As one publisher noted, ‘Publishing online permits greater access to, and for, a reading and writing audience. Not only due to the immediacy of publication release, but to the global nature of the Internet itself’. 
            The overarching goal of this study was to determine the need for, and interest in, an index to online-only poetic works. While our findings indicated enthusiasm for this prospective tool, the survey and interview revealed several issues related to its design and construction. One common concern was the curation of online poetry to indicate quality standards such as peer review; as one respondent noted, ‘We must be careful to retain as high standards for online publishing as we do for print’. Another major identified need was for features and functionality that would enable users to find and collect works by various criteria, or as one respondent put it, ‘It would be divine if there were something like Pandora for poetry!’ Respondents suggested metadata fields for categories such as genre, geographic location, and time period written, and they also indicated a desire to use the index to create and curate their own collections of digital poetry. Another notable need was for digital preservation of online-only poetry. 
            Suggested solutions to the access and preservation of born-digital poetry included a searchable index of online-only poetry, mobile phone apps, and an API feed of metadata, as well as potential collaborations with the organizations and stakeholders, such as the Electronic Literature Organization. But ultimately, most respondents did not see sharp divisions between the print and digital cultures of literary publishing. One respondent noted, ‘I want poetry online to help readers remember the page. In my best-case imaginings, online journals and podcasts get better, and print journals get better, and the online ones make it easy to get to the work and also remind people of other formats in which to experience it’.
            Conclusion
            One of the most notable results of the study was how literary culture long has navigated between the printed page and digital networks in ways that foreshadowed how many humanities scholars today intertwine digital tools and archival materials. As one poet noted,
            Scholars I’ve met who specialize in digital media seem to be very invested in the idea of the opposition. . . . For me it is about an expanded set of artistic tools, presences, venues: diversity and range. It is not about *reducing* the range of these experiences to a digital experience.
            This perspective on the experimental approach to the use of digital technologies in creative works reveals the expanding role of digital content in contemporary literary culture. This study shows how this transformation reveals a new avenue of humanities data curation that engages scholars, information professionals, and publishers equally in the essential work of making digital literature accessible to all. 
            Funding
            This work was supported by the Institute for Museum and Library Services [grant number LG-51-12-0499-12].
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Beasley, S. (2009). From Page to Pixels: The Evolution of Online Journals.
                         Poets &amp; Writers (May/June): 1–5, http://www.pw.org/content/page_pixels_evolution_online_journals.
                    
                    
                        Green, H. E. (2014). Literature as a Network: Creative-Writing Scholarship in Literary Magazines. 
                        portal: Libraries and the Academy, 
                        14(2): 217–38. 
                    
                    
                        Hayles, N. K. (2007). 
                        Electronic Literature: What Is It? http://eliterature.org/pad/elp.html.
                    
                    
                        Paling, S. (2008). Technology, Genres, and Value Change: Literary Authors and Artistic Use of Information Technology. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
                        59(8): 1238–51. 
                    
                    
                        Paling, S. (2009). Mapping Techno-Literary Spaces: Adapting Multiple Correspondence Analysis for Literature and Art. 
                        Information Research: An International Electronic Journal, 
                        14(2), http://www.informationr.net/ir/14-2/paper401.html. 
                    
                    
                        Paling, S. (2011). Developing a Metadata Element Set for Organizing Literary Works: A Survey of the American Literary Community. 
                        Knowledge Organization, 
                        38(3): 262–77. 
                    
                    
                        Paling, S., and Martin, C. (2011). Transformative Use of Information Technology in American Literary Writing: A Pilot Survey of Literary Community Members. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
                        62(5): 947–62. 
                    
                    Paling, S. and Nilan, M. (2006). Technology, Genres, and Value Change: The Case of Little Magazines.
                         
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
                        57(7): 862–72.
                    
                    
                        Stevens, J. (2004). Long-Term Literary E-Zine Stability: Issues and Access in Libraries. 
                    
                    
                        Technical Services Quarterly,
                        22(1): 21–32.
                    
                    
                        Stevens, J. and McCord, S. (2005). Long-Term E-Zine Stability: A Predictive Model. 
                    
                    
                        Technical Services Quarterly,
                        22(3): 29–45.
                    
                    
                        Sukovic, S. (2008). Convergent Flows: Humanities Scholars and Their Interactions with 
                    
                    Electronic Texts. 
                        Library Quarterly
                        78(3): 263–84.
                    
                    
                        Wright, F. A. (2001). 
                        From Zines to Ezines: Electronic Publishing and the Literary
                    
                    
                        Underground. Doctoral dissertation. Retrieved from ProQuest, UMI Dissertations Publishing (3034433): 8–10.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Challenges of an XML-based Open-Access Journal: Digital Humanities Quarterly
                
                    
                        Flanders
                        Julia
                    
                    Northeastern University, United States of America
                    j.flanders@neu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Piez
                        Wendell
                    
                    Piez Consulting Services
                    wapiez@wendellpiez.com
                
                
                    
                        Walsh
                        John
                    
                    Indiana University
                    jawalsh@indiana.edu
                
                
                    
                        Terras
                        Melissa
                    
                    University College London
                    m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    open access
                    digital publishing
                    XML
                    TEI
                
                
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    xml
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Background and Technical Infrastructure
                
                    DHQ’s technical design was constrained by a set of higher-level goals and needs. As an early open-access journal of digital humanities, the journal had an opportunity to participate in the curation of an important segment of the scholarly record in the field. This meant that it was more than usually important that the article data be stored and curated in a manner that would maximize the potential for future reuse. In addition to mandating the use of open standards, this aim also strongly indicated that the data should be represented in a semantically rich format. Of equal concern was the need for flexibility and the ability to experiment with both the underlying data and the publication interface, throughout the life of the journal, without constraint from the publication system. Both of these considerations moved the journal in the direction of XML, which would give us the ability to represent any semantic features of the journal articles we might find necessary for either formatting or subsequent research. It would also permit us to design a journal publication system, using open-source components, that could be closely adapted to the 
                    DHQ data. At the journal’s founding, several alternative publishing platforms were proposed (including the Open Journal System), but none were XML-based and none offered the opportunity for open-ended experimentation that we needed.
                
                
                    DHQ’s technical infrastructure is a standard XML publishing pipeline built using components that are familiar in the digital humanities. Submissions are received and managed through OJS through the copyediting stage, at which point articles are converted to basic TEI using OxGarage (http://www.tei-c.org/oxgarage/). Further encoding and metadata are added by hand, and items from the articles’ bibliographies are entered into a centralized bibliographic system that is also XML-based. All journal content is maintained under version control using Subversion. The journal’s organizational information concerning volumes, issues, and tables of contents is represented in XML using a locally defined schema. The journal uses Cocoon, an XML/XSLT pipelining tool, to process the XML components and generate the user interface. 
                
            
            
                
                    DHQ’s Evolving Data and Interface
                
                As noted above, 
                    DHQ’s approach to the representation of its article data has from the start been shaped by an emphasis on long-term data curation and a desire to accommodate experimentation. The specific encoding practices have evolved significantly during the journal’s lifetime. The first schema developed for the journal was deliberately homegrown and was designed based on an initial informal survey of article submissions and articles published in other venues. Following this initial period of experimentation and bottom-up schema development, once the schema had settled into a somewhat stable form we expressed it as a TEI customization and did retrospective conversion on the existing data to bring it into conformance with the new schema. At several subsequent points, significant new features have been added to the journal’s encoding: for example, explicit representation of revision sites within articles (for authorial changes that go beyond simple correction of typographical errors), enhancements to the display of images through a gallery feature, and adaptation of the encoding of bibliographic data to a centralized bibliographic management system.
                
                These changes to the data have typically been driven by emerging functional requirements, such as the need to show where an article has been revised or the requirements of the special issue on comics as scholarship. However, they also respond to a broader set of requirements that this data should represent the intellectual contours of scholarship rather than simply interface. For example, the encoding of revision notes retains the text of the original version, identifies the site of the revision, and supports an explanatory note by the author describing the reason for the revision. Although 
                    DHQ’s current display uses this data in a simple manner to permit the reader to read the original or revised version, the data would support more advanced study of revision across the journal. Similarly, although our current display uses the encoding of quoted material and accompanying citations in very straightforward ways, the same data could readily be used to generate a visualization showing most commonly quoted passages, quotations that commonly occur in the same articles, and similar analyses of the research discourse. The underlying data and architecture lend themselves to incremental expansion.
                
            
            
                Analysis
                The approach 
                    DHQ has taken offers several significant advantages and also some corresponding disadvantages. The most important advantages are
                
                 • The autonomy the journal has to control all aspects of its own data modeling and interface.
                 • The high value of the resulting data, from a historiographic perspective.
                 • The ease of long-term curation of the data, including continuing evolution of our modeling decisions.
                 • The ease of long-term evolution of the publication infrastructure, including migration to other XML-based systems as needed.
                 • The scalability of a template-based infrastructure: with the system in place, each article requires no incremental work in styling or design; all effort goes towards consistent representation of semantically valued features.
                These advantages all carry a burden of cost and effort: autonomy and control necessarily entail responsibility for maintaining appropriate levels of expertise and undertaking the labor necessary to build and revise technical systems. Because our article work flow includes some hand encoding in TEI, our managing editors need to be better trained and more expert than if they were simply formatting articles in Word and exporting PDF. However, there are also some less obvious tradeoffs. 
                    DHQ’s publication model gains its efficiencies and scalability through an emphasis on uniform handling of repeated features, but this means that it is comparatively difficult to accommodate individual authorial requests for special handling. These entail not only extra effort at the time of publication but also the long-term prospect of special attention during the future data curation activities and updates to the interface and publication system. Authors familiar with content management systems such as WordPress or Scalar are accustomed to being able to exercise a significant level of control over the formatting and behavior of their text and accompanying media such as images and video. Long-term data curation is a less visible feature of such publishing systems. 
                
                Even more interesting and challenging are the special cases that entail semantically distinctive features. Although such submissions are rare, they have provided some valuable test cases in which the data being represented is not a straightforward ‘article’ but some other rhetorical mode: commented program code, dynamic HTML that provokes reader interaction, an article in the form of a comic book. In handling these cases, 
                    DHQ has sought to find ways to accommodate the distinctive form of the original piece while also giving it a proxy presence within the standard 
                    DHQ XML archive, so that its content can be searched and analyzed as part of the larger 
                    DHQ corpus of DH scholarship. As these cases accumulate, the editors seek to identify repeated needs that could become part of the regular 
                    DHQ feature set. 
                
                In the full version of this paper, we will consider in greater detail the role of authorial design in digital humanities publication, and the possible convergences between XML-based systems like 
                    DHQ and content-management based systems like Scalar.
                
            
            
                Future Directions
                
                    DHQ is now completing a multiyear project to centralize its bibliography, and the next step will be to develop interface features that exploit this data. We are also in the planning stages of a project to explore internationalization of the journal through a series of special issues dedicated to individual languages. In both cases, these amplifications of the journal represent natural extensions of the journal’s existing architecture, and although both are substantial projects, they are made feasible by the investment already made in strongly modeled data and an extensible publication infrastructure. In the fuller version of this paper, we will discuss both of these developments in greater detail.
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Character Network Analysis of Émile Zola's Les Rougon-Macquart
                
                    
                        Rochat
                        Yannick
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    yannick.rochat@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    character networks
                    centrality
                    index
                    theory of the character
                    distant reading
                
                
                    literary studies
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this work, we use network analysis methods to sketch a typology of fiction novels based on characters and their proximity in the narration. We construct character networks modelling the 20 novels composing 
                Les Rougon-Macquart, written by Émile Zola. To categorise them, we rely on methods that track down major and minor characters relative to the character-systems. For that matter, we use centrality measures such as degree and eigenvector centrality. Eventually, with this analysis of a small corpus, we open the stage for a large-scale analysis of novels through their character networks. 
            
            Character Network Analysis 
            A character network is a model of a novel’s plot focusing on a single dimension among the different types of narrative entities—that is, the 
                character or, at the level of the whole novel, the character-system: 
            
            [. . .] the arrangement of multiple and differentiated character-spaces—differentiated configuration and manipulations of the human figure—into a unified narrative structure. (Woloch, 2003, 14])
            Characters are represented in the network by nodes. The relations among them are determined on the basis of their proximity in the narration: if two characters appear side-by-side more often than a given threshold, then a link (i.e., an edge) is created between them in the network (Rochat, 2014). If two characters never appear close together, or not significantly enough according to the defined threshold, then they are not linked in the character network. 
            As examples of existing research, Franco Moretti explored the narrative importance of a character by comparing some features of a character network before and after deletion of the said character (Moretti, 2011), while Mac Carron and Kenna (2012) extracted the structures of three mythological works (
                Beowulf, 
                Iliad, and 
                Táin) and compared them one to another and to real social networks, concluding that they were ‘discernable from real social networks’ and eventually proposing to rank them ‘from the real to the fictitious’ (5). 
            
            Les Rougon-Macquart
            The novels constituting 
                Les Rougon-Macquart were published between 1871 and 1893, starting with 
                La Fortune des Rougon and ending with 
                Le Docteur Pascal. They cover a historical period going from 1852 to 1870. In these, Zola arranged a society of fictional and real characters in dissimilar ways, once focusing on a single character, and at other times dividing the attention between a few complementary protagonists, along with other characters recurring from one novel to another: 
            
            I wish to explain how a family [. . .] conducts itself in a given social system. [. . .] I shall endeavour to discover and follow the thread of connection which leads mathematically from one man to another. (Zola, 1967 [E. A. V. Merton, trans.])
            In his study of 
                Les Rougon-Macquart’s character-systems, Philippe Hamon writes that some novels have a main protagonist, while others have more than one protagonist: 
            
            Polyfocalisation of the system on a few heroes—rather than unfocalisation, which alternately shares the ‘hero spots’ of the system—polyfocalisation of which 
                Pot-Bouille, 
                La Bête Humaine and 
                La Débâcle are the best examples, processes issued from a network made of marked ‘nodes’ and interstitial light layers, which take distance from a fixed ‘pyramid-like’ hierarchy (a hero, secondary and marginal characters, etc., according to a non-adjustable scale) of classic works. (Hamon, 1998, 320, my translation)
            
            We propose a mathematical formalism to study these questions in the section on typology. The index of 
                centralisation measures how centralised the network is, i.e., how much more central the most central character is compared to all the other characters, ‘central’ being an open concept thus far. Then, 
                coreness highlights who the characters at the center of the narration are.
            
            The Index 
            In order to construct the character networks, we consider an index built on the whole series (Zola, 1967, 1795–884), for which the indexer detailed his/her choices. It is a table compiling the occurrences of characters, from which we extract the co-occurrences that lead to the determination of the sets of edges. Contrarily to an automatic extraction process, we can rely here on the professional work of scholars, which provides exact positions at a page-level by disambiguating characters cited by nicknames, pronouns, or multiple names. 
            The index contains supplementary information, from which we use the novel names (characters frequently appear in more than one novel) and the characters’ descriptions to distinguish characters with the same name—for example, the six different characters named ‘Rose’. 
            Eventually, we transformed the index into a table composed of 40,768 entries, each one of them having three attributes: name of character, name of novel, and page. The table contains 1,343 unique characters and 7,290 unique pages. 
            The Networks 
            The table is then divided into 20 smaller tables, each one corresponding to a novel. We apply the method developed in Rochat (2014) to include co-occurrences on overlapping pairs of pages in order to take characters appearing in the same sentence but on different pages into account when creating the edges, since they need to be linked together. We build bipartite networks from these tables, with one set of nodes composed of the characters and the other set composed of the pages. Then we compute the graph projections on the sets of characters to obtain the characters’ networks, shown in Figure 1 (see Fruchterman and Reingold, 1991, for the layout algorithm). 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The character networks of the 
                Rougon-Maquart’s 20 novels.
            
            The character networks show significant diversity (Table 1). The number of nodes (i.e., the 
                order) varies from 16 to 88, and the number of edges (i.e., the 
                size) from 68 to 1,181. Works like 
                Le Rêve and 
                La Faute de l’Abbé Mouret feature few characters and relations: this is consistent with their intimate subjects. In comparison, 
                Pot-Bouille, 
                Au Bonheur des Dames, and 
                Germinal feature many characters and relations: they are composed of a rich crowd along with narrative events involving many characters. 
            
            
                
            
            Table 1. Basic network properties. 
            The 
                density of a network is the ratio of the number of existing edges by the number of all possible edges. Low density implies that the characters are sparsely connected, while high density means that the characters are more intricately connected to each other. In our case, this property can be used for categorisation, since large (
                La Débâcle) and rather small (
                La Fortune des Rougon) character networks obtain small density values. However, large density values can also be attained by large (
                Germinal) as well as the small (
                Le Rêve) character networks.
            
            Typology Based on Major vs. Minor Characters 
            In this section, we develop two ways to categorise character networks by exploiting the distributions of major and minor characters. The first one consists in studying 
                centralisation, a global measure based on the centrality measures of all the characters, while the second one measures the 
                coreness of the network—that is, the size of a particularly dense subgraph that we view as a core of protagonists of the network.
            
            Centralisation 
            Centrality is a wide concept mathematically expressed by families of measures reflecting particular properties of the network under study. For example, degree is one of them. Here, we use in particular betweenness centrality: it measures how much a character acts as an intermediary at the level of the network. Betweenness centralisation is the global network measure based on betweenness centrality: we sum the differences between the maximal betweenness score and each node’s betweenness score, and then divide it by the theoretical maximal sum (Freeman, 1979). A centralisation index returns a value located between 0 and 1: a value close to 0 means that there is no node playing a central role (e.g., a ring graph), while a value close to 1 implies that there is a centralised structure (e.g., a star graph). 
            We observe the scores in Table 2: most of the networks have low betweenness centralisation. However, those that rank first are significantly more centralised: 
                L’Oeuvre, L’Argent, Le Docteur Pascal, and 
                Son Excellence Eugène Rougon have one and only one protagonist (the main character of 
                L’Argent appears on every page), and 
                La Débâcle is the story of two men at the front and their strong friendship.
            
            
                Table 2. Centralisation scores.
            
            Coreness 
            In order to delimit the 
                core of the network (in opposition to the 
                periphery), we consider the notion of 
                k-core (Seidman, 1983; Csardi and Nepusz, 2006), that is, the maximal induced subgraph with all its nodes having a degree equal or superior to 
                k. Normalised by its respective network order, the highest possible 
                k value in a network is a measure of how compact the main group of characters is. We call it 
                coreness. 
            
            Results are shown in Figure 2, plotted with the networks’ orders. 
                La Faute de l’Abbé Mouret’s character network is composed of a very dense component consisting of more than half the total number of characters. We remark that among the three ‘polyfocalised’ novels noticed earlier by Hamon, two of them (
                Pot-Bouille and 
                Germinal) have high values of coreness, meaning that the central and prominent characters are well connected among them among themselves and act as interchangeable figures. However, for the third one, 
                La Débâcle, the coreness is low, suggesting that having strong protagonists in a sparser network diminishes the strength of the core of protagonists. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Coreness.
            Conclusion
            In this work, we have shown a descriptive approach to compare character networks. Our results show that it is possible to discriminate them. By iteration, the comparison of character networks leads to the analysis of large numbers of character networks.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Csardi, G. and Nepusz, T. (2006). The igraph Software Package for Complex Network Research. 
                        InterJournal Complex Systems,
                        1695. 
                    
                    
                        Freeman, L. C. (1979). Centrality in Social Networks I: Conceptual Clarification. 
                        Social Networks,
                        1(3): 215–39. 
                    
                    
                        Fruchterman, T. M. and Reingold, E. M. (1991). Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement. 
                        Software: Practice and Experience,
                        21(11): 1129–64.
                    
                    
                        Hamon, P. (1998). 
                        Le personnel du roman: Le système des personnages dans les Rougon-Macquart d’Émile Zola. Librairie Droz. 
                    
                    
                        Mac Carron, P. and Kenna, R. (2012). Universal Properties of Mythological Networks. 
                        Europhysics Letters, 
                        99(2) (July): 28002.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        New Left Review,
                        68 (April). 
                    
                    
                        Rochat, Y. (2014). 
                        Character Networks and Centrality. Ph.D. thesis, University of Lausanne. 
                    
                    
                        Seidman, S. B. (1983). Network Structure and Minimum Degree. 
                        Social Networks,
                        5(3): 269–87. 
                    
                    
                        Woloch, A. (2003). 
                        The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the Protagonist in the Novel. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
                    
                    
                        Zola, É. (1967). 
                        Les Rougon-Macquart. Gallimard.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Collaborative Digitisation: UCL’s Medieval Manuscript Fragment Project
                
                    
                        Terras
                        Melissa
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Graham-Matheson
                        Helen
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    helen.graham-matheson.12@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Furlong
                        Gillian
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    g.furlong@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Wright
                        Steven
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    steven.wright@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Makin
                        Katy
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    k.makin@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Gibson
                        Adam
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    adam.gibson@ucl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Digitisation
                    Library
                    Medieval
                    Manuscripts
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    image processing
                    medieval studies
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Many collections of medieval manuscripts are now being digitised and showcased online, but in order to do so, a complete pipeline of identification, cataloguing, imaging, and delivery is needed, which can be prohibitively expensive and time consuming. Teams seldom have all the skill sets in place to deal with the identification of complex historical texts. It is also rare to attempt any advanced imaging techniques to aid the reading of manuscript material. We report here on an interdisciplinary collaboration to analyse fragments of unknown medieval manuscript material held in UCL Special Collections. We demonstrate that a centre for digital humanities can provide the catalyst to undertake such a small, yet intensive, digitization project within an institutional context, and, working in joint collaboration, can aid in the process of digitization, communicate with a wider online audience to help with identification of material, and promote interdisciplinary working to prepare material for further research in heritage science. 
            The Collection 
            UCL Special Collections,
                1 one of the foremost university collections of manuscripts, archives, and rare books in the United Kingdom, hosts fine collections of medieval manuscripts, early printed books, and archival material. A collection of 157 medieval manuscript fragments have been in the possession of the Library for decades, but have never been fully described and are generally unknown to the wider community. They were purchased in the early 20th century in an initiative led by a professor of German studies at UCL, Robert Priebsch, who had long been trying to secure a group of manuscripts for palaeographic study (Munby, 1960, 38). Money was raised by subscription amongst UCL staff (Munby, 1960), and it is thought that this collection was purchased at auction in Bonn in 1921; unfortunately relevant records did not survive the war (Munby, 1960, 42). Although mentioned briefly in a catalogue of UCL’s holdings in the 1930s (University College, London and Coveney, 1935), the manuscripts are yet to be fully described and researched. Mostly originating from Germany, they have been found to contain rare examples of early musical notation as well as legal, religious, medical, and other texts from a range of dates (mainly 10th–14th centuries), styles, and different languages (including Latin, German, Hebrew, English, French, and Greek). Consistent with having been used in bindings for later printed works, the majority of the fragments have significant damage, most usually remnants of, or loss of text removed by, adhesive. They are variously cut, torn, and faded, with pest damage and various accretions. 
            
            Digital Humanities and Digitisation 
            Although most effort in the digital humanities is focussed on the production, analysis, and visualization of text, there is a growing interest in the community towards digital imaging. Digitisation can produce adequate scholarly surrogates of historical documents (Terras, 2008). However, improvements in digital image processing and analysis have allowed the development of a number of techniques that can reveal a greater wealth of information about the originals, beyond traditional digitisation technologies (MacDonald, 2006). Scholars have been able to image, analyse, and recover more information from historical texts, primarily using a technique called multispectral imaging (Chabries et al., 2003; Salerno et al., 2007; Tanner and Bearman, 2009). Over the past few years, UCL has been building up its expertise in cultural and heritage imaging, working on a range of projects that involve developing and analyzing capture methods for primary historical texts (for example, see Pal et al., 2014; MacDonald et al., 2013; Giacometti et al., forthcoming). 
            We conceived the Fragment Project as the inaugural scholarly programme of the recently opened UCL Multi-Modal digitisation suite,
                2 a facility for teaching and research in digitisation technologies jointly supported by UCL Faculty of Arts and Humanities,
                3 UCL Faculty of Engineering Sciences,
                4 and UCL Library Services
                5 coordinated by UCL Centre for Digital Humanities,
                6 completed in September 2013. In working together on the digitisation of the manuscript fragments, we aimed to make the fragments available to a wider scholarly audience for the first time, help in their identification and classification, but also to categorize the physical properties of this set of primary source material held locally in UCL Special Collections, so that we can use the fragments in our research aimed at developing new imaging techniques for recovering text in deteriorated historical manuscripts. 
            
            The UCL Medieval Manuscript Fragment Project 
            This project was given a small amount of seed funding from both the Library and UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (totaling £3000) to allow the classification, identification, digitization, and cataloguing of the collection. The first phase of the programme, undertaken between November 2013 and April 2014, involved surveying all fragments in the collection, to identify—where possible—the language, content, and date of the fragments, and to quantify the physical condition of each (for example, Cracks, Flaking, Fading, Abrasion, Ink Water Solubility, Loss, Ink Offset, etc.). We were lucky to employ, part time, a recently finished PhD student with wide-ranging linguistic and palaeographic expertise to undertake this overview. Fifty detailed descriptions of selected fragments were produced and used as the basis for a full archive catalogue, which was produced in accordance with international standards using CALM software.
                7 Two hundred seventy-nine high-resolution images of the collection were produced. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. An example of a fragment identified and digitized. Thirteenth-century leaf from a hymnal, parchment. Text in a gothic script in two columns interspersed with musical notation in a German gothic ‘hufnagel’ style on a 4-line stave with C marked. UCL Library Services Special Collections MS.
            Although we were successful in identifying the source of most of the fragments (which are varied: a fragment of St Paul’s Second Epistle to the Romans, a miniscule portion of the Greek play 
                Medea from the 4th or 5th century AD, a Gregorian chant based on Psalm 65), the digital humanists in our group also encouraged the use of social media to connect with a wider community of scholars (UCL does not have a music department, and we had no expertise in our team to help with identification of the music fragments). Others have had success in the identification of medieval fragments via crowdsourcing (Erwin, 2013), so we turned to the hive mind. Liaising with groups such as the Plainsong and Medieval Music Society on Facebook (https://www.facebook.com/groups/108654282490212/) and Musicologie Médiévale (http://gregorian-chant.ning.com/) allowed us to communicate with other manuscript experts and gain further insights, identification, and classification.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Successful outreach via social media to aid in further identification of
            fragments.
            Many of our fragments are now online and can be seen at bit.ly/uclmedievalfragments. This phase of the programme will have several additional benefits for teaching, research, and public engagement. The manuscripts will be showcased in exhibitions and disseminated online, forming a unique set of teaching and research materials. However, the innovative approach of this activity is in being able to prioritise which manuscripts will be most useful to focus efforts on, in order to help read damaged and deteriorated texts via advanced multi-modal imaging techniques, and at the time of writing we are moving into the final phase of the project, quantifying best practice in using multispectral imaging on damaged and abraded text. We now have a range of locally held, categorized medieval fragments with which to work as we perfect our techniques before visiting other archives to image historically important manuscripts.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. MS FRAG/MUSIC/15, an antiphonal featuring Gregorian chants. Text and square musical notation in black with 4-line staves ruled in red. Only 40% of text legible: an example of a fragment we can work on with multispectral imaging to improve legibility of the text.
            Conclusion
            Framing the project as a digital humanities one opened up access to financial and physical resources provided by UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, gave easy access to institutional infrastructure for setting up and maintaining digital projects (such as data backup for digitisation), allowed identification and employment of staff to aid in the surveying and identification of the fragments, aided in reaching out to a wider online community to help identify fragments of unknown provenance, and allowed a large part of the digitization of the collection to be carried out. In doing this work we are now prepared to undertake novel imaging research with the collection (demonstrating the groundwork that is necessary before undertaking advanced cultural heritage imaging). It should be stressed that we could not have undertaken this project without the full support of the Library, whose own investment allowed refining of the collected data, cataloguing, mounting of the digitized material into the institutional content management system, and further digitization. By pooling resources and expertise, we have undertaken identification, cataloguing, and digitization of a collection, for a mere few thousand pounds, whilst preparing for a more advanced phase of imaging research. The project demonstrates, then, that centres for digital humanities, working in equal collaboration with institutional partners, can provide complementary resources and expertise to support complex digitization processes, whilst this mutual relationship can lead to future novel research endeavors.
            Notes
            1. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/special-collections.
            2. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/facilities/digitisation-suite.
            3. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ah.
            4. http://www.engineering.ucl.ac.uk/.
            5. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/.
            6. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh.
            7. http://www.axiell.co.uk/calm.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Chabries, M., Booras, S. W. and Bearman, G. H. (2003). Imaging the Past: Recent Applications of Multispectral Imaging Technology to Deciphering Manuscripts. 
                        Antiquity, 
                        77(296): 359–72. 
                    
                    
                        Erwin, M. (2013). Crowdsourcing the Arcane: Utilizing Flickr (and Google) to Describe Medieval Manuscript Fragments. Updated transcript of talk given at 
                        Society of Southwest Archivists Annual Meeting, Austin, TX, http://micahcapstone.wordpress.com/2013/06/01/crowdsourcing-the-arcane-utilizingflickr-and-google-to-describe-medieval-manuscript-fragments/.
                    
                    
                        Giacometti, A., Terras, M. and Gibson, A. (forthcoming). Objectively Evaluating Text Recovery Methodologies for Multispectral Images of Palimpsests. 
                        International Journal of Heritage in the Digital Era, 15th issue dedicated to Computer Vision in Cultural Heritage.
                    
                    
                        MacDonald, L. W. (2006). Digital Heritage: Applying Digital Imaging to Cultural Heritage. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        MacDonald, L., Giacometti, A., Campagnolo, A., Robson, S., Weyrich, T., Terras, M. and Gibson, A. (2013). Multispectral Imaging of Degraded Parchment. 
                        Computational Color Imaging, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
                        7786: 143–57.
                    
                    
                        Munby, A. N. L. (1960). 
                        The Dispersal of the Phillips Library. University Press, Cambridge, http://books.google.com/books?id=91e5AAAAIAAJ.
                    
                    
                        Pal, K., Schuller, C., Panozzo, D., Sorkine-Hornung, O. and Weyrich, T. (2014). Content-Aware Surface Parameterization for Interactive Restoration of Historical Documents. 
                        Computer Graphics Forum (Proc. Eurographics),
                        33(2).
                    
                    
                        Salerno, E., Tonazzini, A. and Bedini, L. (2007). Digital Image Analysis to Enhance Underwritten Text in the Archimedes Palimpsest. 
                        IJDAR
                        9(2–4): 79–87.
                    
                    
                        Tanner, S. and Bearman, G. (2009). Digitizing the Dead Sea Scrolls. 
                        IS&amp;T Archiving 2009, Final Program and Proceedings, pp. 119–23.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2008). 
                        Digital Images for the Information Professional. Ashgate, London.
                    
                    
                        University College, London and Coveney, D. K. (1935). 
                        A Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Library of University College, London. Printed for University of London, University College.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Collaborative, Speculative Technologically-Enhanced Mobile Libraries, Or How Davidson College Students Learned to Stop Worrying and Love The Library
                
                    
                        Christian-Lamb
                        Caitlin
                    
                    Davidson College, North Carolina, United States of America
                    cachristianlamb@davidson.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    mobile libraries
                    community-building
                    digital humanities pedagogy
                    collaborative projects
                    GLAM
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster will discuss a collaborative assignment given to Dr. Mark Sample’s DIG 350–History and Future of the Book class, in its first iteration of being taught. The course was offered through the Digital Studies Department in fall 2014 at Davidson College, a small, private liberal arts college in North Carolina in the United States. 
            As part of their coursework, the 10 enrolled undergraduate students were asked to come up with speculative designs of a ‘technologically enhanced mobile library’, with assistance from the college’s associate archivist, Caitlin Christian-Lamb. This project was born out of collaboration between Sample and Christian-Lamb, after discussing a shared interest in experimental literature, mobile libraries, literacy, and community-building. The assignment was worth 10% of each student’s grade, and when planned by Sample and Christian-Lamb, included a series of discussions on libraries, archives, and mobile capabilities to set the table for students’ free-form exploration of possible designs. The concept of the technologically enhanced mobile library as described to the class was a combination community bookshelf, literacy outreach module, and experimental book-based playground of sorts, with many of the core elements and purposes left to students to define and expand upon. The example mobile library design given was of a bicycle with bookshelves attached, tracked by GPS and with its changing collections monitored by weekly photographs uploaded to a website or Twitter account. A possible research use would be to gather statistics on literacy and reading rates of local schools, and then place the mobile library near school buildings, advertise its services, and reevaluate whether this had an effect on the amount that students read, or increased levels of literacy.
            However, prior to the first discussion, out of curiosity Christian-Lamb asked the students to take the Pew Research Internet Project’s Library User Quiz, and was surprised that find that, although the majority of the students fell into the Pew-defined ‘Library Lovers’ and ‘Information Omnivores’ groups, the group data indicated that a smaller percentage than the general public felt that libraries promoted literacy or that a local public library closure would have a major impact on the community as a whole. Based on these results, the first project discussion instead veered in the direction of libraries as public intellectual commons, the role of librarians and archivists, and what values library services are designed to fill. Subsequent class discussions elaborated ideas of libraries and archives as social justice centers; idealized possible libraries; libraries as playful, creative spaces (and the relationship of libraries to makerspaces); and Little Free Libraries and other DIY collections.
            Possible outputs for the assignment included designs of a technologically enhanced mobile library; opinion papers or blogs on whether these mobile libraries should exist and what their functions should be, or on the place of mobile community-aimed technologies at an academic, nonpublic library setting; models or interactive websites; games based on the topic of mobile libraries; or any other free-form product approved by the instructors. In addition to illustrating the student outputs and future research possibilities, this poster will share the resources curated for class discussion on libraries, archives, makerspaces, and their community values, as well as demonstrating one example of an experimental pedagogy and the ways in which open, synergistic exploration of preconceived notions on behalf of the students and instructors resulted in a better product than the original assignment.
        
    



    
        
            
                Computational approaches to Ireland’s Contemporary Literary Journals
                
                    
                        O'Sullivan
                        James Christopher
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University
                    josullivan.c@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Contemporary Irish Literature
                    Literary Journals
                
                
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Ireland’s literary communities are thriving. In the face of mounting economic pressures, the island continues to host a relatively substantial volume of prestigious publications dedicated to contemporary literature, all of which are seemingly committed to a high standard of literary quality. Some of Ireland’s most acclaimed contemporary authors are engaged with these journals as editors, with an increasingly wide spectrum of genres and modes being catered to. Ireland is a nation rich in literary tradition, but this is a varied tradition, comprising something of a riot of aesthetics, forms, and ideologies. However, unlike larger countries, it is feasible to identify Ireland’s most prestigious journals, and having done so, produce a whole range of literary extrapolations through the use of computational methodologies. This paper takes a number of Ireland’s longest-running and most prestigious literary journals, and using a variety of computational methods, conducts a series of macro-analytical explorations designed to identify the key trends across its dynamic literary community. In choosing literary journals, I am focusing on a sector that continues to thrive, both nationally and indeed globally (Harmanci, 2011). More importantly, journals and periodicals are reflective of a region’s literary grass roots, in that they largely comprise authors who are an active part of the artistic community. Thus, they arguably provide a more accurate indicator of local and national trends than one would find in an analysis of novels or standalone collections.
            Methodology and Results
            This study brings together a unique dataset, containing digitised editions of some of Ireland’s longest-running and most respected literary periodicals. Specifically, this dataset includes complete or nearly complete collections of each of the canonical 
                journals for contemporary 
                Irish writing. While a major analysis has been conducted and is still under way, for the sake of brevity only a sample of my findings are presented here. The journals have been analysed using a variety of approaches to textual analysis, as well as topic modeling. In this particular instance, I have elected to outline the results of a subset of my stylometric and textual analyses, as well as my initial topic models. For the purposes of this abstract, I am focusing on the online issues of two of Ireland’s leading contemporary journals, Poetry Ireland’s 
                Poetry Ireland Review, and 
                Southword, published by the Munster Literature Centre. The final study will incorporate the results of several other analyses relevant to this exploration of contemporary Irish writing and use a wider dataset.
            
            
                Cluster Analysis of Poetry Ireland Review 
                and Southword
            
            Editorial influences on style are explored using multivariate stylometric methods packaged in Stylo (Eder et al., 2013). In this instance, what is of interest is whether there is a clear stylistic separation between the submissions being accepted to 
                Southword and the 
                Poetry Ireland Review. A cluster analysis, using Delta (Burrows, 2002; Hoover, 2004) and 100 features, demonstrates a clear separation between the styles found in each journal (see Figure 1).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Cluster analysis of Poetry Ireland Review and Southword.
            
                Principal Component Analysis
            
            Principal component analyses of the journals suggests that content is temporally comparable (see Figure 2), but also editorially separable, an issue that will be delineated in greater detail in the presentation.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. PCA of Poetry Ireland Review and Southword.
            
                Distinctive Markers in Poetry Ireland Review
                 and Southword
            
            A list of the most distinctive words from each journal is generated using Craig’s Zeta (Hoover, 2008; Burrows, 2007), with a text slice length of 5,000, text slice overlap of 1,000, and an occurrence and filter threshold of 2 and 0.1. Unlike Delta, Zeta is a mode of classification, the results of which demonstrate a sample of the ‘unique’ words from each journal (see Table 1). 
            
                
                    Poetry Ireland Review
                    Southword
                
                
                    
                        humour
                        criticism
                        oxford
                        dolmen
                        revolution
                        role
                        perception
                        mythology
                        extent
                        stated
                        speak
                        shall
                        original
                        desire
                        pain
                        myth
                        development
                        described
                        fact
                        critical
                        awareness
                        celtic
                        passion
                        importance
                        hearing
                        given
                        matter
                        sight
                        culture
                        historical
                    
                    
                        father
                        sitting
                        walked
                        minutes
                        revival
                        across
                        distance
                        passed
                        drove
                        completing
                        prisons
                        sandwiches
                        seated
                        shouts
                        angled
                        knocks
                        sideways
                        clock
                        camera
                        cigarette
                        beer
                        pipes
                        pressing
                        shit
                        splash
                        corners
                        trousers
                        muddy
                        crowded
                        meal
                    
                
            
            Table 1. Most distinctive words from Poetry Ireland Review and Southword.
            
                Topic Modeling in Poetry Ireland Review
                 and Southword
            
            Topic modeling is a form of probabilistic modeling designed to ‘uncover the hidden thematic structure in document collections’ (Blei, n.d.; 2012). Non-negative Matrix Factorisation was used to conduct the analysis, a fragment of which has been provided (see Table 2).
            
                
                    love time home mr high deep remember war lost died
                    
                
                
                    poetry poems poem work irish poet book poets language verse
                
                
                    life great things made find part power don sense human
                    
                
                
                    black day heart half world trees hair silence dream garden
                    
                
                
                    night light dark sea water sun green room air sky
                    
                    
                
                
                    white man dead time back red blood head leaves bed
                    
                
                
                    na ar de ag la mo agus tuairisc se el
                    
                    
                    
                
                
                    god long face eyes words death hands place earth hand
                    
                
                
                    clarke house years young back church found small ll great
                    
                
                
                    good people man women world Heaney poet political woman life
                
            
            Table 2. Topic models in Poetry Ireland Review.
            Interpretations
            A number of interesting peculiarities have emerged from this study. The fact that there is a consistent stylometric separation of the journals suggests that there is a clear style associated with each journal, which I suggest can be attributed to editorial contexts. To my knowledge, this is the first study that offers quantitative evidence of editorial influences. The topic models are also significant, in that they present some fascinating thematic axes. In 
                Poetry Ireland Review, we see the alignment of Heaney with gender and politics, and dreams with nature. 
            
            In my presentation, I will present the complete set of results from this macro-analysis, as well as the most significant findings from this study, which in an Irish context is the very first of its kind. Key findings and interpretations in relation to literary trends—editorially, temporally, and otherwise—will be presented and discussed. I believe this study of interest to the international literary community, not only because of the global interest in Irish writing, but also because many of these findings may well be generisable, or comparable, across differing literary and cultural contexts. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic Topic Models. 
                        Communications of the ACM,
                        55(40): 77–84.
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. M. (n.d.). Topic Modeling. http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~blei/topicmodeling.html.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’: A Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        17(3): 267–87.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2007). All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        22(1): 27–47.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Sylometry with R: A Suite of Tools. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. University of Nebraska, Lincoln, pp. 487–89.
                    
                    
                        Harmanci. R. (2011). Literary Journals Thrive, on Paper and Otherwise. 
                        New York Times, 7 April, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/08/us/08bcculture.html?_r=0
                        .
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2004). Testing Burrows’s Delta. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        19(4): 453–75.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2008). Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies. In Schreibman, S. and Siemens, R. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 517–33.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Computer Simulation of Diffusion: New Suggestions about the Process of Language Change
                
                    
                        Kretzschmar
                        William
                    
                    University of Georgia
                    kretzsch@uga.edu
                
                
                    
                        Juuso
                        Ilkka
                    
                    University of Oulu
                    ilkka.juuso@ee.oulu.fi
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    cellular automaton
                    complex systems
                    language change
                    diffusion
                
                
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    linguistics
                    english studies
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In two previous papers at DH we have presented work in progress on computer simulation of language diffusion. In this paper, we offer the results from our completed research program, highly suggestive findings about how the process of linguistic change may operate.
            
                Computer simulation is the only practical way to model linguistic diffusion. We have successfully simulated diffusion with a cellular automaton, which uses update rules with respect to the status of its neighboring locations to determine the status (whether a linguistic feature is used or not) at a given location. As shown in Figure 1, each target cell may become live (if dead) if a certain number of neighbors is live, whether from the eight neighbors immediately next to the target, or alternatively from the 24 neighbors in the first and second rows around the target. The same calculation takes place for a target cell to stay live if it is already live.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1. Cellular automaton (green target cell, evaluated by status of eight first-order neighbors, or 24 first- and second-order neighbors).
            
            
                All locations in a matrix are evaluated, and then the new status for each one is displayed all at once (one generation). Throughout hundreds of generations we can watch regional distributional patterns emerge. In so doing we model human interactions, as speakers talk or write to each other and change their behavior based on that of their neighbors. We validate our results by comparison to actual linguistic data from survey research: we always observe clustered patterns in the survey, and we know that our simulation is successful if similar clusters emerge from the cellular automaton, as shown in Figure 2, the status of our simulation after 1,000 generations with a random factor of .01% (one decision overturned randomly in 10,000). This sort of clustered behavior is characteristic of complex systems (Kretzschmar, 2009), as they are studied in physics, evolutionary biology, economics, and other fields, where nonlinear (or ‘fractal’) distributions of variants regularly emerge at every level of scale in scale-free networks.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2. Simulation after 1,000 generations.
            
            
                The cellular automaton is not the only form of simulation that could be applied to speech, but it is perhaps the simplest. Stanford and Kenny (2013), for example, employed an agent-based model to model chain-shifts, where ‘agents’ could move between locations to spread a linguistic feature, whereas in a cellular automaton the location of each cell is fixed. The Stanford and Kenny model, however, uses numerous unvalidated assumptions about how information is shared and about how agents move. Similarly, Baxter et al. (2009), Blythe and Croft (2009), and Ellis and Freeman-Larsen (2009a) all create more complex simulations that do achieve results but lack validation. Our cellular automaton shows that the complexity of agent movement or other similar parameters in such simulations may not be necessary as well as being unvalidated. After extensive testing of possible rule sets in our two-dimensional model, only one rule set produces stable, clustered results of the kind we always observe from real data (2,3,4 live neighbors to become live, 5,6,7,8 neighbors live to stay live). And this rule set, with suitable adjustment by social weighting and a small random factor, is sufficient to produce results that match the clustered patterns that arise in real survey data.
            
            After substantial experience with the computer simulation, we have observed a number of characteristics that are highly suggestive for how the complex system of speech may operate in actual human populations of speakers:
             1. While we have only ever found one rule set that produces clusters, the Bailey set (2,3,4/5,6,7,8, for N=1), other rule sets may be useful, such as proportional rules 90/10, 75/25, and 60/40 that all produce estimates of ‘Where people say X’. The Bailey set, however, eventually produces stable clusters of locations on the grid that match the kind of clustering we observe in Density Estimation statistical processing from the same data.
             2. The relative ages of locations (how many consecutive generations a location has been live) always occur in a nonlinear distribution, with the most one generation old, then many two generations, then small numbers of older locations. This suggests that the persistence of features, not just use of features, is important in language diffusion. Persistence is what accounts for the creation of long-term stable clusters of locations.
             3. Inclusion of a random factor overturning decisions from the rules up to .06% (six decisions in 10,000) slows down the process of cluster formation, but more than .06% randomness throws the simulation into a chaotic (everchanging) condition where no stable clusters form. This suggests that proximity, not random decisions by speakers, controls language diffusion. However, inclusion of a small random factor preserves nearly all of the long tail of infrequent responses in the nonlinear distribution after 1,000 generations, and so it is necessary to include random decisions by speakers in order to achieve the nonlinear distributions we know to exist in survey data.
             4. Inclusion of a social factor also creates clustered behavior (N=2, 25% social weighting). Clusters appear in different places for the social groups defined by characteristics such as age or level of education. Clusters also appear in different places for the same social groups depending on different social information in different seeds, where social information proportional to original survey speakers is added randomly to empty matrix cells. Social ‘proximity’ is thus important to the creation of nonlinear clustering in scale-free networks.
             5. When variants fill the grid, they rapidly increase in number of locations up to about 4,000 locations (c. 50%), then hit a plateau where the number of locations only rises very slowly. Persistence in the plateau stage produces stable clusters. The simulation thus has a life cycle for all surviving variants: constant motion across the grid, smaller temporary clusters for up to 250 iterations as a variant builds density across the grid, and (in addition to smaller temporary clusters) larger stable clusters after a variant reaches 50% density, a process that make take 1,000 iterations. This suggests that features in actual speech may also show a life cycle, e.g., common use across wide areas, temporary small areas in which particular features become very common for a time, and stable, potentially large areas in which features are persistent for long periods.
             6. Running the simulation across all the variants does not produce the A-curve of values that we see in the survey data, so the A-curve in the survey data does not arise merely from the effects of proximity. However, we can create a separate array that represents what speakers remember in their
                 active speech, while allowing the rules to run across all the variants represents what is available to speakers in their 
                passive speech. As shown in Figure 3, this ‘active memory’ array does show an A-curve across all surviving variants when a small random factor is included, which acts on all variants but preserves many low-frequency variants that would otherwise die out. This suggests that the operation of the complex system preserves variants across wide areas in passive understanding of language, but that active use of language involves common use of a smaller number of variants per speakers with a nonlinear preservation of variants across the whole population; this active use of language is what a survey normally elicits. The simulation thus addresses individual human cognitive capacity.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Chart of ‘active memory’ for simulation with random factor of .01% after 1,000 generations (see ‘active’ and ‘enforced active’ tallies at right).
            Our use of a simple cellular automaton in a successful simulation suggests how we might better understand the survey and other data we have already collected, and also suggests how we might do a better job of collecting additional empirical data about language in future. The simulation indicates that we should use care in creation of overly complicated simulations when a simpler one will do.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                            Baxter, G., Blythe, R., Croft, W. and McKane, A. (2009). Modeling Language Change: An Evaluation of Trudgill’s Theory of the Emergence of New Zealand English. 
                            Language Variation and Change
                            ,
                            21: 257–96.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Blythe, R. and Croft, W. (2009). The Speech Community in Evolutionary Language Dynamics. In Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2009b, pp. 47–63.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Ellis, N. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2009a). Constructing a Second Language: Analyses and Computational Simulations of the Emergence of Linguistic Constructions from Usage. In Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2009b, pp. 90–125.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Ellis, N. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2009b). 
                            Language as a Complex Adaptive System. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
                        
                    
                    
                        Kretzschmar, W. (2009). 
                        The Linguistics of Speech. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Kretzschmar, W. (In press). 
                        Language and Complex Systems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Stanford, J. and Kenny, L. (2013). Revisiting Transmission and Diffusion: An Agent-Based Model of Vowel Chain Shifts across Large Communities. 
                        Language Variation and Change,
                        25: 119–53.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Concepts Through Time: Tracing Concepts In Dutch Newspapers Discourse (1890-1990) Using Word Embeddings
                
                    
                        Wevers
                        Melvin
                    
                    University of Utrecht, The Netherlands
                    m.j.h.f.wevers@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Kenter
                        Tom
                    
                    University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
                    tom.kenter@uva.nl
                
                
                    
                        Huijnen
                        Pim
                    
                    University of Utrecht, The Netherlands
                    p.huijnen@uu.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    word embeddings
                    semantic spaces
                    digital cultural history
                    Americanization
                    Discourse analysis
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    philosophy
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    cultural studies
                    semantic web
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this paper, we use a new technique, called Concepts Through Time (CTT), to trace concepts in newspaper discourse. CTT makes use of sequential semantic spaces to follow semantic shifts of concepts diachronically. The semantic spaces are based on the extensive digitized newspaper corpus of the Dutch National Library.
                1 As part of our approach, concepts are modeled as words related to each other in a semantic space. A key aspect of CTT is that the vocabulary used in the debate on a concept may change over time. In fact, the set of words used to discuss a particular concept might not show any overlap at all between different periods of time. As such, our method bears a resemblance to the rhizomatic structure as described by philosopher Gilles Deleuze. The conceptual implication of this method approximates the traditional scholarly methods of conceptual history. We test our method through three case studies: consumerism, globalization, and economic models. These domains are inextricably linked to the manifestation of modernization and Americanization within Dutch public discourse throughout the 20th century.
                2 Tracing the genealogy of these manifestations helps us rethink the variety of meanings of modernization and Americanization in the Netherlands during this period. Essential to the development and success of this method is that, for every step of the process, decisions have been motivated from both the perspective of computational linguistics and cultural history. This approach makes this research project a genuine collaborative digital humanities effort.
                3
            
            Traditionally, the field of conceptual history has tried to combine micro and macro perspectives by studying the emergence and transformation of concepts, ideas, and thoughts over larger periods of time. Historians have increasingly used digital tools for the purposes of conceptual history. However, researchers in these studies regularly employed pre-defined and ahistorical definitions of concepts. Full-text search and n-gram viewers, for example, require a workable definition of a concept or a range of words that cover the subject in order to, subsequently, analyze them within certain contexts and periods.
                4 The necessity of pre-defining terms is a serious drawback of working with these tracking tools. The research done in this way runs the risk of ahistoricity. The same goes for top-down approaches, in which a specific language model allows for the recognition of specific semantic information, such as entities via Named Entity Recognition (Grover et al., 2008; van Hooland et al., 2013) or via word classification lists (Klingenstein et al., 2014). Topic modeling approaches partly circumvent this limitation by modeling groups of words rather than single words. Topic modeling tools such as Mallet and TMT allow users to find topics in a corpus of texts without having to provide the algorithm with any prior information.
                5 With approaches such as ‘Topics over Time’, researchers could also track topics diachronically (Wang and McCallum, 2006). Other research projects have used topic models to develop contextualized dictionaries that helped, e.g., to define the concept of ‘strikes’ in 20th-century Netherlands (Bogers and Van den Bosch, 2008) or the Chicago School of ‘neoliberalism’ in postwar Germany (Wiedemann et al., 2014). 
            
            The methods described above all share the limitation that concepts—whether defined by hand or automatically—are static. Either the user provides a fixed list of words or a fixed list of topics is inferred from the data in these topic-tracking approaches. However, historians commonly use texts to get a grip on the continuities and discontinuities throughout time. This involves the recalibration of their hermeneutical framework as they go along—that is, the list of words they work with. We propose that digital tools should also be able to provide argumentative evidence for such a methodology in constructing historical narratives.
            For this purpose, we introduce a new technique, called CTT (Concepts Through Time), that aims to resolve the deficiencies of earlier methods. The technique is explicitly developed to account for historical changes in the semantics of concepts, thereby approximating the way historians traditionally have worked within conceptual history. CCT enables historians to trace concepts over large periods without having to manually select appropriate terms for the entire time span and without being dependent on a fixed set of topics. This allows for a greater sensitivity to semantic changes and an increased interactive heuristic approach to concepts within their discursive context.
                6
                 Methodologically, CTT is based on word embeddings, as inferred by a neural network trained on a large body of data, to monitor semantically related words. These are created using word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), a computational technique that does not depart from a top-down model of language. Rather, a semantic space is inferred from the input data. Word2vec uses a continuous bag-of-words or a skip-gram architecture in order to produce a multi-dimensional word-vector space. This space contains semantic and linguistic regularities that can be used for the analysis of discourse (Baroni et al., 2014; Wijaya and Yeniterzi, 20111). A positional shift within the vector space can been established as an indicator for chronological shifts on a semantic and syntactic level—for example, in the use of the words ‘gay’ and ‘cell’ (Kim et al., 2014).
                7 This is not done using traditional means of analysis, such as part-of-speech tagging, but by merely observing the geometry in the vector space. However, the authors who have provided the mentioned examples have worked with single words of which the common meaning has shifted almost diametrically. We will be looking at clusters of words and shifts of meaning both large and small.
            
            The data we use to trace concepts are the circa 500,000 newspaper issues between 1890 and 1990 that are available in the Dutch National Library’s digitized newspaper archive. We train subsequent semantic model spaces in which we trace groups of terms, rather than individual words, diachronically and synchronically by keeping track of semantic relations between terms per period. For this approach, no pre-established and fixed topic sets are needed. We will use a single seed set of terms, merely as an entry point into the cluster to then find semantically related words within the semantic model. We will automatically update the set of related words over time, utilizing the subsequent semantic spaces. A key aspect of this procedure is that the original seed words might disappear from the cluster of words over time. 
            The way our word embedding technique clusters words holds surprising similarities with philosopher Gilles Deleuze’s notion of the rhizomatic structure (Deleuze, 1987).
                8 Important features of this structure are that it allows for multiple entry and exit points, and that the semantic meaning of a concept is determined through its ‘relations of exteriority’ (DeLanda, 2006, 10–11). Translated to our approach, the meaning of a term can be considered in terms of the geometric relation in a semantic space.
                9 Starting from this theory, we aim to focus on the stabilization and destabilization of relational vectors between words, i.e., the emergence and disappearance of words within a subset, as well as the shifting position of words in relation to one another. The latter could be the effect of forces within the cluster or changing vector relations outside of the cluster. We argue that the semantic space allows us to analyze ‘the processes that historically produce the identity of a given whole, but also the processes [coding and decoding] that maintain that identity through time’ (DeLanda, 2006, 10). Using this approach, we hope to determine words central to a topic and avoid concept drift caused by ambiguous words. 
            
            The development of this tool stems from a close collaboration between information retrieval experts and cultural historians. Every single technical or methodological choice has been motivated such that it complied with both sound computational linguistic research and critical historical methods. Consequently, we have high hopes of the applicability of this technique in historical research. We will evaluate our approach through three historical use cases in the context of the historiographical debates on modernization and Americanization in the Netherlands.
                10 In the first case, we will trace popular consumer goods, such as cigarettes, alcohol, and fast food. This case study sets out to show which consumer goods appeared in newspaper discourse in specific periods. Moreover, it might show us in what wider discursive contexts these consumer goods were discussed—e.g., as luxury goods or as unhealthy products. The second use case maps out businesses in newspaper discourse. This might shed light on processes of globalization in which local businesses are substituted by multinationals. The final use case deals with the notion of efficiency. The concept was introduced in the Netherlands after the First World War (Bloemen, 1988); we will trace the genealogy of this concept to see whether it was already present in earlier discourse without being denoted as ‘efficiency’. In our final paper, we will show a formalization of the search strategies used to trace concepts through time. Furthermore, we will reflect on the representativeness of the newspaper archive as well as the applicability of the method to other corpora. 
            
            Notes
            1. This collection includes over half a million newspapers for the 1890–1995 period. See www.delpher.nl.
            2. This paper is part of the research project Translantis, which looks into the role of the United States as a reference culture in Dutch public discourse. Therefore, the chosen case studies are related to issues of Americanization within the field of consumer society and economy. 
            3. Collaboration between computational experts and humanities scholars is an elemental part of the digital humanities. See Burdick et al. (2012), pp. 15–17.
            4. This method was adopted to study eugenics by Huijnen et al. (2014).
            5. For an explanation of topic modeling, see Blei and Lafferty (2009). For uses of topic modeling in historical research, see Newman and Block (2006); Mimno (2012); Blevins (2010); Wittek and Ravenek (2011).
            6. The importance of context for historical research is eloquently expressed in Snickars (2012).
            7. In Kim et al.’s paper, the authors show how ‘gay’ has shifted from the connotation with an emotion to sexuality, and ‘cell’ has shifted from the denotation of a prison cell to the cellular phone. 
            8. For a clear description of rhizomatic thinking and assemblage theory, see ‘Assemblage Theory’ (2010). An interesting implementation of Deleuze’s notion of assemblage and rhizome has been performed by DeLanda (2006).
            9. Michel Foucault makes a similar point when he argues that the meaning of an expression cannot be simply deduced from syntactic and semantic meaning. Rather, one should look into the conditions in which expressions appear and change—in his words, ‘by the analysis of the relations between the statement and the spaces of differentiation, in which the statement itself reveals the differences’. See Foucault (2012) .
            10. These use cases stem from the Translantis research project. See 
                www.translantis.nl and van Eijnatten et al., 2013.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ‘Assemblage Theory’. (2010). Texas Theory Wiki, Assemblage Theory, http://wikis.la.utexas.edu/theory/page/assemblage-theory. 
                    
                    
                        Baroni, M., Dinu, G. and Kruszewski, G. (2014). Don’t Count, Predict! A Systematic Comparison of Context-Counting vs. Context-Predicting Semantic Vectors. http://anthology.aclweb.org/P/P14/P14-1023.xhtml.
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. M. and Lafferty, J. D. (2009). Topic Models. 
                        Text Mining: Classification, Clustering, and Applications,
                        10: 71. 
                    
                    
                        Blevins, C. (2010). Topic Modeling Martha Ballard’s Diary. 
                        Historying, 1 April, http://historying.org/2010/04/01/topic-modeling-martha-ballards-diary/.
                    
                    
                        Bloemen, E. (1988). 
                        Scientific Management in Nederland, 1900–1930. Doctoral thesis, Leiden.
                    
                    
                        Bogers, T. and Van den Bosch, A. (2008). Recommending Scientific Articles Using Citeulike. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. ACM, pp. 287–90, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1454053.
                    
                    
                        Burdick, A., et al. (eds). (2012). 
                        Digital Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        DeLanda, M. (2006). 
                        A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity. Continuum, London.
                    
                    
                        Deleuze, G. (1987). 
                        A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 6–23.
                    
                    
                        Foucault, M. (2012). 
                        The Archaeology of Knowledge [1974]. Random House, London. 
                    
                    
                        Grover, C., et al. (2008). Named Entity Recognition for Digitised Historical Texts. In 
                        LREC, http://ltg.ed.ac.uk/np/publications/ltg/papers/bopcris-lrec.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Huijnen, P., et al. (2014). A Digital Humanities Approach to the History of Science. In Nadamoto, A., et al. (eds), 
                        Social Informatics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8359. Berlin: Springer, pp. 71–85.
                    
                    
                        Kim, Y., et al. (2014). Temporal Analysis of Language through Neural Language Models. 
                        arXiv:1405.3515 [cs], 14 May, http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.3515. 
                    
                    
                        Klingenstein, S., Hitchcock, T. and DeDeo, S. (2014). The Civilizing Process in London’s Old Bailey. 
                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
                        111(26) (1 July): 9419–24, doi:10.1073/pnas.1405984111.
                    
                    
                        Mikolov, T., et al. (2013). Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality. 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-their-compositionality.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Mimno, D. (2012). Computational Historiography: Data Mining in a Century of Classics Journals. 
                        Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage,.
                        5(1) (April): 3:1–3:19.
                    
                    
                        Newman, D. J. and Block, S. (2006). Probabilistic Topic Decomposition of an Eighteenth-Century American Newspaper. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                        57(6): 753–67.
                    
                    
                        Snickars, P. (2012). If Content Is King, Context Is Its Crown. 
                        VIEW Journal of European Television History and Culture,
                        1(1) (21 February 21): 34–39.
                    
                    
                        van Eijnatten, J., Pieters, T. and Verheul, J. (2013). Big Data for Global History: The Transformative Promise of Digital Humanities. 
                        BMGN—Low Countries Historical Review,
                        128(4) (16 December): 55–77.
                    
                    
                        van Hooland, S., et al. (2013). Exploring Entity Recognition and Disambiguation for Cultural Heritage Collections. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 29 November, http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/11/29/llc.fqt067.
                    
                    
                        Wang, X. and McCallum, A. (2006). Topics over Time: A Non-Markov Continuous-Time Model of Topical Trends. In 
                        Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, pp. 424–33, http://dl.acm.org.proxy.library.uu.nl/citation.cfm?id=1150450.
                    
                    
                        Wiedemann, G., Niekler, N., et al. (2014). Document Retrieval for Large-Scale Content Analysis Using Contextualized Dictionaries. In 
                        Terminology and Knowledge Engineering 2014, http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01005879/.
                    
                    
                        Wijaya, D. T. and Yeniterzi, R. (2011). Understanding Semantic Change of Words over Centuries. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2011 International Workshop on DETecting and Exploiting Cultural diversiTy on the Social Web. ACM: 35–40, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2064475.
                    
                    
                        Wittek, P. and Ravenek, W. (2011). Supporting the Exploration of a Corpus of 17th-Century Scholarly Correspondences by Topic Modeling. 
                        http://bada.hb.se/handle/2320/9689. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Conceptualizing DH for Multiple Audiences: Folkvine and Chinavine
                
                    
                        Janz
                        Bruce
                    
                    U of Central Florida, United States of America
                    bbjanz@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    multiple audiences
                    hermeneutics
                    folk art
                
                
                    philosophy
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    asian studies
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    folklore and oral history
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Understanding audiences is crucial to the design of digital humanities projects, and understanding that there may be more than one audience and designing for that should be part of the initial discussion for DH design. Past that, though, we need better theorization of the phenomenon of the audience in the digital humanities. My examples will be two DH projects I have been involved with. Folkvine (http://folkvine.umbc.edu/) and Chinavine (http://chinavine.org/) both collect and make available folk arts, the first in Florida and the second in China. The goal for both of these projects has been to serve multiple audiences. Both approached the question of multiple audiences slightly differently. Awareness of multiple audiences could lead to a more reflexive and reflective attitude for designers and for the audiences. It could be less about consumption of digital content and more about rethinking the presentation of self and community. My attempt to introduce hermeneutics here is to move past the notion that questions of audience are just questions of usability or reception. DH projects create a world between the architects, subjects, and users; this is an attempt to interrogate one aspect of that world.
        
    



    
        
            
                Construction of the Corpus of Toraakira-bon Kyōgen
                
                    
                        ICHIMURA
                        Taro
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    tichimura@ninjal.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        WATANABE
                        Yuki
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    ywatanabe@ninjal.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        KONO
                        Tomoaki
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    tkouno@ninjal.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        OGISO
                        Toshinobu
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    togiso@ninjal.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    historical corpus
                    Late Middle Japanese
                    Noh comedy
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As part of the Corpus of Historical Japanese, we are constructing a corpus of 
                kyōgen books. In this corpus, we annotated both document structure information and morphological information for language study.
            
            
                Kyōgen is a form of traditional Japanese comic theater. It developed alongside 
                Noh in the Muromachi period (1337–1573). The 
                Okura Toraakira-bon books are old script books, written by Okura Toraakira in 1642. As 
                kyōgen uses an older form of the Japanese language, i.e., the language of the Muromachi period, these 
                kyōgen books thus constitute important documents for researching colloquial language of the time. 
            
            Thus, we built the corpus as an original text in Otsuka (2006) that was the latest commentary of the 
                Okura Toraakira-bon books and reflected the original well. They consist of 237 plays and 57 notes (approximately 270,000 words).
            
            
                Information on the Document Structure
            
            In 
                kyōgen scripts, like in Western ones, we find lines to be spoken by the actors that were written in colloquial style, stage directions that were written in a literary style. To study the 
                kyōgen scripts linguistically, it is necessary to distinguish the lines from the stage directions.
            
            We studied tags and document type definitions for the 
                kyōgen scripts (Table 1; see also Ichimura et al., 2012; Kobayashi et al., 2013) with reference to TEI P5 (TEI Consortium, 2007) and encoded them in XML files (Figure 1). 
            
            
                
            
            Table 1. Main tags.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. XML.
            
                In the process, an issue about the notation arose. Because we used printed books that reflect the notation of the original manuscript, we were forced
                 to increase the notation pattern in morphological analysis.
            
            
                 1. Three-letter words.
            
            
                 2. Whether to have a dot mark for a voiced sound or not.
            
            
                 3. Signs of the repetition.
            
            
                To solve this problem, we revised and marked them according to the following policy.
            
            
                1. We replaced the katakana with hiragana letters (Figure 2).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Revision of katakana. 
            
                2. We replaced a kana character containing a kana with a dot mark when it was clear that it was pronounced by a voiced consonant (Figure 3).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Revision of the kana scripts with the dot mark.
            
                3. We replaced the signs for one character with the character applied to it. However, we did not replace signs for more than two characters, because their repeated range was wide and occasionally it spanned beyond a sentence (Figure 4).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Revision of the repetition marks.
            
                Morphological Information
            
            In order to use it for language study, the corpus needs to be annotated to associate information to words.
            In addition, significance can be obtained from morphological information. In written Japanese, there is no space between words like English, which was the case for early modern Japanese texts as well. In addition, Japanese has three kinds of letters or characters used in writing. Furthermore, in early modern times, spellings had not been fixed, which are fixed in contemporary Japanese (Figure 5).
            
                
            
            This makes it even more difficult to identify a desired word. To solve these problems, we used a morphological analysis system, and automatically annotated all words in the text with morphological information.
                
                    K
                
                yōgen
                texts were analyzed with a high degree of accuracy (an approximate 96% precision rate).
            
            
                In this process, for each word, we gave the word information ‘lemma’, which unified notation and the conjugations of a word. Thus we came to be able to search the variation in various notations and conjugations of the desired word at a time.
            
            
                Utility Value of this Corpus
            
            The data are displayed on the search tool named 
                Chū-nagon (Figure 6).
            
            Using both morphological information and document structure information, we can search single words or series of words, including form variations, with the speakers and type of text. 
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Search result on 
                Chū-nagon.
            
            We will be able to study the language of 
                kyōgen in a more sophisticated manner.
                1 In addition, we can analyze what kind of expression was used by a certain character, or how the person was characterized in the drama.
            
            NINJAL
                2 have already constructed the corpus of early middle Japanese (for the Heian period, or the years 794–1185) and early modern Japanese (for the Meiji period, 1868–1912). Now that we have constructed the high annotated corpus of early modern Japanese, we will be able to study the Japanese language from classical times to the present age diachronically using a computer.
            
            Note
            1. For example, when a user searches a series of words ‘おりやらします’, the examples and speakers are displayed as a list, and the person will notice that almost all the speakers of ‘おりやらします’ are women. Then the user will understand that this series of words is female language of the early modern Japanese.
            2. NINJAL is an abbreviation for the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ichimura, T., Kawase, A. and Ogiso, T. (2012). Structuring Colloquial Early Modern Japanese Text and Its Issues of Definition. 
                        Proceedings of the 96th IPSJ SIG Computers and the Humanities, CH96, pp. 1–8.
                    
                    
                        Kobayashi, M. and Ichimura, T. (2013). Structuring the Corpus of 
                        Toraakira-bon Kyogen. 
                        Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Corpus Japanese Linguistics, pp. 323–32.
                    
                    
                        National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics. (2009). Center of Corpus Development, NINJAL. http://www.ninjal.ac.jp/corpus_center/.
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Ichimura, T. and Kouno, T. (2013). Preliminary Study of Morphological Analysis of Early Modern Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Corpus Japanese Linguistics, pp. 145–50.
                    
                    
                        Otsuka, M. (2006). Okura toraakira noh kyogenshu: honkoku chūkai. 1. Seibundo shuppan, Osaka.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium. (2007). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Text Encoding Initiative. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ (accessed 19 February 2015).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Contextual Modelling in Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Ciula
                        Arianna
                    
                    University of Roehampton, UK
                    Arianna.Ciula@roehampton.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Eide
                        Øyvind
                    
                    Universität Passau, Germany
                    oyvind.eide@uni-passau.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    modelling
                    semiotics
                
                
                    historical studies
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    semantic analysis
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    Semiotic Framework
                
                Kralemann and Lattmann (2013, 3399–400) claim that models should be understood in the semiotic theory put forward by Peirce, with three main classes of signs: symbols, icons, and indexes. They claim that models are icons because the dominant relation with the original objects they represent is one of similarity.
                    2 Different shades of iconic similarity between sign and object as theorized by Pierce correspond to three kinds of models in Kralemann and Lattmann:
                    3
                
                 • 
                    Image-like models—for example, photographs where single qualities such as forms and shapes are seen as similar to the original objects.
                
                 • R
                    elational or 
                    structural models—that is, diagrams where the ‘interdependence between the structure of the sign and the structure of the object’ (Kralemann and Lattmann, 2013, p. 3408) enables the modeller to make inferences about the original by manipulating its model
                
                 • 
                    Metaphor-like models, which represent attributes of the original by a specific quality of their own not recognised by convention or habit.
                
                Models do not act as signs in virtue of themselves. What establishes the model as a sign is the interpretative act of a subject, whether as creator or reader. The practical act of modelling connects the model to its interpretation, that is, to its specific semantic content in a given social and institutional context (Kralemann and Lattmann, 2013, 3402–3). The modeller’s judgement depends on his or her presuppositions connected to ‘theory, language. or cultural practice’ (Kralemann and Lattmann, 2013, 3417). It is evident that Kralemann and Lattmann reiterate the concept of models as middle ground between theory and objects.
                    4 The relationship of iconicity between the model and the object being modelled is partly externally determined (it relies on the similarity between the model and the object) and partly internal (it depends on theory, conventions, prior knowledge). Based on this duality they stress, on the one hand, the subjectively determined dependency of models on prior knowledge and theory and, on the other, their independence from these in light of the specific conditions of the objects being modelled.
                
            
            
                
                    Modelling in Digital Humanities
                
                In this paper we take previous research (Ciula and Eide, 2014; Marras and Ciula, 2014) one step further by mapping Kralemann and Lattmann’s trichotomy of models as icons to digital modelling exercises in historical research. The prototypical cases we chose are a starting point to investigate how such models relate to the cultural objects they represent. 
                
                    
                
                Figure 1. Models representing objects in context.
                If we accept Kralemann and Lattmann’s argument it follows that by modelling we link models to qualities and relationships already existing in the objects being modelled. Such linking is based on choices that are made for a certain end, informing and motivating the act of modelling. Models are created in actual scholarly situations of production and use and cannot be seen as decontextualised operations. A model is partially arbitrary in that the same inferences drawn by manipulating one model could have been reached in other ways—for instance, using a different model.
                In this framework, models operate as sign functions. To understand their epistemic role, we need to look at both how they come to be (context) and how the similarity relation with the object is realised. By analysing the association of syntactic attributes of the source object with the attributes of the model we focus indeed on the contextual elements. However, these need to be complemented with the analysis of the specific sign-function in which production and use of models is enacted, as indicated in Figure 1. Three examples will be used to analyse the three types of sign-functions in a DH context:
                 • 
                    Image-like models. We will use an example from digital palaeography research (Ciula 2005; 2009), where the abstract model letter acts as an image-like model of the samples it was algorithmically generated from. What we can learn about the objects of analysis (the medieval handwritten letterforms) depends on the features being selected in the modelling process. However, the inferential power of the model is mainly based on a strong sensorial similarity between model and object. 
                
                 • 
                    Relational models. As an example we will use models of landscapes described in historical sources (Eide, 2013). The inferential power of the model relies on the common relational structure between object and model. What new we can know about the object of analysis very much depends on the correspondence between the structuring of the textual expressions in the modelling process and the structure of the map model. 
                
                 • 
                    Metaphor-like models.
                    5 We will use the example of network models used to capture information about references to persons in historical sources. These do not only tie specific textual passages to real-world historical entities, they also form parts of networks of co-references (Eide, 2009). The association of a fishing tool (the net) to describe relationships between people is metaphorical. The inferential power of the model leverages on a deep cognitive similarity between the model and the object. It can generate unexpected connections between the objects it represents, which exist ‘only’ metaphorically in a network.
                
                
                    
                
                Figure 2. Image-like model. Morphological features of segmented letter forms are modelled into an average morphing letter. Inferences on the manuscript handwriting are based on the analysis of the morphing letter-models in virtue of a ‘sensuous resemblance’.
                
                    
                
                Figure 3. Relational model. Relational textual expressions are modelled into geometrical relations. Inferences on space as expressed in the text are drawn in virtue of the corresponding spatial structure in the map.
                
                    
                
                Figure 4. Metaphor-like models. Person names and their relationships as referred to by a document are modelled, respectively, into entities (nodes) and into properties connecting them (links). Assertions of co-reference are also modelled into properties connecting entities. Thus the net is now used to model social relations as well as assertions about people.
                Common for all three types of models is the inferential power operating at the interplay between their ‘intrinsic structure’ and their ‘extrinsic mapping’ (Kralemann and Lattmann 2013, 3409). Indeed, the features being selected in the modelling process are influenced by contextual elements of different kinds, including hypothesis, scholarly methods and conventions, sample selection, and the technologies being used. However, the epistemic power of the model relies more on extrinsic aspects (sensorial similarity) and less on intrinsic aspects in image-like models, while it depends very much on intrinsic aspects (cognitive similarity) and less so on extrinsic aspects in the case of metaphor-like models (Elleström, 2013).
            
            
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                In the paper we will focus on some aspects highlighted in Kralemann and Lattmann’s theory with respect to the role of 
                    context in modelling acts and the nature of 
                    representational relation between objects and models through practical examples. We believe that these two foci are where modelling practices in DH meet with this semiotic framework in productive ways. 
                
                We will address the questions outlined in the introduction by contextualising this framework with specific examples of image-like, relational, and metaphor-like modelling with respect to source-based digital humanities. Prior knowledge is a sine qua non to create models in the first place and to use them as interpretative tools with respect to the objects they are signs of (Ciula and Eide, 2014). The relationships between modelling processes and interpretative outcomes are neither mechanical nor directly causal; however, the type of similarity on which modelling relies shapes the interpretative affordances of those ‘anchor’ models. Modelling processes bring about investments and burdens with respect to our knowledge of the objects we model. In particular, models as signs relate to the interpretation of those objects in different ways, from the immediacy of visual similarity on the image end of the iconic continuum to the deep cognitive similarity on the metaphorical end.
                
                    
                    
                
            
            
                Notes
                1. By source-based modelling we mean the creation and use of models representing some kind of historical sources and cultural artefacts, such as documents and manuscript pages, together with any of their relevant components and their structure.
                2. We do not dwell in this paper on the complexities around the cognitive concept of similarity.
                3. The distinction between the three types of icons is not meant to be clear-cut. We follow Elleström (2013) in seeing these types as grades of a continuum rather than separate categories.
                4. Past research concerned with the experimental or techno-sciences recognise models including computational models as mediators between theory and objects of analysis (e.g., Winsberg, 2003; Morrison, 2009). This is in line with sign-vehicles functioning as mediators between denotational and connotational qualities, between thing and meaning (MacEachren, 2004, p. 246).
                5. In Kraleman and Lattman these models are claimed to be based on semiotic similarity, but this appears categorically misleading to us, so we privilege the concept of metaphor taken from Peirce.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Buzzetti, D. (2002). Digital Representation and the Text Model. 
                        New Literary History,
                        33: 61–88.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, A. (2005). Digital Palaeography: Using the Digital Representation of Medieval Script to Support Palaeographic Analysis. 
                        Digital Medievalist,
                        1(1),
                    
                    http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/1.1/ciula/.
                    
                        Ciula, A. (2009). The Palaeographical Method under the Light of a Digital Approach. In Rehbein M., Sahle, P. and Schaanm T. (eds), 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter / Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age. Norderstedt: BoD, pp. 219–35, 
                    
                    
                        http://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/volltexte/2009/2971/.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, A. and Eide, Ø. (2014). Reflections on Cultural Heritage and Digital Humanities: Modelling in Practice and Theory, DATeCH ’14. 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage, Madrid, Spain, May 2014, pp. 35–41, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2595207&amp;CFID=389568956&amp;CFTOKEN=79273864.
                    
                    
                        Eide, Ø. (2009). Co-Reference: A New Method to Solve Old Problems, 
                        Digital Humanities—Book of Abstracts, Maryland, pp. 101–3.
                    
                    
                        Eide, Ø. (2013). Why Maps Are Silent When Texts Can Speak: Detecting Media Differences through Conceptual Modelling, From Pole to Pole. 
                        Proceedings of the 26th International Cartographic Conference, Dresden, August 2013, 
                    
                    http://www.icc2013.org/_contxt/_medien/_upload/_proceeding/31_proceeding.pdf.
                    
                        Elleström, L. (2013). Spatiotemporal Aspects of Iconicity. In Elleström, L., Fischer, O. and Ljungberg, C. (eds), 
                        Iconic Investigations. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 95–117.
                    
                    
                        Frigg, R. and Hartmann, S. (2012). Models in Science. In Zalta, E. N. (ed.), 
                        The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2012 ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University,
                    
                    http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/models-science/.
                    
                        Jannidis, F. and Flanders, J.
                         (eds). (2012). Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the Humanities: An Ongoing Conversation. Workshop at Brown University, Providence, RI, March 2012, http://datasymposium.wordpress.com.
                    
                    
                        Kralemann, B. and Lattmann, C. (2013). Models as Icons: Modeling Models in the Semiotic Framework of Peirce’s Theory of Signs, 
                        Synthese,
                         190(16): 3397–420.
                    
                    
                        MacEachren, A. M. (2004). How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization, and Design. Guilford, New York.
                    
                    
                        Mahr, B. (2009). Information Science and the Logic of Models. 
                        Software and Systems Modeling, 
                        8: 365–83.
                    
                    
                        Marras, C. and Ciula, A. (2014). Circling around Texts and Language: Towards ‘Pragmatic Modelling’ in Digital Humanities. 
                        Digital Humanities—Book of Abstracts, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2014, pp. 255–57.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2005). 
                        Humanities Computing. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.
                    
                    
                        Morrison, M. (2009). Models, Measurement, and Computer Simulation: The Changing Face of Experimentation. 
                        Philosophical Studies,
                        143(1): 33–57.
                    
                    
                        Winsberg, E. (2003). Simulated Experiments: Methodology for a Virtual World. 
                        Philosophy of Science, 
                        70: 105–25.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Cora Crane's Contribution to Stephen Crane's Posthumous Fiction
                
                    
                        Hoover
                        David L.
                    
                    New York University, United States of America
                    david.hoover@nyu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Stephen Crane
                    authorship attribution
                    Cora Crane
                    joint authorship
                
                
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Stephen Crane (1871–1900), best known for 
                The Red Badge of Courage, is widely considered an innovative writer of great promise. He died at the age of twenty-eight, having completed five novels, a large number of short stories, some journalism and war correspondence, and two books of poetry. He left behind 
                The O’Ruddy, an unfinished picaresque novel later completed by Robert Barr (see Hoover, 2010, for an analysis) and several unpublished stories and sketches (some of them unfinished). Considerable uncertainty surrounds the genesis of some of his posthumously published and unpublished fiction.
            
            Crane’s adult life was unconventional and, for the times, rather scandalous. In 1896 he met Cora Taylor, ‘the madam of a pleasure resort, the Hotel de Dream’ (Wertheim, 1997). They traveled together as journalists and then moved to England, living as man and wife, though they never married. Crane contracted tuberculosis shortly after this and died in 1900. After his death, Cora, calling herself ‘Mrs. Stephen Crane’, tried to sell some her own fiction and some of his unpublished fiction, and she is known to have finished at least one of his stories, ‘The Squire’s Madness’ (Bowers, 1969). Opinions differ about how much she had to do with several other stories (Bowers, 1969; Wertheim, 1997; Gilkes, 1960). A contemporary source reported that ‘Mrs. Crane has taken upon herself the labor of completing seven or eight short stories that her husband left unfinished’ (‘The Lounger’, 1901, 199). One biographer puts the number at ‘half a dozen’ (Berryman, 1962, 259). She may also have had a hand in ‘The Ideal and the Real’ and ‘Brer Washington’s Consolation,’ two controversial stories with racist and pro-slavery themes that remained unpublished until 1978 (Linder, 1978, 2). Stephen also apparently had a hand in some of Cora’s work (under her pseudonym, Imogene Carter) as one of the first female journalists (Gilkes, 1960; Berryman, 1962). Finally, a late money-making project of Crane’s, 
                Great Battles of the World, was researched and partly written by Kate Lyon (the mistress of the writer Harold Frederic), though the full extent of her contribution is unclear (Wertheim, 1997, 136).
            
            Given this rather confused situation, it seems worthwhile to apply modern methods of authorship attribution to the questions surrounding the authorship of at least the following stories:
             ‘The Man from Duluth’ 
             ‘The Surrender of Forty Fort’
             ‘The Battle of Forty Fort’
             ‘A Self-Made Man’
             ‘A Man by the Name of Mud’
             ‘At the Pit Door’
             ‘An Illusion in Red and White’
             ‘Manacled’
             ‘A Desertion’
             ‘The Ideal and the Real’
             ‘Brer Washington’s Consolation’
            The situation regarding the war correspondence and the war sketches partly by Kate Lyon seems too problematic for solution, as the amount of journalism by Cora or Cora and Stephen is quite small, and there seems to be insufficient additional writing by Kate Lyon for comparison. Crane’s reputation rests on his fiction, however, so that the stories seem the important focus, and there is at least a modest amount of Cora’s own writing to compare with Stephen’s. 
            Although she was not very successful in selling her own fiction after Stephen’s death, at least ‘What Hell Might Be’ (a short prose poem), ‘Cowardice’, and ‘The Red Chimneys’ were known to have been published (Gilkes, 1960; Wertheim, 1986). After some frustrating searching, I acquired e-texts of all of them. ‘The Lavender Trousers’, ‘Elbridge Carter’s Dream’, and ‘An Old-World Courtship’ were never published, but the manuscripts for these stories exist in the Stephen Crane Collection at Columbia University (they are discussed briefly by Gilkes [1960], who apparently read them in manuscript), and I have used OCR and manual transcription to produce e-texts of them (I am grateful to Columbia University Library for access to this material). Another story, ‘José and the Saints’, was reportedly unpublished and the manuscript lost (Gilkes, 1960, 277–78), but a contemporary source reports that she ‘found a ready market’ for it (‘The Lounger’, 1901, 199), and I have since discovered that it was published in 1902 and is available online. Together, these texts should be sufficient for an attempt to unravel the authorship of Stephen’s final stories. (I also collected two pieces of non-fiction by Cora for comparison—‘Arundel Castle’ and ‘The 17th Regiment of Light Dragoons’—but preliminary testing showed that Cora’s non-fiction is so distinct from her fiction that it is inappropriate for inclusion.)
            Before attempting to measure Cora’s participation in Stephen’s late fiction, some aspects of this problem require further comment. Stephen’s fiction is quite varied in setting and theme, and contains several groups of more or less closely related stories. More than a dozen stories are set in the fictional Whilomville (loosely based on Port Jervis, New York, where Crane spent part of his childhood). Ten are loosely based on camping experiences of Crane and some friends northwest of Port Jervis. Six are set in Cuba, four concern an infantry regiment in the fictional country of Spitzbergen, and others have Mexican or western settings. Some are satiric, some comedic, some serious, and many treat war in some way. The one story we know Cora completed for Stephen, ‘The Squire’s Madness’, is a parody of a Gothic tale. Given this range of settings and subject matter, it seems important to select stories for testing against the questionable pieces so as not to privilege Stephen or Cora inappropriately. Cora’s seven independent stories are varied as well: besides the brief prose poem mentioned above, two take place at least partly in Mexico, two are set in England (one is a ghost story), one is set in Stephen’s Whilomville, and one is a maudlin story of an affair followed by a suicide. (This is an extreme form of problems identified in Hoover [2004] and, more thoroughly, in Eder and Rybicki [2013].) Fortunately there is an excellent resource in the 
                Stephen Crane Encyclopedia (Wertheim, 1997) to aid in this effort.
            
            My analysis is not yet complete, but Figure 1 shows some preliminary results, based on eight late Stephen Crane stories and the eight available Cora Crane stories, balanced as well as possible by kind and length. Here, I have divided the stories into sections of about 1,500 words to reduce the effect of size differences.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Cora Crane vs Stephen Crane: 800mfw, 1,500-word sections.
            Cora’s stories all cluster separately from Stephen’s late stories (initial testing showed a fairly strong chronological development in Crane’s fiction, so I selected stories only from the last four years of his life). ‘What Hell Might Be’ is an outlier almost certainly because it is only 423 words long, as testing in 600-word sections confirms. An analysis based on the 900mfw separates all the sections correctly, and less accurate results, such as the one shown in Figure 2, based on the 800mfw, also suggest that they are distinct enough that it should be possible to detect even relatively small amounts of Cora’s writing in Stephen’s late fiction, if it exists. (One of the two texts by Cora that appears in the left cluster of Stephen’s texts is her half of ‘The Squire’s Madness’.)
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Cora Crane vs late Stephen Crane: 800mfw, 600-word sections.
             As a first attempt at evaluating Cora’s contribution to Stephen’s late fiction, I tested the same eight stories against the eleven texts of questionable authorship mentioned above, with the results seen in Figure 3. 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Cora vs Stephen and 11 questionable texts: 400mfw, 1,500-word sections.
            The presence of all but one of Cora’s stories in the central cluster, the correct clustering of the two parts of ‘The Squire’s Madness’, and the presence of only one of Stephen’s stories, ‘At the Pit Door’, in Cora’s cluster do not support the idea that she had much to do with the posthumous stories. (‘At the Pit Door’ is a lighthearted sketch about a line outside a theatre; no typescript or manuscript exists.) Furthermore, the appearance of the two racist stories published in 1978 as an outlying cluster suggests that their very heavy dialect make them quite distinct. An analysis of the same texts divided into smaller sections of approximately 1,000 words is shown in Figure 4.
            
                
                    
                    
                
            
            Figure 4. Cora vs Stephen and 11 questionable texts: 500mfw, 1,000-word sections.
             This analysis generally supports the previous one. Here only Cora’s ‘Elbridge Carter’s Dream’ clusters with Stephen’s texts, and only Stephen’s ‘An Illusion in Red and White’ and ‘Manacled’ cluster with Cora’s texts. (Crane’s publisher already had both of these stories in January 1900, five months before Crane’s death [Bowers, 1969].) The two racist stories remain outliers. Dropping the two outliers and retesting in 600-word sections gives the results in Figure 5, which tell much the same tale. Here one section each of Cora’s ‘José and the Saints’ and ‘Elbridge Carter’s Dream’ cluster with Stephen, but none of Stephen’s and none of the questionable texts join the Cora cluster. The eleven questionable sections that form a cluster to the left of Cora’s cluster have often been suggested as having possible contributions from Cora, but they are all set in 18th-century Pennsylvania, and one, ‘Ol’ Bennet and the Indians’, was published before Crane’s death.
            Dividing the same set of texts into sections of approximately 500 words and performing t-tests on all the words with a frequency of three or more yields only 101 significant words (p &lt; .05). Repeating the analysis in Figure 5 using only these words correctly clusters all the sections except one (from ‘Elbridge Carter’s Dream’), and suggests only one section of ‘A Desertion’ and all the sections of the two racist stories as being by Cora. Preliminary Delta testing lends some equivocal support to these attributions and weakly suggests the possibility of Cora’s hand in ‘At the Pit Door’, ‘An Illusion in Red and White’, ‘The Man from Duluth’, ‘A Desertion’, and ‘A Self-Made Man’. A demonstration that Cora was a major contributor to Stephen’s posthumous fiction would have been a more exciting result, but the weakness and inconsistency of the attributions of sections of the stories of questionable authorship to Cora suggests that any part she played was a relatively minor one.
                
                
            
            Figure 5. Cora vs Stephen and nine questionable texts: 400mfw, 600-word sections.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Berryman, J. (1962). 
                        Stephen Crane. World Publishing Company, Cleveland, OH.
                    
                    
                        Bowers, F., ed. (1969). 
                        The Works of Stephen Crane. University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Do Birds of a Feather Really Flock Together, or How to Choose Training Samples for Authorship Attribution. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(2): 229–36.
                    
                    
                        Gilkes, L. (1960). 
                        Cora Crane: A Biography of Mrs. Stephen Crane. Indiana University Press, Bloomington. 
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2004). Testing Burrows’s Delta. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        19(4): 453–75.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2010). Authorial Style. In McIntyre, D. and Busse, B. (eds), 
                        Language and Style: Essays in Honour of Mick Short. New York: Palgrave, pp. 250–71.
                    
                    
                        Linder, L. D. (1978). ‘The Ideal and the Real’ and ‘Brer Washington’s Consolation’: Two Little-Known Stories by Stephen Crane? 
                        American Literary Realism, 1870–1910, 
                        11(1): 1–33.
                    
                    
                        ‘The Lounger’. (1901). 
                        The Critic,
                        38(1). Good Literature Publishing Company.
                    
                    
                        Wertheim, S. (1986). Cora Crane’s Thwarted Romance. 
                        Columbia Library Columns, 
                        36(1): 26–37.
                    
                    
                        Wertheim, S. (1997). 
                        A Stephen Crane Encyclopedia. Greenwood Press, Westport, CT. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Creating Linked Data within Archival Description: Tools for Extracting, Validating, and Encoding Access Points for Finding Aids
                
                    
                        Gracy
                        Karen F.
                    
                    School of Library and Information Science, Kent State University, United States of America
                    kgracy@kent.edu
                
                
                    
                        Zeng
                        Marcia Lei
                    
                    School of Library and Information Science, Kent State University, United States of America
                    mzeng@kent.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Linked data; semantic analysis; archival description
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In current archival information systems, useful linkable information is embedded in narrative descriptions known as finding aids. While the finding aid excels at providing contextual information to understand the nature and scope of archival collections, the format of the genre is characterized by large text blocks in which many types of information are intermingled and unlabeled. In the blocks of histories of records and the scope notes for collections, dozens or even hundreds of names of persons, organizations, places, and events, as well as topical terms can be found. While these text blocks in finding aids are full-text-searchable and amenable to natural language processing techniques, the lack of semantic distinction among the different entities and topics hinders efficient and effective information retrieval and restricts the ability of information systems to create the links that would gather widely dispersed information about the same person, organization, or thing into one place. 
            Because of these challenges of converting archival descriptions to archival linked data, the Linked Open Data—Libraries, Archives and Museums (LOD-LAM) research group at the School of Library and Information Science, Kent State University (http://lod-lam.slis.kent.edu/index.html) has been exploring various automated and semiautomated ways to enrich archival description with semantic tagging. This process involves (1) the identification of name entities and topical terms from finding aids, (2) extraction of these entities and terms and processing them using semantic analysis services, (3) validating the names of each extracted identity, and then (4) encoding the entities and topics that can be validated within the finding aids with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).
            In a pilot study, the LOD-LAM research group developed a software program that facilitated the first and second steps mentioned above of this multistep process, as reported in the NKOS Workshop in 2014 DL Conference (Gracy et al., 2014). The Semantic Analysis Method (SAM) Tool first obtains the archival descriptions by one of three methods: copying and pasting text from a finding aid document, upload of an individual PDF file, or batch upload of multiple PDF files. Then, the SAM Tool sends the file or files to a semantic analysis service, such as OpenCalais (http://viewer.opencalais.com/). These services generate semantically tagged output in the JSON format, which the SAM Tool then converts to a CSV file. The resulting CSV database can then be viewed as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. The CSV files can be used in the OpenRefine tool (openrefine.org) to validate the names and topical terms against various controlled vocabularies, such as the Library of Congress Name Authority File, the Library of Congress Subject Headings, and the Getty vocabularies. As a continuing study, additional functionality that the research group will be exploring in the next year will be automated methods to embed those validated entities and topics in finding aids, connect those entities to the same entities in other data sources, and enhance finding aids with information found in those other sources.
            Similar to OpenCalais, other semantic analysis tools are available, with free or demo versions that allow the performance of the first few tasks (the identification of name entities and topical terms from finding aids, extraction of these entities and terms, processing them using semantic analysis services, validating the names of each extracted identity). The APIs can be tested (after obtaining the keys) as well. Some of the tools have more functions, such as semantic reasoning, categorization, and fact mining, in addition to text mining and entity name extractions. Visualization of the relationships between entities and on geographic maps are other functions of these tools. In this poster, research team members Zeng and Gracy will present the results of experiments to test the performance of several semantic analysis engines in identifying and extracting entities and topical terms, including OpenCalais, MachineLinking (http://www.machinelinking.com/wp/), Cogito Intelligence (http://www.intelligenceapi.com/), and Zemanta (http://www.zemanta.com/api/). The research findings include the comparison of functions, the core functions identified through the study, and the estimated values added to extracting, validating, and encoding the access points for finding aids. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gracy, K. F., Davidson, S. and Zeng, M. L. (2014). Semantic Analysis Method (SAM): A Tool for Identifying Potential Access Points in Unstructured Text. Paper presented at the 
                        13th European Networked Knowledge Organization Systems (NKOS) Workshop, Digital Libraries 2014 Conference, London, 11–12 September 2014.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Creating Time Capsules for Colonial Botanical Drugs in the Early Modern Low Countries
                
                    
                        Zervanou
                        Kalliopi
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    k.a.zervanou@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Klein
                        Wouter
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    W.Klein@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Van den Hooff
                        Peter
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    P.C.vandenHooff@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Bron
                        Marc
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    mbron@yahoo-inc.com
                
                
                    
                        Wiering
                        Frans
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    F.Wiering@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Pieters
                        Toine
                    
                    Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                    T.Pieters@uu.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    history of botany
                    history of pharmacy
                    ontologies
                    linked data
                
                
                    historical studies
                    metadata
                    natural language processing
                    ontologies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    knowledge representation
                    xml
                    internet / world wide web
                    semantic web
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The History of Medicinal Plants from the New World Case Study
                As proof of concept for semantic interoperability, our work focuses on cultural heritage data relating to the history of medicinal plants in the Low Countries roughly from the moment that natural drug components from the New World started penetrating Europe until the introduction of chemical and synthetic drugs in the nineteenth century (i.e., 1550–1850). The resulting system aims at enabling a historian to investigate the trajectories of colonial drug components in the Low Countries, and the patterns of correspondence, trade, and knowledge exchange that lie underneath it. Our case study is meant to provide the aggregated data required for new information to surface, which an individual researcher is unable to produce by means of traditional historical research alone.
                The factors leading to the adoption of a given drug component are revealing of the dynamics of the medical market at that historical period of time. Recent research showed that drug adoption has only partly to do with therapeutic qualities. Equally important are non-medical factors such as public acceptance, marketing, and availability (Pieters, 2004; Gijswijt-Hofstra et al., 2002; Friedrich and Müller-Jahncke, 2009). A special focus on the trajectories of individual drugs has proven itself a valuable research method in this respect. For colonial botanical drugs in the early modern period, several publications have paved the way for this novel approach in the history of tropical medicine (e.g., Vöttiner-Pletz [1990] on guaiacum, used to treat syphilis; Foust [1992] on rhubarb; Jarcho [1993] on Peruvian bark).
                Another interesting aspect of our case study relates to the circulation of knowledge and goods in the early modern period with particular attention to exotic botany and pharmacy in the Netherlands (as in, e.g., Wilson, 2000; Schiebinger and Swan, 2005; Cook, 2007; Dauser et al., 2008; Dupré and Lüthy, 2011; Snelders, 2012; Van Gelder, 2012). Knowledge about the vicissitudes of individual drugs across time and place may enrich current debates about the circulation of knowledge and goods. Moreover, sequenced data about colonial drugs may reveal trajectory patterns and the mechanisms of trade and exchange in the early modern period. 
                These aspects of our case study make it thus an excellent ground for digital research methods experimentation and a resource for other humanities areas, such as pharmacy, ethno-botany, philosophy, and science of the Enlightenment period, and socio-economic studies of the respective colonial trade period. 
            
            
                Creating Time Capsules
                    2
                
                Our data sources are of two main categories: structured database data, referring to linguistic, pharmaceutical, and botanical data, such as the Dutch Chronological Dictionary and the Economic Botany Database; and unstructured free text corpora collections, such as pharmacopoeias, medical books, and other Early Dutch text corpora. The complete list of our current data sources is illustrated in Table 1.
                
                    
                    Figure 1. Time capsule architecture overview.
                
                An important consideration and challenge in our database data lie in their various formats (relational database, Excel tables, etc.) and in our text data (OCR errors and transcribed data in Latin or Early Dutch). Most importantly, a serious issue lies in the spelling and semantic variation of both drug component as well as plant names and in the ambiguity of their taxonomic classification, which introduces fuzziness into our data classification. For example, a drug ingredient may or may not originate from a certain plant, which may or may not belong to a given plant taxonomy class and may or may not correspond to a given contemporary name.
                For the semantic integration of our data, we adopt a linked-data approach whereby our data sources are first converted into RDF and then linked to our Historical Drug Components Ontology, so as to enrich existing information of the respective KB, as illustrated in Figure 1. In order to address the issues associated with variation, we incorporate historical lexicon resources, and we further enrich these by application of automatic spelling variation detection (Reynaert, 2014). The issue of uncertainty in our data classification is currently addressed by adopting a fuzzy classification approach, whereby an ambiguous instance may be classified into more categories—e.g., a name can be an instance of both a plant concept and a drug component concept. Finally, our structured data sources are used as a resource in detecting relevant information about drug components and their potential use in text documents. The resulting semantic annotations in these historical text corpora are in turn also converted into RDF and automatically linked to our structured sources, so that original historical written evidence is provided to the researchers. 
                
                    
                        
                            Structured Data
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Botanical, pharmaceutical, historical, and image resources
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Ontology of Historical Drug Components
                            
                                Historical drug components information found in historical pharmaceutical sources
                            
                        
                        National Museum for the History of Pharmacy
                    
                    
                        
                            Economic Botany Database
                            
                                Metadata of objects in the Economic Botany Collection
                            
                        
                        Naturalis Biodiversity Center
                    
                    
                        
                            BRAHMS
                            
                                Metadata for 1.2 million records of plant collections
                            
                        
                        Naturalis Biodiversity Center
                    
                    
                        
                            Snippendaalcatalogus
                            
                                Inventory of plants of the Snippendaal’s 1646 Amsterdam botanic garden
                            
                        
                        
                            Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            IrisBG
                            
                                Current information about the plants of the Amsterdam botanic garden, including pictures
                            
                        
                        
                            Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam
                            http://dehortus.gardenexplorer.org/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Dutch Nature Images Collection
                            
                                Images of flora and fauna in the Netherlands and the Dutch Antilles
                            
                        
                        
                            
                                Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision—Stichting Natuurbeelden
                            
                            http://www.natuurbeelden.nl/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            RADAR
                            
                                Geographical and research data about botanical macro remains collected during archaeological excavations on Dutch territory
                            
                        
                        Cultural Heritage Agency (RCE)
                    
                    
                        Lexical resources
                    
                    
                        
                            PLAND
                            
                                Plant names in various Dutch dialects, including sources, dates, locations, and name distributions
                            
                        
                        
                            Meertens Institute
                            http://www.meertens.knaw.nl/pland/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Chronological Dictionary
                            
                                Historical/etymological Dutch dictionary including first observed sources and dates 
                            
                        
                        
                            Meertens Institute
                            http://dbnl.org/tekst/sijs002chro01_01/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            GiGaNT
                            
                                Diachronic Dutch lexicon (6th century–present), including spelling variations, proper names, and morpho-syntactic information
                            
                        
                        
                            Institute for Dutch Lexicology (INL)
                            http://www.inl.nl/onderzoek-a-onderwijs/projecten/gigant
                        
                    
                    
                        Free-text data
                    
                    
                        
                            Looted Letters
                            
                                Transcriptions and metadata of c. 3,500 letters, taken as loot from Dutch ships during the Anglo-Dutch wars (1652–1805)
                            
                        
                        
                            Meertens Institute
                            http://www.gekaaptebrieven.nl/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Letters as Loot
                            
                                Linguistically analysed subset of c. 1,000 letters from the Looted Letters collection
                            
                        
                        
                            Institute for Dutch Lexicology (INL)
                            http://brievenalsbuit.inl.nl/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            CKCC corpus
                            
                                Transcriptions and metadata of c. 20,000 letters from the correspondence of 17th-century scholars in the Netherlands
                            
                        
                        
                            Huygens ING (and partners)
                            http://ckcc.huygens.knaw.nl/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            DBNL corpus
                            
                                Subset of DBNL 16th- to 19th-century texts, including literary, medical, biographical, and other texts 
                            
                        
                        
                            DBNL–National Library of the Netherlands (KB)
                            http://dbnl.org/index.php
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Pharmacopoeias
                            
                                Collection of scanned images of apothecary data
                            
                        
                        Google Books
                    
                
                Apart from data aggregation, our time capsules should allow for information re-contextualisation. This issue is partially addressed by our semantic data integration, thus providing the researcher with different but related information sources and aspects (botanical, linguistic, historical). Another important aspect in contextualisation lies in making explicit the relation of data to space and time, thus allowing the virtual spatio-temporal ‘reconstruction’ of the knowledge transfer trajectories. For this purpose, we exploit a combination of spatio-temporal information in our data sources with spatio-temporal reasoning using OWL-Time (W3C, 2006) and SOWL (Batsakis and Petrakis, 2011), an ontology framework for representing and reasoning over spatio-temporal information in OWL. 
                In the current version of our system, our structured and free-text sources are being processed and integrated, while a demo interface is gradually developed for querying the aggregated data. Our next steps include the development of an exploratory search interface and visualisations of data overviews. A particular challenge lies in the development of a user-friendly web interface for querying our RDF data using SPARQL (W3C, 2013). Future work finally includes the application of our system to a different case study and different types of data (text and images), so as to test its portability and its functionality in a different domain.
                Notes
                1. From the early ’70s until his death in 1987, Warhol selected items from correspondence, newspapers, gifts, photographs, and other material and preserved them in sealed boxes, which he marked with a date or title. These so-called time capsules provide a unique view into Warhol’s private world, as well as an enlightening window on the interrelatedness of culture, media, politics, economics, and science in the 1970s and 1980s. 
                2. http://www.timecapsule.nu/.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Batsakis, S. and Petrakis, E. G. M. (2011). SOWL: A Framework for Handling Spatio-Temporal Information in OWL 2.0. In Bassiliades, N., Governatori, G. and Paschke, A. (eds), 
                        5th International Symposium on Rules: Research Based and Industry Focused (RuleML-2011), LNCS, vol. 6826. Springer, pp. 242–49.
                    
                    
                        Bauer, C., Rosensprung, F., Lajtos, S., Boch, L., Poncin, P. and Herben-Leffring. C.
                         (2005). Deliverable D15.1MDS1: Analysis of Current Audiovisual Documentation Models, Mapping of Current Standards, http://prestospace.org/project/
                        deliverables/D15-1_Analysis_AV_documentation_models.pdf,
                    
                    
                        Cook, H. J. (2007).
                         Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch Golden Age. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    
                    
                        Dauser, R., Hächler, S., Kempe, M., Mauelshagen, F. and Stuber, M. (2008). 
                        Wissen im Netz: Botanik und Pflanzentransfer in europäischen Korrespondenznetzen des 18. Jahrhunderts. Akademie Verlag, Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Doerr, M. (2003). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Module: An Ontological Approach to Semantic Interoperability of Metadata. 
                        AI,
                        24(3): 75.
                    
                    
                        Dupré, S. and Lüthy C. (2011). 
                        Silent Messengers: The Circulation of Material Objects of Knowledge in the Early Modern Low Countries. LIT Verlag, Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Foust, C. (1992). 
                        Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Friedrich, C. and Müller-Jahncke, W.-D. (eds). (2009). 
                        Arzneimittelkarrieren: zur wechselvollen Geschichte ausgewählter Medikamente: die Vorträge der Pharmaziehistorischen Biennale in Husum vom 25–28 April 2008. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft.
                    
                    
                        Gijswijt-Hofstra, M., Van Heteren, G. M. and Tansey, E. M. (eds). (2002). 
                        Biographies of Remedies: Drugs, Medicines and Contraceptives in Dutch and Anglo-American Healing Cultures. Clio medica 66. Rodopi, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        Jarcho, S. (1993). 
                        Quinine’s Predecessor: Francesco Torti and the Early History of Cinchona. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
                    
                    
                        Library of Congress. (2002). Encoded Archival Description (EAD), version 2002. Encoded Archival Description Working Group: Society of American Archivists, Network Development and MARC Standards Office, Library of Congress, http://www.loc.gov/ead/.
                    
                    
                        Library of Congress. (2010). MARC Standards. Network Development and MARC Standards Office, Library of Congress, http://www.loc.gov/marc/index.html.
                    
                    
                        Pieters, T. (2004). Historische trajecten in de farmacie: medicijnen tussen confectie en maatwerk. Inaugural lecture. Hilversum. 
                    
                    
                        Reynaert, M. (2014). TICCLops: Text-Induced Corpus Clean-Up as Online Processing System. In 
                        Proceedings of COLING 2014 System Demonstrations, Dublin, Ireland, pp. 52–56.
                    
                    
                        Schiebinger, L. and Swan, C. (2005). Colonial Botany: Science, Commerce, and Politics in the Early Modern World. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
                    
                    
                        Snelders, S. (2012). Vrijbuiters van de heelkunde: op zoek naar medische kennis in de tropen 1600–1800. Atlas, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (eds). (2014). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.7.0.: 16 September 2014. TEI Consortium, http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
                    
                    
                        Van Gelder, E. (2012). Bloeiende kennis: groene ontdekkingen in de Gouden Eeuw. Verloren, Hilversum.
                    
                    
                        Van Gompel, M. and Reynaert, M. (2013). FoLiA: A Practical XML Format for Linguistic Annotation: A Descriptive and Comparative Study. 
                        Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal,
                        3: 63–81.
                    
                    
                        Vöttiner-Pletz, P. (1990). Lignum sanctum: zur therapeutischen Verwendung des Guajak vom 16. bis zum 20. Jahrhundert. Govi-Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.
                    
                    
                        Wilson, R. (2000). Pious Traders in Medicine: A German Pharmaceutical Network in Eighteenth-Century North America. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park.
                    
                    
                        W3C. (2006). Time Ontology in OWL. W3C Working Draft, 27 September 2006, http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/.
                    
                    
                        W3C. (2013). SPARQL 1.1 Overview. W3C Recommendation, 21 March 2013, http://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-sparql11-overview-20130321/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Crowdsourcing the Text: Contemporary Approaches to Participatory Resource Creation
                
                    
                        Powell
                        Daniel James
                    
                    King's College London, Electronic Textual Cultures Lab, University of Victoria
                    daniel.j.powell@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Van Hyning
                        Victoria
                    
                    Zooniverse, University of Oxford
                    victoria@zooniverse.org
                
                
                    
                        Wolfe
                        Heather
                    
                    Folger Shakespeare Library
                    hwolfe@folger.edu
                
                
                    
                        Tonra
                        Justin
                    
                    National University of Ireland Galway
                    justin.tonra@nuigalway.ie
                
                
                    
                        Fraistat
                        Neil
                    
                    Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities, University of Maryland
                    fraistat@umd.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    crowdsourcing
                    social knowledge creation
                    social editing
                    community management
                    collaboration
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    text generation
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    social media
                    crowdsourcing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Session Topic
            Crowdsourcing in the digital humanities has reached a tipping point. Digital projects are more likely than ever to integrate participatory components into funding proposals, development plans, and scholarly objectives. A recently funded National Endowment for the Humanities (USA) Digital Humanities Startup Grant is typical: ‘The development of software tools that would facilitate citation and annotation of music notation and capture information about multiple participants’ contributions to collaborative digital projects. As an initial case study, the project would focus on an existing effort to compile a critical edition of Nicolas Du Chemin’s ‘Chansons Nouvelles’.
                1 Similarly, the Arts &amp; Humanities Research Council (UK) awarded over £4 million in 2014 to various projects under its ‘Digital Transformations in Community Research Co-production’ scheme; many of these are focused on participatory creation of textual materials. 
            
            This trend is paralleled by an increased focus on the part of digital humanists. In her DH 2010 keynote ‘Present, Not Voting’, Melissa Terras helped focus digital humanists’ attention on the topic when she noted, ‘Crowdsourcing—the harnessing of online activity to aid in large-scale projects that require human cognition—is becoming of interest to those in the library, museum and cultural heritage industry, as institutions seek ways to publicly engage their online communities, as well as aid in creating useful and usable digital resources’.
                2 Described in the context of the Transcribe Bentham project, Terras framed crowdsourcing Bentham, and participatory resource creation in general, as a lens through which to discuss a variety of issues in digital humanities writ large, including our dual dependencies on primary sources and technology, legacy data, sustainability, money, serendipity, impact factors, and many more.
                3 Her talk ends with a call for robust, ‘proactive’ self-reflection to better understand the place of digital humanities in wider academic practices. 
            
            Our panel responds to that call. From 2011 to 2014, there have been a number of papers, posters, and workshops on individual crowdsourcing projects at Digital Humanities conferences (including a keynote in Nebraska). Despite this, there has, to our knowledge, never been a singular session or panel devoted to crowdsourcing the creation of textual data. Given the importance of such data to digital humanities research in general, as well as its increasing prevalence in funded projects, a sustained, focus discussion is more necessary than ever. This panel brings together a number of high-profile projects and initiatives to discuss the difficulties and affordances of engaging the public in co-creation of text-based scholarly materials. We will touch on the technical (developing infrastructure systems to facilitate public and collaborative work), the social (how best to work with user communities through effective feedback and communication), and the theoretical (what are the implications for scholarly practice as we now understand it when ‘scholarly’ work is distributed amongst divergent groups?). Our objective is to present a cross-section of current crowdsourcing projects in the humanities that will, collectively, allow us to move forward in conscientiously developing best practices for participatory textual creation in digital humanities.
            Presentations
            
                1. Notes Towards a Participatory Humanities
            
            Powell, D.
            Increasingly, academic communities faced with intractable amounts of data are turning to collaborative and participatory methods like crowdsourcing to catalogue, digitise, and effectively leverage their holdings. This includes the vast amount of handwritten and print material held by libraries and archives that has so far been inaccessible to scholarly inquiry on account of overall scale or individual difficulty. Institutions like the New York Public Library, the US National Archives, the British Library, and the University of Oxford are actively seeking to leverage public involvement to catalogue, transcribe, and otherwise process their holdings into usable form. Whether focused on restaurant menus, daily reports from World War I soldiers, or the expansive manuscripts of Jeremy Bentham, harnessing the cognitive surplus of the interested crowd has become a paramount concern for digital humanists and cultural heritage professionals. This presentation will contextualise this panel as a whole by providing a high-level overview of current and past crowdsourcing projects in the humanities that deal mostly or exclusively with the creation of textual content. It will also outline the structure of the panel from a pragmatic perspective. 
            
                1.1 Crowdsourcing the Text: Contemporary Approaches to Participatory Digital Resource Creation
            
            According to Wikipedia and the
                 New York Times Magazine, technology critic and author Jeff Howe coined the term ‘crowdsourcing‘ as a portmanteau of ‘crowd’ and ‘outsourcing.’
                4 In harnessing the undefined public, individuals and organisations can accomplish tasks with less investment, time, and attention. Although initially very much applied to the private sector, it has increasingly found a place in academia, in cultural heritage institutions, and in a variety of attempts to create scholarly knowledge. Archivists, librarians, cataloguers, humanists, and digital humanists have been especially quick to argue that crowdsourcing methods can be harnessed to enable the digitisation of large amounts of print and manuscript material that present unique challenges to traditional humanist processes. These difficulties often stem from the sheer scale of holdings to be digitised or from the lack of computationally tractable versions of documents (e.g., handwriting that cannot be read via optical character recognition). Crowdsourcing is popularly seen as a way to overcome the first difficulty by harnessing large numbers to undertake small tasks that add up to a greater product. It can overcome the second by the complex decision-making and intuitive decision-making power of large numbers of human brains. In both cases, users become co-creators of academic content that is, after crowd processing, viable for use by academic researchers.
                5
            
            A number of recent projects have attempted to crowdsource textual information. This overview will draw on specific examples from the following: 
             • Transcribe Bentham (University College London)
             • What’s on the Menu? (New York Public Library)
             • Papers of the War Department, 1784–1800 (Center for History and New Media)
             • Citizen Archivist (US National Archives)
             • Australian Newspapers Online / Trove (National Library of Australia)
             • Smithsonian Digital Volunteers Transcription Center (USA)
             • Family Search Indexing (FamilySearch.org)
             • Wikisource (Wikimedia Foundation)
             • Zooniverse (University of Oxford)
             • Early Modern Manuscripts Online (Folger Shakespeare Library) 
             • Crowd Consortium (multinational)
            Of particular interest here is how we as digital humanists, as editorial actors tasked with preserving and often remediating cultural materials, deal with issues of oversight, authority, quality, and credit. Projects like those listed above, as well as those like 
                A Social Edition of the Devonshire Manuscript, prompt us to consider what happens when crowdsourcing is applied to primary source materials as a way to render them computationally acceptable. What is the role of the humanist in a collaborative world where text overflows the bounds of the academy? How can we ensure scholarly quality, effective public engagement, and cost efficiencies in the new landscape of textual work? 
            
            
                1.2 Panel Organisation
            
            This panel has evolved out of a number of discussions under way in the digital humanities, scholarly editing communities, and the GLAM fields, all centred on better understanding how the unique content of the traditional humanities—primarily textual in nature—can best be integrated with the open-source approaches evident in contemporary digital practices. Part of this introductory presentation will provide a succinct overview of the pragmatics of the panel as outlined here. 
            Panel participants include personnel from Zooniverse (https://www.zooniverse.org/) at the University of Oxford; researchers from King’s College London studying the applicability of collaborative methods to scholarly editing (http://dixit.uni-koeln.de/esr.html#c18485); researchers involved with the development of the Transcribe Bentham (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/) and Ossian Online (http://demo.ossianonline.org/) projects; developers and humanists from the Folger Shakespeare Library (http://www.folger.edu/) involved in building crowd transcription environments; and digital humanists involved with the Crowd Consortium Initiative (http://www.crowdconsortium.org/), funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services and dedicated to exploring effective crowdsourcing techniques in the GLAM fields. All panelists are engaged in the study of development of various digital humanities tools, projects, and initiatives devoted to understanding crowdsourcing in relation to textual artefacts. The individual presentations fall into three major categories: introduction, case studies, and a roundup of collective insights. Our final presentation—Engaging the Public: Best Practices for Scholarly Crowdsourcing—will move us directly into wider audience discussion during the open-forum section of our session. 
            The panel will be organised as follows:
             • The panel chair (Daniel Powell) will introduce the panel and provide a high-level overview of crowdsourcing cultural heritage materials in the short presentation ‘Notes Towards a Participatory Humanities’ (10 minutes).
             • Panelists will each present their short paper (10 minutes each; 40 minutes total).
             • The projects, theory, and pragmatics brought up during individual presentations will be discussed in an open forum between panelists and audience members (30 minutes).
             • The panel chair will summarise major points from the panel, reflect on ways forward, provide contact information, and close the panel (10 minutes).
            The names and affiliations of panel participants are as follows:
             • Neil Fraistat, Maryland Institute of Technology in the Humanities, University of Maryland, Crowd Consortium (USA)
             • Victoria Van Hyning, Zooniverse, University of Oxford (UK)
             • (Chair) Daniel Powell, King’s College London, Electronic Textual Cultures Lab, University of Victoria (UK, Canada)
             • Justin Tonra, National University of Ireland Galway, Ossian Online (Ireland)
             • Heather Wolfe, Early Modern Manuscripts Online, Folger Shakespeare Library (USA)
            We are amenable to a panel chair who is not also a presenter but were unable to find anyone who could commit to attending DH 2015 in Sydney. It was suggested by some of those we approached that an Australian involved with Trove or the Newspaper Digitisation Project would be an ideal moderator. 
            
                1.3 Conclusion
            
            This individual presentation will serve as an introduction to the overall panel, pressing questions in the field, and an argument for the relevance of examining crowdsourcing text in digital humanities contexts. It will also cover the pragmatics of organisation and the structure of the panel. As such, it is not designed to share original scholarly work, but rather to contextualise the other participants’ presentations so that we might all, together, work towards such insights. 
            
                2. Unlocking Textual Corpora with Zooniverse
            
            Van Hyning, V.
            This presentation will argue that crowdsourced transcription has the power to unlock and render accessible textual corpora that would otherwise remain inaccessible, unedited, and unknown. A number of efforts in this area are taking place under the aegis of Zooniverse (Zooniverse.org), the world-leading academic crowdsourcing organisation based at the University of Oxford and the Adler Planetarium in Chicago. Zooniverse began with a single crowdsourcing project called Galaxy Zoo (galaxyzoo.org/), which was launched in July 2007 by Dr Chris Lintott, now professor of astrophysics at the University of Oxford, and Dr Kevin Schawinski, who was an astronomy graduate student at the time. The goal was to process some one million images of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey into two types: spiral and elliptical, a task that would have taken one person a minimum of three years of round-the-clock effort to complete. The several-thousand-strong crowd of volunteers who participated not only completed the task in a matter of months, but each image was classified an average of 38 times, as opposed to once, and thus rendered excellent quality data for each image.
             The success of Galaxy Zoo led to the foundation of the Zooniverse in Oxford and the development of over 30 new projects in astrophysics, biology, climate science, and the humanities, including in the fields of music, papyrology, and the history of World War I. Zooniverse now has over 1.18 million registered users and partners with over 400 academic researchers, librarians, and archivists around the world. Following the successful generation of high-quality data by the crowd, Galaxy Zoo cultivated a science team that have published more than 40 papers. The complete list of Zooniverse papers from across all projects is available at zooniverse.org/publications.
             Over the past seven years, the developers and researchers involved in Zooniverse have accrued extensive experience in creating user interfaces that facilitate lay participation in the sciences and humanities. Projects have evolved from the basic classification tasks required in Galaxy Zoo to more complex and demanding tasks such as text transcription. 
            
                2.1 Building a Zooniverse for the Humanities
            
            Zooniverse now supports a number of crowdsourcing projects related to textual transcription, driven by a volunteer base of more than 40,000 registered users. These range from character-by-character transcription of ancient Greek papyri in the Ancient Lives project (ancientlives.org/) to word-by-word transcription in the Shakespeare’s World project, part of the Early Modern Manuscripts Online initiative that will be discussed in greater detail by my fellow panelist Dr Heather Wolfe (Folger Shakespeare Library). The line-by-line transcription approach applied to the sketchbooks and personal papers of artists from Tate Britain (Secret Lives of Artists) will be examined, as well as projects that require tagging and partial text transcription, as in Old Weather (oldweather.org/), concerning ships’ logs; Notes from Nature (notesfromnature.org/), an entomology project; and Operation War Diary (operationwardiary.org/), about WWI British field diaries from the Western Front.
            This paper will outline the benefits and challenges of each transcription method deployed at Zooniverse, and reveal what our team has learned from designing, implementing, and sustaining each project. It will suggest how these findings might inform future crowdsourcing initiatives both at Zooniverse and elsewhere. 
            
                2.2 Case Studies 
            
            Zooniverse transcription projects vary widely in scope, content-area focus, and implementation; this talk will consider the following ‘citizen science’ and ‘citizen humanities’ projects and their use of crowdsourced transcription:
            
                 • Ancient Lives: Character-by-character transcription of approximately 500,000 Ancient Greek papyri fragments; a collaboration between the Imaging Papyri Project, the Oxyrhynchus Papyri Project, the Egypt Exploration Society, Zooniverse, and the University of Oxford. 
            
            
                 •
                Old Weather: Transcribing millions of weather entries from ship’s logs; a collaboration between the National Archives and Records Administration (USA), the National Archives (UK), the Met Office (National Meteorological Services, UK), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, USA), the National Maritime Museum (UK), the University of Oxford, and a number of others. 
            
            
                 •
                Notes from Nature: Transcription of etymological specimen labels from over 200 institutions, including the University of California at Berkeley, the South Eastern Regional Network of Expertise and Collections (SERNEC) project—a collaborative collection from 222 herbaria across the southeastern United States—the Natural History Museum of London (NHML), Zooniverse, and Vizzuality, to name only a few. 
            
            
                 •
                Operation War Diary: A collaboration between the Imperial War Museum (London), the National Archives at Kew (London), and Zooniverse. A tagging and transcription project that is designed to capture data for the Kew catalogues and for a second crowdsourcing project called Lives of the First World War based at the Imperial War Museum. 
            
            
                 •
                Secret Lives of Artists (in production): A line-by-line transcription project of artists’ letters, diaries, and sketchbooks—a partnership between Tate Britain and Zooniverse designed to capture full text transcriptions that will eventually be incorporated into the museum’s online archives catalogue. Multiple users will perform each transcription, and these transcriptions will be automatically compared to one another and to gold-standard data to determine consensus. 
            
            
                 •
                Shakespeare’s World (in production): A word-by-word transcription project that will enable users to acquire palaeography skills and the ability to transcribe early modern manuscript material in the Folger Shakespeare Library collection. Multiple users will perform each transcription, and these transcriptions will be automatically compared to one another and to gold-standard data to determine consensus.
            
            
                2.3 Conclusion
            
            Each project offers compelling and potentially reusable models of crowdsourced transcription and volunteer engagement that might interest researchers from disciplines and specialties across the digital humanities and the GLAM fields (galleries, libraries, archives, museums). Each of these projects consist of collections of anywhere between 50,000 and 1.5 million images, numbers that make traditional academic consideration—whether in terms of editing, cataloguing, or researching—at best impractical and at worst impossible. Within the Zooniverse, volunteers tackle work that would not be undertaken otherwise, typically because it would take an individual researcher or a small group of researchers decades to accomplish. 
            Well-structured academic crowdsourcing projects enable researches to ask a consistent question or questions of a large body of data, and thus make both qualitative as well as quantitative analyses in their research. For example, in the first seven months of Operation War Diary, users tagged and transcribed nearly 60,000 pages of material. This is roughly the equivalent of one academic researcher’s full-time effort for five years. The data generated by the crowd has shed new light on troop movement and experiences of life on the front, including armament, recreation, and soldiers’ physical and socio-psychological experiences of the First World War. Studied through the lens of large datasets—especially textual ones that may exist only through collaborative production—even a well-studied topic such as the First World War can be seen in a new light. 
            
                3. Strategies for Effectively Crowdsourcing Transcription: Findings from Early Modern Manuscripts Online
            
            Wolfe, H. 
            What happens when you attempt to crowdsource an activity that was previously only the bastion of specialised scholars? That’s exactly the problem faced by the Early Modern Manuscripts Online project (EMMO) at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, DC. Funded by a generous grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services for three years, EMMO’s goal is to transcribe and encode all of the early modern English manuscripts at the Folger and make them freely available as a searchable corpus of texts. Our hope is that the availability of such texts, previously only available to scholars trained in the study of English secretary hand, will shift primary research from a print-centric view of English history, literature, religion, and politics to a much more nuanced understanding of how texts circulated. We also envision that this corpus will be invaluable for data mining and a wide variety of other research agendas and questions.
             
            
                3.1 Strategies for Effectively Crowdsourcing Text
            
            Currently in its second year of development, EMMO is beginning to experiment with a variety of formats for rapidly training our potential crowds in English secretary hand and basic editorial conventions before letting them loose on digitised images of manuscripts. In this talk, I will report and reflect on our experiences with four interrelated strategies for effectively crowdsourcing textual transcription: 
            • Online transcription sprints.
            • Pedagogical partnerships.
            • Intensive palaeography workshops.
            • Transcribathons at university libraries.
             
            3.1.1 Beginners
            EMMO relies on both expert and beginner crowds, and there are different demands for each. Our beginner crowds—initially unknown to us, and most likely unfamiliar with secretary hand and with the orthography and abbreviations of early modern England—are most likely unwilling to sit through an intensive multi-level online tutorial before being allowed to transcribe. Zooniverse has been instrumental in helping us develop an online learning environment that minimises initial investment while making resources such as abbreviation and letterform guides readily available and easily accessible. Because our beginner crowd has never worked with early modern handwriting before, we have a ranking system for our digital images of manuscripts that allows us to direct easier examples to true beginners, and a hidden ‘test’ that allows the most accurate transcribers to play a larger role in vetting transcriptions. Transcriptions of each page image are made four times, at which point the transcriptions are collated so that errors can be highlighted and corrected by sending them out for further transcriptions or for correction by our super-users. Because we imagine that some veteran crowdsourcers will have no interest in transcription at all but are nonetheless interested in the project’s overall goals, we have also created non-transcription tasks that include creating bounding boxes around individual words. 
            We encounter other beginner crowds at transcribathons. These four- to 12-hour events can take place anywhere, but we have so far held them in university libraries. We typically offer prizes and incentives for our volunteers, as well as mini-training sessions at particular times throughout the transcribathon. Individuals can work on their own laptops or on teams, and we occasionally project ‘stumpers’ on the screen so that everyone can participate simultaneously. Because we are working with people with a variety of skill levels and time commitments, we design the transcribathons to meet multiple needs and interests.
             
            3.1.2 Experts
            Our expert crowds, largely based at universities, tend to have an interest in the time period and, in some cases, familiarity with secretary hand. We have developed an in-house module called Dromio for transcriptions made by communities at the Folger, in partner classrooms, and amongst an international group of palaeography contacts. Dromio is a TEI transcription/collation tool that pulls images from our digital image database and allows users to transcribe and encode them. The transcription window is a small box that sits on top of a zoomable page; it also includes buttons for our TEI tagset as well as for common early modern abbreviations. The transcriptions and editorial notes can be viewed in HTML or XML, and the names of the transcriber and the encoder are included in the metadata
                . 
            
            So far we have used Dromio for an advanced palaeography seminar that brought together 16 experienced palaeographers for an intensive week of transcribing some of the Folger’s most difficult and perplexing manuscripts, and we will be using it again in summer 2015 for an intensive week of introductory palaeography. EMMO has hired a full-time palaeographer and has a full cadre of interns and volunteers who use Dromio for transcription. We have been approached by professors from history and English departments who want to introduce students to primary resources in the classroom, and who are currently designing classes that incorporate specific Folger manuscripts. Dromio will be released as open-source software at the end of our grant, and we hope that the release will encourage other special collections to contribute to EMMO. Because accuracy is quite important for semi-diplomatic transcriptions, we are particularly interested to compare efficiencies in our partner Zooniverse to our in-house platform Dromio as we embark on the next phase of EMMO.
             
            
                3.2 Conclusion
            
            As indicated above, the Folger is approximately a year into this project. By the time of DH 2015, we will have had the opportunity to hold a number of additional workshops and transcribathons, as well as time to think through an analysis of our different strategies. This will allow us to make recommendations during this panel, based on our successes and failures. In particular, we will be in a unique position to comment on both transcribing difficult-to-parse manuscript content and on an integrated approach to managing and training volunteer communities. It is quite difficult for the ‘man on the street’ to transcribe English secretary hand with no training; combining such training with community management oriented towards producing effective transcriptions of difficult content can be seen as a sort of ‘best case’ litmus test for the efficacy of these models of knowledge co-creation. 
            
                4. Crowdsourcing Texts of Many Dimensions: Transcribe Bentham and Ossian Online
            
            Tonra, J.
            This paper analyses the theoretical and practical implications of crowdsourcing two different kinds of text: transcriptions and annotations. Two projects that adopt the model for these respective purposes are Transcribe Bentham and Ossian Online. They exhibit differing motivations for choosing this model, and aim to crowdsource tasks whose requirements and biases place particular demands and restrictions on participants. As a consequence, the accuracy of the term ‘crowdsource’ must be questioned for more subjective tasks that require the generation of original intellectual content. Collaboration plays a central, though differently focused, role in both forms of crowdsourcing, and investment in infrastructure and in the engagement of a community of volunteers is a constant imperative in this type of endeavour.
            
                4.1 The Complexity of Crowdsourcing Texts
            
            4.1.1 Motivations for Crowdsourcing Text
            The motivations for these two projects’ adoption of the crowdsourcing model give an immediate sense of their typological distinction, and of the particular challenges and opportunities for each. Transcribe Bentham mounted a crowdsourced transcription initiative to produce manuscript transcriptions for the print edition of 
                The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham in a more economical manner than could be achieved by existing editorial staff (Causer et al., 2012, 121). The purpose of Ossian Online is to pilot an interdisciplinary model of scholarly collaboration by facilitating crowdsourced annotation and interpretation of a key 18th-century literary work. Specifically, Ossian Online aims to provide an experience of collaborative and interdisciplinary knowledge creation while testing the value of the crowdsourcing model to more subjective tasks in the workflow of the scholarly edition.
            
            4.1.2 Bias and the Crowdsourced Task
            The tasks that are required of the crowd in Transcribe Bentham and Ossian Online occupy different positions on the spectrum that runs from microtasking to macrotasking (Walsh et al., 2014, 382f.). Participants in Transcribe Bentham ‘transcribe Bentham’s manuscripts into a text box and, using a customized toolbar, encode the features of the manuscripts in Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)–compliant Extensible Mark-up Language (XML)’ (Causer et al., 2012, 120). The crowd, in this instance, engage in microtasking to solve problems of ‘the sort that would be difficult to solve computationally’ (Walsh et al., 2014, 382): transcription of manuscripts cannot (yet) be automated (though tranScriptorium is engaged in addressing this issue), nor can the encoding of structural features of Bentham’s manuscripts such as additions and deletions. Transcription is a largely objective process, but the addition of markup to the text moves into the realm of the subjective. Despite Transcribe Bentham’s explicit invitation to encode more objectively identifiable structural features of the manuscript, several volunteers considered this assignment more subjective, and ‘an aggravation to an already demanding task’ (Causer and Terras, 2014, 67). At its core, the fundamental and most successful work of Transcribe Bentham was objective: ‘a transcript of Bentham’s writing rather than original intellectual content’ (Causer and Wallace, 2012, 58).
            In addition to presenting accurate texts and a critical edition of the Ossian poems published between 1760 and 1773, Ossian Online includes a tool for crowdsourcing annotation and interpretation of the texts. Ossian has previously been the subject of critical attention from a variety of traditional disciplinary and national perspectives, but despite the profound intercultural nature of the work, scholarship on the subject has been confined within disciplinary and national boundaries. In creating a virtual space for sharing intercultural and interdisciplinary perspectives on Ossian, the project aims to generate fresh debate and new knowledge through a synthesis of these disciplinary insights. The aspiration of generating new knowledge based on the specific skills of participants is a characteristic of macrotasking: a crowdsourcing endeavour involving more complex ‘open-ended, socially negotiated tasks [that] may go further than processing information’ (Walsh et al., 2014, 383). 
            
                4.1.3 Demands and Restrictions on Participation
            
            The particular tasks required of the crowd in Transcribe Bentham and Ossian Online are related to the practices of scholarly editing but demand very different competencies. Transcription of manuscripts, in principle, demands little beyond literacy. Of course, some familiarity with palaeography and of the conventions of preparing transcripts for scholarly editing will hasten the process. But the basic act of recognising and reproducing text is not particularly specialised, demanding, or subjective. The demographics of Transcribe Bentham volunteers and the extent of their work thus far bear this out (Causer and Wallace, 2012, 39–52).
            The kinds of contributions invited by Ossian Online—critical interpretation born of close reading informed by disciplinary knowledge—demand a more specialised contributor and inevitably call into question the 
                crowd in crowdsourcing. Transcribe Bentham has already identified this fallacy, describing its experience as more accurately one of 
                crowd-sifting: ‘beginning with the traditional open call associated with crowdsourcing, and then encouraging the emergence of a self-selecting, smaller number of individuals with the skills, desire and time to complete a complex task on a regular basis’ (Causer and Terras, 2014, 72–73).
            
            Recent examples of crowdsourced interpretation offer different approaches to the task, while sharing a noticeable emphasis on 
                constraint. Prism, a tool for collaborative interpretation of texts, allows users to highlight portions of text that correspond to sets of previously defined interpretive categories (
                sound or 
                sense in Poe’s ‘The Raven’, for example). Meanwhile, 
                An Inquiry into the Modes of Existence (AIME) is an augmented digital book containing sections of glossary, documentation, and interpretive contribution in parallel with the text of Bruno Latour’s book of the same title. Freely accessible on the Web, contributions to AIME are restricted to a hierarchy of contributors, collaborators, and mediators, all of whom have been approved by the project. Constraint in contributors is matched by constraint in contribution: the project has identified and defined 15 topics (or 
                values) that will shape the contributions. Their content is also prescribed: a contribution ‘subjects the Inquiry to the trials for which is was designed’, and is explicitly ‘not a comment [. . .] nor is it like editing a wiki or reviewing’.
            
            Transcription and annotation occupy different practical and ideological positions within the process of scholarly editing. Both are part of a tradition that the social edition, and its ‘embrace [of] social networking and commensurate tools’ (Siemens et al., 2012, n.p.), promises to inform and extend. Transcription, though mechanical and value-neutral, is an essential part in establishing and presenting an accurate text. Annotation can span a subjective range from demonstrable empirical observations about the texts (the information of critical apparatus), through contextual or documentary information, to literary-critical commentary. The more subjective and specialised the task, the more necessarily the crowd becomes circumscribed. The creators of Prism are correct in their view that ‘Reading [. . .] does not end with the identification of the words on a page’ (380) and that crowdsourcing can contribute to interpretive encounters with texts. However, the more that interpretation is prescribed, the greater the obligation to qualify the use of the term 
                crowdsourcing, or to define precisely the model of collaborative interpretation.
            
            
                4.2 Conclusion: Collaboration and the Crowd?
            
            If the 
                crowd, in its multitude and anonymity, is to be edged out of crowdsourcing in cases of macrotasking such as contributing interpretive annotations, it begs the question of why interpretation should be sought from a dispersed group. One of the fundamental reasons is the recognition that certain types of creativity and innovation are enabled by collaboration. The Internet has, since its origins in ARPANET, been a medium that facilitates dispersed academic collaboration and the development of research networks. More specifically, Ossian’s appeal to a broad range of academic disciplines is evident in the research produced by such fields as literature, history, Irish studies, Scottish studies, Celtic studies, romanticism, antiquarianism, textual studies, and book history. Ossian Online entices these existing disciplinary perspectives into dialogue with one another to enable the creation of new knowledge and better understanding and appreciation of an important cultural artefact. Such a practice inevitably unearths consonance and dissonance, and AIME’s treatment of the latter is instructive. The project creates a database of ‘crossings’ that occur ‘when there is a clash between two [interpretive] values’. On this principle, and a related understanding that heightened activity may occur at provocative or polysemic portions of the text, Ossian Online will visualise the scale of user engagement across the span of the text—thus mapping the extent of collaborative annotation and the particular interpretive concerns of the crowd.
            
            4.3 References
            
                Barr, R. A. and Tonra, J. (eds). Ossian Online. National University of Ireland, Galway.
            
            
                Causer, T. and Terras, M. (2014). ‘Many Hands Make Light Work. Many Hands Together Make Merry Work’: 
                Transcribe Bentham and Crowdsourcing Manuscript Collections. In 
                Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage. Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 57–88.
            
            
                Causer, T., Tonra, J. and Wallace, V. (2012). Transcription Maximized; Expense Minimized? Crowdsourcing and Editing 
                The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham. 
                Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                27(2): 119–37. 
            
            
                Causer, T., and Wallace, V. (2012). Building a Volunteer Community: Results and Findings from 
                Transcribe Bentham. 
                Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                6(2).
            
            
                Latour, B.
                An Inquiry into the Modes of Existence. Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques.
            
            
                Praxis Program Team. (n.d.). Prism, Scholars’ Lab.
            
            
                Siemens, R., Timney, M., Leitch, C., Koolen, C. and Garnett, A. (2012). Pertinent Discussions Toward Modeling the Social Edition: Annotated Bibliographies. 
                Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                6(1).
            
            
                Transcribe Bentham. (n.d.). The Bentham Project, University College London.
            
            
                tranScriptorium. (n.d.). tranScriptorium Consortium.
            
            
                Walsh, B., Maiers, C., Nally, G., Boggs, J. and Praxis Program Team. (2014). Crowdsourcing Individual Interpretations: Between Microtasking and Macrotasking. 
                Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                29(3): 379–86.
            
            
                
            
            
                5. Engaging the Public: Best Practices for Scholarly Crowdsourcing
            
            Fraistat, N. 
            For the community engaged in leading crowdsourcing projects, as well as developing tools and applications to enable them, an important next step is to assemble our collective knowledge. What do we know at present about the parameters and potential scalability of crowdsourcing infrastructures, content, and tools? Who are the key players, and what are the major projects? What is the evidence of success in these projects? How can we best address the new challenges inherent in relying on ‘crowdsourced’ research resources? How can we establish standards for evaluating and incorporating user-generated contributions to crowdsourced projects? This talk will discuss the findings and results of a crowdsourcing workshop to be held at the University of Maryland in May 2015 in the context of key points made by other presenters in the roundtable.
            
                5.1 Reports and Findings from Engaging the Public
            
            Made possible by funding from NEH, IMLS, and the Sloan Foundation, Engaging the Public: Best Practices for Scholarly Crowdsourcing aims to culminate and then broaden the conversation about crowdsourcing begun in two face-to-face regional meetings (20 attendees each) and two webinars that are taking place through the auspices of Dartmouth’s 2014 IMLS-funded National Forum in Crowdsourcing for Libraries and Archives: Creating a Crowdsourcing Consortium (CCLA). Through this two-and-a-half-day capstone event, we will be bringing together 50 scholars from several disciplines and representatives from 10 funding agencies in order to consolidate the earlier work of CCLA and seek to advance a truly cross-disciplinary agenda for the future of scholarly crowdsourcing. We will also be seeking to support crowdsourcing efforts among digital humanities groups, museums, libraries, and archives by linking their work to computer science and social science communities and forging a collective consortium. 
            Throughout the workshop, our central concern will be on the question of how institutions might best adopt and employ crowdsourcing strategies for increasing public engagement, integrating data from contributors into existing collections, and increasing knowledge in the humanities and related domains. In obtaining support for the workshop from three different funders, each with their own distinct communities to bring into the conversation, we hope to ensure a rich cross-disciplinary dialogue and send a very public signal about the importance of these emerging practices, thereby increasing the overall impact of the workshop. 
             At its most fundamental level, the workshop has as its central question, ‘How might institutions best adopt and employ crowdsourcing strategies for increasing public engagement, integrating data into existing collections, and increasing knowledge in the humanities and other disciplines?’ Under this broad umbrella are a number of pressing questions that will guide the workshop, including,
             • What is a crowdsourcing platform, and why is it important? 
             • What advantages does crowdsourcing offer, and under what conditions does it fulfil those promises? 
             • How might institutions best adopt and employ crowdsourcing strategies for use in collecting metadata, transcribing historic material, integrating data into existing collections, and increasing user engagement?
             • Which types of institutions would benefit most from the use of crowdsourcing (e.g., libraries or archives with recently digitised collections, ones in danger of losing funding or closing due to lack of community involvement or patronage, etc.)? 
             • Can crowdsourcing strategies be used to increase public engagement in the physical spaces of cultural heritage institutions? 
             • How can crowdsourcing activities best be used in the classroom? 
             • How will material and crowdsourced data be collected, stored, and made accessible? 
             • How can interfaces such as games be effectively designed not only as data collection and processing tools but also as powerful means to motivate and mobilize the public?
             • How can funders best support scholarly crowdsourcing?
            In pursuing such questions, the workshop has the following aims: 
             1. Expand the conversation about best practices in engaging the public across the humanities and with the sciences.
             2. Begin to establish standards for evaluating and incorporating user-generated contributions in research and in national collections. Determine what metadata and provenance are needed to preserve and contextualize public contributions.
             3. Establish guiding principles that can inform the implementation of crowdsourcing efforts.
             4. Collect ‘lessons learned’ from prior experiences with crowdsourcing and from the analyses of such work in the social sciences, including cutting-edge information and best practices in the field. Summarize lessons learned in an accessible way for the humanities, with accompanying principles, strategies, and best practices gathered into a useful visual brief.
             5. Help establish a national consortium among these groups to examine collectively how tools and platforms to date can change the ways in which museums, libraries, archives, and research projects based elsewhere can use crowdsourcing technology to enhance collections and user experiences.
             6. Provide a means for program officers from major funders to deepen their understanding of the current state of the art as well as the opportunities and challenges of crowdsourcing and to engage with the crowdsourcing community.
             7. Produce a livestream feed and podcasts of keynote and panels, as well as a detailed written report documenting the proceedings and findings of the workshop.
             8. Move findings and podcasts to CrowdConsortium.org, a group web presence, that will serve to house these best practices documents, reports, links to top research, and open-source, sharable resources for stakeholders interested in crowdsourcing.
            
                5.2 Conclusion
            
            This presentation will report on the key outcomes achieved during the workshop as a point of departure for larger group discussion of both the current state of the art (partly represented by the other presenters in the roundtable) and the future of scholarly crowdsourcing.
            Notes
            1. See NEH Grant HD51836, Enhancing Music Notation Addressability, awarded to the University of Maryland in March 2014, 
                http://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh/grant-news/announcing-20-digital-humanities-start-grant-awards-march-2014. 
            
            2. See the abstract for her talk in the compiled abstracts from DH 2010, http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/pdf/book-final.pdf. 
            3. See Melissa Terras’ blog for a full transcript, as prepared, of her keynote, 
                http://melissaterras.blogspot.co.uk/2010/07/dh2010-plenary-present-not-voting.html. 
            
            4. See ‘Crowdsourcing’ on Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing) and an ‘On Language‘ column by William Safire from 2009 (http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/08/magazine/08wwln-safire-t.html?_r=3&amp;ref=magazine&amp;).
            5. Mia Ridge, writing on her Open Objects blog, has a highly useful FAQ page that addresses more thoroughly the relationship of crowdsourcing to academic work; see http://openobjects.blogspot.co.uk/2012/06/frequently-asked-questions-about.html. 
        
    



    
        
            
                DARIAH-DE: Building a Distributed Research Data Repository for a Digital Humanities Network
                
                    
                        Schmunk
                        Stefan
                    
                    Göttingen State and University Library, Germany
                    schmunk@sub.uni-goettingen.de
                
                
                    
                        Funk
                        Stefan
                    
                    Göttingen State and University Library, Germany
                    funk@sub.uni-goettingen.de
                
                
                    
                        Grupe
                        Nadja
                    
                    Göttingen State and University Library, Germany
                    grupe@sub.uni-goettingen.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Research Infrastructure
                    Digital Humanities
                    Repository
                
                
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    information architecture
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            DARIAH-DE is the German contribution to the ESFRI project DARIAH-EU—Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities. DARIAH-EU
                1 is a European Digital Humanities Network and infrastructure funded by the European Commission, which has several national subordinate projects—for example, DARIAH-DE, funded by national research agencies such as the BMBF in Germany.
                2 DARIAH-DE supports researchers in the humanities working with digital resources and methods in building a digital infrastructure for research tools and data services, as well as coordinating and (if necessary) further developing existing study and training courses in the digital humanities. The central objective of DARIAH-DE is to enable the interoperability of tools and research data. Following internationally valid and accepted standards and policies, DARIAH-DE aims to ensure the long-term preservation and future use of research data. One of DARIAH-DE’s main activities is to build a research data repository for the arts and humanities based on a distributed and generic infrastructure. 
            
            This repository will be made available to associated research projects such as EHRI—the European Holocaust Research Infrastructure—as well as individual researchers and projects who want their data to be stored in an easily accessible, persistent, citable long-term archive. A main focus is, therefore, accommodating different project and researcher needs. To achieve this, DARIAH-DE is working together with TextGrid.
                3 TextGrid is a virtual research environment, consisting of the modular software TextGridLab and the repository TextGridRep. The DARIAH-DE Repository is based on the code used in the TextGrid Repository and will be implemented with a number of services tailored for DARIAH-DE’s specific uses, such as an AAI (Authorisation and Authentification Infrastructure). Recently the DARIAH-DE AAI and the DARIAH-DE Storage API
                4 for saving data on a bit preservation level were merged such that the storage layer is distributed and synchronized between the participating computing centres. This way the infrastructure is ensured to not only work as storage space for static data—that is, thus be publicly accessible and citable for the long term—but in addition gives the option of storing dynamic data—optionally secured by AAI and constantly updated through regular use. 
            
            The data can be accessed through APIs to render it reusable by other tools and services such as the DARIAH-DE Collection Registry, which contains information about arbitrary data repositories and their collections. The Generic Search developed in DARIAH-DE crawls and indexes the collection registry’s collections and provides easy access and retrieval, while the DARIAH-DE Schema Registry provides XML-schemas for mapping and metadata crosswalks. 
            DARIAH-DE provides not only a repository but a central component of a distributed research infrastructure. The DARIAH-DE project shows how all those services, APIs, dynamic and static repositories, and clients are integrated into a digital humanities network of research data and researchers in the digital humanities, using different workflows and approaches for working with and publishing research data, all based on the data stored in the DARIAH-DE Repository. And all of the developed and used services and tools are reusable in different project contexts. 
            In addition to the poster presentation at DH 2015 in Sydney, scientific experts and developers will perform a multimedia demonstration of the data ingest, with a specific focus on the humanities scientists’ options to archive, provide, and reuse research data and how to model the necessary workflows and processes. In particular it will be shown how researchers can ingest data into the repository, but also how different research tools get access and ingest them after they analyse or enrich them. 
            More information about the German project DARIAH-DE and the European project DARIAH-EU can be found at https://de.dariah.eu/ (German) and at https://www.dariah.eu (English). 
            Notes
            1. http://www.dariah.eu/.
            2. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, http://www.bmbf.de/en/.
            3. http://textgrid.de/en/.
            4. DARIAH Storage API—A Basic Storage Service API on Bit Preservation Level, http://handle.gwdg.de:8000/11858/00-1734-0000-0009-FEA1-D.
        
    



    
        
            
                Data Aesthetics, Old and New.
                
                    
                        Lemos Morais
                        Renata
                    
                    Deakin University, Australia
                    renata.morais@deakin.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    new aesthetic
                    data aesthetic
                    network culture
                
                
                    internet / world wide web
                    cultural studies
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Two years ago, a New Aesthetic was announced by Bruce Sterling in a widely circulated and debated text published on 
                Wired magazine: ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’. This aesthetic is, for him, as significant as any of our past avant-gardes: ‘the New Aesthetic is one thing among a kind: it’s like early photography for French Impressionists, or like silent film for Russian Constructivists, or like abstract-dynamics for Italian Futurists’ (Sterling, 2012). New Aesthetics can also be understood as a ‘collaborative attempt to draw a circle around several species of aesthetic activity—including but not limited to drone photography, ubiquitous surveillance, glitch imagery, streetview photography, 8-bit net nostalgia’ (Battles, 2008). It is concerned with documenting a contemporary phenomenon of ‘eruption of the digital into the physical’ (Sterling, 2012). A new language and sensibility have been identified in the intersection of humans and their machines, one that is related directly to the visual coding and translation of machinic interferences, glitches, and noise to the augmented field of human perception, which is enabled by pervasive digital media. 
            
            As in the case of any avant-garde, the New Aesthetic was first identified and presented by a cluster of young artists, led by James Bridle, a British computer programmer and designer who coined the term and developed the concept by doing content curation in his Tumblr page, http://new-aesthetic.tumblr.com/. He refuses to identify the New Aesthetic with a movement, however, stating that it ‘may be considered a work, a conversation, a performance, an experiment, and a number of other things (although, please, not a movement)’ (Bridle, 2013). Despite all his efforts to refuse being labeled as the founder of an artistic current, his Tumblr page became a classic contemporary work of digital curation as an art form. It basically is a gathering point of images and information about instances in which the digital becomes physically embodied, trying to raise awareness of the physical reality of information networks, together with 3-D printed objects or sculptures reminiscent of pixelated works. The objects portrayed point toward the material embodiments of data networks, ranging from satellites and drones to cellphones.
            The power of observation is here more important than the power of creation. The various technological affordances present in digital media are reshaping our relation to the material world, creating the conditions for the emergence of 
                immaterial physicality: ‘a transfer instantiating the immaterial in a physical form, a “print-out” whose tangibility then becomes the operative dimension in asserting the presence of an immaterial, digital, “information space”’ (Betancourt, 2013). The informational structure and logic of computational code ‘leaks’ into visual/digital culture, which is then translated into sensuous matter, pregnant with immaterial physicalities. 
            
            Whenever the New Aesthetic is mentioned, particularly in reference to the work of James Bridle, we are faced with a direct engagement with the cultural and political outputs of digital networks: their noise, visual identity, clear and/or obscure applications, and agendas. What is artificial blends with what is natural in such an intimate way that the New Aesthetic becomes a perfect example of Donna Haraway’s 
                naturecultures: collective expressions created and distributed by a network of post-cyborg agents living in a world of pervasive and invisible prosthetics, in which machinic species are equivalent to the material-semiotic assemblages of biological bodies. If ‘the machinic and the textual are internal to the organic and vice versa in irreversible ways’ (Haraway, 2003, 15), then so is their aesthetic. The work of James Bridle is iconic in regards to a New Aesthetic that represents the technological properties of the digital by accumulating virtual traces of material networks. By documenting and curating various examples of immaterial physicalities and bringing the ‘digital’ into the ‘physical’ in an automated and mechanic way, data aesthetics shape reality according to the fluid possibilities of the virtual, organically and meticulously. This article examines the inner workings and cultural implications of data aesthetics, and the ways in which digital curation and network dynamics become tools for a critical engagement with the world, connecting us to our physical landscapes in an unprecedented way, while redefining our perception and experience of time and space.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Battles, M. (2012). But It Moves: The New Aesthetic and Emergent Virtual Taste. Metalab, 14 April, http://metalab.harvard.edu/2012/04/but-it-moves-the-new-aesthetic-emergent-virtual-taste/.
                    
                    
                        Betancourt, M. (2013). Automated Labor: The ‘New Aesthetic’ and Immaterial Physicality. CTheory. Theory beyond the Codes: tbc048, May, http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=717.
                    
                    
                        Bridle, J. (2013). The New Aesthetics and Its Politics. Booktwo.org, 12 June, http://booktwo.org/notebook/new-aesthetic-politics/.
                    
                    
                        Haraway, D. (2003). 
                        The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness. Prickly Paradigm Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Sterling, B. (2012). An Essay on the New Aesthetic. 
                        Wired, 4 February, http://www.wired.com/2012/04/an-essay-on-the-new-aesthetic/. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Data Revisualization as Critical Humanities Practice: Reinterpreting 19th Century Data with Modern Tools
                
                    
                        Schmidt
                        Benjamin
                    
                    Northeastern University, United States of America
                    bmschmidt@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Data Visualization
                    United States History
                    Humanities Data Analysis
                
                
                    historical studies
                    visualisation
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Data visualization is a rhetorical form of increasing importance, both inside the digital humanities and in arenas of public discourse from journalism to advertising. This paper will argue that the act of revisualizing and representing information whose historical importance was consolidated through visualization offers a useful opportunity for humanists. It lets them fruitfully contribute to and intervene in the professional practice of data visualization, while building new methods of visualization that are specifically grounded in historical reflection on the self-presentation and failures of visualization in a wider historical context. It will do so by constructing 
                revisualizations of influential historical data from the US Bureau of the Census. This data was first visualized in atlases published between 1870 and 1920 that remain some of the most widely influential works in the history and present practice of data visualization and thematic mapping. Revisualization reveals the elisions, illusions, and labor at the heart of these canonical works.
            
            In the world of data analysis and visualization itself, a recent process of canon formation has made historical visualization a fundamental part of the field’s self-conception and acts as an inspiration (Tufte, 1983).
                
            
            Inside the digital humanities, the grounding of data visualization as a historically situated practice is somewhat muted. Martin Jessop (2008) and John Theibault (2012) have called for better situating practices of data visualization as historical practices themselves.
                 On the one hand, there is deep interest in data visualization as a deliverable for digital humanities projects in which humanists implement out-of-the-box practices of visualization
                 (‘Palladio Project’, 2014) and take the representation and augmentation of historical visualizations for digital modes of presentation as an end goal (Fletcher, 2014).
                
            
            On the other hand, scholars such as Lauren Klein have called for situating these advances in the history of data visualization; still others, such as Johanna Drucker (2011), call for an authentically humanistic form of data visualization that will register uncertainty among the power relations involved in categorical enforcement.
                
            
            The practice of data revisualization bridges the divide between enthusiastic application of other tools and critical reflection on the elisions inherent in visualization. This talk will investigate a self-consciously critical practice of data visualization through the re-analysis and re-visualization of two deeply influential cartographic data visualizations produced by the US Bureau of the Census between 1870 and 1920. One shows shifting population densities in recent decades of US history. It was widely discussed across American society, including providing the impetus for the single most influential article in the historiography of the United States, Frederick Jackson Turner’s frontier thesis
                 (Turner, 1894). The other shows the ‘center of population’ for the population as a whole and for the white and Negro subsets of it. These maps, and the census atlases they come from, are well known both among practitioners of data visualization and scholars of the 19th-century American state (Dandison, 2012; Kinnahan, 2008; Hannah, 2000).
                
            
            This paper will investigate and deconstruct these maps in two ways:
            1. Through the use of archival sources from the National Archives, the paper will better contextualize the maps as products of state construction. The center-of-population maps, for example, are described internally by the Census Bureau in terms that highlight the extreme difficulty of calculating the mean rather than the median of population. Employment records and extraordinary quantities of saved paperwork at the Census Bureau bear this out. These files can help explain the rhetorical origins of data visualization in practices of the state that emphasize the extraordinary labor invested in created data visualization as a way of constituting authority. Archival records also help to clarify the way that these records were used in the early 20th century by other members of the national polity, from advertisers interested in demonstrating the centrality of their state to newspaper editors fearfully tracking the Negro population’s move north after the Great War.
            2. Through revisualization of the historical data using the D3 framework for JavaScript, the paper will investigate the elisions in the original data as well as the ways that different choices can open up different perspectives on the data. For example, while Turner treated the closing of the frontier as an objective fact, this analysis will show how it was only possible through an aggressively imposed set of assumptions about population distributions that even the Census Bureau itself abandoned 10 years later, leading a (mostly ignored) restoration of the frontier on official documents.
            The challenges this poses for data visualization make possible useful interventions in the wider community of data visualization. For example, to adequately represent the shifting frontier line, in all its incarnations, requires extending default svg path behavior to enable smooth transitions in ways that are broadly useful for digital humanities mapping projects mapping with D3.
            The strictly national character of this history will usefully intersect with the global themes of the conference, because they highlight the fundamental but frequently repressed connection between data visualization and explicitly state-centered ways of seeing. The census data is doubly so; it both relies on state-focused data and historically served to consolidate a nation-centered identity. Yet recent scholarship has tended to focus on the 
                scientific provenance of data visualization, despite the earlier emergence of both specific forms like the choropleth and the widespread dominance of what Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison called ‘trained judgment’ as a way of seeing data in state circles decades before their hegemony in scientific circles (2007).
                
            
            In contrast to these state-oriented, bureaucratic forms of organization, this paper will propose a model of humanities visualization as an interpretive, authorial practice that aims to open questions of data integrity and visual design rather than mask them through interactivity. As a single-author visualization project, it will address the ways that claims for the inevitability of collaboration in digital humanities can serve as a backdoor for the introduction of statist forms of argumentation.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dandison, B. (2012). A Handsome Atlas: Historical Maps, Old Charts, and Vintage Data Visualization. http://www.handsomeatlas.com/.
                    
                    
                        Daston, L. and Galison, P. (2007). 
                        Objectivity. Zone Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2011). Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        5(1), 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2014). 
                        Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Fletcher, W. L. (2014). Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United States. http://dsl.richmond.edu/historicalatlas/.
                    
                    
                        Hannah, M. G. (2000). 
                        Governmentality and the Mastery of Territory in Nineteenth-Century America. Cambridge Studies in Historical Geography 32. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Jessop, M. (2008). Digital Visualization as a Scholarly Activity. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23(3) (September 1): 281–93, doi:10.1093/llc/fqn016.
                    
                    
                        Kinnahan, T. P. (2008). Charting Progress: Francis Amasa Walker’s Statistical Atlas of the United States and Narratives of Western Expansion. 
                        American Quarterly,
                        60(2): 399–423, doi:10.1353/aq.0.0012.
                    
                    
                        Meirelles, I. (2013). 
                        Design for Information: An Introduction to the Histories, Theories, and Best Practices behind Effective Information Visualizations. Rockport Publishers, USA. 
                    
                    
                        ‘Palladio Project’. (2014). http://hdlab.stanford.edu/projects/palladio/.
                    
                    
                        Theibault, J. (2012). Visualizations and Historical Arguments [in English]. In Dougherty, J. (ed.).,
                        Writing History in the Digital Age, 23 March, http://writinghistory.trincoll.edu/evidence/theibault-2012-spring/.
                    
                    
                        Tufte, E. R. (1983). 
                        The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT.
                    
                    
                        Turner, F. J. (1894). The Significance of the Frontier in American History. In 
                        Annual Report of the American Historical Association, 1893. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, http://archive.org/details/1893annualreport00ameruoft, pp. 197–228. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Detection of People Relationship Using Topic Model from Diaries in Medieval Period of Japan
                
                    
                        Yamada
                        Taizo
                    
                    The University of Tokyo, Japan
                    t_yamada@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Inoue
                        Satoshi
                    
                    The University of Tokyo, Japan
                    inoue@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Japanese history
                    LDA
                    Topic model
                
                
                    historical studies
                    text analysis
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Analysis of relationships between persons is an important element for historical study. Traditionally, the analysis is processed by a historical researcher manually, because reading comprehension of historical materials and historical background are needed for the analysis. However, the analysis is based on subjective judgment, and finding a relationship that is yet unknown by the analyst is difficult. Furthermore, manual analysis cannot cope with a large amount of historical materials. We consider that a method for objective and automatic analysis is required.
            In this study of analysis between persons, we introduce a method for detecting relationships between persons from historical materials. In the method, we detect co-occurrence for each text in historical materials as a relationship between persons. The score that indicates the co-occurrence is calculated according to the topics that are latent and hidden in the text. For the detection of the latent topic, we use LDA (Latent Dirichelt Allocation; Blei et al., 2003) as a topic model. In the study, LDA assumes that text has one or more latent topics, a topic has one or more personal names, and the topic is hidden in the text. The latent topic is calculated by personal name co-occurrence. When the latent topics are calculated, the following two output results can be obtained: relationships between texts and latent topics, and relationships between latent topics and personal names. Using LDA, a text can be shown by topic content ratio. By the process, because appearance of personal name can be indicated by allocation of the latent topics, relationship between personal names can be calculated objectively and automatically.
            Since LDA is required for the vector of the personal name in the study, we introduce a personal extraction method from text of historical materials. The method is which personal name can be extracted according to sequence pattern matching, because we have no dictionary for the historical personal name, and morphological analysis against text of Japanese medieval material is very difficult. The sequence pattern means string sequence, which seems to personal name appearances. We prepare training data that includes patterns of personal name and non-personal name and test the data created by random sampling from texts. We confirm test data with the training data on whether the terms extracted by the sequence pattern are personal names. When the prediction failure pattern appears, the failure pattern is added into the set of the sequence pattern in correspondence with personal name, and then pattern matching is processed again. The precision of the personal name extraction can be improved until about 0.95 by performing the feedback several times. For the pattern matching, we use SVM (Support Vector Machine). Currently SVM is one of most superior supervised learning techniques.
            We prototyped text search systems where a user can search text of ‘上井覚兼日記’ (
                Uwaikakken nikki), which is a diary (1574–1586) from the Japanese medieval period written by ‘上井覚兼’ (Uwai kakken), who is a senior statesman of ‘島津家’ (Shimadu family) of Japan. For the historical study of Kyushu (which is a local area of Japan) or 島津家 in the medieval period, the diary is one of the important historical materials and a Japanese national treasure. The diary is held by the Historiographical Institute (HI), the University of Tokyo, and the text data is listed in the database of 
                The Full-Text Database of the Old Japanese Diaries published by HI. In the system, a user can obtain search results by traditional text search, a personal name in the text, and a personal name related to the personal name. The system can also show a graph indicating the relationship between personal names. Due to the presentation of related personal names, the system uses the detection method of relationship between personal names. And the system uses our personal name extraction method for presentation of a personal name.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. 
                        Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
                        3 (March): 993–1022. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Developing a Sustainable Model in Mutual Cultural Digital Heritage
                
                    
                        Peters
                        Nonja Ivonne
                    
                    Curtin University, Australia
                    n.peters@curtin.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Ensor
                        Jason Donald
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    j.ensor@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Dutch-Australia
                    Mutual Cultural Heritage
                    Digital Preservation
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    cultural studies
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Since 2013 the Migrant, Mobilities, and Connection project has consisted of a complementary and interlinked program of research and development between Curtin University (History of Migration Experiences, Sustainability Policy Institute, Perth), the University of Western Sydney (Digital Humanities Research Group), and the Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, The Hague). The backbone of both programs is informed by a digital framework that reconstructs the life courses of migrants through correlating data from both countries within the context of mutual cultural heritage policies and research objectives. The goal is to reconstruct a history that simultaneously intersects with Australia and the Netherlands through accessing or digitizing birth documents; death lists; shipping lists; passport requests; health clearances; alien registration; citizenship papers; school and business records; diaries and letters previously held only in state, regional, national, and international archives; consulates; and other governmental organizations. Indeed, our pilot study involves 51,525 emigration registration records from the National Archives, The Hague, which contain pre-migration demographic facts for over 180,000 Dutch emigrants over the period 1946–1982. This includes ‘hard facts’ on composition of family, dates of birth, addresses, religion, marital status, date of arrival, carriers, port of entrance, and emigration scheme, and ‘soft facts’ on profession.
            Migration is, by its very nature, a mutual heritage activity since all migrants leave documentary traces of their past in memory institutions from their country of origin or home, and move records of their present and future into archives and libraries of the receiving or host society. By maintaining, managing, using, and highlighting this heritage, we can foster a critical reflection on our shared pasts and acknowledge, integrate, and build awareness of the migration experience. This includes drawing attention to the right of dual belonging, the desire to find common ground and contribute to home and hostland identities, and the need to build knowledge about events that induced individuals—and refugees in particular—to leave their land. This paper will tease out the project’s progress within the context of how to best negotiate mutual heritage records in digital forms and enable access to the intersecting and interdependent histories they represent.
            Like any form of data migration, which conventionally involves the process of transferring data between storage types, formats, and computer systems, here we have the additional load of mapping old and new datasets into meaningful assemblages that ‘talk’ to each other. This includes not only the differences between the Australian and Dutch provenance of data but also the information that exists digitally and information that is yet to be digitized. How, for example, do we join data in the Australian domain with data in the Dutch domain, or information that is embedded in dusty community-based storage attics with names on the ‘Welcome Walls’ at the Fremantle Maritime Museum in Perth and the Australian National Maritime Museum in Sydney? We bump up against these issues because the solutions are not easy and require a step change in how we conceptualise the digital repatriation of mutual cultural heritage materials. 
            While much digital research in the library and information field deals with the explosion of user-generated content online, which creates new challenges and opportunities for libraries as custodians of data as well as objects, our project is faced with the exact opposite issue: not the problem of struggling to decide what data to collect and document from the ever-growing content generated by new media environments, but rather the equally tremendous volume of untapped cultural heritage materials and the infeasibility of libraries to collect and save it. Furthermore, from a digital humanities research point of view and with regards to the current spatial turn, around this arises a challenge over whether the ascendance of humanities-focussed GIS mapping techniques that emphasize the stories of a place and their geo-located attachment to said places—otherwise known as sited narratives or histories—can be meaningfully utilised in the context of mutual cultural heritage, in which the human subjects carry the inheritance of two or more worlds with them throughout their life courses.
            Migrating People, Migrating Data
            This short paper is part of two interlinked short papers that discuss the archival, custodial, and digital challenges that impact the discovery, collection, preservation, and content management of material and immaterial traces from the past that the Netherlands shares with Australia. (The other short paper is ‘Ruptured Life Courses: Institutional and Cultural Influences in Transnational Contexts’ by Marijke van Faassen and Rik Hoekstra.) In partnership with key institutional and community stakeholders, our pilot study on mobility between these two countries is about developing new understandings of the experience and representation of migration and how this has shaped an evolving sense of Dutch-Australian heritage—and with it, the consequences for the formation of cultural identities. 
            The deliberate play in the short papers’ linking theme, ‘Migrating People, Migrating Data’, is to signal the thematic content of the parent project, Migrant, Mobilities, and Connection—that is, the sociocultural material traces that append to the historical activity of people moving from one region to settle in another, in which the movement of bodies through space combines with information about their mobility through time. At the same time, it is also to signal the technical and conceptual challenges surrounding the consolidation of different data sources (both hard copy and digital) from a prior generation of technology to successive generations. For example, many Dutch community groups in both countries are actively collecting documents, artefacts, photographs, and maps to pass on to future generations. However, few have developed sustainable workflows to ensure the sustainability of their ‘collections’, and rarely are they familiar with cataloguing and metadata conventions that help describe an item’s provenance, role, and position in the world. Planning for digital preservation therefore is uneven, leading to concerns about a ‘digital gap’ in a community’s history. Mitigating the deleterious effects then of information loss and fading human recollection is an issue central to both the continued accessibility of cultural heritage materials and the digital preservation of historical knowledge beyond technology format lifetimes. 
            Project Members
            Dr Nonja Peters, Curtin University and University of Western Sydney
            Professor Paul Arthur, University of Western Sydney
            Dr Marijke van Faassen, Huygens ING
            Dr Rik Hoekstra, Huygens ING
            Dr Jason Ensor, University of Western Sydney 
        
    



    
        
            
                How Long Is Now? The 'Digital' in DH
                
                    
                        Seberger
                        John
                    
                    University of California, Irvine, United States of America
                    sebergerj@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    knowledge production
                    Derrida
                    representationalism
                    distant reading
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            ‘What Is Digital Humanities? [. . .] NB: Refresh the page to get a new definition’.
            —Jason Heppler, http://www.whatisdigitalhumanities.com
            Answers to the question ‘What is DH?’ abound. One needs only skim several recent editions to gain a preliminary, wayfaring-like 
                 sense of the discursive horizon and its temporality (see 
                . In such volumes, DH as stabilized institutional entity looms in the distance of a ‘present-future’ 
                . It seems that DH scholars face a set of futures and move (multi-)linearly toward freedom from a ‘turtlenecked hairshirt’ of one form or another 
                .
            
            Recently, however, a non-linear window has opened. Raley 
                 frames DH as a discursive construction, as a site of potential. That is, while ‘semantic battles about the institutional identity of the digital humanities are a symptom of a discipline [. . .] fixated upon making a permanent space for itself” 
                , DH may be productively conceived of as a troubling mediator through which scholars can imagine ‘potentials—not what is, but what might have been [. . .], as Geoffrey Rockwell suggests, “what could be”’ 
                . Within this formulation, the present-future orientation of the DH discourse tilts.
            
            In this short paper, I will not attempt a concrete answer to the question ‘What is . . . ?’ Rather, grounded in my own disciplinary situation within a department of informatics, I will ask another question. By considering the temporality and materiality of the ‘digital’ as it applies to the humanities’ textual objects I ask, ‘How long is the “now” in which the potentials of DH reside?’ 
            A Digital Discourse
            As Foucault 
                 noted, ‘The positivity of a discourse [. . .] characterizes its unity throughout time’, but the ‘
                a priori of positivities is [. . .] itself a transformable group’. It follows, then, that the durability of ‘digital’ comes into question as the violent 
                 signifier by which DH distinguishes itself from humanities; as discursive entity, it is subject to change even as it effects change. The presence of the digital modifier, a nebulous source of techno-adjectival power, sketches the uncomfortable mutation of a known category (i.e., humanities), established across hundreds of years of practice. (NB: This is closely related to Alan Liu’s notion of ‘alien’ 
                ]). But how far in time does a mutation reach?
            
            Referential clarity dissolves with the digital modifier as new textual materialities arise and exert influence not only over ‘text that might yet be’, but also texts that already are. At some point, the ‘alien’ of the digital modifier becomes resident across tenses; the digital materiality so emphasized in ‘DH’ yields a potentially pervasive change to the materiality (and therefore interactivity) of the humanities’ textual objects, the products of inscription (see 
                . As will be seen through a discussion of inscription, a shift toward digital textual materiality fundamentally transforms the archive of textual study 
                across the tenses. In the context of digital inscription, the ‘now’ of DH extends spectrally across the ‘present-future’ and the ‘present-past’ 
                .
            
            (Digital) Inscription
            The etymological roots of inscription (the Latin 
                scribere, to scratch) demonstrate the physicality of the mark, the intentional exertion of force upon a substrate 
                . Inscription results in the removal of the substrate’s embodied noise, its openness and naturally unbounded potential relations to the objects and agents of its ecology. Thus, inscription constitutes a transformation—both the transformation of object into the written-textual and the entrance of a text into the archive it partly constitutes. It represents the point at which a ‘present’ is materially embodied for future remembering, ‘readied for future use’ 
                . One might further envision inscription as the precursor to textuality, to the ‘woven’ structure of interrelated inscriptions 
                 in a forward-facing present tense.
            
            In the increasing invisibility 
                 of physical inscription that occurs under the influence of the digital modifier, or indeed the presence of analogous ‘writing on’ or ‘writing upon’, wherein meaning is apparently added without the removal of substrate, such marking still connotes absence. The inscription, as either metaphor or actuality, is the marked’s categorical entrance into the archive
                . The inscription is simultaneously the mark of the archive and the space in which the archive symbolically resides. It is the textuality of the humanities, whether digital or not. As such, the archive of humanities, modified by a digital transformation in the method and mode of inscription, is itself transformed. In this transformation the temporal boundaries of the DH discourse become hazy. The present tense of digital textuality colonizes the pre-digital; the epoch of ‘potential memory’ 
                 re-contextualizes extant texts bounded in pre-digital inscription; the ‘digital’ modifier troubles potential pasts as much as it does potential futures. That which has been woven in one materiality is potentially unraveled. Closed work risks openness 
                ; woven inscription risks Barthesian fragmentation. The present-future of the digital acts upon the present-past.
            
            Pervasive Distance
            A basic tenet of philology frames the problem of temporality in digital inscription. According to McGann (2014, 44), the philological method necessitates ‘examin[ing] original materials 
                in situ [. . .]. Surrogates, digital or otherwise, may serve the work at some point, but they cannot substitute for those first hand visits’. But such a statement becomes problematic when the alien becomes resident, when digital (re)inscription colonizes pre-digital inscription. When the potential invisibility of the digital renders pre-digital texts fallaciously 
                always already digital, the boundaries of text, the difference between original and surrogate, blur. In the event of such a potentiality, one must ask, ‘To what extent can an interpretive knowledge product derived from analysis facilitated by digital transformation refer to anything but itself, to anything but the pervasive present of the digital modifier?’ An analysis of Moretti’s first acknowledgement of ‘distant reading’ will clarify.
            
            The textual-technical 
                dispositifs that give rise to such methods as ‘distant reading’ render a representational metaphor that filters the texts that they are (theoretically) intended to render transparent. Moretti 
                 calls for ‘a return to that old ambition of 
                Weltiliteratur’ in order to study the ‘planetary system’ of literature (54). In the move from canon to planetary system, a question of scale becomes immediately apparent. How does one move from the closeness of reading to a distant, telescopic view? The answer is scaffolding: 
            
            The study of world literature will somewhat have to reproduce this ‘page’—which is to say: this relationship between analysis and synthesis—for the literary field. But in this case, literary history will quickly become very different from what it is now: it will become ‘second hand’: a patchwork of other people’s research, 
                without a single direct textual reading.
            
            (
                )
            
            ‘Direct textual reading’ is bypassed via scaffolding, the construction of a sociotechnical vantage from which to view the whole ‘planetary system’. The ‘planetary system’ 
                becomes text by way of digital re-inscription. The scaffolding provides the context for knowledge production by way of extending the now-resident digital alien of DH to pre-digital texts. But the scaffolding is more than just context; it is the context 
                and the knowledge produced, an artificial hypotext referring to itself through the spectrality of digital inscription. It is the sociotechnical assemblage by which linearity can be assigned to ‘a device, a trope, a limited narrative unit’ 
                , but an assemblage that bears an a priori relationship to the otherly inscribed texts it analyzes. It has only itself as its object of study and must methodologically account for itself.
            
            A digital method like distant reading must interpret itself; it is the contemporary tendency to rely on the prima facie validity of pervasive, computerized, and disembodied representationalism that lurks behind the knowledge productive phenomena of DH (and big data) that deserves interpretation. Moreover, it is in this growing invisibility of the digital that Foucault’s historical a priori of the inscribed humanities archive becomes a 
                pervasive a priori: an artificial and invisible scaffolding presenting with the appearance of an ‘always already’ materiality that retroactively transforms the archival materialities of the past.
            
             In order to approach the question of the ‘now’ in which DH potentials reside, one must first reflexively interpret DH itself. The emergence of DH represents an opportunity to read the potentials of the digital, not to merely read digitally—to critique through a process of abduction the potential development of a pervasive a priori. In considering DH as discursive site of potentials as Raley (2014) suggests, one begins to see unexpected implications of the ‘digital’ modifier for the analysis of cultural objects across time. The future of ‘digital’ in the humanities is of great consequence to the past.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Berry, D. M. (2012). Understanding Digital Humanities. Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
                    Bogost, I. (2010). The Turtlenecked Hairshirt, 9 January, http://bogost.com/writing/blog/the_turtlenecked_hairshirt/.
                    Bowker, G. C. (2008). Memory Practices in the Sciences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    Burdick, A., Drucker, J., Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T. and Schnapp, J. (2012). Digital Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    Derrida, J. (1998). Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression. 1st ed. Prenowitz, E. (trans.). University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    Derrida, J. (2006). Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, The Work of Mourning and the New International. Routledge, New York.
                    Eco, U. (1989). The Open Work. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    Farge, A., Scott-Railton, T. and Davis, N. Z. (2013). The Allure of the Archives. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    Flusser, V. (2011). Does Writing Have a Future? Roth, N. A. (trans.). University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
                    Foucault, M. (1982). The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language. Reprint. Vintage.
                    Gold, M. K. (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
                    Hockney, S. (2004). The History of Humanities Computing. In A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Professional, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/.
                    Ingold, T. (2007). Lines: A Brief History. 1st ed. Routledge.
                    Liu, A. (2009). Digital Humanities and Academic Change. English Language Notes, 47: 17–35.
                    McGann, J. (2014). A New Republic of Letters: Memory and Scholarship in the Age of Digital Reproduction. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    McKenzie, D. F. (1999). Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
                    Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on World Literature. New Left Review, 1: 54–68.
                    Raley, R. (2014). Digital Humanities for the Next Five Minutes. Differences, 25(1): 26–45, doi:10.1215/10407391-2419991.
                    Weiser, M. (1991). The Computer for the 21st Century. Scientific American, 265(3): 94–104, doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0991-94.
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Corpus and Toolset for Performing Text Analysis on Chinese Translation of Buddhist Scriptures
                
                    
                        Hung
                        Jen-Jou
                    
                    Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    jenjou.hung@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Translatorship attribution
                    Text Analysis
                    Chinese Buddhist Translations
                    N-gram Corpus
                    Visualization Tool
                
                
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    text analysis
                    asian studies
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    linguistics
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The success of Buddhism in China can be partly attributed to the great number of texts translated from Indian languages during the Eastern Han dynasty to the Tang dynasty (618–907 CE). The vast amount of Buddhist texts that were translated from both Sanskrit and other Indian languages between the 2nd and the 11th centuries not only had a far-reaching cultural impact on Chinese society but also made itself felt on Chinese language in terms of syntactic and lexical patterns of change. 
            Over the years, scholars have leveraged traditional text-critical methods to research language change in Chinese as evinced in the corpus of Buddhist texts. Philologists have investigated doctrinal, literary, and linguistic aspects in order to ascertain the authorship, dating, authenticity, and so forth of these texts. It has been found that many of the authorship or translatorship attributions of early Chinese sutras are unreliable. 
            Traditional philology has its limits, however, and the advantages of qualitative, computational approaches to the analysis of Buddhist texts are increasingly explored. Digital philology as a branch of the digital humanities, with its application to Buddhist materials, stands to open new horizons for research. For European languages, text analysis has been a very successful field. As for Chinese Buddhist texts, a digital version of the Taishō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon is freely available through the efforts of the Chinese Buddhist Electronic Texts Association (CBETA). The availability of such a corpus in digital form enables researchers to apply statistical methods or artificial intelligence algorithms to text analysis. However, this type of research is only rarely applied to the study of Chinese Buddhist texts. We believe there are two main issues behind the present under-exploitation of these resources.
            First, the design of the CBETA XML markup is mainly aimed at providing a correct and comfortable display of the text on the computer screen rather than preparing the text for future possible uses for the sake of quantitative analysis. Second, the performance of quantitative analysis on digital texts still requires high-level skills in computer programming and advanced statistical knowledge, which creates a high barrier for scholars in the humanities who are now attempting to navigate these tools. In order to assist researchers we develop various resources for the computational analysis of the CBETA corpus. The main tasks include:
            1. Creation of a ‘text-analysis friendly’ version of the CBETA corpus.
                1 This dataset has following features:
            
             • The markup is compliant with TEI P5.
             • All information that is not critical for corpus analysis has been taken out—e.g., critical apparatus, markup of menu items, etc.
             • The representation of text structures has been simplified and unified; only the &lt;div&gt; element with ‘type’ attribute is allowed for representing the text structure.
             • Each textual block is wrapped with an &lt;ab&gt; element with a type attribute, which is used to distinguish text block with different types (prose, verse . . .). 
             • Every non-Unicode character is assigned a unique code point in the Unicode private-use area (‘undisplayable’ is not a good category; you can display everything, of course).
            2. As an alternative to the XML format, we created the N-gram statistic dataset.
                2 The dataset is generated by transforming the XML file into plain text format and removing all punctuation from the text. Then the long text strings are cut with fixed lengths to generate n-grams, and the occurrences of each gram are calculated. 
            
            
                3. We developed an online tool called the ‘Buddha N-gram Viewer’.
                3 This tool allows users to visualize the overtime occurrences of phrases in Chinese Buddhist texts. It also provides detailed lists of the matches of phrases in the text, which enables the researcher to trace the text back to the original source and look it up there.
            
            Figure 1. Occurrences of ‘Thus have I heard’ as ‘如是我聞’ and ‘聞如是’ in the Buddha N-gram Viewer.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Nirvana as ‘泥洹’ and ‘涅槃’ in the third fascicle of the 長阿含經 (the Chinese translation of the Dīrgha-āgama; T 1).
            Notes
            1. The dataset is available at https://github.com/ddbc/CBETA_TAFxml.
            2. The dataset is available at https://github.com/ddbc/CBETA-ngram.
            3. The tool is available at http://dev.ddbc.edu.tw/BuddhaNgramViewer/.
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Democracy Project: Making Government More Transparent one Video at a Time
                
                    
                        Blakeslee
                        Sam
                    
                    Institute for Advanced Technology and Public Policy, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    sblakesl@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Dekhtyar
                        Alex
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    dekhtyar@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Khosmood
                        Foaad
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    foaad@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Kurfess
                        Franz
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    fkurfess@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Kuboi
                        Toshihiro
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    tkuboi@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Poshcman
                        Hans
                    
                    Institute for Advanced Technology and Public Policy, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    hposchma@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Prinzivalli
                        Giovanni
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    gprinziv@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Roberston
                        Christine
                    
                    Institute for Advanced Technology and Public Policy, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    crober22@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Durst
                        Skylar
                    
                    Department of Computer Science, California Polythechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, United States of America
                    cdurst@calpoly.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    e-government
                    digital democracy
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    software design and development
                    speech processing
                    information architecture
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            One would think in one of the most advanced industrialized countries in the world, in the state most renowned for technological innovation, an average citizen can easily find out what was said in a public session by his or her elected representative. Surprisingly this is not the case in California in 2014. In the California State Legislature, important legislative decisions on pending bills occur in committee hearings. The videos of these hearings are publicly available,
                1 but California is one of the many US states that do not transcribe or close-caption them. The committee hearings contain a treasure trove of information,
                2 but it takes extraordinary time and effort to find relevant information in the hours upon hours of raw, untranscribed, and unindexed footage. The ability to access and search transcripts of legislative committee hearings is a great resource for political insiders, media, government watchdog organizations, and interested citizens. It is one way to enable public accountability of elected officials (as well as government officials and lobbyists participating in the hearings) for the things they said at these hearings, and, more importantly, for the effects of the hearings on the state’s legislation. 
            
            We present our contribution to government transparency: the Digital Democracy (DD) platform. The goal of the project is to provide automated, inexpensive, timely, accurate, and informative knowledge extracted from legislative hearing sessions. 
            The Digital Democracy System Design 
            The Digital Democracy platform obtains data about the legislative committee hearings: the video archives, the information about the state legislature, and so on. Figure 1 shows the design of the DD system. The main source of information for the DD platform is the Cal Channel
                3 video archive of legislative sessions, a service provided courtesy of cable TV companies that operate in California. In addition, the DD platform obtains information on the nature of legislative sessions (bills, legislators, committees), political contributions, registered lobbyists, and financial disclosures from a variety of existing online databases provided by the state of California or by good government organizations. The information is stored in the Digital Democracy database (DDDB), from which it is delivered to the end users and used for analytical tasks.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Digital Democracy system architecture. 
            Access to the information and the knowledge stored in the DD database is provided through a variety of means. The beta version of the DD platform uses a web portal
                4 as the means of accessing the data and interacting with the system. Mobile applications and social media plugins, complete with alerting mechanisms, are planned for the future. 
            
            
                Users and Use Cases 
            
            We consider three core categories of users of the platform: (a) individual citizens, interested in legislative affairs; (b) media and watchdog organizations observing and covering legislative sessions; and (c) legislators and their staff. For the first category of users, the key use case is the ability to find all committee hearings associated with a specific bill, watch the hearings and read transcripts, and search for the things a specific lawmaker (e.g., representing their district) said in those hearings. The second group of users is interested in searching the database for specific topics and being able to listen to and watch the portions of committee hearings related to the topics of their interest. Finally, the third category of users wants to use the DD platform to find specific moments during committee hearings where important decisions were made or important words were said. 
            The Beta Site
            In 2014 we piloted the beta site
                5 for the project. The site provided the basic navigation and search functionality for a collection of California legislative committee hearings from the 2013–2014 session. Users could search hearing transcripts, browse hearings and bills discussed at them, and look up information about the hearing participants. Screenshots of the beta site depicting results of the hearing transcript search and a hearing page are shown in Figure 2. 
            
            Evaluation
            We conducted a beta test of the Digital Democracy site from March to July of 2014. The beta testers (public officials, their staffers, journalists, political activists) had access to about 30 committee hearings, primarily devoted to the discussion of California’s state budget. Tables 1, 2, and 3 and Figure 3 summarize the results of the beta test.
            Conclusion
            The Digital Democracy platform is a research and reporting tool providing popular access to an aspect of the political discourse that was hitherto not available. We find that Digital Democracy is well received and useful, but has the potential to be much more. As we continue building the new features for our upcoming releases, we take into consideration the additional recommendations and feedback we receive from our beta testers.
            
                
                    
                    Do you feel that the ability to search legislative hearing videos using the Digital Democracy tool would be useful?
                    If you were able to search and clip a video to share on social media, would you find this feature useful?
                    If you were able to run analytics to identify trends in speaker statements, speaker interactions, voting records, and donor data, would you find this feature useful?
                    During the beta test, did you find the Digital Democracy site easy to navigate?
                    During the beta test, did you ever have problems with the video not playing correctly?
                
                
                    YES
                    27
                    23
                    24
                    23
                    3
                
                
                    NO
                    1
                    6
                    3
                    5
                    23
                
                
                    NO RESPONSE
                    1
                    0
                    2
                    1
                    3
                
            
            Table 1. Tester feedback on usefulness of Digital Democracy features and potential features.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Screenshots of the Digital Democracy beta site.
            
                
                    
                    Searching Keywords in Transcripts
                    Searching Speakers
                    Searching Issues/Topics
                    More Complex Analytical Searches
                
                
                    EXTREMELY USEFUL
                    22
                    20
                    19
                    13
                
                
                    USEFUL
                    5
                    7
                    6
                    11
                
                
                    NOT USEFUL
                    2
                    2
                    2
                    3
                
                
                    NO RESPONSE
                    0
                    0
                    2
                    2
                
            
            Table 2. Tester feedback on usefulness of search functionality.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. How users would use Digital Democracy data.
            
                
                    
                        In Free-Form Feedback
                    
                    number
                    example
                
                
                    Thought Very Useful
                    8
                    
                        ‘This looks to be an extremely useful tool. I thought the site was easy to navigate and the links to video and text were seamless and really helpful’.
                    
                
                
                    Suggested an Improvement
                    7
                    ‘
                        Creating an alphabet list, at the top of the “browse speakers” feature in addition to the already present features, would allow for ease if searching by speaker’.
                    
                
                
                    Wanted to See More
                    7
                    ‘I 
                        think this is a great start for a test. Look forward to seeing it grow with the inclusion of other subject areas (ie. energy, transportation, justice system, etc).’
                    
                
                
                    Had Difficulties
                    2
                    ‘
                        Actually, the site never loaded at all. I could not give any real assessment as a result. But I would very much be interested in this kind of material being available and searchable’.
                    
                
                
                    Wanted to Collaborate
                    1
                    ‘
                        Would be interested in discussing how we integrate our services’.
                    
                
            
            Table 3. Types of user feedback in free-form responses. 
            Notes
            . http://www.calchannel.com/recentarchive/.
            2. As evidenced by the firsthand experience of the first author, who served in both the California State Assembly and the California State Senate.
            3. http://www.calchannel.com.
            4. http://www.digitaldemocracy.org.
            5. http://www.digitaldemocracy.org.
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Dunhuang: Enhancing Virtual Explorations of the Real Dunhuang
                
                    
                        Wang
                        Xundong
                    
                    Dunhuang Academy, Dunhuang, China
                    wxd23@hotmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Zhou
                        Peter
                    
                    C. V. Starr East Asian Library,University of California, Berkeley, United States of America
                    pzhou@library.berkeley.edu
                
                
                    
                        Wang
                        Eugene
                    
                    Harvard University, United States of America
                    eywang@fas.harvard.edu
                
                
                    
                        Downie
                        J. Stephen
                    
                    Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois, United States of America
                    jdownie@illinois.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    Dunhuang
                    Silk Road
                    digitization
                
                
                    archaeology
                    art history
                    medieval studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    asian studies
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    visualisation
                    cultural infrastructure
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We are proposing a panel consisting of four panelists with complementary professional and scholarly expertise to create a forum to engage with the digital humanities community concerning the unique resources being created as part of the Digital Dunhuang project. The Mogao Caves at Dunhuang, a designated UNESCO World Heritage Site, are a splendid treasure house of art from ancient China (Fan, 2004; Fan and Yongzeng, 2007). Digital Dunhuang, an ongoing project funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation under the auspices of the Dunhuang Academy, is creating a permanent digital archive and content delivery system for all caves and murals at the Dunhuang site. It incorporates existing and future digitization work into a powerful platform for digital asset management, digital preservation, and delivery of multi-terabytes of content. This panel session will encourage as much audience participation as possible to initiate an ongoing and vibrant dialogue with digital humanists in order to plan future developmental pathways for the Digital Dunhuang project. The ‘Real Dunhuang’ aspect of our panel title is intended to emphasize the fact that the Digital Dunhuang project incorporates much more than text as it strives to digitally capture, preserve, and then share the physical realities of the Dunhuang Caves and their cultural heritage treasures. The panelists, their affiliations, and their topics are listed below.
            Presentations
            
                1. Introducing the ‘Real’ Dunhuang and the Digital Dunhuang Project
            
            Jian Wu, Dunhuang Academy
            Dunhuang was a centre of commerce along the Silk Road in ancient times. During the 1,000 years after AD 366, with the spread of Buddhism, Buddhists including monastics, the rich and the powerful, as well as ordinary people, with the help of master painters, constructed the famous artworks of the Mogao Caves at Dunhuang. In 1987 the Mogao Caves became one of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The Mogao Caves contain large numbers of masterpieces of Buddhist art spanning a period of 1,000 years and covering a variety of genres. Currently there are 735 existing caves, 492 of which house about 45,000 square meters of murals. There are also more than 2,000 sculptures at the Mogao Caves. The unique artistic style of Dunhuang art is not only the amalgamation of Han Chinese artistic tradition and styles assimilated from ancient Indian and Gandharan customs but also an integration of the arts of the Turks, ancient Tibetans, and other Chinese ethnic minorities. As evidence of the evolution of Buddhist art in China, as well as historical records of artistic exchanges between China, Central Asia, and India, the Mogao Caves are of unmatched historical value and provide invaluable reference for studying the complex art history of ancient China and the world.
            The relatively dry climate in and surrounding Dunhuang contributes a lot to the preservation of the Mogao Caves. However, damage has been caused to murals and sculptures due to the special nature of rock caves, the special materials used in painting murals, as well as other factors such as erosion, infiltration of rain, seasonal floods, and earthquakes. Some of the damage is even devastating. With the development of local tourism, more and more tourists are entering the caves, which makes protecting the caves even more challenging.
            
                2. Digital Dunhuang: Digitally Capturing, Preserving, and Enhancing Real Dunhuang
            
            Peter Zhou, University of California, Berkeley
            Dunhuang Academy has been devoted to the protection of the Mogao Caves since its founding in 1944 (originally called the Dunhuang Art Research Institute). The protection measures since the 1990s include slowing down the degeneration of murals with a variety of protection techniques, as well as looking for digital tools to preserve the caves. With support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, Dunhuang Academy is currently undertaking the Digital Dunhuang project with cooperation from home and abroad. We are working on digitizing the three-dimensional structures of murals, sculptures, and caves of all the 492 caves, and also working on constructing a digital database of the Mogao Caves resources. The Digital Dunhuang project not only enables permanent preservation of the significant cultural heritage but also provides a platform of sharing it with a larger audience, including scholars all over the world, which will definitely have a profound influence (Zhou, 2011).
            Digital Dunhuang has called on the expertise of a number of institutions over the years, including the Dunhuang Academy, Zhejiang University, the Getty Conservation Institute, and Northwestern University, to name just a few (Lu, 2011; Xu et al., 2011). Compared with other digital humanities projects such as the International Dunhuang Project: The Silk Road Online (IDP; http://idp.bl.uk/), which is a consortium of linked digital collections of primarily Dunhuang manuscripts on the Internet, Digital Dunhuang is a multi-faceted platform for current and future content development, providing long-term preservation of large files of varying format, whether textual or representational (images), pertaining to either conservation or archaeological work carried out at the site and related records, and delivering high-resolution images and a virtual museum experience to the users around the world (Kenderdine, 2013).
            2.1 A Growing World-Class Digital Humanities Resource
            Over 400 caves are to be photographed (including individual and stitched images), and the Digital Dunhuang database is designed to incorporate a wide range of data types (Wu, 2011). These include complete archeological and conservation data and files, documentation for a large number of artifacts, Dunhuang manuscripts, and scholarly publications. The ultimate goal of Digital Dunhuang is to store the totality as well as minutia of the Dunhuang Caves’ digital content; preserve those digital surrogates, reconstructions, files, and digital assets perpetually; and provide a research platform for digital humanities scholarship (Tadic and Zhou, 2012). The size and scope of the project are quite significant. Some exemplary statistics include the following:
             • 92 caves already photographed (with approximately 400 more to go).
             • 14,000 square meters of murals captured.
             • 600,000 raw images.
             • 70 terabytes of data.
             • 87 caves with complete QuickTime Virtual Reality.
             • 42,000 negatives scanned.
             • 20 years of climate monitoring data on 87 caves.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Dunhuang scientists preparing to digitally scan cave for 3D modelling.
            
                3. Explicating the Potentials of Digital Dunhuang on Scholarship and Teaching
            
            Eugene Wang, Harvard University
            In-depth research of the Dunhuang Caves requires sustained and long-term immersion in caves. Humidity control in the caves and other conservation concerns make it unlikely for the caves to be infinitely available for unlimited access. Thus, the project makes a significant contribution to scholarship and education by making the caves available in a time-independent manner both for current and future scholars and students. Furthermore, unlike scroll paintings, the murals and sculptures in the Dunhuang Caves are deeply embedded in the visual program, encompassing all the walls and ceilings of the caves. Reproductions on printed pages never quite convey or deliver the complex spatial orientation and inter-relatedness of wall paintings. The Digital Dunhuang project is making it possible to create a truly immersive experience of the Dunhuang Caves. Mapping digital files of murals onto the spatial grid of a cave creates a reconstituted digital cave that allows the viewer to enter and contemplate the murals in their intended spatial orientation. Moreover, high-definition scans of murals enable students of the Dunhuang Caves to scrutinize details in physically inaccessible spots that even a real-time viewer in the cave cannot see clearly.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Example 3D rendering of cave interior paintings.
            
                4. Enhancing the Impact of Digital Dunhuang on Digital Humanities Scholarship
            
            J. Stephen Downie, University of Illinois
            The Digital Dunhuang project has the potential to reinvigorate and reconceptualize Dunhuang and Silk Road scholarship. However, notwithstanding the growing domestic and international interest in Dunhuang remains, there is a noticeable lack of an integrated system to incorporate all content for perpetual curation and preservation for Dunhuang research, both in and outside of China. A range of scholarly projects in recent years have explored different aspects of the Dunhuang artifacts, and the Digital Dunhuang project is now exploring mechanisms by which to unite them with its ongoing digitization work. Both Open Annotation Collaboration (http://www.openannotation.org) (van Hooland and Verbough, 2014) and Linked Open Data (http://linkedata.org or http://lodlam.net) (Cole et al., 2013) as possible incorporation technologies. The project is also exploring a range of data curation practices and options to ensure that its data remain usable and accessible in perpetuity. Because many options are available to help integrate and curate data resources related to Dunhuang studies, the Digital Dunhuang project hopes to use the opportunity of this proposed panel to solicit the advice and expertise of the panel participants. In this way, the Digital Dunhuang project can better meet the needs of the digital humanities community.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cole, T. W., Gerber, A., Sanderson, R. and Smith, J. (2013). Using Open Annotation. In
                         Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. Lincoln, NE: Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, pp. 11–13, http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/workshops-003.html
                        .
                    
                    
                        Fan, J. (ed.). (2004). 
                        World Cultural Heritage: Dunhuang Grottoes. China Travel and Tourism Press, Beijing.
                    
                    
                        Fan, J. and Yongzeng, L. (eds). (2007). 
                        Appreciation of Dunhuang Grottoes. Jiangsu Fine Arts Publishing House, Nanjing.
                    
                    
                        Kenderdine, S. (2013). ‘Pure Land’: Inhabiting the Mogao Caves at Dunhuang. 
                        Curator: The Museum Journal, 
                        56: 199–218, doi:10.1111/cura.12020.
                    
                    
                        Lu, D. (2011). The Research and Application of Conservation and Utilization in Mogao Grottoes Aided by Computer: Exploration and Practice. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Cultural Heritages and Digitization. Dunhuang: Dunhuang Academy, pp. 12–27.
                    
                    
                        Tadic, L. and Zhou, P. (2012). 
                        Digital Dunhuang: A Repository System of Dunhuang Murals and Digital Resources: Functional Requirements. Dunhuang: Dunhuang Academy.
                    
                    
                        Van Hooland, S. and Verbough, R. (2014). 
                        Linked Data for Libraries, Archives and Museums: How to Clean, Link and Publish Your Metadata. Facet Publishing, London.
                    
                    
                        Wu, J. (2011). Dunhuang Captured in Images: New Visual Dunhuang Created with Scientific and Artistic Technologies. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Cultural Heritages and Digitization. Dunhuang: Dunhuang Academy, pp. 28–34. 
                    
                    
                        Xu, L., et al. (2011). Reconstruction of Spatial Information of Mogao Grottoes Mural Image Based on Laser Point Cloud. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Cultural Heritages and Digitization. Dunhuang: Dunhuang Academy, pp. 270–82.
                    
                    
                        Zhou, P. (2011). The Development of a Repository System of Dunhuang Murals and Digital Resources for Dunhuang Studies. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Cultural Heritages and Digitization. Dunhuang: Dunhuang Academy, pp. 317–23.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Evidence in the Jury Room: the Impact of Tablets on Communication and Decision
                
                    
                        Tait
                        David
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    d.tait@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Gelb
                        Karen
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    k.gelb@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Tablets Deliberation Collaboration Display software
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            One of the most onerous responsibilities a citizen may have to perform is jury duty: listening in silence to days, even months, of people talking at you, then trying to reach an unanimous decision with a group of strangers. This task violates the normal rules of communication: the decision-makers do not engage with the speaker; they are forbidden from any form of personal enquiry; rather than being experts they are chosen precisely because they have no knowledge of the subject; and further, confronted with a confusing set of facts, they are expected to make a simple decision. 
            Into this complicated communication task enters digital evidence. Criminal trials that were once characterised by oral testimony in the form of eyewitness statements and confessions now include displays of scientific diagrams, photographs, interview transcripts, witness statements, intercepted phone calls, and video evidence. For more complex trials, courts typically give jurors a DVD containing some of this evidence to take into the jury room. The next step in the process of digital transformation, under active consideration by courts, is giving jurors individual copies of digital evidence on a tablet. 
            Having information on a tablet may improve both individual and group processes. For individual jurors, technological aids can prompt juror memory, and enhance comprehension and engagement; for the jury as a whole it may improve the thoroughness of the deliberation. Providing each juror with his or her own copy of the evidence may encourage critical discussion and healthy debate among jurors, which in turn can challenge prejudices and lead to fairer outcomes. Combining oral discussion with visual display could produce the jury with an efficient way of managing cognitive load. Alternatively, giving jurors tablets could increase prejudice against the accused, undermining the right to a fair trial, making visually memorable images more significant, and inhibiting the free flow of debate as individual jurors are diverted from their collective task. Because courts have been unsure which of these two scenarios is more likely, there has been some hesitation about giving jurors tablets. Empirical research will therefore assist in making the relevant policy decisions.
            This paper reports on an experimental study at the University of Queensland using 106 mock jurors and a written scenario, with six-person juries deliberating for 15 to 30 minutes with visual evidence provided to them either on paper or iPads. The study shows that jurors who deliberated with iPads were significantly more likely to find the accused guilty than those who deliberated with paper. Before deliberation both groups had virtually identical conviction levels, but after deliberation the ‘paper’ group had shifted twice as far as the ‘iPad’ group. Explanations for this include undue weight given to prosecution evidence amongst the tablet users, less attention to group processes, greater willingness to disagree, and less pressure to reach a compromise. The paper reports on a subsequent, more elaborate study with an expanded scenario and evidence list, plus collaboration software that allows the jurors to post images to a shared screen in the jury room. Collaboration technologies are of considerable interest to digital humanities scholars. This study tests how a one-to-many display facilitates collaboration in the highly constrained jury deliberation process. These constraints include deliberating as a single group, complying with judicial directions about the weight to be given to different pieces of evidence, and chairing of discussion by a single foreperson. 
            The study is funded by the Canadian Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council as part of the Cyberjustice consortium based at the University of Montreal and headed by Karim Benyekhlef. The study has been developed by a team including David Tait (Digital Humanities Group, University of Western Sydney), Christian Licoppe (Paris Tech), Meredith Rossner (LSE), and Blake McKimmie (University of Queensland). The cyberjustice consortium brings together scholars from several countries with an interest in the impacts of emerging technologies on justice processes. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Humanities as Catalyst for Digital Art History: The Slade Archive Project
                
                    
                        Terras
                        Melissa
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Bruchet
                        Liz
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    l.bruchet@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Malik
                        Amna
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    amna.malik@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Collins
                        Susan
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    sladedirector@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Beavan
                        David
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    d.beavan@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Volley
                        Jo
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    j.volley@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Giacometti
                        Alejandro
                    
                    King's College London, United Kingdom
                    alejandro.giacometti@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Archive
                    Digitisation
                    Public Engagement
                    Art History
                    Crowdsourcing
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The Slade School of Fine Art,
                1 an internationally leading art school based at University College London, has an intriguing but underused archive relating to students and staff, and their teaching, artworks, and experiences. The Slade Archive Project, jointly undertaken by the Slade and UCL Centre for Digital Humanities,
                2 is an interdisciplinary, highly iterative, exploratory research collaboration, investigating how digital tools and techniques can open up the archive to the public and increase engagement with its contents. We demonstrate that collaborative work with a centre for digital humanities informs and enhances the use and understanding of digital methods available to art historians—a field that has not, to date, made much use of computational research methods—and encourages and supports new archival research methods. 
            
            
                The Slade and Its Archive
            
            Since 1871 the Slade School of Fine Art has educated and trained generations of world-renowned artists.
                3 The Slade has an extensive archive, including papers, photographs, class lists, student records, audio recordings, films, prospectuses, death masks, and other artefacts, providing rich evidence of the culture and activities of the college. However, this archive is difficult to access, and no attempt has been made to present it to a wider audience. Over time, the archive has been consolidated and dispersed across the university, with records now held by UCL Art Museum,
                4 UCL Records Office,
                5 UCL Library Special Collections,
                6 and within the art school itself. Cataloguing is incomplete, and the documentation systems are not interoperable. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The main body of the Slade Archive, held at UCL.
            The art school is both the context and the subject of the archive: any project derived from this archive will be, at least in part, art historical in nature. However, the archive is also of great interest to alumni, family historians, filmmakers, and authors who request access and want to contribute because of an interest in the personal histories 
                beyond their conventional scholarly value. In this complex web of priorities, interdependencies, and responsibilities, digital technologies can provide the means to engage with archival content in unprecedented ways. 
            
            
                Digital Humanities and Art History
            
            There has been curiously little research that applies digital methods within an art historical context (beyond simple digitisation of collections). Although scholars are starting to question the relationship of digital methods to art history (Rodriguez Ortega, 2013) and are exploring new tools (Rodriguez et al., 2012), these are not yet embedded into art historical methods. The John Paul Getty Trust has been urging art historians to utilize more digital technologies (Dobrzynski, 2014), but it has been suggested that the digital needs of art historians can be successfully met only through the work of many support organizations (Long and Schonfeld, 2014): we have undertaken to do this in the Slade Archive Project, which is inherently collaborative. 
            
                The Slade Archive Project as Digital Humanities Collaboration
            
            The Slade Archive Project was launched in summer 2012 as a joint initiative driven by a shared curiosity of what could be done with the unique archive materials within the digital space. At the outset, our small team
                7 working from different areas of specialization had yet to learn what the archive even held. The project was conceived as a flexible and collaborative frame under which various sub-projects could be developed, driven by the specific research interests of those working at the Slade and the wider university, and by available resources or discreet funding opportunities. UCL’s provision of seed funds
                8 for the initial scoping study of the archive gave us permission to work speculatively, to explore the archive in part by testing ways in which we might activate it, and the consequences and opportunities of doing so. 
            
            Framing the project as a digital humanities one opened up access to resources maintained by UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (such as the multi-modal digitisation suite
                9), gave access to institutional infrastructure for setting up and maintaining digital projects, and allowed us to embed activities in teaching delivered as part of the MA/MSc in digital humanities.
                10 Digital activities across the life span of the project are many and varied, and have included establishing a digital presence for the archive
                11 (branding, hosting, and guiding social media activities to encourage public engagement), crowdsourcing the identification of individuals within annual class photographs
                12 (prototyping a platform to allow the identification of individuals within digitised historical photographs), publishing archived oral history interviews
                13 (providing guidance on digitisation), and mapping the diaspora of Slade students (using GIS to geographically plot their career pathways). 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. We digitised a selection of Slade class photographs and, using our own prototype face recognition and crowdsourcing software created by using cheap, off-the-shelf tools,
                14 asked alumni to help us identify individuals. Visitors to the website can also add comments and add their recollections, and draw connections between students, tutors, and their historical context. 
            
            Another subproject is the Transnational Slade project
                15 in which we identify international students who studied at the Slade in the 1950s, in order to trace the impact they went on to have internationally after graduation. The 1950s were a key period of change between Britain and its former colonial territories, and art historically it was a time when modernism began to enter the work of artists who would play a more visible role in the Independence movements of their countries in South Asia, Africa, and the Middle East (Dadi, 2010; Enwezor and Achebe, 2001). Yet how art school education has affected the history of art in different parts of the world has not been fully explored. We again used crowdsourcing identification of those within archival photos and gathered input on encounters, memories, and understandings of both the context of the Slade in the 1950s and the international students who were in attendance. This research has already resulted in new art historical understandings: we now know that approximately 10% of students at the Slade during the 1950s came from outside the United Kingdom, which shows how important international students were to its culture and the resulting diaspora. The online audience engaging with this aspect of our project have provided new accounts, information, and archival material that have helped us understand further the Slade’s role in international art contexts, particularly in Sudan and Pakistan. 
            
            In undertaking this research through the public dissemination, display, and crowdsourcing of otherwise dispersed and inaccessible archives, we are, as curator Matthew Teitelbaum wrote in 1996, ‘learning in public’ (40). As tasks and roles once associated with different professional and disciplinary arenas overlap, our range of activities have expanded beyond the familiar art historical activities of researching in and extracting from the archive, to encompass the collaborative, digitally iterative, and publicly situated work of ‘enabling, making public, educating, analysing, criticizing, theorizing, editing, and staging’ (Weski et al., 2012, 8). The digital aspects of the project provided the means to approach, refine, and choose ways in which to interrogate and understand the nature of the archive, whilst challenging conventional epistemological and disciplinary frames as it brings methods, practices, and theories together in new configurations (Cook, 1997). 
            
                Conclusion
            
            The Slade Archive Project, as well as enabling us to explore what digital technologies can do to support, encourage, and expand research and outreach activities centred around a world-leading art school’s archive, allows us to conceptually rethink the remit and scope of such archival projects, and the role that digital humanities centres have in fostering and exploring new research techniques within traditional humanities disciplines. Involving digital humanities in this essentially art historical pursuit enabled us to articulate questions that incorporate disciplinary concerns (for instance, the writing of art historical narratives, or the validity of our crowdsourcing efforts), alongside questions of how the archive not only 
                connects people, but how people connect and contribute to the archive, and by extension, to our scholarly pursuits. The Slade Archive Project is, then, a practical example of the collaborative endeavour necessary to embed digital methods in art history research, as described hopefully by Long and Schonfeld (2014), and demonstrates the role that a digital humanities centre can have in helping colleagues exploring different aspects of their research. Employing the staff, expertise, and resources of a digital humanities centre does not suggest the need for some overarching authoritative digital humanities role to override the knowledge of archivists, curators, artists, and art historians. Rather it asks if and how the integration of digital humanities methods into the art historical landscape might add to our already rich disciplinary toolkit, and remind us of what we already know from our respective practices, in order to assist us in critically navigating our project together, where new convergences of the museum, the academy, the library, the archive, and the digitised spaces between continue to form new configurations of risk and opportunity in art historical research. 
            
            Notes
            1. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/slade.
            2. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh.
            3. Famous alumni include Gwen and Augustus John, Stanley Spencer, and Ben Nicholson around the turn of the 20th century and early 1900s; Richard Hamilton and Eduardo Paolozzi in the 1940s; and Derek Jarman, Paula Rego, Euan Uglow, and Craigie Aitchison in the 1950s and 1960s. More recent Turner Prize–winning alumni include Martin Creed, Rachel Whiteread, Antony Gormley, and Douglas Gordon. 
            4. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums/uclart. 
            5. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/about/records-office. 
            6. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/special-collections.
            7. Those listed as authors represent the core project team, but we would also like to thank Emma Chambers, Stephen Chaplin, Alexandra Eveleigh, Andrea Fredericksen, Gill Furlong, Colin Penman, Gemma Romain, Frederic J. Schwartz, Tony Slade, Alan Taylor, and Robert Winkworth for their input.
            8. The Slade Archive Project was funded initially in 2012 by a UCL internal small research grant in the Arts and Humanities faculty, and then with a small research grant in 2013 from UCL Grand Challenges for the Transnational Slade component, which gave resources to employ a part-time research assistant and to carry out basic digitisation of specific items in the collection. In addition, sponsorship from the Andor Charitable Trust allowed digitisation of archived oral history recordings.
            9. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/facilities/digitisation-suite. 
            10. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/courses/mamsc.
            11. http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/slade-archive-project/.
            12. http://sladearchive.github.io/. 
            13. https://soundcloud.com/slade-archive-project.
            14. Digitised class photos of the Slade Archive are processed through a face recognition algorithm using OpenCV (Bradsky, 2000). This process produces a location mapping of all recognised faces on the larger images. This information was used to crop image portraits of each person recognised by the algorithm and created a static HTML page for each face identified. With the help of the D3 library (Bostock et al., 2011), we also built an interactive visualisation that highlights each portrait within the class photo. We then asked the public to help identify the sitters using the Disqus (https://disqus.com) commenting system, which has been integrated into each portrait page. Periodically, we collected the public’s comments and integrated the names of the people identified into the visualisation. Our prototype gathered a surprising amount of the public’s interest, partly with the help of some media attention (Weaver, 2013). 
            15. http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/slade-archive-project/category/transnational-slade/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V. and Heer, J. (2011). D3: Data-Driven Documents. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proc. InfoVis). 
                    
                    
                        Bradsky, G. (2000). The OpenCV Library. 
                        Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools.
                    
                    
                        Cook, T. (1997). What Is Past Is Prologue: A History of Archival Ideas since 1898, and the Future Paradigm Shift. 
                        Archivaria,
                        43 (Spring): 17–63. 
                    
                    
                        Dadi, I. (2010). 
                        Modernism and the Art of Muslim South Asia. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 
                    
                    
                        Dobrzynski, J. H. (2014). Modernizing Art History. 
                        Wall Street Journal, 28 April, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304518704579519632304010744.
                    
                    
                        Enwezor, O. and Achebe, C. (2001).
                         The Short Century: Independence and Liberation Movements in Africa, 1945–1994. Prestel, Munich. 
                    
                    
                        Long, M. and Schonfeld, R. C. (2014). Supporting the Changing Research Practices of Art Historians. Ithaka S+R Research Publication, 30 April, http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/supportingchanging-research-practices-arthistorians? utm_content=bufferbe57e&amp;utm_medium=social&amp;utm_source=twitter.com&amp;utm_campaign=buffer#s thash.hyLuOcuz.dpuf 
                    
                    
                        Rodríguez, N., Baca, M., Albrezzi, F. and Longaker, R. (2012). The Digital Mellini Project: Exploring New Tools and Methods for Art-Historical Research and Publication. Paper presented at 
                        Digital Humanities 2012 Conference, Hamburg, Germany, http://www.dh2012.unihamburg. de/conference/programme/abstracts/the-digital-mellini-project-exploring-new-tools-methods-for-arthistorical- research-publication/. 
                    
                    
                        Rodriguez Ortega, N. (2013). Digital Art History: An Examination of Conscience. 
                        Visual Resources,
                        29 (1–2): 129–33. 
                    
                    
                        Teitelbaum, M. (1996). Notes on the Meeting of Cultures. In Watson, S., White, P., and Hill, T. (eds), 
                        Naming a Practice: Curatorial Strategies for the Future. Banff: Banff Centre Press, pp. 40–44.
                    
                    
                        Weaver, M. (2013). Slade Art School Puts Old Class Pictures Online to Find Past Pupils. 
                        The Guardian, 25 December, http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/dec/25/slade-art-school-photos-online-past-pupilsalumni-london. 
                    
                    
                        Weski, T., von Bismarck, B., and Schafaff, J. (eds.) (2012). 
                        Cultures of the Curatorial. Sternberg Press, New York. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Humanities educational vehicle - new patterns of research and learning approach in the Digital Age of Access
                
                    
                        Duridanov
                        Ludmil
                    
                    New Bulgarian University, Bulgaria
                    duridanov@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Curry
                        Joanne
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    j.curry@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Ivanov
                        Stanislav
                    
                    New Bulgarian University, Bulgaria
                    sivanov@nbu.bg
                
                
                    
                        Simoff
                        Simeon
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    s.simoff@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Zareva
                        Desislava
                    
                    New Bulgarian University, Bulgaria
                    dzareva@nbu.bg
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Interdisciplinary collaboration
                    Participatory learning
                    Virtual environment
                    Ancient history
                    Intercultural skills
                
                
                    archaeology
                    classical studies
                    interface and user experience design
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    software design and development
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    programming
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    anthropology
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Our paper presents an ongoing project aiming to create a close-to-work 
                virtual ambience and tо develop interactive research tools for digital humanities (DH), implementing the traditional experience of arts and humanities into a dynamic interface for cultural information retrieval. The approach, discussed in this paper, offers a humanitarian perspective to human-computer interaction and interface design. The project develops the ‘expressive medium’ and ‘exploratory laboratory’ view of DH (Svensson, 2010). Three aspects are highlighted concerning the deployment of an exploratory laboratory as an educational vehicle for expanding the knowledge of information and communications technology (ICT) students in humanitarian areas. The educational aspects include: 
            
            1. Complementing essentials of global experience on the ‘big arena’ of real professional interaction where business actions require the mastership of culturally rich ‘mixed mode’ interaction. Global experience here is considered to be
             (a) Professional experience to work in a distributed global environment, as well as 
             (b) Extension of mental models to interact intuitively focused at the ‘big picture’ of real life, in real teams and real markets. 
            2. Perceived sensitive channels of cross-cultural background impacting interaction, which are the dynamic mechanisms enacting our practical solutions and business procedures. 
            3. Disclosing the hot spots of a multidisciplinary interconnectedness and applying associatively a methodological sensibility to various historical and cultural key aspects of modern phenomena. 
            This DH initiative is implemented within the framework of UWS PX (Professional Experience) projects for ICT students. The PX projects create an engaged learning environment in which students address real problems and form collaborative student teams; these teams are provided with initial requirements by a ‘client’; through the interaction with the ‘client’ and participatory agile software development with the ‘client’, students develop a shared concept and implement it as a computing system. 
            This is the formal vehicle, where an interdisciplinary team of lecturers in the humanities and in information technology from NBU Sofia acts as a ‘client’ for UWS PX student teams during the last four years. Due to geographical distance they communicate and co-create only by using virtual channels of interaction. 
            The development of a shared concept requires ICT students to focus on a selected variety of sensitive profiles innate to the areas of arts and humanities. They have to immerse into the multilingual reality of southeastern (SE) Europe (6000 BC–AD 1000) where ‘national mindsets’ and spoken languages were not a barrier for communication on the commercial routes. Since 2011 a shared understanding of a multifaceted cultural focus at various times and geographical areas has been developed which is to be accessed on a map/timeline (Duridanov et al., 2013).
            The paper presents the outcomes of a four-year collaborative work focusing on the development of an integrated associative environment, aiming to educate the so-called digital natives or Millennium users—terms used to denote youngsters who grow up with digital technologies and interact with them intuitively from an early age. 
            The associative environments that we build up within the series of projects are computer-generated environments based on the idea of human perception and spontaneous associations in everyday life; they are intended for the use of collaborative research and participatory learning. The main managing principle to be highlighted is a ‘spontaneous protocol’ (Duridanov and Zareva, forthcoming), which requires the user to click continuously or hold on a website as a ‘second home’, to change roles within ‘game strategies’ as well as levels of knowledge. The whole procedure of creating associative environments should be considered as an organically developed sensibility. We intend to disclose the ‘hidden mechanisms’ of how digital natives and digital immigrants interact and construct a Web 2.0 ambience on educational ground. 
            The vision of the project is to build a DH educational environment as an open-source ‘virtual library’ equipped with access and analysis tools. It borrows and extends the idea from the movie 
                Disclosure (1994) (Duridanov and Simoff, 2007; 2008; Duridanov et al., 2013). The so-called library is the core, which expands gradually into an ‘educational center’, where students have online access and interfere in a noncommercial way, play and develop ‘virtual scenarios’ and ‘associative ambiences’. The center will be hosted by New Bulgarian University Sofia (Duridanov et al., 2013) and will continue to develop the ‘infrastructure’ with further collaborative projects between both universities, with the participation of other research units as well. 
            
            The following components of an integrated environment have so far been developed: 
             (A) A digital library, allocated in a 3D animated ambience (using Second Life), emulates a four-folded access to a ‘systematic catalog’ which appears on two websites as walls of an octagonal room securing linguistic and geographic/historic access (via map with a timeline). The fourth access to religious rituals of everyday life will succeed touching a word (via linguistic access), a location (via geographical map), or a historic moment (on the timeline below the map). The four-folded access is extracted from the methodological works of the late Prof. Ivan Duridanov, where the names of gods, tribes, mountains, rivers, and cities in ancient SE Europe have been proved to be ‘interconnected’ and create an ‘associative environment’ whose ‘windows’ could be opened to enter a past moment of cultural history or location within that moment. The main problem to be solved here was the accessing of multilingually presented names in PDF documents. The implementation of Latin alphabet as a ‘standard language’ on STICKY NOTES had to be replaced by opening the page via accessing a FAVOURITE, because of the too long ‘opening duration’ of a document (Duridanov et al., 2013). Presentation of some of the outcomes can be viewed as follows: 
             Part 1: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CQx_10wq9
             Part 2: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rbealR7f1JA
             Part 3: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IFUaGetbl2o 
             (B) A geographical map with a timeline presented here is to be accessed via a website with a ‘double window’ to a mind map of a historical moment or a geographical location to disclose visually the above-mentioned ‘associative links’ that at first appear as ‘hidden knowledge’ to the student. The main problem to be solved was here the ‘designing’ of rivers extracted from the scientific documents. Presentation of some of the outcomes can be viewed at http://youtu.be/jf5imrPoZHU and http://youtu.be/k2p7U7YvMPY.
             (C) Virtual environment for cultural reenactment. Here were tested two 3D animation programs (Blender, 3D Unity) to approach easily an Orphic ritual of everyday life focused on the initiation of 12 figurines into an ‘inside knowledge’ by a priestess. The Thracian ritual selected by NBU classical scholars highlights a very modern way (it could be said) to access the ‘secrets’ of knowledge applied in ancient times. Therefore the selection of 3D animation appears be an intrinsic part of an agile development of a participatory learning ambience having modern educational value, because it visualizes the ‘hidden point of view’ of a participant as well as that of a visitor. The process and the outcomes of this work will be demonstrated during the presentation. 
            Methodologically the project follows an agile development strategy to cope with the unpredictability. The methods face three problematic fields: 
             (a) Innovative ‘infrastructure’ of associatively developed participatory learning in a virtual environment. 
             (b) Communications between the two project teams proceed only ‘virtually’ and develop a cross-cultural attitude. 
             (c) ‘Mind navigation’ proceeds intuitively to structure a ‘mental merger’ between the traditionally opposed areas of informatics on the one side and arts and the humanities on the other side. This means a complete revision of familiar semantic notions, i.e., a ‘code breaking’ procedure that has been negotiated explicitly step-by-step for ‘both sides’, not only at the very same beginning. Here is to be stressed the introduction of an interdisciplinary ‘mixed approach’ enacting constraints of arts and humanities (classical studies, linguistics, history, social psychology, and archaeology) into an ICT strategy for students and research fellows of all areas. 
            The main results are to be conceived on three levels: 
             • ‘Fusion’ of various segments of disrupted knowledge. 
             • Development of close to market professional know-how and behavior sensibility.
             • Project management milestones developed as integral parts of an integrated Open Source Educational Center for the so-called digital natives. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Duridanov, L., Curry, J. and Ivanov, S. (2013). Virtual Environments as an Education Tool for Digital Natives. 
                        Proceedings of the National Conference on Education in the Information Society, http://sci-gems.math.bas.bg/jspui/bitstream/10525/1991/1/EIS2013-book-p10.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Duridanov, L. and Simoff, S. (2007). The Hearing Dimension of 3D Virtual Worlds: Unexploited Opportunities. In Hongladarom, S. (ed.), 
                        Computing and Philosophy in Asia. Cambridge Scholars Pub, http://philpapers.org/rec/SIMCFT.
                    
                    
                        Duridanov, L. and Simoff, S. (2008). ‘Inner Listening’ as a Basic Principle for Developing Immersive Virtual Worlds. 
                        Heidelberg Journal of Religions on the Internet, 
                        3(1), http://archiv.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/volltextserver/8299/1/Duridanov.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Duridanov, L. and Zareva, D. (forthcoming). Spontaneous Protocol: A Dynamic Interface of Education ‘Technology’. In Velev, D. (ed.), 
                        Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Application of ICT and Statistics in Economics and Education, Sofia, http://icaictsee-2014.unwe.bg.
                    
                    
                        Svensson, P. (2010). The Landscape of Digital Humanities. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        4(1), http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Media Literacy in Indonesian Youth: Building Sustainable Democratic Institutions and Practices
                
                    
                        Suwana
                        Fiona
                    
                    Queensland University of Technology, Australia
                    f.suwana@qut.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    digital media literacy
                    democray
                    digital democracy
                    youth civic engagement
                    Indonesian youth
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    asian studies
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As the world’s third-largest democracy, Indonesia has experienced fundamental changes since the country progressed from a repressive authoritarian to a democratic regime in 1998. Competitive, direct elections have been held four times; freedom of speech and assembly are legally protected; and citizens have a lively and outspoken public sphere. Freedom House, the U.S.-based non-governmental organization, labels Indonesia as a free and democratic country (Antlov and Wetterbeg, 2011, 3). Indonesia’s Ministry of Communication and Informatics reports that there were 82 million Internet users in 2014, and Indonesia has the eighth-highest number of Internet users in the world (Kominfo, 2014). The Internet is perceived as a media that can potentially promote greater democracy due to it being a freer and more open form of communication compared to traditional media, therefore opening more opportunities for freedom of speech and other communicative functions than traditional media communication.
            Bennett (2008, 9) argues that the future of democracy is in young people’s hands. It is crucial for young people to learn how to use digital media in order to develop civic and political actions. Democracy and participation in public culture require not just a willingness to consume information but a willingness to create, share, and use information. Internet use has increased rapidly in Indonesia, particularly among Indonesian youth (Kominfo, 2014). This provides an opportunity to use Internet and social media to enhance democracy in Indonesia. Nugroho, Putri, and Laksmi (2012, 7) found that the Internet has encouraged space for citizens to communicate without restriction. Also, Indonesian citizens can create their own public sphere and engage freely with others by blogs, social media, and micro-blogging. Digital media literacy is an important life skill that is increasingly necessary to develop democracy in Indonesia; therefore, this research aims to investigate whether young Indonesian people have been able to understand and meaningfully use digital media to support democratic institutions and practices.
            There will be two stages in this research. In the first phase, the focus group method will be suitable for researching Indonesian youth’s digital media literacy and capacity to use digital media to support democracy. I will conduct two focus group discussions to identify and compare their digital media practices. The first focus group will be conducted with young Indonesian urban men and women, middle class, ages 18 to 25 (as university/college students), and Internet heavy users (defined as using the Internet a minimum of once a day (ACMA, 2009a, 6). The second focus group will be conducted with a group of the same background as Group 1 but with a different Internet habit, namely Internet medium users, defined as using the Internet one to seven times a week (ACMA 2009a, 6). Both focus groups will be recruited from faculties of politics/communication in the top 10 university/colleges in Jakarta, and respondents will be drawn from leadership positions in campus organisations (student union/guild). Focus group discussion topics will include how the student makes responsible choices and accesses online information, and also how the student analyses and creates information in a variety of digital media forms. The second phase, semi-structured interviews, will be conducted relating to the digital media practices of young Indonesian urban men and women, middle class, ages 18 to 30, active members in non-profit organizations or the community as a leader or participating on a committee, Internet heavy user and living in Indonesia’s capital, Jakarta. The findings will measure the role of digital media literacy to enhance democracy in Indonesia.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ACMA (Australian Communication Media Authority). (2009a). Australia in the Digital Economy Report 2: Online Participation. http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/aba/about/recruitment/online_participation_aust_in_digital_economy.pdf.
                    
                    
                        ACMA (Australian Communication Media Authority). (2009b). Digital Media Literacy in Australia: Key Indicators and Research Sources. http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/the-acma-digital-media-literacy-resources.
                    
                    
                        Antlov, H. and Wetterbeg, A. (2011). Citizen Engagement, Deliberative Spaces, and the Consolidation of a Post-Authoritarian Democracy: The Case of Indonesia. http://www.icld.se/pdf/ICLD_wp8_printerfriendly.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Bennett, L. (2008). Changing Citizenship in the Digital Age. In Bennett, W. L. (ed.), 
                        Civic Life Online: Learning How Digital Media Can Engage Youth, 1-24, doi: 10.1177/1748048514524119.
                    
                    
                        Kominfo. (2014). Kemkominfo: Pengguna Internet di Indonesia Capai 82 Juta (Ministry of Communication and Information: Internet Users in Indonesia Reached 82 Million). http://kominfo.go.id/index.php/content/detail/3980/Kemkominfo%3A+Pengguna+Internet+di+Indonesia+Capai+82+Juta/0/berita_satker#.VDSDcBB8C3p (accessed 1 September 2014).
                    
                    
                        Nugroho, Y., Laksmi, S., Amalia, M., Santi Widyartini, M., Cox, D. and Miles, I. (2011). Citizens in @ction: Collaboration, Participatory Democracy, and Freedom of Information: Mapping Contemporary Civic Activism and the Use of New Social Media in Indonesia. http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk/newsandevents/documents/Citizensinaction-MIOIR-HIVOSFinal_Report.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Nugroho, Y., Putri, D. and Laksmi, S.
                        (2012).
                        
                             
                        
                        Mapping the Landscape of the Media Industry in Contemporary Indonesia. Report Series: Engaging Media, Empowering Society: Assessing Media Policy and Governance in Indonesia through the Lens of Citizens’ Rights. http://www.cipg.or.id/uploads/books/D02-MediaIndustry-CIPG-Hivos-MAN_FULL_FINAL_rev.pdf.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Musical Industry and Identity in Melanesia
                
                    
                        Webb-Gannon
                        Camellia Bell
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    c.webb-gannon@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Webb
                        Michael
                    
                    The University of Sydney, Australia
                    michael.webb@sydney.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Dick
                        Tom
                    
                    Southern Cross University, Australia
                    tom.dick@scu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Stern
                        Monika
                    
                    CNRS, France
                    monika.stern@pacific-credo.fr
                
                
                    
                        Crowdy
                        Denis
                    
                    Macquarie University, Australia
                    denis.crowdy@mq.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    Melanesia
                    music
                    digital media
                    justice
                    identity
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    anthropology
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This panel discusses and embodies three key ideas expressed in ‘A Manifesto for Music Technologists’, an online declaration emerging from Microsoft Music New England’s 2014 symposium ‘What is Music Technology For’ (http://www.musictechifesto.org/?page_id=2), and applies these ideas to the contemporary digitalization of music in Melanesia. Specifically, the panel explores the ways in which music technology is contributing to the creation and imbrication of new Melanesian identities—political, economic, and sociocultural—and to the disintegration of the traditional notion of a Melanesian music ‘industry’. It attends to the ways in which music digitalization at once contributes to improved justice for Melanesians in these areas (for example, in politics and culture), and undermines justice in others (for instance, in the music economy). 
            The first idea from the manifesto that we examine is that ‘music technologies create possible futures and offer new ways to inhabit the present and past. Their changes presage changes in culture, signaling trends yet to come. They are thus sites of struggles over money, membership, power, and prestige. Technological change is inseparable from economic, cultural and political change’. Crowdy discusses the ‘musical poverty’ in Melanesia that stems from the dissolution of the commercial music industry, which traded in cassette tapes and ‘linked [industry] to [music] creators in terms of sales and royalties’. He examines how different economic possibilities are simultaneously opening up for musicians with the development of new smartphone apps (which he is currently creating and will be trialing with the other panelists in an action research project), which will allow musicians to create and distribute music for payment using their own mobile phones. Dick and Stern explore how ancient oral narrative traditions in Vanuatu are interfacing with music technology, anchoring present changes and networks in the past. They look at the role that identity factors such as gender and location (urban or rural) affect Ni-Vanuatu musicians’ access to and interaction with digital technology, and examine what these changes to traditional musical cultures in Vanuatu might mean for the future of Vanuatu’s music ‘industry’. Webb and Webb-Gannon discuss a developing Melanesian regional approach to music and technology by documenting and analyzing Melanesian trends in creating, posting, and commenting on YouTube music and visual content, as well as proclamations of a regional identity through music that shakes off longstanding negative stereotypes of Melanesians and invites the world to see Melanesians as empowered, political, and proud of where they are situated globally.
            The second point from the manifesto that we take up in this panel is the notion that ‘meaningful innovation bridges multiple perspectives—yet the music technology field remains predominantly white, male, and tends toward assumptions that its user base is Western and able-bodied. . . . Meaningful innovation happens when fields intersect—yet those who work in music technology are too often siloed in distinct fields within universities, industry, startups, journalism, hobbyist and fan subcultures’. The panelists—three ethnomusicologists (one specializing in music technology), a peace and conflict analyst, and a cultural events producer-facilitator—will discuss their diverse academic research in an effort to actively bring together multiple perspectives on the innovation and justice-related change that music digitalization is bringing about in Melanesia. The panel not only features research from different disciplines/professions but it uses music case studies from the non-Western world (Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, West Papua, Solomon Islands) to examine what characteristics of music from these places are locally or nationally distinctive and can be identified as being of the region. It also highlights music created by Melanesian women, considering whether the digitalization of such music contributes to greater agency in the region for women musicians and listeners alike.
            Third, we attend to the idea and call to action in the manifesto that ‘music technologies make worlds. Let us make better worlds. Let music technology do good, serve public interest, foster belonging, justice, collaboration and sharing, enable greater access to positive musical experiences and personal connections, and create durable objects and practices’. Webb and Webb-Gannon survey the online music movement for a Free West Papua, examining how non–West Papuan Melanesians are using new media such as YouTube to advocate through song for West Papua’s right to self-determination, and the ways West Papuans are using YouTube to record musical messages of resistance for the world. Dick and Stern assert that young Ni-Vanuatu musicians are bridging two worlds: a traditional world of music with deep endogenous cultural significance and a globally connected world inviting musicians to share with and imbibe other music cultures. Balancing or merging these to create better cultural worlds for Ni-Vanuatu musicians and listeners is a delicate undertaking, as Dick and Stern attest. Crowdy turns his attention to the durability of music technology objects. Warped-sounding cassettes are no longer a lucrative commodity for musicians or producers; digital music products in the form of piratable SD card libraries have contributed to performer poverty. But Crowdy sees the mobile phone, with its potential for music creation and distribution, as the hope of Papua New Guinean musicians’ economic future, at least until the arrival of superior technology that allows sweeter-sounding worlds to be constructed.
            
                1. The Impact of Gender and Local Identity on Vanuatu’s Digital Music Industry
            
            Tom Dick
            Southern Cross University 
            Monika Stern
            Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
            In Vanuatu, where new technologies are overlaid on social structures built on thousands of years of oral tradition, story and voice are important concepts. Musical exchanges are deeply embedded in the archipelago’s traditional culture, and alongside the old circulation systems of musical knowledge, the Internet and mobile phones have created new networks for the circulation of music. In the new millennium Vanuatu has experienced considerable development in digital technologies, with the arrival of the Digicel mobile telephone company in 2008. In the first decade of the new millennium, mobile phone ownership rose from less than 1 percent to more than 50 percent of the population. The possibilities for digital storage have made the mobile phone an indispensable tool for young musicians.
            This paper explores how music and technology are converging in Vanuatu. Today, the nascent music industry in Vanuatu is a site of many conflicting forces. Young Ni-Vanuatu men, and to a lesser extent women, are engaging with global media, as evidenced by the internationalization of the urban Fest’Napuan festival and action around this annual event, and the emergence of two provincial ‘sister’ events. The dynamic of locality on identity provides a lens to explore the ways that digital technology is shaping the future of the Vanuatu music ‘industry’. How are the modes of distribution and dissemination of music changing? In particular, the authors explore the possible synergies between the emerging practice of transmedia production and the importance of story for Ni-Vanuatu musicians. Does the participatory culture of transmedia storytelling resonate with the way musicians in different parts of Vanuatu are representing themselves domestically and internationally? Are Ni-Vanuatu musicians idiosyncratic transmedia producers? The authors examine the situation of young musicians in different Banks islands in Vanuatu, looking at how they use music to express identity with the resources available to them, and ways in which global elements are being co-opted and appropriated by local ones.
            
                2. Mobile Phones and Musical Impoverishment in Papua New Guinea
            
            Denis Crowdy
            Macquarie University
            In many places around the world, mobile phones and associated communication networks are widely used for distributing and listening to music. As smartphones become more commonplace, the range of activities and possibilities surrounding such mobile music expands. This paper probes the impact of the smartphone through a number of case studies from Papua New Guinea, a nation where rapid growth in mobile telecommunications has occurred since 2007. This has coincided with the rapid growth of home studios that create music featuring an increase in the use of synthesised and sequenced instruments over guitars and ukuleles, previously important instruments in contributing to local popular music styles. The commodity status of music has also changed as a result of digital production and sharing, and is related to similar changes occurring in music industries elsewhere. What was once considered a commercial music industry with a clear commodity—the cassette, linked to the creators in terms of sales and royalties—is now a more dispersed amateur activity. Indeed, it is possible to see locally recorded music as essentially free media fuelling commodification in other areas such as phones, network bandwidth, digital media hardware, and advertising, for example. While this is similar to developments in many other parts of the world, disparities in income, wealth, and basic infrastructure intensify concerns about economic justice in Papua New Guinea and speak to issues recently explored in ethnomusicology around musical poverty and impoverishment. Observations from the case studies described have been used to design an applied ethnomusicology project involving the development of music production applications for mobile phones and collaboration between a number of scholars and organisations focusing on Melanesia; the paper concludes with a discussion of this activity.
            
                3, 4. Music, Video, and the Internet as Means to Increasing Political and Cultural Participation and Engagement in Melanesia
            
            Michael Webb
            University of Sydney
            Camellia Webb-Gannon
            University of Western Sydney
            In his renowned post-colonial critique of the ways outsiders have portrayed the Pacific Islands and its inhabitants, Epeli Hau‘ofa commended paying attention to local expertise, to ‘images, sounds and movements that speak to us, that speak of us in our place and our time’ (Hau‘ofa, 2008). This paper has two parts, which together provide an overview and a specific instance of how digital technology appears to be contributing to the fulfillment of Hau‘ofa’s desire for Islanders. Increasingly, images, sounds, and movements are being created and employed by indigenous innovators to project new senses of identity and belonging across Melanesia. The paper considers how communities and individuals are gaining access in various ways to the tools and resources required to create and launch new digital music and video products that have in recent years begun circulating on the Internet, and which have the potential to significantly increase political and cultural engagement and participation in the region as well as contribute to the reshaping of senses of belonging in the world. We believe that at present we are only witnessing the beginning of a trend that will likely blossom as technologies become more affordable and widely available in the southwestern Pacific region. Part One of this paper, by Michael Webb, provides an introduction and overview—an analytical survey of the kinds of musical products that Melanesians are authoring that communicate a desire for their perspectives to be seen and heard. It examines the technologies that Melanesians are employing to create and promote new local, national, and regional music forms, and discusses the types of interactions taking place on Internet forums between musicians, promoters, and listeners. This first part assesses the social and cultural-political implications of the digitalization of new popular Melanesian music for its producers and intended consumers. Part Two of the paper, by Camellia Webb-Gannon, offers a case study of Melanesia-wide identification through music, dance, and video, with the West Papuan desire for political independence. It examines songs and accompanying video content created by non–West Papuan Melanesians professing solidarity with West Papuans, and music written and performed by West Papuans proclaiming their affinity with other Melanesian peoples. The message of such music, the paper argues, is strategic on a number of levels. At an international level, it links West Papuans to Melanesian culture and politics, thereby distancing it for listeners from Indonesian sovereignty claims. Regionally, it is also an attempt by non–West Papuan musicians to rally support in their respective Melanesian countries for West Papuan self-determination, and represents an effort by West Papuan musicians to do the same. Locally, it buoys West Papuans’ morale, which energizes the struggle. The digitalization of West Papua–related solidarity music has enabled members of the West Papuan diaspora to experience solidarity virtually, with, for example, West Papuan political prisoners recording musical messages of support for diaspora leaders, which have been uploaded to YouTube. It has also allowed traditional treasured protest songs to be preserved for posterity, and has provided West Papuan musicians with access to the music of other ‘black’ political struggles—styles such as reggae and hip-hop that serve as models for their own new expressions and aspirations. The social justice impact of this solidarity music and the technologies it is utilising form the analytical core of this case study. 
            Reference
            Hauʻofa, E. (2008).
                 
                We Are the Ocean: Selected Works. University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu. 
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts
                
                    
                        Trilcke
                        Peer
                    
                    University of Göttingen, Germany
                    trilcke@phil.uni-goettingen.de
                
                
                    
                        Fischer
                        Frank
                    
                    Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities, Germany
                    frank.fischer@zentr.uni-goettingen.de
                
                
                    
                        Kampkaspar
                        Dario
                    
                    Herzog August Library Wolfenbüttel, Germany
                    kampkaspar@hab.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    network analysis
                    dramatic texts
                    literary history
                
                
                    literary studies
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The project ‘Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts’ follows in the tradition of structural analysis approaches in the literary studies (Titzmann, 1977) and is aimed at advancing them in recourse to established methods like Social Network Analysis (Wasserman and Faust, 1998). The project also enhances these elder approaches through automated data acquisition and analysis in order to handle much larger corpora and to be able to generate comprehensive relational data to analyse structural transformations in the history of literature.
            As theoretical foundation we used a network-analytic conceptualisation of dramatic interaction (first ideas in Moretti, 2011; critical reading and theoretical reconceptualisation in Trilcke, 2013; also a detailed research summary). In continuation of concepts of dramatic configuration (Marcus, 1973; Pfister, 1977; Pohlheim, 1997), we resorted to a basic operationalisation according to which an ‘interaction’ takes place if two characters are listed as speakers within a given segment of a text (usually a ‘scene’).
            For our first automation purposes, we considered ‘interaction’ as ‘scenic co-presence of two speakers’. Based on this concept of relations, network data is extracted automatically—both the global networks of ‘interactions’ of the plays (density, average degree, connectedness, etc.) and data that characterises individual actors (degree and various other centrality indices). The workflow we created also allows the collection of data on a meso-level (e.g., identification of clusters) and includes visualisations of the extracted network data, which in turn contributes to the analysis of the structural transformation in the history of literature.
            Corpora of Dramatic Texts
            For the automated analysis of theatre plays, a reliable and sufficiently large (German-language) corpus was needed. The following corpora were reviewed:
             • Deutsches Textarchiv / German Text Archive (DTA): 54 dramatic texts.
             • Wikisource: 50 dramatic texts.
             • Projekt Gutenberg-DE: 641 dramatic texts.
             • TextGrid Repository: 690 dramatic texts.
            The DTA corpus has the best quality of TEI markup, but so far only incorporates few texts. The latter also applies to the German-language branch of Wikisource. The Gutenberg-DE archive is problematic due to the poor markup it provides (just some basic XHTML). Thus, only the TextGrid Repository (containing basic TEI markup) was really applicable.
            First, we extracted all dramatic texts from the repository, 690 texts altogether that are marked as ‘drama’ in the ‘genre’-field of the metadata. Most of them are German plays from about 1500 to 1930, plus a dozen translations of Greek tragedies and some Shakespeare plays.
            Acquisition of Network Data
            As an intermediate step, we created a list of relations between all the persons appearing in a play for each of the 690 TEI files and wrote them into a CSV file, one of the standard formats for the storage of network data. To extract the speaker data, usually two separate steps are required: The recognition of the individual segments of a play and the recognition of individual speakers.
            To facilitate the following work, the script first splits the files. For each level recognised in the document tree, a subdirectory is created containing all the individual parts of the TEI files, along with the respective index files. Different kinds of outputs are generated this way: for one, a detailed register of all &lt;speaker&gt; tags, but also all the &lt;rs&gt; and &lt;person&gt; tags. To obtain unambiguous reference targets, ID numbers are assigned (also facilitating later interventions, if erroneously assigned names must be manually corrected). Furthermore, co-occurrence lists are created. In the bottom directory, the occurrence of all speaker pairs in all files are counted. In the upper directories, the values of all subdirectories are added.
            In addition to the recognition of the structure, the correct assignment of names is one of the bigger challenges. Ideally, all &lt;speaker&gt; tags would contain a @who attribute to provide a unique ID for each character. If this is not the case (or if &lt;rs&gt; or &lt;person&gt; tags were used instead), the script has to analyse the textual content of the tag. Possible misspellings (due to the transcription or the original) and grammatical changes have to be considered. For instance, in Lessing, 
                Nathan the Wise V/1, we encounter different sorts of Mamalukes, be it ‘A Mamaluke’, ‘The Mamaluke’, ‘A second Mamaluke’, or just ‘Second Mamaluke’. In this case, some linguistic knowledge about adjectives is enough to rule out mistakes when assembling the lists of relations. But there are more complicated cases when automatising this process, e.g., if multiple characters speak up at once (‘All’).
            
            In addition to trying to clarify these cases automatically, there is still the possibility of manual intervention in cases of doubt. Here, the generated index files with unique IDs will be of help. For an upcoming version of the script, it is intended to provide a simple GUI to allow easy editing in such cases.
            Data Analysis and Visualisation
            The data analysis was done by using the igraph package via Python (3.4.x). It was used for both the visualisation of the graphs and the calculation of the network data.
            For a first visualization, we fed the graph data into a spring-embedding method (Fruchterman-Reingold), which tries to arrange related nodes closer together (clustering). A first impression of the entire corpus is provided in Figure 1. It comprises nearly 700 plays from 2,500 years of theatre history, starting chronologically at the top left with the ancient Greeks ranging to the bottom right and the second quarter of the 20th century.
            
                
            
            The visualised graphs (a ‘distant reading’ of its own) also suggested that most of the calculated CSV had at least minor flaws in them due to ambiguous markup. These findings contributed to the error handling in the previous step (Acquisition of Network Data).
            Some basic network calculations were done on the basis of the 12 (completed) theatre plays by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Corresponding diagrams are show in Figure 2.
            
                
            
            Conclusions
            The extracted (and adjusted) network data will serve as a basis for further statistical calculations and also be made publicly available. Our research focus will now shift to implementing further calculation tools for the network analysis of theatre plays (e.g., to calculate the betweenness centrality to determine the importance of individual characters in a network). We will also work on enhancing the network data (quantify speech units, include stage presence of non-speaking persons, etc.) and try to build multiplex networks that not only capture the ‘interactions’, but also consider parental or instrumental relations.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Marcus, S. (1973). 
                        Mathematische Poetik. Athenäum-Verlag, Frankfurt.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets 2, http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet2.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Pfister, M. (1977). 
                        Das Drama. Theorie und Analyse. Fink, Munich.
                    
                    
                        Pohlheim, K. K. (ed.). (1997). 
                        Die dramatische Konfiguration. Schöningh, Paderborn.
                    
                    
                        Titzmann, M. (1977). 
                        Strukturale Textanalyse. Theorie und Praxis der Interpretation. Fink, Munich.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, P. (2013). Social Network Analysis (SNA) als Methode einer textempirischen Literaturwissenschaft. In Ajouri, P., Mellmann, K. and Rauen, C. (eds), 
                        Empirie in der Literaturwissenschaft. Münster: Mentis, pp. 201–47.
                    
                    
                        Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1998). 
                        Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digitalization of Shoso-in Monjo and Extraction of Knowledge
                
                    
                        GOTO
                        Makoto
                    
                    The National Institutes for the Humanities, Japan
                    goto@nihu.jp
                
                
                    
                        NAITO
                        Motomu
                    
                    Knowledge Synergy Inc. Japan
                    motom@green.ocn.ne.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Japanese History
                    Topic Maps
                    Onotlogy
                    Historical Text
                
                
                    historical studies
                    ontologies
                    knowledge representation
                    asian studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We have been conducting research on digitalization methods for the restoration of Shoso-in Monjo since 2002. Shoso-in Monjo is a collection of historical documents from 8th-century Japan, comprising approximately 15,000 documents in total.
                1 It is the largest group of historical documents from ancient Japan or East Asia, and is highly valuable data. However, because of the historical background of Shoso-in Monjo, the documents have become disorganized compared to their original, 8th-century state. A “restoration” to this original state is necessary in order to conduct research using Shoso-in Monjo. To resolve this issue using computers, we reconstructed a virtual Shoso-in Monjo and created a comprehensive, all-encompassing database of the scattered Shoso-in Monjo information. We called this database the Shoso-in Monjo Database: ‘SOMODA’.
                2
            
            We conducted a markup of the Shoso-in Monjo textual data using XML (eXtensible Markup Language), thus structuring the database, and linked image data and index information. Thereby, we created a system through which any information from the Shoso-in Monjo can be acquired.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The main page of SOMODA.
            SOMODA does not just display complete texts or images; it is a system containing various information derived from data that was restored, and a system through which this information can be viewed simultaneously. We developed the latter database in 2007.
            After considering how SOMODA ought to be developed from now on—that is, approximately seven years after the database was first created—we concluded that it is necessary to simplify the data search and information discovery model of Shoso-in Monjo along with enabling cooperation with many databases, thereby ensuring effective information discovery based on knowledge data. We therefore adopted an ISO standard Topic Maps as an ontological method and applied it to the SOMODA data. In the next section, we report our findings.
            Characteristics of the Topic Maps
            Topic maps are defined as follows by ISO 13250 Topic Maps Data Model. ‘Topic maps is a technology for encoding knowledge and connecting this encoded knowledge to relevant information resources. Topic maps are organized around topics, which represent subjects of discourse; associations, representing relationships between the subjects; and occurrences, which connect the subjects to pertinent information resources’.
                3
            
            Furthermore, it is possible to assign Subject Identifiers to topics to identify/differentiate subjects within a topic map. Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRI) are used as Subject Identifiers. Subject Identifiers that have been made public are called Published Subject Identifiers (PSI). By using PSIs, it is possible to accurately identify/differentiate subjects based on unique IRIs, without being troubled by issues such as synonyms, homonyms, and polysemy, which are difficult to resolve on the Web today.
            Based on this, it will be possible to assign academic IDs one by one to the Shoso-in Monjo on the Web while enabling a high level of cooperation with other digital archives (see Figure 2).
                4
            
            
                Figure2. The ontology of Shoso-in Monjo topic map
            
            
                The Generated Shoso-in Monjo Topic Map
            
            Based on these characteristics, we created a topic map for the Shoso-in Monjo as described below.
            First, based on the historical particulars of, and changes to, Shoso-in Monjo, we noted the relationship between the state of the Shoso-in Monjo today and the structure of the 8th-century original. At present, Shoso-in Monjo has a layered structure of association: Series (
                Shozoku), Sub Series (
                Chitsu), Volume (
                Kan), 
                dankan (the smallest unit of paper remaining from the original 8th-century documents), page. We created a representation of this layered structure. Next, we noted the original structure as being the 
                Chobo (the original Documents)—
                dankan (the broken piece of Documents)—page. We then assigned PSIs to each page and 
                dankan, making higher-level use of the Shoso-in Monjo digital data possible. This will become the foundational information for the Shoso-in Monjo topic map as a whole.
            
            We next extracted information on personal names in ancient Japan from existing dictionaries. Additionally, we affixed associations regarding the social status, occupation, and location to the personal names based on existing research articles on Japanese history. Then we affixed associations with the ‘pages’ in the Shoso-in Monjo in which these personal names appear. This allows one to understand what kinds of people are described in the Shoso-in Monjo and in what kinds of historical records they appear.
            Third, we extracted information relating to East Asian scriptures and sutras from existing dictionaries. We then noted the version, anthology, and author of the sutra. Further, we affixed associations between the titles of these sutra and the places in which they actually appear within historical records. Through this, the relationship between book titles and publications as entities can be understood.
            
                The Usefulness of the Shoso-in Monjo Topic Map
            
            We anticipate that the Shoso-in Monjo topic map will be useful in the following ways.
             • Connecting personal names in the Shoso-in Monjo with sutra titles.
             • Discovery of semantic information that may not be found using a conventional search model, such as whether a given person had anything to do with a unique scripture at a sutra-copying place.
            For instance, the relationships between the holders of annotated editions of sutras at a given time during the 8th century and their locations have been visualized in Figure 3, using the topic map we generated as the source. Based on this, information such as what kinds of texts a set of annotated editions belonging to a given monk are and whether there is any bias regarding the authors of these annotated editions can be understood. Further, by adding information on the location and time, information can be obtained on whether the holder of an annotated edition or the location of the edition changes with time. This will become an important source of information for analysing how the monks of the 8th century studied sutras.
            
                
                    Figure 3　Affixing associations between the whereabouts of sutras and the holders of records using the topic map*1: PageID *2: Sutras Name *3: Name of Monk *4: Current Node *5: Position
                
            
            
                Connecting registers and sutras/personal names. The Shoso-in Monjo had a history of causing problems for research due to its exceedingly complicated structure, which made it difficult to see the big picture. The Shoso-in Monjo database created up to 2007 is what resolved this issue. However, it was not suited for viewing multiple materials relating to a specific keyword at once. That has been resolved and it has become possible to mechanically analyze whether, for instance, a given sutra appears in a specific register (document).
            
            
                Connecting personal names with each other. Many personal names can be seen in the Shoso-in Monjo. Accordingly, it will be possible to analyze whether particular connections exist between personal names or between occupations. Based on this, it is possible that the personal relationships that have hitherto been only vaguely identified within the Todaiji sutra-copying center—the focus of the writings in the Shoso-in Monjo—will become clear.
            
            In the future, we can expect that large amounts of research information/knowledge beyond what has already been described will be organically connected to the historical records of the Shoso-in Monjo within the Shoso-in Monjo topic maps.
            Challenges and Prospects
            The development of the database created in this study has only just begun, and there are the following challenges.
            1. Processing complex time transitions. While the Shoso-in Monjo is a collection of documents from a relatively short period—that is, the mid-8th century—there are still some temporal changes; within those temporal changes, there are also changes to the ontological structure. How these changes are processed will be investigated from now on. Further, while the contents of the Shoso-in Monjo texts are from the 8th century, it is necessary to take up to the Meiji Period into consideration in order to include subsequent changes in complex historical record structures. How to respond to this kind of circumstance will be a challenge hereafter.
            2. Establishing appropriate topics. While the first step is inputting information on personal names and scriptural titles based on historical records, inputting more abstract research knowledge/information is desirable if one is to achieve the original goals of the topic map. It will be necessary to constantly consider the extent to which establishing these topics conforms to the goals of Shoso-in Monjo research.
            At present, we have obtained permission to make secondary use of the index appended to the research papers of the Shoso-in Monjo, and our next plan is to put it to practical use.
            In the future, we believe it will be necessary to extend the research of the Shoso-in Monjo outward by further brushing up on ontology and creating links to historical records from the same period as the Shoso-in Monjo, such as the Shoku Nihongi, and to databases on Buddhist sutras.
            Using this system, it will be possible to develop materials for an even higher level of research in history and humanities in Japan.
            Notes
            1. A detailed explanation about Shoso-in Monjo in English appears at Bryan Lowe and Chris Mayo, Guide to Shoso-in Research, https://my.vanderbilt.edu/shosoin/.
            2. See Shoso-in Monjo Database SOMODA, http://somoda.media.osaka-cu.ac.jp/.
            3. ISO 13250-2: Topic Maps—Data Model, http://www.isotopicmaps.org/sam/.
            4. Shoso-in Monjo Topic Map, http://www.somoda.jp (scheduled to open in 2015).
        
    



    
        
            
                Digitisation, Processing, Dissemination: Charting the Ecology of the New Scholarly Edition
                
                    
                        Martinez
                        Merisa Ariel
                    
                    University of Borås; Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training (DiXiT) Network
                    merisa.martinez@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Kelly
                        Aodhán
                    
                    University of Antwerp; Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training (DiXiT) Network
                    aodhan.kelly@uantwerpen.be
                
                
                    
                        Powell
                        Daniel
                    
                    King's College London; University of Victoria; Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training (DiXiT) Network
                    daniel.j.powell@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital scholarly editing
                    textual criticism
                    critical digitization
                    publication and dissemination
                
                
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    crowdsourcing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Contexts
            
            Digital scholarly editing is in a state of flux, as workflows and channels of scholarly communication face disruption via newer technologies, models of creation, and patterns of consumption and re-use. This poster situates the digital scholarly edition (DSE) as a ‘textual locus’ for intellectual activity, where editing is a distributed, iterative web of processes, each with an effect on the surrounding digital ecosystem. We reconsider how 
                critical digitisation, 
                collaborative creation, and 
                dissemination and reuse might intersect to produce a unique lifecycle for the DSE. It is a provocation and a thought experiment; as such, it eschews technical specifications for broader, systematic critiques of shifts in knowledge and edition building.   
            
            
                Critical Digitisation
            
            Digitisation has been trivialized as a mechanical preamble to the analytical work undertaken by scholarly editors.
                1 We assert that 
                critical digitisation forms an integral part of the emergent ecosystem of the DSE, requiring informed decision-making, advanced technical and financial competencies, subject specialisations, and a keen awareness of use (and re-use) cases for digitised materials. Publications in critical technology studies and science and technology studies have argued that engagement in digital materiality—and with digital tools themselves—is anything but value-neutral; the work of Bruno Latour, N. Katherine Hayles, and Donna Haraway, among many others, has recently begun to inform discourses surrounding (digital) humanities practices.
                2 Digitisation is always critical, with judgments made or consciously avoided during the selection of materials, to production, to presentation, preservation and beyond (see Terras, 2008). Critical digitisation is, therefore, an integral layer of the editing process that drastically affects the affordances, values, and potential reuse of materials throughout the lifecycle of digital scholarly editions.  
            
            
                Collaborative Creation
            
            Digital connectivity—and the communities of practice it engenders—re-shapes how editions are produced from the ground up. Wikipedia and crowdsourcing projects like Transcribe Bentham and the Letters of 1916 suggest outlines for this new way of constructing knowledge. 
                A Social Edition of the Devonshire MS has explicitly attempted to model large-scale collaborative editing, prompting debate among scholarly editors and digital humanists.
                3 Despite the contentious nature of this discussion, the DSE may continue to become a more social, collaborative, and multivariate network. The open-source community, especially those groups devoted to tool building and knowledge construction, is a powerful articulation of how the technologically facilitated social production of intellectual content may fruitfully develop, given a vibrant community of interest. Such a community might be deeply invested, active for significant periods of time, and most importantly, radically open to participation from everyone, not just experts. Content might be available for copying, alteration, and redistribution, because when scholarly editions can be copied with a click of a button, the isolated edition of the past becomes untenable. 
            
            
                Dissemination and Usage Environments
            
            
                New media has dramatically blurred the delineation between scholars and readers, producers and users. As scholarly communication increasingly moves from clearly defined channels of production, distribution, and use toward overlapping loci of intellectual activity, this tendency becomes more apparent. DSEs are accordingly disseminated and reused in increasingly iterative fashions, with users often having access to a DSE across a multitude of platforms while it is still a work in progress—not least because digital editions rarely constitute something that could be considered a ‘finished product’. This allows for broader pedagogical and societal impact as new audiences, remixers, and use cases open up. Users accessing such a work in progress can exert influence over future iterations of the publication through feedback or even user-centric design processes. Social approaches to production such as crowdsourcing, social annotation, and pedagogical exercises in creating editions have made users a valued part of the production process. Participation in these editorial processes is arguably a very pure form of scholarly dissemination, to the extent that production and dissemination might blur together when such transformed relationships occur in digital environments. In this poster we address ways to map and account for such transformed relationships in dissemination and the digital environments where these activities take place.
            
            Conclusion
            The ways that humanists study, create, and remediate textual materials through digital scholarly editions is changing. The digital ecosystem we envision explores how technical, cognitive, and social developments fundamentally affect what a DSE is or 
                can be. For inasmuch as the edition is a site of intellectual activity among the interested publics, academics, and librarians, it is also a site of production, deeply intertwined with its foundational materials and the ways it is disseminated and read.
            
            Notes
            1. For a discussion arguing against digitisation as critical process, see Lavagnino (2009). For the opposing viewpoint, see Dahlström et al. (2012). For a discussion of the relationship between cultural heritage professionals and digital humanists, see, for example, Sula (2013). 
            2. For an overview of STS, see ‘An Extremely Brief History of Science and Technology Studies’ (2014). For another example of discourse-shaping discussions of critical analysis, see Liu (2012). As a field, the digital humanities largely ignores debates raised by new media and information science professionals who approach technology as completely imbricated in socio-cultural contexts. For example, see Winner (1980). 
            3. For the edition itself, see the Wikibooks-mounted project, http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/The_Devonshire_Manuscript. For critical work relating to the project, see Siemens et al. (2012). For arguments against the idea of collaborative editing, see Robinson (2013). See also Bordalejo (2013).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ‘An Extremely Brief History of Science and Technology Studies’. (2014). The Society Pages, University of Minnesota, http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2014/07/30/an-extremely-brief-history-of-science-technology-studies/.
                    
                    
                        Bordalejo, B. (2013). What Is Meant by Editing in the Phrase ‘Social Editing’? Presentation from the 
                        2013 Social, Digital, Scholarly Editing Conference, https://www.academia.edu/4125893/What_is_Meant_by_Editing_in_the_Phrase_Social_Editing.
                    
                    
                        Dahlström, M., Hansson, J. and Kjellman, U. (2012). As We May Digitize: Institutions and Documents Reconfigured. 
                        Liber Quarterly,
                        21(3), 10-1-113640, http://liber.library.uu.nl/index.php/lq/article/view/8036/8403.
                    
                    
                        Lavagnino, J. (2009). Access. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        24(1) (April), 10.1093/llc/fqn03, http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/24/1/63.full.pdf+html.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2012). Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities? In Gold, M. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/20. 
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2013). Why Digital Humanists Should Get Out of Textual Scholarship. Keynote Address from the 
                        2013 Social, Digital, Scholarly Editing Conference, https://www.academia.edu/4124828/SDSE_2013_why_digital_humanists_should_get_out_of_textual_scholarship.
                    
                    
                        Siemens, R., Timney, M., Leitch, C., Koolen, C. and Garney, A. (2012). Toward Modeling the Social Edition: An Approach to Understanding the Electronic Scholarly Edition in the Context of New and Emerging Social Media. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        27(4):445–61, dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqs013, http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/4/445.
                    
                    
                        Sula, C. (2013). Digital Humanities and Libraries: A Conceptual Model. 
                        Journal of Library Administration, 
                        53(1), 10.1080/01930826.2013.756680, http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01930826.2013.756680.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2008). 
                        Digital Images for the Information Professional. Ashgate, Surrey.
                    
                    
                        Winner, L. (1980). Do Artifacts Have Politics? 
                        Daedalus, 
                        109(1), http://innovate.ucsb.edu/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/Winner-Do-Artifacts-Have-Politics-1980.pdf.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digitizing Slow and Deliberate: The Victorian Short Fiction Project
                
                    
                        Thorne-Murphy
                        Leslee
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    leslee_thorne-murphy@byu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Browne
                        Jeremy
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    jeremy_browne@byu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Victorian
                    Short Fiction
                    Wiki
                    Undergraduate
                    Pedagogy
                
                
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    english studies
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The field of the digital humanities is built on the back of the archive. Researchers and the public have access to ever-growing online compilations of important texts (e.g., Dalmau and Courtney, 2011; Allori and Kaborycha, 2013), physical artifacts (e.g., Hunter et al., 2014; Streiter and Goudin, 2014), and lived experience (e.g., McGrath and Peaker, 2014). The power that these digital repositories afford—access to vast amounts of primary sources, processing tools to make sense of them, etc.—has redefined scholarship in the humanities. 
            We should ask ourselves, however, what the process of creating sweeping digital collections leaves out. That is, as we move to automate the processes of digitization (e.g., Lenkiewics and Drude, 2013; Lombardi, 2014), do we risk losing aspects fundamental to the human experience? If Mark Algee-Hewitt (2013) is correct that distant reading is three-fourths interpretive, if the materiality of the original text is key to understanding its contents (Lavin, 2013), then a close experience with literary artifacts supports effective distant reading. Automated digital archiving—while undisputedly valuable to certain researchers—potentially shortchanges students and budding scholars. 
            This paper describes the student-centric production of the Victorian Short Fiction Project (VSFP). Grown organically from a paper-based compendium of student research to a wiki of more than 160 articles, the VSFP conscientiously objects to removing the human experience from the curating process, even in the digital age. Two principles guide VSFP procedures: First, we prioritize quality of experience above speed of delivery. Second, the VSFP nurtures new scholars whose interaction with both the printed and digital text is integral to their development. 
            The VSFP is a pedagogical project. Students in Victorian literature classes at Brigham Young University select a 19th-century periodical from the Special Collections library. They then choose a short story published in that periodical; prepare a digital transcription of the story, including an introduction and annotations; and post their work to the VSFP. 
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                
            
            Figure 1. The VSFP homepage.
            Though short fiction is plentiful in Victorian literature, scholars have typically downplayed its significance, looking instead to French and American fiction for the genesis of the genre (e.g., Killick, 2008; Korte, 2003; Orel, 1986). The VSFP creates a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to contribute to an area of inquiry in professional literary scholarship. It includes little-known fiction by Charles Dickens, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, and Joseph Conrad, just to name a few authors. And we have fiction by a host of authors whose work has been all but forgotten, which makes the VSFP valuable for understanding the wider development of the short story during the century. 
            By embedding the students’ experience with the digital humanities within a traditional literary classroom experience and within a scholarly conversation in a literary field, they learn to see the digital humanities as a natural part of their academic studies, and as a relevant part of their career preparation. However, anyone familiar with the practices of the digital humanities will realize that building a digital collection of short fiction one student-prepared text at a time is, quite frankly, appallingly inefficient. The typical procedure would be to set up a system of culling all short fiction from Victorian-era periodicals and digitizing them en masse. 
            What would be lost in a typical process is exactly the rationale that gave rise to the VSFP in the first place. We need to nurture a new generation of digital humanists, not just by employing them as student workers on our large projects, but by showing them how the digital humanities is inextricably linked to the rest of their field. One student’s comments are representative of how students appreciate such connections: 
            I learned how to work in an electronic environment, and that knowledge is invaluable in today’s electronically mediated world. Also, knowing that the material I was going to post would be public motivated me to fastidiously ensure that the work was a polished representation of my writing and researching abilities. Overall, this project was one of, if not the most influential educational activity I’ve taken part in as a student here at BYU. I was able to research lesser known material which contributed to the sense of accomplishment I felt. I had the sense that I was actually contributing to the discourse within literary studies and not simply churning out another banal paper or project, and at the same time I also feel that the knowledge I gained from the project is valuable because it is not a topic that the whole of literary studies is familiar with, and I can therefore feel a sense of ownership for what I’ve done and feel pleased with the effort I put into it.
            Note the aspects that the student pinpoints as particularly valuable: digital literacies, personal ownership, and legitimate participation in a community of practice. We know from constructivist theory and research that these qualities contribute to better performance (Ennis et al., 1999) and early professionalization of novices (Lave and Wenger, 1991). Other student comments reinforce the professionalizing aspects of the project. Students are motivated to do their best work because they know it will outlast the class. 
            There is another aspect of student responses that deserves attention. Students often express a sense of sheer wonder at the process of bringing archival materials to a 21st-century audience. As one student put it, “The project made me interested in spending time in the archives. . . . And doing the project made me realize how valuable books are, and how I need to take much better care of books than I do. They are really priceless and need to be taken care of if I want them to last for the next hundred years.” Another student observed, “[I]t was just impressed on me even more how great it is to be able to look at the original text and how much more you learn from a publication b[y] looking at that original copy. For example, for my journal, the format of it and the way it was illustrated and even the way it smelled was enriched by reading and made its audience seem more real.” Ironically, the tactile experience of working with the archival holdings makes this digital project even more rewarding and beneficial for the students. 
            As the field of the digital humanities charges bravely on in the construction of new knowledge, as we increase our understanding of the human experience by applying computation methods to centuries-old disciplines, we must not lose appreciation for the essential—yet often unacknowledged—physical aspects of that experience. We must be attentive to the balance between creation of or from digital content and the curation and appreciation of source artifacts, especially as we cultivate a new generation of scholars. Such awareness may serve as content knowledge that will influence our interpretation of digital representations. 
            The VSFP will continue its deliberate efforts by posting approximately 20 new articles each year with the hope of influencing future literary scholars. Meanwhile, we are beginning the process of seeking NINES certification so that this digital repository will be of increased value to researchers of Victorian literature. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt, M. (2013). Romancing the Novel: A Computational Taxonomy of the Eighteenth-Century Literary Field. Invited presentation at Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, November.
                    
                    
                        Allori, L. and Kaborycha, L. (2013). Opening Aladdin’s Cave or Pandora’s Box? The Challenges of Crowdsourcing the Medici Archives. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2013, Lincoln, NE, July. 
                    
                    
                        Dalmau, M. and Courtney, A. (2011). The Victorian Women Writers Project Resurrected: A Case Study in Sustainability. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2011, Palo Alto, CA, June. 
                    
                    
                        Ennis, C. D. (1999). Creating a Culturally Relevant Curriculum for Disengaged Girls. 
                        Sport, Education, and Society, 
                        4: 31–49. 
                    
                    
                        Hunter, J., Macarthur, J., Van der Plaat, D., Gosseye, J., Muys, A., Macnamara, C. and Bannerman, G. (2014). Extracting Relationships from an Online Digital Archive about Post-War Queensland Architecture. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne, July. 
                    
                    
                        Killick, T. (2008). 
                        British Short Fiction in the Early Nineteenth Century: The Rise of the Tale. Ashgate, Aldershot.
                    
                    
                        Korte, B. (2003). 
                        The Short Story in Britain: A Historical Sketch and Anthology. Francke, Tubingen.
                    
                    
                        Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991). 
                        Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Lavin, M. (2013). Representing Materiality in a Digital Archive:
                         Death Comes for the Archbishop as a Case Study. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2013, Lincoln, NE, July.
                    
                    
                        Lenkiewicz, A. and Drude, S. (2013). Automatic Annotation of Linguistic 2D and Kinect Recordings with the Media Language for Elan. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2013, Lincoln, NE.
                    
                    
                        Lombardi, T. (2014). Mining the Cloud of Witness: Inferring the Prestige of Saints from Medieval Paintings. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne, July.
                    
                    
                        McGrath, J. and Peaker, A. (2014). Our Marathon: The Boston Bombing Digital Archive. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne, July. 
                    
                    
                        Orel, H. (1986). 
                        The Victorian Short Story: Development and Triumph of a Literary Genre. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Streiter, O. and Goudin, Y. (2014). 
                        Creating a Digital Tombstone Archive: From Fieldwork to Theory Formation. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne, July. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Disciplinary Impact: The Effect of Digital Editing
                
                    
                        Pierazzo
                        Elena
                    
                    Université Stendhal Grenoble III, France
                    elena.pierazzo@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    textual scholarship
                    digital methods
                    traditional methods
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    scholarly editing
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2003 Peter Robinson asked ‘where we are with electronic scholarly editions, and where we want to be’; more than 10 years later we may ask a similar question: Where are we, and where do we want to go? Rather than asking exactly this, however, I would like to address the question from a different angle—namely, what has been the impact of the digital in scholarly editing in more than 20 years of practice, and in which ways may this impact the future? This approach will allow us also to reflect in general on the impact of the digital in humanities disciplines more generally, by considering textual scholarship as a case study. 
            A first caveat on this analysis: textual scholarship is not really a discipline. One could call it an inter-discipline or a super-discipline: we edit, and do so with similar approaches, within many of what we consider to be the traditional disciplines, such as, for instance, history, English, French, German, theology, philosophy, and art history. Most disciplines in fact have to deal with old documents, and therefore they have to edit them to study and make them available for scholarship. In spite of the many national and disciplinary differences, there are similarities in all the approaches adopted; furthermore, all of these disciplines have been affected by the impact of the digital. 
            Within the past 20 years, all scholarly editions have in a sense become digital: all editions are in fact prepared on a computer; some use a very basic nonspecific setup such as word processor and standard image viewers; others are prepared with the help of sophisticated ad-hoc software, using markup and various combinations of scripts and algorithms. Let us consider the former case first. One cannot overestimate the impact of the availability of affordances such as copy and paste, digital images, and emails on the work and workflow of a textual scholar; these possibilities are transformational on the one hand, but they do not question the substantial heuristics of the textual scholarship—or not a great deal. The same cannot be said for those editors who have experimented with more innovative digital methods such as automatic collation, text encoding, and phylogenetics, among others; instead, the engagement with these methodologies brings into question some of the most established heuristics of textual editing, and it is claimed here that such innovations are building a methodological divide within textual scholars. Let us consider, for instance, automatic collation: this requires the editor first to transcribe all the witnesses of a given textual tradition in order to be able to compare them, a practice substantially unknown to traditional textual scholarship where collation is conducted by transcribing only one witness in full and then recording only the variants of other witnesses in various ways. Automatic collation is not an editorial method per se, but it is one first, necessary step of phylogenetic as well as other editorial digital methods (Andrews and Macé, 2013). The transcription of all witnesses is indeed a costly activity, and perhaps it is not the most exciting either, resulting in a much more detailed collation with respect to the one done manually; both aspects of this constitute a problem for the textual scholarship community: the transcription is stigmatized because it is resource-thirsty, and the (over)accurate collation because it does not distinguish between ‘proper’ errors, innovation, readings, and orthographic variants, with the risk, it is feared, of the reconstruction of an unreliable genealogical network of relations (Howe et al., 2012). According to Andrews (2013), however, the problem for traditional editors is not as much that variants and errors are not distinguished, but the fact that they refuse to consider that with the new digital method they might not need to be distinguished, since they refuse to consider the change in the heuristic of the discipline as worth having. A similar case happens with text encoding: while the use of text encoding is a new introduction to editing as a result of digital methods and it does seem to bring a different approach to the way we understand and edit texts (Cummings, 2008; Price, 2008), it is also refused as ‘too techie’, and the requirement for editors to learn the TEI seems beyond the reach of editorial work (Bree and McLaverty, 2009). 
            In spite of this skepticism and drawback that have so far prevented the majority of textual scholars from embracing digital methods, new generations of textual scholars are indeed trained in digital tools and are therefore understanding and editing texts in these new ways. Universities, research centres, and various networks organize one event after the other, where mostly graduate students and young researchers are trained in the use of TEI, collation tools, and other formalisms. One example of this trend is represented by the ‘Marie Curie’ DiXiT ITN; within this network, 12 Early Stage Career Researchers (PhD students, more or less) and five Experienced Researchers (postdoc) are being intensively trained in all aspects of digital editing. The network offers courses every six months for the whole duration of their fellowship; furthermore, such trainings have been offered openly also to people outside the DiXiT Network. Once the experience of DiXiT is over, the impact of these 17 researchers (to which we have to add all the external participants in the training and camps) in the academic market for textual scholarship could be very strong: we are talking about small numbers, but in a super-discipline such as textual scholarship that counts only handfuls of practitioners within each national and disciplinary community, that effect could be really transformational. It will also be interesting to see in future years how many of these newly trained digital editors will remain for the longer term in the traditional disciplines where they began, or if, because of this digital experience, they will end up more on the digital humanities job market instead. A survey of the career plans and aspirations of the DiXiT fellows conducted for this paper might give us some indications.
            What could be the consequences of this situation at a disciplinary level? The methodological gap (people who engage with digital methods and people who do not) will be magnified and enhanced by a generational gap; the result of this situation could bring textual scholarship to the breaking point. This is what happened in the field of linguistics: the impact of digital technologies has transformed the methods and heuristics of linguistics beyond recognition, to the point that a new label had to be created: computational linguistics. Is this the scenario that we envisage for digital editing? A similar disciplinary divide seems to be happening within paleography (Stokes, 2009) and doubtless can be also observed for, say, musicology and history, to name a few. 
            As I have argued elsewhere (Pierazzo, 2015, forthcoming), digital editing is not a new discipline—not yet, at any rate. It is certainly evident that in digital scholarly editing there are at least as many elements of continuity as there are of innovation. The innovative elements are truly transformative, involving as they do formats, methods, roles, heuristics, and hermeneutics of editing. Yet the purpose of editing remains the same—that is, the presentation of historical documents in ways that are meaningful for a group of users according to a documented and sharable methodology. For this, we may conclude that digital scholarly editing is a radical evolution (but not revolution) of print-based editing, as if in a Darwinian pattern of evolution a few steps have been jumped all at once. However, what is interesting to ask here is if the elements of continuity will be enough to keep the discipline together, so to speak, or will the innovative methods otherwise continue to widen the divide between traditional and digital? The answer to this question depends on the willingness of the traditional disciplines to engage with the new methods, but also from the attitude of digital humanists/editors to keep the dialog open with them. This is ultimately one of the biggest challenges of the digital humanities of the next few years: the relationship with the traditional humanities and their more or less peaceful coexistence. The paper will therefore present an analysis of the impact of the digital within scholarly editing using measurable indicators obtained by surveying the field, outlining patterns and trends that may help us assessing the consequences of such an impact. Such indicators include the number of early career researchers attending annual training events such as the DHSI and MMSDA, the number of digital-oriented papers at conferences like the ESTS and the STS in the past five years, and, in contrast, the number of print editions published by print publishers such as Cambridge University Press, Oxford University Press, Brepols, and Brill during the same period.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L. (2013). The Third Way: Philology and Critical Edition in the Digital Age. 
                        Variants,
                        10: 61–76. 
                    
                    
                        Andrews, T. L. and Macé, C. (2013). Beyond the Tree of Texts: Building an Empirical Model of Scribal Variation through Graph Analysis of Texts and Stemmata. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing
                        , 
                        28(4): 504–21. 
                    
                    
                        Bree, L. and McLaverty, J. (2009). The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Jonathan Swift and the Future of the Scholarly Edition,. In Deegan, D. and Sutherland, K. (eds), 
                        Text Editing, Print and the Digital World. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 127–36. 
                    
                    
                        Cummings, J. (2008). The Text Encoding Initiative and the Study of Literature. In Siemens, R. and Schreibman, S. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 451–76. 
                    
                    
                        Howe, C. J., Connolly, R. and Windram, H. F. (2012). Responding to Criticisms of Phylogenetic Methods in Stemmatology. 
                        Studies in English Literature, 1500–1900,
                        52(1): 51–67. 
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015, forthcoming). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Methods, and Models. Ashgate, Aldershot. 
                    
                    
                        Price, K. M. (2008). Electronic Scholarly Editions. In Siemens, R. and Schreibman, S. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 434–50. 
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. M. W. (2003). Where We Are with Electronic Scholarly Editions, and Where We Want to Be. 
                        Computerphilologie, 
                        5, 
                    
                    http://computerphilologie.tu-darmstadt.de/jg03/robinson.html. 
                    
                        Stokes, P. A. (2009). Computer-Aided Palaeography, Present and Future. In Rehbein, M. Sahle, P. and Schaßan, T. (eds), 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im Digitalen Zeitalter—Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age, unter Mitarbeit von Bernhard Assman, Franz Fischer und Christiane Fritze. Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 2, Norderstedt, pp. 313–42, urn:nbn:de:hbz:38-29782.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Discourse, Design and Disorder: Digital Models for an Aesthetic Literary Theory
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark Andrew
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    mark.algee-hewitt@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    quantitative anlysis
                    information theory
                    redundancy
                    literary theory
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    english studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As quantitative textual analyses are based primarily on words, which are lexical objects that, by definition, carry meaning and information, these methods should offer a clear path that leads from analysis to interpretation. If two groups of texts are well differentiated by author (Burrows, 2003), genre (Jockers, 2013), or period (Hughes et al., 2012) based on word correlations or frequencies, it is reasonable to assume that those words that differentiated them should offer us a straightforward approach to understanding why 
                those words in particular separated 
                these texts. Yet this is not the case in most digital humanities findings. In authorship attribution, for example, high-frequency words are valued because they are “content-free” and thus are used ‘unconsciously’ by an author (Burrows, 2003).
                1 Even when content-laden words are used as the features, it is often the case, as in the Stanford Literary Lab’s first pamphlet, ‘Quantitative Formalism’, that some complex mixture of proportions of many words does the work at separating something like genre (Allison et al., 2011). All too often, reading these kinds of lists of words gets us no closer to understanding 
                why two corpora are separated into groups. Even topic modeling, which promises results based on interpretable ‘topics’, only adds to this complex problem because the clusters of words that underlie the model are often only subjectively ‘named’ by the analyst.
                2
            
            At the root of this problem is the way in which much digital humanities work treats words as feature sets, rather than objects with interpretable weight. This has done much to uncover hidden structural (or stylistic) features of textual corpora, but has required an interpretive leap, from data to metadata, to explain these structures. The actual features that articulate the differences between texts are not easily integrated into the interpretive process. Instead, they establish the 
                fact of a differentiation whose 
                meaning is often explained by extratextual or a priori knowledge. In this paper, I argue that we can begin to mitigate this interpretative gap by deriving more complex, higher-order, quantitative metrics through which we can compare textual corpora. The two metrics I develop in this paper, heterogeneity and redundancy, are both based in frequency data, but 
                meaningfully translate word frequencies into metrics whose relationship to the features is quantitative but whose relationship to the text as a whole is qualitative—that is, they are metrics that can be derived quantitatively, but that offer information that is immediately relatable to the texts and that can be used to interpret the results in a way that is not only quantitatively rigorous but also grounded in a theoretical method for understanding textual or informational difference.
            
            Heterogeneity
            The first metric that I develop in this project draws a connection between the quantitative analysis of texts and literary theory by way of Mikhail Bakhtin’s theory of heteroglossia. In ‘Discourse in the Novel’, Bakhtin proposes that we understand the novel as a genre of accumulation and mixture resulting in a heterogeneous object of multiple and overlapping language (Bakhtin, 1981). While poetry is dominated by a single, unitary voice, prose writing, particularly novelistic prose, is defined by a ‘diversity of voices’, according to Bakhtin: the more ‘novelistic’ the text, therefore, the more competing voices there should be and the less like the rest of the text any one part becomes. While it is useful to parse the distinction between prose and poetry, we can also operationalize the theory of heteroglossia to understand differences between and within different type of writing by measuring the ‘distance’ between the different parts of a text, thereby calculating how internally diverse it is. For this measurement, I divide the text into equally sized chunks and calculate the distance (using both a Euclidean distance metric and a Kullback-Leibler divergence) between every part and every other part. By combining these internal distances into a single score and scaling them logarithmically to account for text length, I am able to derive a single number that represents the amount of linguistic diversity between different parts of the text.
                3 Texts with a high degree of diversity, or heterogeneity, between their parts would be made up of more internal ‘voices’ following Bahktin. As I show in this paper, this metric of heterogeneity not only separates different kinds of writing, but also writing of different periods, or by different authors or even by different genres. And because the metric is a direct measure of internal diversity, the ways that groups of texts are separated by this metric offers critical information about those groups of texts: texts with a low heterogeneity score are mono-vocal: their patterns of language do not vary across the text. Texts with a high heterogeneity score are highly diverse among their constituent parts and depend upon variety, rather than repetition, to engage their readers.
            
            Redundancy
            The second metric I describe in this paper is based on Claude Shannon’s work in information theory. While metrics of entropy (or information loss) are common in measuring textual differentiation (the Kullback-Leibler divergence is one such metric), the measure of entropy in these cases is made 
                between texts and offers only a way to characterize how different two texts are based on their shared word frequencies. The two interventions that I make in this paper are (a) to measure redundancy, the opposite of the informational entropy described by Shannon, and (b) to make this measurement 
                within rather than 
                between texts. By slightly altering Shannon’s formula for redundancy (1963) I offer a way to calculate the redundancy of a text that is scaled to the possible combinations of words within the text, rather than the possible combinations of words across the language (as it is traditionally calculated). This again allows me to calculate a single number based on word frequencies (in this case, bigram probabilities) that speaks directly to the information content of the text itself. In other words, the redundancy metric that I describe in this paper not only offers a way to classify different kinds of texts based on their score, but in doing so, it also describes how likely each text is to use repeated word combinations or if a text can be characterized by its tendency to combine words in new ways. This measurement therefore, reveals important information about how the text communicates with the reader that allows me to both describe differences between texts and, more importantly, characterize these differences based on features that are legible at the level of the text. 
            
            By combining these two metrics, heterogeneity and redundancy, both of which offer data on how repetition and variety functions within groups of texts, this paper demonstrates how these higher-order features can be used reliably to describe surprising differences between corpora that are uninterpretable through standard digital humanities analyses. In this paper I apply this new combination of metrics to two case studies in long 18th-century literature: genre and canonicity. As I demonstrate how these metrics together can differentiate between different kinds of writing, for example—poetry, prose, and nonfiction (Figure 1) as well as between canonical and noncanonical writing (Figure 2), I simultaneously articulate a theory of how the information content of the texts and their internal repetitions can help explain these groupings. This work also reveals a clear historical pattern among these different groups that is not apparent in any other quantitative analysis of the corpora that I use. These two ways of understanding textual difference therefore not only provide new information on literary history and criticism, but they also offer a way to bridge the gap between the quantitative calculation of clusters and the meaning behind these clusters. Despite their apparent simplicity (both redundancy and heterogeneity use a single number to describe a text), I argue that their actual complexity and their derivation from literary theory and information theory, respectively, allow us to understand the texts that they describe with a much greater nuance and in more critical detail than what we would be able to do from reading the texts, let alone deriving the clusters of the texts directly from word frequencies. What I argue that these two measurements provide is a quantitative aesthetic theory: one that articulates both a quantitative and theoretical way of understanding how texts are grouped and, more importantly, the critical significance of and meaning behind these historical, generic, and textual formations.
            Figures
            
                
                    
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    p = &lt;2.2e--16
                
            
            Figure 1. Difference between eighteenth-century genres derived from heterogeneity scores.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Change in redundancy over time in canonical (blue) and noncanonical (red) texts.
            Notes
            1. This method, particularly the dependence upon ‘content-free’ words, was critiqued by Hoover (2009) in ways that echo the concerns that I raise here.
            2. There are notable exceptions to this, particularly studies that begin with a predefined list of meaningful terms and use their frequencies only to differentiate between texts. This is most evident in spatial humanities work that uses predefined geographic names to differentiate between texts (Wilkens, 2011). 
            3. This measure is related to the Type-Token ratio, a standard metric of lexical diversity within a document, but where the Type-Token ratio measures lexical diversity across the entire document, the metric of heterogeneity that I propose here compares diversity 
                between rather than 
                within segments of the text, measuring, for example, the degree to which the ending of a text is like the beginning, or the middle.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Allison, S., Heuser R., Jockers M., Moretti F. and Witmore W. (2011). Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment. 
                        Literary Lab Pamphlet, 
                        1, 15 January. 
                    
                    
                        Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the Novel. In Holquist, M. (ed.), Emerson, C. and Holquist, M. (trans.), 
                        The Dialogic Imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2003). Questions of Authorship: Attribution and Beyond. 
                        Computers and the Humanities, 
                        37(1): 5–32.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. 2009. “Word Frequency, Statistical Stylistics and Authorship Attribution.” In 
                        Archer, D. (ed.), 
                        What’s in a Word-list? Investigating Word Frequency and Keyword Extraction. London: Ashgate, pp. 35–52. 
                    
                    
                        Hughes, J., Foti, N., Krakauer D. and Rockmore D. (2012). Quantitative Patterns of Stylistic Influence in the Evolution of Literature. 
                        PNAS, 
                        109: 7682–86. 
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
                    
                    
                        Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1963). 
                        The Mathematical Theory of Communication. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
                    
                    
                        Wilkens, M. (2011). Canons, Close Reading, and the Evolution of Method. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Discovering and Rediscovering Full Text: Unearthing and Refactoring
                
                    
                        Kilner
                        Kerry
                    
                    The University of Queensland, Australia
                    k.kilner@uq.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Fitch
                        Kent
                    
                    The University of Queensland, Australia
                    kent.fitch@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Corpus building
                    text mining
                    Australian literature
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    image processing
                    information retrieval
                    lexicography
                    literary studies
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    machine translation
                    programming
                    english studies
                    cultural infrastructure
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            AustLit contains thousands of full text items ranging from seminal works of 19th- and early-20th-century Australian literature through collections of early science and speculative fiction, to a large corpus of children’s literature, alongside selected criticism and scholarship. In addition, AustLit bibliographical records link outwards to tens of thousands of full text items available online. 
            This paper presents the results of a project undertaken by the AustLit team in 2014 and 2015 to totally refactor the existing AustLit full text corpus, including a massive expansion of the corpus by identifying and harvesting literary texts published in newspapers in the period covered by the National Library of Australia’s (NLA) database of digitised newspaper available through Trove.
                1
            
            A number of different formats and digitisation protocols have been used over the past 14 years to build a corpus of works that has the potential to support a range of different use cases. That potential had not been met until the total restructure of the AustLit database and content management system over the past two years provided an opportunity to look again at the material we have and the way we deliver that material to researchers and readers. A major factor in AustLit’s future plans to deliver full text is the NLA’s newspapers database. It offers a valuable opportunity to build our corpus and advance knowledge about the place of literature in culture and reading practices across the 19th and early 20th centuries. Newspapers were the primary form of transmission for literature during the period covered by the NLA’s database; the possibility of identifying and unlocking the literary content in the database thus allows us to support new research into reading culture.
            This paper will present the refactored full text system AustLit developers have created to expand utility, readability, and research opportunities. It will also discuss an innovative method of identifying and harvesting poetry from the NLA’s newspapers database. 
            In July 2014, AustLit contained just over 10,500 links to poems identified within the NLA’s Digitised Newspapers collection. Each of these links had been manually created by a combination of inspired searching for words from a known poem, searching for known literary columns, and systematic browsing through each page of each issue of nominated newspaper titles across specific date ranges. 
            One of AustLit’s many new research projects is the Colonial Newspapers and Magazines Project, undertaken by researchers at UNSW, Canberra. This project is creating a literary ‘map‘ of Australia’s colonial period by collecting and recording information about the reading habits of Australians before 1900 and linking these findings into AustLit’s data structures. This huge task has been begun by concentrating on three specific years in the 1800s, and whilst producing accurate and near-complete results, the only feasible method of browsing every page of selected titles is extremely labour intensive. 
            Hence, we started exploring an automated approach to identifying at least some relevant content. As a starting point, we noted the effectiveness of Ted Underwood’s genre identification approaches on 17th- and 18th-century texts digitised by HathiTrust.
                2 We used his vocabulary information to produce two vocabulary frequency lists: one of all words and one of words found in works of poetry. 
            
            We first trained using a naive Bayesian classifier with the ‘all’ and ‘poetry’ vocabulary frequencies, and ran the trained classifier on a training set of newspaper articles identified as poetry and on another set whose genre was unknown. 
            The known poetry article list was derived from the 10,500 articles linked to as poetry in AustLit. The unknown set was generated by randomly selecting articles from NLA’s digitised newspapers. We found that whilst providing a useful signal, vocabulary alone was not sufficient to reliably classify articles as poetry or not-poetry. Examination of classification failures led us to explore additional signals to add to our classification heuristics: 
             • Text justification.
             • Variations in length of successive lines. 
             • Apparently rhyming lines. 
             • Presence of digits in OCRed text. 
             • Presence of a small number of ‘marker’ words. 
            Our initial results correctly classified just over 80% of articles associated with AustLit poetry links as poetry. Manual examination of the articles not identified (false negatives) revealed that the vast majority were articles containing a small amount of poetry set within a sea of prose. A significant other group where written using a vocabulary not typical of poetry (words such as ‘proclamation’, ‘neutrality’, and ‘precautions’, which pushed the classifier towards rejection as poetry), and there was another large group of articles with such poor OCR that few words were accurately identified. An error in AustLit linking to the incorrect article was also identified. 
            We then measured the effect on the classifier of automatically correcting the OCR of articles and found it gave only slight improvements to false positives and negatives, because the predominant reasons for rejection of a known poetry article as non-poetry were not related to correctable OCR. 
            We then implemented the following set of refinements to the classifier, which lifted our successful classification rate to over 85% whilst keeping ‘false positives’ below 1%:
             • Improved rhyming detection heuristics.
             • Used article metadata to exclude advertisements. 
             • Internal article segmentation in an attempt to identify ‘islands’ of poetry contained in predominantly prose articles. 
             • Use of cues from social tagging and commenting. 
            We aim to harvest what appears to be vast numbers of poems published in Australian newspapers during the 19th and early 20th centuries and to deliver that full text to AustLit users within an enhanced discovery and reading environment. This project also allows AustLit to expand a project that has neither the funding nor the research staff to build on the initial 10,500 manually created records and links into the newspapers database. While the creation of nuanced, human-derived records is no longer possible for the colonial newspapers project, the hope is that this method will provide it with a data boost by building the AustLit full text corpus and record store with greatly reduced human input, thereby enabling the analytical research into the period’s reading and publishing culture. 
            Notes
            1. http://trove.nla.gov.au.
            2. See http://tedunderwood.com/2012/07/27/getting-everything-you-want-from-hathitrust/.
        
    



    
        
            
                DIVADIAWI - A Web-based Interface for Semi-automatic Labeling of Historical Document Images
                
                    
                        Wei
                        Hao
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    hao.wei@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Chen
                        Kai
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    kai.chen@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Seuret
                        Mathias
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    mathias.seuret@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Würsch
                        Marcel
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    marcel.wuersch@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Liwicki
                        Marcus
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    marcus.eichenberger-liwicki@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Ingold
                        Rolf
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    rolf.ingold@unifr.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Historical document images
                    web interface
                    semi-automatic labeling
                
                
                    image processing
                    historical studies
                    interface and user experience design
                    xml
                    internet / world wide web
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            According to the latest panel discussions at the Historical Image Processing (HIP 2013)
                1 and Document Analysis Systems (DAS 2014)
                2 conferences, historical documents are among the most challenging types of documents for automatic processing. This is due to the vast variety of challenges they pose to document image analysis (DIA) systems. In the pipeline of automatic DIA, layout analysis is an important prerequisite for further stages, such as optical character recognition and information retrieval. Layout analysis aims at splitting a document image into regions of interest and especially distinguishing text lines from other regions.
            
            For automatic layout analysis methods, an essential prerequisite is the ground truth (GT), i.e., existing labels (text line, decoration, etc.) annotated by human experts for the corresponding regions. An example of historical document image
                3 and its ground truth are shown in Figure 1. The importance of GT is twofold: first, automatic methods could learn knowledge represented by GT from the experts, and then predict the layout of unseen images. Second, it is used to assess the performance of an automatic method by the accuracy of the prediction of the method against the GT. However, the generation of GT is time-consuming.
            
            We propose a novel web-based interface called 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI, in order to assist the user to semi-automatically generate ground truth for large numbers of historical documents. The name 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI stands for a Web-based Interface for Document Image Analysis of DIVA group (Document, Image and Voice Analysis).
                4
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI incorporates two parts: automatic processing and manual editing. In the automatic processing part, the system automatically draws polygons representing text lines for which manual generation of GT is quite time-consuming. In parallel or sequentially, the user can manually edit the polygons by modifying them or directly drawing new polygons. 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI greatly accelerates the generation of GT. It is robust to generate GT for historical document images of a diverse nature.
            
            
                
            
            
                (a)
            
            (b)
            Figure 1. (a) An image example and (b) its ground truth. In (b), the cyan, blue, red, green, and purple polygons represent the regional contours of the page, text block, text lines, decorations, and comments, respectively.
            
                State of the Art
            
            In recent years, several tools for GT generation have been developed. Aletheia (Clausner et al., 2011) is an advanced system to generate GT for printed materials such as newspapers. It aids the user with a top-down method using split and shrink tools as well as a bottom-up method to group elements together. WebGT (Biller et al., 2013) is a web-based system for GT generation for historical document images. It provides a semi-automatic strategy enabling instant interaction between the user and the system. The Java-based 
                D
                IVA
                DIA tool (Chen et al., 2015) was developed by our group. It provides a user-friendly user interface to generate GT. The tool has been proven effective and flexible by performing a real task of GT generation. Other state-of-the-art tools include AGORA (Ramel et al., 2006), PixLabeler (Saund et al., 2009), TRUEVIZ (Lee et al., 2003), and GEDI (Doermann et al., 2010).
            
            Compared to the state of the art, the novelty of 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI is twofold. First, the high level of automation greatly reduces the human effort. The user needs to do only a few simple modifications after the automatic processing. Second, 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI doesn’t require the user to install any software. It works on all modern browsers, e.g., Firefox, Chrome, and Internet Explorer.
            
            
                System Overview
            
            
                Ground Truth Representation
            
            As it is shown in Figure 1(b), we define five types of regions of interest: 
                text line, text block, decoration, comment, and 
                page (Chen et al., 2015). The 
                text line is the type of region where the main text is written. The 
                text block incorporates text lines and document background between text lines. The 
                decoration represents decorative elements such as figures, drop capitals, and decorative initials. The 
                comment represents the annotations and inserted text in the margins. Finally the 
                page outlines only the document part within the scanned image. The contours of the five regions are represented by polygons. All information—including the polygons, the document name, and the name of the author who generated the GT—are saved in XML files of the PAGE format (Pletschacher and Antonacopoulos, 2010), a widely used image representation framework for layout analysis. Furthermore, the GT also has the potential to be exported to the widely used TEI-P5 format for manuscript description
                5
            
            
                System Workflow
            
            
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI is now publicly accessible at http://diuf.unifr.ch/diva/divadiawi/. A screenshot of 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI is shown in Figure 2. 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI integrates automatic processing and manual editing. The workflow is illustrated in Figure 3 and detailed below.
            
            Among the five region types, the regions of text lines cost most of the working time for GT generation.
                6 The automatic processing of 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI is developed to accelerate the GT generation specifically for text lines. The user needs to manually draw a rectangular polygon representing a text block that contains some text lines. As soon as the rectangular polygon is drawn, the automatic processing starts. We use Gabor filters, widely used for text extraction (Jain and Farrokhnia, 1991; Raju et al., 2004), to detect regions of text lines from the rectangle. After being detected, text lines are represented by polygons and are then drawn. The automatic processing performs well on our datasets. Most of the regions of text lines are properly outlined. However, there are still some minor mistakes. In small areas where two adjacent text lines intersect or are very close to each other, the two text lines are wrongly grouped into a single line in some cases. In addition, for some strokes lightly written near the boundary of a text line, automatic processing fails to detect them. Thus manual modification follows.
            
            The manual editing has two modes: manual drawing and manual modification. Since automatic processing specifically deals with text lines, the user needs to manually draw regions of the page, text blocks, decorations, and comments. The user can select the shape (polygon or rectangle) and region type to draw. The drawn polygons and rectangles have different colors depending on their region types. After drawing, the user can modify polygons or rectangles by dragging a vertex to a new position. A new vertex can also be added to a polygon. In addition, a polygon can be deleted. Finally, an XML file storing the GT of the page is generated.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. A screenshot of DIVADIAWI.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. System workflow of 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI.
            
            
                (a)
            
            
                
            
            (b)
            
                (c)
            
            
                (d)
            
            Figure 4. The process to draw polygons of text lines by automatic processing and manual modification. (a) A part of original image. (b) Rectangular polygon of text block drawn. manually by the user. (c) Polygons of text lines obtained by automatic processing. (d) Final result obtained by manual modification.
            Evaluation
            IAM Historical Document Database (IAM-HistDB)
                7 is used for the evaluation. The database contains a variety of historical document images, which are color or gray, single-column or double-column, and date from different centuries.
            
            
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI works well on the database. Thanks to the automatic processing, it greatly accelerates the GT generation. We show an example to draw polygons of text lines on a color image
                8 in Figure 4. Most pixels within regions of text lines are included in the polygons obtained by automatic processing (see Figure 4[c]). However, the result of this step is still not perfect. For example, the bottom part of the big character ‘G’ in the first text line is very close to the second text line, leading automatic processing to fail to separate them. The problems could be solved by manually dragging the problematic vertexes of the polygons to proper positions (see Figure 4[d]). In general, with the automatic processing, the user needs to do only a few simple manual modifications for each text line. This manual work is much less effort than completely manual editing from scratch. 
            
            System Usability Scale (SUS; Brooke, 1996), a measurement to assess the global performance of system usability, is used to assess 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI. Researchers from the humanities and computer sciences are both invited to participate in the assessment. Quantitative evaluation details will be provided in the full paper.
            
            
                Conclusions and Future Work
            
            We propose
                 D
                IVA
                DIAWI, a web-based interface for the GT generation for historical document images. 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI is efficient to accelerate the GT generation, thanks to the integration of automatic processing and manual editing. It is robust to work on different kinds of historical document images from the IAM-HistDB.
            
            In the future we will keep improving 
                D
                IVA
                DIAWI. For example, automatic processing could be better designed to even decrease errors. Techniques to automatically outline other region types—e.g., page and text block—could also be applied. 
            
            Notes
            1. Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing, 2013, http://www.cvc.uab.es/~vfrinken/hip2013/.
            2. 11th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, 2014, http://das2014.sciencesconf.org/.
            3. Saint Gall DB: Cod. Sang. 562, Abbey Library of St. Gall (SG30).
            4. http://diuf.unifr.ch/main/diva/.
            5. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/MS.html.
            6. In a process of manual GT generation of 100 document pages, about 80% of the time was spent on text lines.
            7. http://www.iam.unibe.ch/fki/databases/iam-historical-document-database.
            8. Parzival DB: Cod. 857, Abbey Library of St Gall (PAR23).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Biller, O., Asi, A., Kedem, K., El-Sana, J. and Dinstein, I. (2013). WebGT: An Interactive Web-based System for Historical Document Ground Truth Generation. 
                        12th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, pp. 305–8.
                    
                    
                        Brooke, J. (1996). SUS—A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. Usability Evaluation. In Jordan, P. W., Weerdmeester, B., Thomas, A. and McLelland, I. L. (eds), 
                        Industry. Taylor and Francis.
                    
                    
                        Chen, K., Seuret, M., Wei, H., Liwicki, M., Hennebert, J. and Ingold, R. (2015). Ground Truth Model, Tool, and Dataset for Layout Analysis of Historical Documents. 
                        Proceedings of SPIE 22nd Document Recognition and Retrieva XXII, vol. 9402.
                    
                    
                        Clausner, C., Pletschacher, S. and Antonacopoulos, A. (2011). Aletheia—An Advanced Document Layout and Text Ground-Truthing System for Production Environments. 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, pp. 48–52.
                    
                    
                        Doermann, D., Zotkina, E. and Li, H. (2010). GEDI—A Groundtruthing Environment for Document Images. 
                        Ninth IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems (DAS 2010).
                    
                    
                        Jain, A. K. and Farrokhnia, F. (1991). Unsupervised Texture Segmentation Using Gabor Filters. 
                        Pattern Recognition,
                        24(12): 1167–86.
                    
                    
                        Lee, C. and Kanungo, T. (2003). The Architecture of TRUEVIZ: a Groundtruth/Metadata Editing and Visualizing Toolkit. 
                        Pattern Recognition,
                        36(3): 811–25.
                    
                    
                        Pletschacher, S. and Antonacopoulos, A. (2010). The PAGE (Page Analysis and Ground-truth Elements) Format Framework. 
                        International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 257–60.
                    
                    
                        Raju, S. S., Pati, P. B. and Ramakrishnan, A. G. (2004). Gabor Filter Based Block Energy Analysis for Text Extraction from Digital Document Images. 
                        First International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries, pp. 233–43.
                    
                    
                        Ramel, J. Y., Busson, S. and Demonet, M. L. (2006). AGORA: The Interactive Document Image Analysis Tool of the BVH Project. 
                        Second International Conference on Document Image Analysis for Libraries, pp. 145–55.
                    
                    
                        Saund, E., Lin, J. and Sarkar, P. (2009). PixLabeler: User Interface for Pixel-Level Labeling of Elements in Document Images. 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, pp. 646–50.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                DIVAServices – A RESTful Web Service for Document Image Analysis Methods
                
                    
                        Würsch
                        Marcel
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    marcel.wuersch@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Ingold
                        Rolf
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    rolf.ingold@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Liwicki
                        Marcus
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    marcus.eichenberger-liwicki@unifr.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    web services
                    document image analysis
                
                
                    image processing
                    information architecture
                    internet / world wide web
                    programming
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper presents an open-source web service providing researchers in all fields with state-of-the-art computational methods for several Document Image Analysis (DIA) steps. Research on automatic DIA focuses mainly on developing and refining automatic processing steps, e.g., text line extraction, binarization, and layout analysis. While many state-of-the-art methods perform satisfactorily, the algorithms applied to obtain the results are not easily accessible for other researchers. Just making the source available online is not sufficient, as it typically requires a cumbersome installation of required libraries and reading long manuals about the usage. Our approach is to directly make the methods available as web services that can be accessed via RESTful HTTP requests, the current state of the art in online web communication. Thus, the resulting services can be integrated easily into document processing workflows by any software engineer without specific knowledge of the mathematical and algorithmic details of DIA. We will build on standards for result presentation, such as the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
                1 and the International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF).
                2
            
            
                State of the Art
            
            Our research is motivated by the availability of many different web-based tools for researchers with a humanist background wanting to do document image analysis (e.g., 
                SALSAH [Schweizer and Rosenthaler, 2011], Transcribe Bentham [Causer and Wallace, 2012], or the Genizah project [Wolf et al., 2011]). Most of these tools were either developed to solve a specific task or lack the inclusion of (semi)-automatic methods. Several projects using web services for DIA have been proposed in recent years. One such example is the Document Analysis and Exploitation (DAE; Lamiroy and Lopresti, 2011) that provides different algorithms as web services and allows for workflow creation. Our aim is to expand this research with a focus on making the algorithms available for researchers with only little computer science knowledge by providing them also with simple web interfaces as showcases building on the web services and demonstrating how to use them to integrate computational methods into their research. 
            
            Methodology
            We propose an open-source framework for providing algorithms to the public. For this we designed a RESTful web service architecture exposing all information using the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). The intention is to include a wide assortment of services for different tasks:
             • Image processing and enhancement in order to make the desired content more easily visible or to make the processing of further automatic analysis simpler. Those methods include, for example, binarization methods (Otsu 1979), Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG), Difference of Gaussian (DoG).
             • Document layout analysis methods allowing automatic extraction of texts, text lines, or images. These methods include pixel- (Wei, 2013) and interest point– (Garz et al., 2011) based approaches.
             • Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to support the transcription of the documents.
             • Methods for palaeographic analysis, such as script identification (Ghosh et al., 2010), writer identification (Fiel et al., 2013), and water mark analysis.
             • Methods for feature extraction and feature selection, so that computer scientists can directly work on extracted meta-information without any specific knowledge in DIA. For example, the following methods are included: Local Binary Patterns (LBP; Nicolaou et al., 2014), Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT; Lowe, 1999), Gabor features (Chen et al., 2010), standard feature search algorithms, as well as several feature selection methods (Wei et al., 2014).
             • Machine Learning algorithms: Support Vector Machines (SVMs), k-nearest neighbor algorithm (k-NN), Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs).
                3
            
             • 
                Evaluation metrics for the automatic assessment of results and to allow computer science researchers to compare their systems. There we will build on the standards laid out in DAE
                .
            
            Figure 1. Conceptual overview of the proposed D
                ivaServices framework. Access to the provided methods and tools would all be standardized using HTTP requests and JSON as input/output format.
            
            Besides a large set of own implementations we will integrate several open-source software like Tesseract
                4 and OCROpus.
                5 This enables fast integration of many available image processing algorithms that have been in development for years and proven to produce reliable results.
            
            A high-level overview of the proposed framework is provided in Figure 1. Access to the provided tools and algorithms would be standardized across all possible end-user applications using simple HTTP requests and JSON as input/output format. For accessing the methods we will follow the proposed URL format for RESTful services.
            The current state of D
                ivaServices is available at http://divaservices.unifr.ch. Using GET requests allows for browsing the available services. We are in the process of developing a web front-end that will allow for automated prototype creation of all available algorithms in order to allow for experimenting with them.
            
            Since we only provide algorithms, creating specific workflows is left to developers designing client applications and can therefore be designed targeting the specific need of end users. At a later stage we aim at directly implementing some of the more common workflows directly into D
                ivaServices.
            
            As proof of concept
                6 a simple histogram-based line segmentation method was exposed using the proposed framework. This service was then integrated into the D
                ivaD
                iaWT, a web-based interface that allows for the creation of transcriptions. The user interface of the D
                ivaD
                iaWT is shown in Figure 2.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Overview of the DivaDiaWT. The original image is displayed on the left side, transcriptions on the right side. Transcriptions can be displayed in Layout mode, where they are aligned with the original image. 
            The line segmentation service is used on a user-marked region and automatically extracts lines from there. In Figure 3 a user created a box using his mouse around a region that he wants to have automatically processed into text lines. The result of the automated text line segmentation is shown in Figure 4. 
            We have set up a web server on which we run our RESTful web services. When the user wants to automatically segment a text area, a POST request is made to the server containing the following JSON:
            {
             "url": "http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/loris/bbb/bbb-0360/bbb-0360_001r.jp2/full/pct:25/0/default.jpg",
             "top": "300",
             "bottom": "500",
             "left": "190",
             "right": "750"
            }
            Listing 1. Example of a JSON sent together with the POST request for automatic line segmentation. The url points to the source image; the four location values mark the region within the image that the user selected.
            [
             {
             "bottom": "180",
             "left": "95",
             "right": "469",
             "top": "156"
             },
             { …}
            ]
            Listing 2. The JSON the server sends back to the client application containing all bounding boxes of the detected text lines.
            The web service downloads the image and processes the region marked by the user. This can lead to several detected text lines, and the server responds with a JSON file containing the bounding box of each detected text line:
            [
             {
             "bottom": "180",
             "left": "95",
             "right": "469",
             "top": "156"
             },
             { …}
            ]
            The D
                ivaD
                iaWT parses this information and presents it as shown in Figure 4. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. The user marked a box (visible as grey shaded area) that should be automatically divided into text lines using an algorithm provided by D
                ivaServices. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. The result of the automated segmentation process. 
            Notes
            1. http://www.tei-c.org. 
            2. http://www.iiif.io. 
            3. See 
                 for an overview of classification algorithms in script identification.
            
            4. http://code.google.com/p/tesseract-ocr. 
            5. http://github.com/tmbdev/ocropy. 
            6. Code of the proof of concept is available at https://github.com/lunactic/Diva-WebService.
        
    



    
        
            
                DPRR: Digitizing the Prosopography of the Roman Republic
                
                    
                        Mouritsen
                        Henrik
                    
                    Department of Classics, King's College London, United Kingdom
                    henrik.mouritsen@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Bradley
                        John
                    
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London, United Kingdom
                    john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Rathbone
                        Dominic
                    
                    Department of Classics, King's College London, United Kingdom
                    dominic.rathbone@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Robb
                        Maggie
                    
                    Department of Classics, King's College London, United Kingdom
                    maggierobb@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Roman Republic
                    structured prosopography
                    linked data
                
                
                    classical studies
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    historical studies
                    semantic web
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Rome’s remarkable development from a modest Italian city-state into the ruler of a Mediterranean empire arguably happened because of its highly competitive aristocratic elite during the time of the Roman Republic (500 BC to 31 BC). The 
                Digitizing the Prosopography of the Roman Republic project
                1 at King’s College London (Department of Classics, and Department of Digital Humanities [DDH]) aims to enhance the understanding of this story through the development of a digital prosopographic database of these elite individuals, and believes that through its availability online a host of old questions from Roman Republic history as well as many new ones will be made feasible to explore. Through the database one will be able to see an individual’s career patterns, connections with their families and links between families, and evidence for the process of how families got themselves into the elite group.
            
            The name of the project is significant in that, unlike other prosopographies that DDH has undertaken, this one draws heavily on several existing print and digital prosopographies that are already in existence, and we believe that it is in the bringing together of data from these hitherto separate resources that new insights will become available. Of the prosopographical work available, Broughton’s study of office-holders (1951–1952, supplement 1986) remains the standard work. However, DPRR has arranged that more recent prosopographical work by Nicolet (1966–1974), Rüpke (2005), Zmeskal (2009), and others will also be included. Underpinning all of this is the monumental 
                Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft (Pauly et al., 1893–) which dates from the late 19th century and continues to provide the basis against which historical identity of individuals is argued even today. Indeed, the way to represent not only the combined data from these quite different sources in a single structure, but also to deal with their disagreements, is one of the issues the project will be exploring.
            
            The project will draw on the experience of the Department of Digital Humanities at KCL through its use of its highly successful ‘factoid’ design for structured prosopography (Bradley and Short, 2005; Pasin and Bradley, 2013), which has been already successfully applied to several other structured prosopographies in which DDH was a partner, including 
                Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (PASE),
                2 the 
                Prosopography of the Byzantine World (PBW),
                3 and more recently the 
                People of Medieval Scotland (PoMS),
                4 People of Northern England (PoNE),
                5 and the 
                Making of Charlemagne’s Europe,
                6 although the secondary-source nature of the material for DPRR will necessitate some modifications to the factoid principles.
            
            DPRR expects to become a key resource for scholars interested in the classical world at the time of the Roman Republic, and will thus be participating in the various linked data initiatives currently under way in the digital classics field. In particular, as an online resource, DPRR will be contributing URIs for its various individuals, and expects to make available the data it holds about its individuals using linked data conventions such as RDF. In this regard, it hopes to participate in the continuing work of the SNAP:DRGN
                7 project, and to work with the broader LAWDI
                8 community. In addition, the factoid model for data often opens up the data for network analysis techniques such as Social Network Analysis (SNA). DPRR also intends to explore what SNA potential might be found in its data, drawing on the experience DDH has had with applying SNA techniques to the factoid model of the 
                People of Medieval Scotland dataset.
            
            Notes
            1. Funded by the UK’s AHRC.
            2. http://www.pase.ac.uk.
            3. http://www.pbw.kcl.ac.uk/.
            4. http://www.poms.ac.uk/.
            5. http://www.pone.ac.uk/.
            6. http://www.charlemagneseurope.ac.uk/.
            7. http://snapdrgn.net/.
            8. http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Linked_Ancient_World_Data_Institute.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bradley, J. and Short, H. (2005). Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of New-Style Prosopography. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        20(Suppl. 1): 3–24.
                    
                    
                        Broughton, T. and Robert S. (1951). 
                        The Magistrates of the Roman Republic. In De Lacy, P. H. (ed.), 
                        Philological Monographs. Vol. 1: 
                        509–100 BC; Vol. 2: 
                        99–31 BC; Vol. 3 Supplement. Atlanta: Scholars Press ed. 
                    
                    
                        Nicolet, C. (1966–1974). 
                        L’Ordre équestre à l’époque républicaine (312–43 av. J.-C.). Paris. 
                        Pasin, M. and Bradley, J. (2013). Factoid-Based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies: Towards an Integrated Approach. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, June 29, doi:10.1093/llc/fqt037.
                    
                    
                        Pauly, A., Wissowa, G. and Kroll, W. (eds). (1893–). 
                        Real-Encyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaf: Stuttgart and Munich.
                    
                    
                        Rüpke, J. (2005). 
                        Fasti sacerdotum: die Mitglieder der Priesterschaften und das sakrale Funktionspersonal römischer, griechischer, orientalischer und jüdisch-christlicher Kulte in der Stadt Rom von 300 v. Chr. bis 499 n. Chr. 3 vols. Wiesbaden. 
                    
                    
                        Zmeskal, K. (2009). 
                        Adfinitas. Die Verwandtschaften der senatorischen Führungsschicht der römischen Republik von 218 - 31 v. Chr. Passau.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                DREaM: Distant Reading Early Modernity
                
                    
                        Wittek
                        Stephen
                    
                    McGill University, Canada
                    stephen.wittek@mcgill.ca
                
                
                    
                        Sinclair
                        Stéfan
                    
                    McGill University, Canada
                    stefan.sinclair@mcgill.ca
                
                
                    
                        Milner
                        Matthew
                    
                    McGill University, Canada
                    matthew.milner@mcgill.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    early modern
                    eebo
                    voyant
                    topic modeling
                    distant reading
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    literary studies
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    english studies
                    renaissance studies
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Our proposed paper will provide an overview of the theory and methodology driving the creation of Distant Reading Early Modernity (DREaM), a digital humanities project that has made a massive corpus of early modern texts amenable for use with macro-scale analytical tools. Key focus areas include the technical challenges deriving from non-standardized spelling, the philosophy of our tutorial program, the argument for our approach to the early modern archive, and the potential benefit to early modern scholarship of distant reading techniques. 
            From Microfilm Library, to EEBO, to EEBO-TCP, to DREaM 
            The foundational work for DREaM began in 1934, when Eugene B. Power used parts of two movie and still cameras to create one of the world’s first microfilm bookcameras, a device he used to photograph thousands of texts in British libraries (Anderson and Power, 1990). In 1998 Power’s microfilm library became the basis for Early English Books Online (EEBO), a database that comprises the images for some 125,000 texts from 1475 to 1700, and has profoundly expanded the horizons of early modern research.
                1 To date, approximately one-third of the documents on EEBO are available as transcribed, full-text editions. Researchers for the EEBO Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) are currently working to transcribe the remaining 85,000 documents, which are as yet only available as digitized microfilm images.
                2
            
            Although completion of the transcription work is still at least 10 years in the future, the prospect of a full-text library of all documents from the first 225 years of English print points to the need for some careful re-thinking about the relation between scholarship and archival sources. As it now stands, the EEBO-TCP corpus amounts to 8.02 gigabytes of XML-encoded text and contains nearly 45,000 documents, for a grand total of well over a billion words (1,155,264,343 by our count). Confronted by the sheer expanse of a corpus several magnitudes larger than anything one could hope to read in a lifetime, early modern scholarship must now work to incorporate digital methodologies that enable a bird’s-eye view of large corpora, an approach that Franco Moretti has dubbed ‘distant reading’ (Moretti, 2007). DREaM has begun the work of making such a view possible. 
            Unlike EEBO, DREaM enables batch downloading of custom-defined subsets rather than obliging users to download individual texts on a one-by-one basis. In other words, it functions at the level of ‘sets of texts’ (sometimes called 
                worksets) rather than ‘individual texts’. Examples of subsets one might potentially generate include ‘all texts by Ben Jonson’, ‘all texts published in 1623’, or ‘all texts printed by John Wolfe’. A user-friendly interface makes subsets available as either plain text or XML-encoded files, and gives users the option to automatically name individual files by date, author, title, or combinations thereof (this file naming flexibility can be useful when interoperating with other tool suites). 
            
            The ability to generate custom-defined subsets is important because it allows researchers to explore the early modern canon with distant reading techniques, and to capture otherwise intractable data with visualizations such as graphs, charts, or other forms of graphic representation. On this note, another key feature of DREaM is that it allows users to transfer specially tailored subsets directly to the analytic interfaces of Voyant Tools (voyant-tools.org), a suite of textual visualization tools that collectively constitute the leading platform for open-access digital humanities research.
                3 In fact, DREaM is actually implemented within Voyant Tools (version 2.0, not yet released, which provides much better support for very large text collections). DREaM thus provides a compelling example of a bridge between massive full-text repositories (that typically provide faceted searching) and more specialized analytic and visualization environments. By enabling simple transference between the EEBO-TCP archive and Voyant, DREaM has significantly expanded the range and sophistication of technologies currently available to researchers who wish to gain a broad sense of printed matter in early modern England. 
            
            Notably, however, DREaM does not aim to replace EEBO, or to supplant conventional forms of research. Rather, our goal is to simply add a new item to the scholar’s toolbox, and to increase transferability between distant reading methodologies and more fine-grained forms of analysis. 
            
                Negotiating the Complexities of Non-Standardized Spelling
            
            Standardized spelling had yet to emerge in early modernity: writers had the freedom to spell however they pleased. To take a famous example, the name ‘Shakespeare’ has 80 different recorded spellings, including ‘Shaxpere’ and ‘Shaxberd’. As one might imagine, variance on this scale presents a serious challenge for large-scale textual analysis. How is it possible to track the incidence of a specific word, or group of words, if any given word could have an unknown multiplicity of iterations? 
            To address this problem, we enlisted the assistance of VARD 2, a tool that helps to improve the accuracy of textual analysis by finding candidate modern form replacements for spelling variants in historical texts.
                4 As with conventional spellcheckers, a user can choose to process texts manually (selecting a candidate replacement offered by the system), automatically (allowing the system to use the best candidate replacement found), or semi-automatically (training the tool on a sample of the corpora). 
            
            After some preliminary training, we ran the TCP-EEBO corpus through VARD using the default settings (auto normalization at a threshold of 50%). Rather than using the ‘batch’ mode—which proved unreliable for such a big job—we wrote a script that normalized the texts on a one-by-one basis from the command-line. This process took about three days on a commodity machine. VARD normalized 80,676 terms for a grand total of 44,909,676 changes overall. 
            A careful check through the list resulted in 373 term normalizations that we found problematic in one way or another. The problematic normalizations amounted to 462,975 changes overall, or only 1.03% of the total number of changes. These results were satisfactory: our goal was not to make the corpus ‘perfectly normalized’ (an impossibility, not least because perfection is debatable in this context), but, more pragmatically, to make it generally normalized, which is the best one can reasonably expect from an automatic process. On this point, it is important to note that VARD encodes a record of all changes within the output XML file, so scholars will be able to see if the program has made an erroneous normalization. 
            Some of the problematic VARD normalizations seem to have derived from a dictionary error. For example, ‘chan’ became ‘champion’ and ‘ged’ became ‘general’. In other instances, the problematic normalizations were ambiguous or borderline cases that we preferred to simply leave unchanged. Examples include ‘piece’ for ‘peece’, and ‘land’ for ‘iland’. There were also cases where the replacement term was not quite correct: ‘strawberie’ became ‘strawy’ rather than ‘strawberry’, and ‘hoouering’ became ‘hoovering’ rather than ‘hovering’. We fixed as many of these kinks as we could by making adjustments to the VARD training file and running the entire corpus through the normalization process a second time. 
            Of course, it is not difficult to imagine scenarios wherein a researcher may prefer to work with original spellings rather than normalized texts. With such projects in mind, we have kept both normalized and non-normalized versions of the EEBO-TCP corpus. 
            
                The DREaM Tutorial Program
            
            As noted above, one of the central objectives of DREaM is to create an interface that will maximize user-friendliness, allowing scholars with a minimal level of technical expertise to quickly and efficiently create subsets tailored for whatever specific research question they wish to pursue. We are building DREaM for our own research, but we also have a much broader pedagogical perspective in mind. To meet this objective, we have launched a pilot tutorial program, currently under way, that will teach scholars how to use DREaM, but will also point to ways in which DREaM could more effectively serve the demands of scholarly investigation. 
            In a series of tasks that build toward the production of a short case-study report, pilot users must articulate a detailed research question and provide a description of their argument. In addition to establishing a valuable feedback loop for the project, this assignment aims to nudge new users toward a more comprehensive, more practical understanding of how macro-scale textual analysis can complement scholarly practice. The key conceptual challenge, as we see it, hinges on new users’ ability to understand, and learn to negotiate, the gap between distant reading and more conventional means of engaging archival sources. 
            Our pool of pilot users derives from the membership of our parent project, Early Modern Conversions, a five-year interdisciplinary research initiative that has brought together a team of more than 100 scholars, partners, and graduate student associates from universities in Canada, the United States, England, New Zealand, and Australia.
                5 Early Modern Conversions provides a propitious testing ground for DREaM because it is at the vanguard of early modern research, and because it entails a rich diversity of disciplinary approaches. Our presentation for DH2015 will report on the results of the tutorial program and on the progress of the project overall. 
            
            Screenshots 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The DREaM interface. Search fields in the middle of the screen enable users to define a subset of EEBO-TCP texts by keyword, year, author, and publisher. Below the search field, an ‘Export’ button opens a dialogue box that offers the option of sending the subset directly to Voyant-tools.org, or downloading it as a ZIP archive. Users may also choose to download subsets as either plain text or XML-encoded files. A drag-and-drop mechanism (bottom) enables automatic naming of files within a subset by date, author, title, or combinations thereof. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. A sample subset transferred to Voyant Tools. Beginning in the top left corner, one sees a word cloud representing the frequency of keywords in terms of font size. At a glance, it shows that the highest frequency words in the subset are ‘good’ and ‘come’. Below the word cloud, there is a summary that lists statistics for basic categories such as word count, vocabulary density, word frequency, etc. In addition, the summary lists words that have a notably high frequency for each year: ‘Rome’ and ‘death’ appeared with particular frequency in 1594, while ‘virtue’ and ‘envy’ stood out in 1612. Moving to the bottom left corner, one sees an ordered list of frequencies for each word in the corpus accompanied by a thumbnail graph that tracks the frequency of words over the 40-year delimitation. At a glance, the tool shows a significant spike for the word ‘knight’ in 1624. In the middle of the screen, a ‘Corpus Reader’ tool enables users to drill down into the corpus to examine the context for particular terms. 
            Notes
            1. See http://eebo.chadwyck.com.
            2. See http://eebo.odl.ox.ac.uk/e/eebo/.
            3. See http://voyant-tools.org.
            4. See http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/vard/about/.
            5. See http://earlymodernconversions.com.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Anderson, R. and Power, E. B. (1990). The Autobiography of Eugene B. Power, Founder of University Microfilms. UMI, Ann Arbor, MI.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2007). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. Verso, London.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Electronic Literature and the Politics of Process
                
                    
                        O'Sullivan
                        James Christopher
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University
                    josullivan.c@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Electronic Literature
                    E-lit
                
                
                    literary studies
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Critics have long examined the ‘multimodal capacity of electronic literature’ (Page and Thomas, 2011, 2). The material semantics of electronic literature are not inherently new, but rather a rejuvenation of established literary practices exemplified by the material modernists and other such movements to have sought control over the paratextuality of a literary work. Yet new media does deliver rejuvenation through enhanced paratextual potential. Materiality, and in turn paratextuality, is concerned with experience: it governs the reception of a work and the ways in which its audience might interact with it. In this paper I will engage with works of electronic literature in an attempt to delineate how some of the field’s most prominent authors and practitioners have used the manipulability of digital paratext for artistic purposes. 
            Electronic Literature as Avant-Garde
            When an author selects a digital medium, there are ideological considerations that cannot be ignored—they are making a statement about the aesthetic they desire and what that aesthetic represents. In this respect, we see how it is that electronic literature is very much connected to concepts of the avant-garde, so much so that its works are often criticised as being overtly experimental. Responding to Andrew Gallix’s challenge that electronic literature sacrifices literary quality, Grigar accepts that ‘the hybridity of the forms and technological innovation that artists bring to their work result in a high level of experimentation that may at first obfuscate literary content’ (n.d.), but she is quick to point out that obfuscation should not deny the digital’s claim to the mantle of literary. If electronic literature serves as little more than a jolt in literature’s long history, then surely it has achieved the very thing that literature sets out to achieve? Perhaps electronic literature is more valuable ideologically than it is semantically or aesthetically, but having such political value is in itself a very literary trait. Grigar raises another interesting point in that same article, referring to electronic literature’s brief moment within the spotlight of the press, back when it still held its ‘shock of the new’. She offers this as a rebuttal to the claim that electronic literature, once popularised within the media, has since been relegated to a tertiary note on specialised blogs. On the contrary, electronic literature may no longer be a media darling, but it has found itself a place within the academy, and within the focus of respected authors and critics from across the digital humanities. 
            In this sense, electronic literature’s ability to disrupt the status quo has faded, but it has traded the ease by which it can shock for an ability to achieve problematisation through defamiliarisation—so much so, that electronic literature has become self-reflective to the point where it is now querying its most essential of properties: being born digital. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
                Closed Room, Soft Whispers, by Jacob Garbe. From Pathfinders Exhibit, MLA 2014 convention, Chicago, January 2014.
            
            The Pathfinders Exhibit at the 2014 MLA convention presented a selection of early electronic literature, alongside some more recent pieces. Many of the works on show displayed a new iteration in the juxtaposition between literature and technology, in that digital and physical materiality had been fused beyond hardware and software. What Strickland achieves with her hybrid 
                V: WaveSon.nets/Losing L’una, for example, has been taken to its conclusion: electronic literature is moving, diachronically, at an immense pace, its authors beginning to deconstruct the very boundaries that they themselves put up. 
            
            When code is open access, the reader can pierce the veil in a manner rarely seen before. Readers, and indeed authors, have insights into the worlds of their precursors and contemporaries. Authors in this field began by swerving away from the page, but now they are, while perhaps not swerving away from the digital, certainly seeking its convergence with other, seemingly disparate, materialities. It is re-creation of the re-created, a tension that has been consciously instigated in an effort to achieve further defamiliarisation of that which is already defamiliar. This is precisely what Pressman labels as ‘digital modernism’, a movement that, she argues, interrogates ‘cultural infrastructures, technological networks, and critical practices’ (2014, 10), and in doing so, ‘offers a surprising counterstance to this privileging of newness’ (1). 
            The Politics of the Screen
            Within the electronic literature community, there is a marked reaction against the intentions of software’s function. Authors in this realm practice perverse engineering, where a tool is not modified for literary purposes but rather adapted, at a surface level, so that it satisfies some authorial desire. Flash, for example, was never intended for literary purposes, but it is at the very heart of the first two volumes within the 
                ELO Collection. The exploitation of computer systems is fundamental to contemporary electronic literature in that the majority of works are produced using technologies that were designed for some other purpose. This act, the manipulation of hardware and software for literary purposes, is a fundamental aspect of the movements that promote and produce much of this work. Reducing the process of writing electronic literature to a purpose-built intuitive graphical user interface would be akin to creating a program that structured the metre for nondigital poetry. In this sense, electronic literature is the product of exploited technologies; it is expression through manipulation. This presents an interesting reversal of Adorno and Horkheimer’s view, with technology becoming an instrument in the problematisation of those structures that they argue it enforces. Ideological arguments cannot always account for an author’s technological selections, but there are many instances where both the form and tools adopted for a work of electronic literature are inherently ideological, if not overtly political.
            
            In exploring the influence of digital materiality and the politics of e-lit processes and practices, I will look at 
                Flight Paths (see Figure 2), by Kate Pullinger and Chris Joseph, as well as Mark Marino’s ‘a show of hands’, a piece inspired by the 2006 immigration reform in Los Angeles.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. ‘Previous Contributions’, from 
                Flight Paths, by Kate Pullinger and Chris Joseph. 
                Electronic Literature Collection, Vol. 2. Electronic Literature Organization, February 2011, collection.elitarture.org.
            
            Conclusions
            While we cannot separate ideology from any literature, we can see that electronic forms are married to the politics of process. Each of these works has meaning in its materiality, considerably more than would typically be the case, even amongst the foremost of the material modernists. While Yeats was able to embed the esoteric in his bindings, the screen permits semantic permeations throughout a work as a whole. Even concrete poets, with typographic arrangements, are restricted by the surface of the page. I do not want to represent the page as a media with particularly negative limitations: all forms have limitations that can at times be just as readily considered strengths. Concrete poetry, like the cover of a Yeatsian edition, is manifested as a permanent entity. There is no such permanence in the electronic environment, where works of art, when reduced to substance, are merely the graphically rendered representations of bits and bytes. This impermanence offers something authors that is not found in other forms, and as has been seen, it allows them a freedom of ideological expression that is very much bound to materiality. Process is also essential. Traditionally, authors collaborate with publishers to see their literature produced in book form. I think it fair to assume that the majority of writers do not actually possess a working knowledge of how it is that manuscripts are transformed into physical books. That is not to say that nondigital writing practices are without process, but that process plays a more significant role in the digital arena, where authors must be familiar with processes of production if they are to write. Even where collaboration exists, an understanding of how technology can—and cannot—manipulate the linguistic content of a piece must be possessed. It is not simply about words on the surface but rather about the surface and the underlying code that dictates part of the reader experience. Garbe did not just write 
                Closed Room, Soft Whispers, he 
                made it: he composed the surface-level text, he wrote the underlying code, and he built the wooden box. Marino captured his own images; he worked directly with the platform that presents his narrative. In this respect, the politics of the screen are, unlike the page, materially layered, with authors being as much makers as they are writers.
            
            Throughout this paper, I will use these works of electronic literature to delineate how contemporary juxtapositions of traditional and modern literary practices have presented authors with hyper-paratextuality, and their engagement with such is significant. It is easier for an author to put down words on a page than it is, for example, to learn Python and produce a generative poem. Thus, it is always significant when an author chooses digital encapsulation for expression. This act, the selection of an electronic rather than nondigital medium, is an authorial statement from which immediate conclusions can be drawn. The significance of the influence exerted by digital paratextuality may be questioned on the basis that much of that which makes it digital sits behind the interface, but the recognition of digitality is in itself influential. Authors do not complicate the process of writing with additional technical requirements on a whim. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Grigar, D. (n.d.). Electronic Literature: Where Is It? 
                        Electronic Book Review.
                    
                    
                        Page, R. and Thomas, B. (2011). 
                        New Narratives: Stories and Storytelling in the Digital Age. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
                    
                    
                        Pressman, J. (2014). 
                        Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media. Oxford University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Pullinger, K. and Joseph, C. (n.d.). Flight Paths. 
                        Electronic Literature Collection,
                        2.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Element Detection in Japanese Comic Book Panels
                
                    
                        Kuboi
                        Toshihiro
                    
                    California Polytechnic State University, United States of America
                    tkuboi@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Khosmood
                        Foaad
                    
                    California Polytechnic State University, United States of America
                    foaad@calpoly.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    element detection
                    comic books
                    image processing
                    translation
                
                
                    image processing
                    information retrieval
                    asian studies
                    translation studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Comic books are a unique and increasingly popular form of entertainment combining visual and textual elements of communication. This work pertains to making Japanese comic books more accessible. Specifically, this paper explains how we detect elements such as speech bubbles and character eyes present in Japanese comic book panels. Some possible applications of the work presented in this paper are automatic detection of text and its transformation into audio or into other languages. Automatic detection of elements can also allow reasoning and analysis at a deeper semantic level than what’s possible today.
                1 We present our process for speech bubble detection in this paper.
            
            Background
            A page in a comic book consists of multiple panels, in which the scenes of the comic are depicted. Each panel has multiple elements, including text and graphics. Text in comic books is typically enclosed in speech bubbles. We use elements as a term broader than ‘object’.
            Prior works by others have focused on separating text and graphics in documents (Wong et al., 1982), but not on comic book panels. Our work is important for the digital humanities community because we cover an art form that the community has not covered before.
            Approach
            We use a heuristic-based expert system, implemented by the authors, and machine learning for detecting elements present in images. Figure 1 shows a block diagram of our speech bubble detection pipeline. The images are segmented by the image processing system, which segments an image into regions and extracts candidate regions that are likely to contain elements of interest, which are text. Components of connected black pixels are profiled into text and non-text. Then the statistics of the candidate regions are computed, and the statistics are used to formulate the heuristics. Some of the statistics used include whether the region is enclosed by black pixels and the percentage of the area of the image the region occupies. The regions are classified whether they are elements of interest by the expert system based on the heuristics.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The Speech Bubble Detection pipeline.
            We use Naive Bayes and Maximum Entropy from NLTK (NLTK Project, 2014), and support vector machine (SVM) from WEKA (Hall et al., 2009) as our learning algorithms to detect speech bubbles because of their performance and ease of use. We compute statistics of the speech bubble candidate regions in the images. For example, we compute the number of black pixels as well as the ratio between black pixels and white pixels in the regions. We also compute the size of the region in terms of the percentage of the area of the image the region occupies, and the horizontal and vertical range of the region. We use the information as the features on which the machine learning algorithms are trained. Some of the features used are heuristic-based features inspired by the expert system. Those features are binary features, such as whether the size of the region falls within a certain range, as well as whether the region is enclosed by the edges of black pixels. We allow gaps between edges that are smaller than 3 pixels wide. We also compute the vertical and horizontal distribution of the black pixels as histograms of black pixel counts and use them as features. In total, 58 features are used.
            We use supervised learning and semi-supervised learning methods. In supervised learning, each candidate region is labeled as either positive or negative by humans. A positive sample means the region is a speech bubble. In semi-supervised learning, not all the training data used is hand labeled. Some of the training data is produced by the system itself. In our approach, unseen samples labeled by the trained machine learning system are added to the training data. 
            Speech Bubble Detection
            Two hundred forty-three panels from 
                Doraemon, a popular Japanese comic book—which amount to the total of 804 samples—are used to evaluate the expert system and the machine learning system. Each panel contains zero, one, or multiple speech bubbles. 
            
            Table 1 shows the performance of the expert system on the panels. The expert system achieves 95% accuracy with 91.3% precision, 97.7% recall, and the F-score of 0.944. Since the possible applications of our work require no speech bubbles lost in the process, high recall is more important than high precision.
            Table 1. The performance of the expert system.
            
                
                    
                    Accuracy
                    Precision
                    Recall
                    F-score
                
                
                    Expert
                    0.95
                    0.913
                    0.977
                    0.944
                
            
            The same 243 panels used in the evaluation of the expert system are used for evaluation of the machine learning system. The 804 samples are divided in a 2-to-1 ratio into 539 training sets and 266 test sets. The Max Entropy is trained multiple times (10 and 20 iterations) before tested on the test sets. Table 2 shows the performance of the three algorithms averaged over 5 runs. 
            All three algorithms produce results comparable to that of the expert system. Notably, the Maximum Entropy does very well in terms of recall, scoring above 0.98, which is better than the score of the expert system. Among the machine learning algorithms the SVM produces the best result. Whether the region is enclosed by the black edges is one of the best discriminators.
            Table 2. The performance of the machine learning algorithms.
            
                
                    
                    Accuracy
                    Precision
                    Recall
                    F-score
                
                
                    Naive Bayes
                    0.908
                    0.897
                    0.889
                    0.892
                
                
                    Max Ent (10 iter.)
                    0.934
                    0.881
                    0.981
                    0.928
                
                
                    Max Ent (20 iter.)
                    0.928
                    0.863
                    0.985
                    0.920
                
                
                    SVM
                    0.943
                    0.900
                    0.973
                    0.935
                
            
            In our semi-supervised learning experiment, the machine learning algorithms are trained on the training sets, which include samples labeled by the machine learning algorithms themselves as well as the samples manually labeled. In order to assign more weight on the manually labeled samples than on the machine labeled samples, we duplicate the manually labeled samples in the training sets. 
            Although the performance is not as good as that of the supervised learning, all three algorithms produce results comparable to that of the expert system. Especially the Maximum Entropy and SVM do very well in terms of recall, beating the expert system. The performance of the Naive Bayes improves as more correctly labeled training data are included in the training sets.
            Since different algorithms tend to err on different samples, we also experiment with an ensemble machine learning method, in which multiple classifiers are combined to arrive at final classifications. We experiment with two variations of the ensemble method: The Ensemble AND, in which a sample is classified as positive if both of the classifiers agree that a sample is positive, and the Ensemble OR, in which a sample is classified as positive if at least one of the two classifiers agree that a sample is positive.
            Among our ensemble classifiers, the Ensemble AND of the SVM and the Maximum Entropy with 20 iterations performs best with the F-score of 0.941, as shown in Table 3. 
            Table 3. The performance of the ensemble classifiers.
            
                
                    
                    Accuracy
                    Precision
                    Recall
                    F-score
                
                
                    SVM AND Max Ent (20 iter.)
                    0.947
                    0.928
                    0.955
                    0.941
                
            
            Figure 2 shows a result of our image segmentation process. All the text in the original image on the left is segmented and assigned the same color (red). All the other connected black pixels are grouped as non-text components. Note that black pixels that are very close in the original image are connected by a process called RLSA smoothing (Wong, 1982).
            
            Figure 2. An example of segmentation of text.
            Figure 3 shows some of the images produced as the result of the speech bubble detection. The first image from the left shows that all speech bubbles are correctly detected. The second image from the left is an example of the false negatives. The speech bubble in this image is missed because the edge of the bubble is broken and the gaps between the edges are more than 3 pixels wide. The third image from the left shows a case of the false positives. The lens of glasses are identified as speech bubbles because the eye contained in the lens has similar black pixel count and size to text. The fourth image from the left contains another example of the false positives. It is a false positive because the text is not contained in a speech bubble. It is identified as a speech bubble because the text is completely surrounded by edges. The machine learning system makes more mistakes than the expert system. However, the machine learning system sometimes correctly detects speech bubbles on which the expert system makes mistakes.
            
            Figure 3. Examples of the images produced as the result of speech bubble detection.
            
                Conclusion
            
            We are able to implement an expert system that detects the elements very accurately and a machine-learning system that does the same job as well as the expert system. The main disadvantage of the expert system is that the heuristics need to be modified when new samples are added. With machine learning, we let the machine learn from the examples by itself. We have demonstrated that machine learning can be successfully applied to a very difficult task, such as element detection in comic book panels, and they can do the task as well as the expert system. 
            Future Work
            An interesting future goal is to be able to detect even more elements in each panel. If the machine could detect all the elements present in the panels, the scenes depicted in the panels could be described automatically. 
            Note
            1. Readers interested in more details of our work can read our full-length paper at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/270546570_ELEMENT_DETECTION_IN_JAPANESE_COMIC_BOOK_PANELS and also access our code at https://github.com/tkuboi/ComicbookElementDetection.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P. and Witten, I. H. (2009). The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. 
                        SIGKDD Explorations,
                        11(1).
                    
                    
                        NLTK Project. (2014). NLTK 3.0 documentation. http://www.nltk.org.
                    
                    
                        Wong, K. Y., Casey, R. G., and Wahl, F. M. (1982). Document Analysis System. 
                        IBM Journal of Research and Development,
                        2(6): 647–56.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                ElfYelp: Geolocated Topic Models for Pattern Discovery in a Large Folklore Corpus
                
                    
                        Broadwell
                        Peter Michael
                    
                    UCLA, United States of America
                    broadwell@library.ucla.edu
                
                
                    
                        Tangherlini
                        Timothy R
                    
                    UCLA, United States of America
                    tango@humnet.ucla.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    geospatial search
                    topic modeling
                    text mining
                    mapping
                    computational folkloristics
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    information retrieval
                    text analysis
                    folklore and oral history
                    maps and mapping
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Folklore, by its very nature, is deeply linked to place. This link is particularly strong in legends (Gunnell, 2008; Tangherlini, 1994; Lefebvre, 1974). Consequently, being able to discover the correlation between places mentioned in legends and the topics those legends address offers folklorists a powerful method for exploring the complex relationship between storytelling and place. By projecting these correlations into a historically accurate cartographic viewing environment, ‘ElfYelp’ affords researchers an opportunity to explore large, complex cultural archives through a geographically tuned lens.
            Early folklorists were intrigued by the possibility of discovering geographic correlations between traditional stories and the places where they were found (Krohn, 1926). These early studies imagined that the mapping of cultural artifacts could help locate the ‘origin’ of those forms, an approach critiqued by C. W. von Sydow (von Sydow, 1948). One of its main failings was the mobility of peoples: where something was collected had little to do with where it originated. Von Sydow’s rebuff had the unfortunate collateral effect of leading many folklorists to abandon cartographic endeavors and to adopt the equally flawed assumption that folkloristic phenomena are evenly distributed across the landscape. With the advent of relatively easy-to-use GIS software and accurate, machine-actionable historical gazetteers, there is now a renewed interest among folklorists in the power of maps.
            In this new cartographic method, maps are used to discover latent geographic patterns in the overall corpus, allowing researchers to explore how storytellers have conceptualized the landscape through narrative. For example, are there places in the landscape that are home to more supernatural creatures than others? Discovering patterns leads to important second-order questions: Do certain areas, rich in a set of topics, have topographic or structural features that lead to these associations? Are there political, social, or economic events in these areas that might help explain these patterns?
            Project Overview and Related Approaches
            In the current work, we extend our preliminary research into geo-semantic browsing of Danish folklore (Broadwell and Tangherlini, 2014) by developing a tool to discover and compare different regions’ topic ‘fingerprints’. Our results are further enhanced via a more sophisticated labeling of the Kristensen collection (Broadwell et al., 2014; Kristensen, 1980) and a refined method for the interpolation of geographic regions.
            This work builds upon emergent methods in computational data mining and spatial search to support micro-targeted marketing and location-aware search and recommendation services. Sizov’s proposal to generate ‘folksonomies’ of geolocated photograph captions in social media (Sizov, 2010) led to Yin et al.’s technique of ‘Latent Geographical Topic Analysis’ (LGTA), which establishes a ‘location-text joint model’ for geo-LDA (Yin et al., 2011). This model assigns a probability for each topic (based on Gaussian spatial distributions) that any point on the map might ‘generate’ a text containing that topic in some proportion. A refinement to this approach uses polygonal regions that avoid topic overlap as much as possible (Kling et al., 2014). Considerable modifications of these techniques are necessary to address folklore questions. The insistence of the latter approach on avoiding topic overlap, for example, works against the goals of folklorists, since many interesting research questions are based on overlap, such as: Do areas that have a high concentration of ‘ghost’ stories also have high concentrations of ‘wise minister’ stories?
            Data Processing and Analytical Methods
            In our data, each of the 20,431 Danish legends in the target corpus is treated as a locus of place/content co-occurrence. We resolved place references in the stories to approximately 1,750 distinct latitude/longitude pairs via historical gazetteers (DigDag, 2008). Several content-based attributes are associated with each story: a vector of prominent keyword frequencies as well as vectors of 36 high-level and 772 fine-grained categories assigned by the collector and his assistants. We regularized the inconsistencies of the high-level index by using it to train a Naive Bayes classifier that we then applied to the full corpus (Broadwell et al., 2014). To reduce sampling bias from the collector’s habits, we aligned historical census data with administrative records to calculate the population densities for the approximately 2,000 parishes in Denmark, which we used to normalize the co-occurrence matrices by population.
            To map the aggregated co-occurrence frequencies of a given story attribute to geographic locations, we calculated the spatial ‘decay’ of the observed z-values based on the standard deviational ellipses for five sample storytellers (Tangherlini, 2010). This model of story ‘decay’ is predicated on an idea of how far a storyteller’s stories might ‘reach’ into the surrounding community. We favor a simple Kriging approach to interpolating between observed points given the decay radius, rather than merely layering Gaussian curves to create ‘hot spots’; importantly, Kriging has the potential to take into account landscape features such as hills and marshes that may impede the ‘reach’ of stories (Cressie, 1993).
            Comparing the maps of the original indices to those of the alternative NB classifier reveals hidden geographical affiliations in the collection, much as the differing story labelings between these two classifiers highlighted interesting ‘borderline’ stories (Broadwell et al., 2014). For example, the alternative index assigns more stories mentioning the area around Breum Kilde to the ‘Witches’ category. Previous studies have linked this area to several stories containing oblique references to witchcraft that were not reflected in the collector’s high-level index; these references likely derive from the location’s historical associations with a Catholic monastery that was also the site of the last witch burning in Denmark (Tangherlini, 2000) (see Figure 1).
            Yet story labels like those described above, as well as standard topic modeling, do not use as a formative basis the idea that folklore topics may exhibit affinities for particular geographical regions. To explore this aspect of folklore, we employed a version of LGTA that finds a specified number of geographical regions and assigns a set of ‘geo-topics’ to each region in varying proportions; the geo-topics are themselves built from term vectors associated with each story. Story labels based on the 772-label secondary indexing scheme proved particularly effective in constructing geo-topics.
            Building co-occurrence matrices of places to topics, labels, and keywords also enables the comparison of arbitrary locations. Ranking a location’s associated attributes allows the identification of regions that share similar ranked lists of topics (e.g. witches, cunning folk, animal disease) via a standard vector comparison algorithm (cosine similarity). LGTA provides such a ranking for geo-topics; for other region features such as keyword co-occurrence counts, we use a weighting system similar to the term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) scores commonly used for web searches (Broadwell and Tangherlini, 2012).
            Experiments
            To test the usefulness of our models, we devised two experiments. The first asks, ‘Where are the elves?’ A population density–corrected Kriging map reveals various regions that have a high concentration of stories labeled as ‘elf stories’ by the original collector or the Naive Bayes classifier, or regions that have ‘elf’ geo-topics high in their topic ranking (Figure 2). Consulting a base layer of historically accurate maps allows the user to interrogate the landscape surrounding these areas and ask, ‘What else is here?’ (streams, woods, etc.). Similarly, the population density maps provide a second set of considerations: Do people situate elves in places that are less populated? Finally, the experiment allows a user to consider other areas that have similarly high concentrations of elf stories. Are there certain landscape features that may help explain why certain storytellers associated a particular place and similar places with a specific type of threat? 
            A second experiment inverts the problem, asking, ‘What do I find here?’ A user draws an arbitrarily large bounding box on the map, and the system returns a ranking of keywords and geo-topics for that geographic area (Figure 3). It also identifies similar regions, based on the ranked list of topics. The underlying premise is that areas for which certain topics appear highly ranked will share features, be they environmental, institutional, or demographic (or a combination of all three). As such, this approach can help stimulate research questions: Are there types of places that were related, in the minds of storytellers, with certain types of stories?
            Conclusion
            ElfYelp provides a productive research environment for interrogating the relationship between storytelling and the concept of place. The tool, which we believe can be a key component of a ‘folklore macroscope’ (Tangherlini, 2013; Börner, 2011), raises more questions than it answers, but in so doing allows for the sustained exploration of how people use stories to comment, construct, and negotiate concepts of space and place.
            Figures
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The ElfYelp geo-LDA interface, showing the geo-topics and most prominent labels of a region (highlighted) historically associated with witches.
            
                
            
            Figure 2: A comparison of the place co-occurrence maps for stories assigned to the ‘Ellefolk’ (Elves) category by Tang Kristensen and his assistants (left) and by a Naive Bayes classifier (right). Simple Kriging was used to interpolate the z-values between the observed locations.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Rankings of Naive Bayes story classifications for the specified region according to the ElfYelp 
                Spøgelsesskop (‘spooks-scope’) interface.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Börner, K. (2011). Plug-and-Play Macroscopes. 
                        Communications of the ACM,
                        54(3): 60–69.
                    
                    
                        Broadwell, P. M., Mimno, D. and Tangherlini, T. R. (2014). The Tell-Tale Hat: Reverse Engineering a Folklore Expert. 
                        Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2014, 7–12 July 2014, Lausanne.
                    
                    
                        Broadwell, P. M. and Tangherlini, T. R. (2012). TrollFinder: Geo-Semantic Exploration of a Very Large Corpus of Danish Folklore. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, 26–27 May 2012. Istanbul.
                    
                    
                        Broadwell, P. M. and Tangherlini, T. R. (2014). Forthcoming. WitchHunter: Tools for the Geosemantic Exploration of a Danish Folklore Corpus, 
                        Journal of American Folklore, special issue on computational folkloristics.
                    
                    
                        Cressie, N. (1993). Statistics for Spatial Data. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
                    
                    
                        DigDag: The Digital Atlas of Denmark’s Historical-Administrative Geography. (2008). http://digdag.dk.
                    
                    
                        Gunnell, T. (ed.) (2008). 
                        Legends and Landscape. University of Iceland Press, Reykjavik.
                    
                    
                        Kling, C. C. et al. (2014). Detecting Non-Gaussian Geographical Topics in Tagged Photo Collections. 
                        Proceedings of the 7th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 24–28 February 2014, New York.
                    
                    
                        Kristensen, E. T. (1980). 
                        Danske sagn som de har lydt i folkemunde. Nyt Nordisk Forlag, Copenhagen. Originally published 1892–1908.
                    
                    
                        Krohn, K. (1926). 
                        Die folkloristische arbeitsmethode. Aschehoug, Oslo.
                    
                    
                        Lefebvre, H. (1974). 
                        La production de l’espace. Éditions Anthropos, Paris.
                    
                    
                        Sizov, S. (2010). GeoFolk: Latent Spatial Semantics in Web 2.0 Social Media. 
                        Proceedings of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 3–6 February 2010, New York.
                    
                    
                        Tangherlini, T. R. (1994). 
                        Interpreting Legend: Danish Storytellers and Their Repertoires. Garland Publishing, New York.
                    
                    
                        Tangherlini, T. R. (2000). ‘How Do You Know She’s a Witch?’: Witches, Cunning Folk, and Competition in Denmark. 
                        Western Folklore,
                        59: 279–303.
                    
                    
                        Tangherlini, T. R. (2010). Legendary Performances: Folklore, Repertoire, and Mapping. 
                        Ethnographia Europaea,
                        40: 103–15.
                    
                    
                        Tangherlini, T. R. (2013). The Folklore Macroscope: Challenges for a Computational Folkloristics. The 34th Archer Taylor Memorial Lecture. 
                        Western Folklore,
                        72(1): 7–27.
                    
                    
                        von Sydow, C. W. (1948). 
                        Selected Papers on Folklore. Rosenkilde and Bagger, Copenhagen.
                    
                    
                        Yin, Z., et al. (2011). Geographical Topic Discovery and Comparison. 
                        Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on the World Wide Web, 28 March–1 April 2011,
                    
                    Hyderabad.
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Encoding Vocabularies of Australian Indigenous Languages
                
                    
                        Thieberger
                        Nick
                    
                    University of Melbourne, Australia
                    thien@unimelb.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Tuohy
                        Conal
                    
                    University of Melbourne, Australia
                    conal.tuohy@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Aboriginal languages
                    TEI
                    manuscript
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    lexicography
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    linguistics
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper discusses a project that is encoding archival vocabularies of Australian Indigenous languages recorded by Daisy Bates (White, 1985; McGregor, 2012) in the early 20th century. With this material we aim to create new research outcomes by exploring the text using novel techniques. We advocate a methodology in which primary research materials should be citable and accessible so that derived analyses can be verified and the primary data enriched by the process of research. This work will allow identification of the languages represented by these vocabularies and the internal variation in those languages. It will also make the data searchable for the first time, and linkable to other datasets, with the long-term goal of creating rich records for Australian Aboriginal languages, and, at the same time, embedding research practice in established international methodologies. This is the first application of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) to Indigenous-language material in Australia, and one of the few uses of the TEI with Indigenous languages that we know of (see Czaykowska-Higgins et al., 2014). 
            Some 23,000 pages of these manuscripts at the National Library of Australia were digitised as TIFF images from a microfilmed copy and named according to NLA conventions, and 4,300 pages have so far been keyboarded, geocoded, and TEI encoded. These pages represent three kinds of material: (1) a handwritten questionnaire, containing some 2,000 prompt words and sentences; (2) a typescript version of each questionnaire; and (3) other manuscript pages. We have identified over 150 speakers and on the order of 40 languages in the collection. One of the outcomes of the project will be to determine the relationships between these wordlists and later sources, and to identify more securely what languages are represented.
            The Barr Smith Library has been producing pdf/text versions of some of these manuscripts that increases their availability,
                1 and the collection has been in the public domain since the 1950s. It has been used in various projects, including Native Title claims, but, in general, the knowledge gained by these processes is not reflected in the collection itself. The promise offered by new DH methods is that any enrichment of the sources should then be reflected in them. We acknowledge that Indigenous people have a strong interest in the Bates vocabularies, but, given the number of speakers involved, the many descendants they would now have, the geographic spread of the sources (covering most of Western Australia), and the resources available to us, we are unable to consult widely in the way that, for example, the Laves project did, working as it was with archival material from a single geographical area (as reported in Henderson, 2008).
            
            The TEI texts will remain the repository of the full data model of the project, representing the corpus of texts in a number of different dimensions. At one level, the TEI texts will constitute a set of facsimile editions by linking page facsimile images to the textual transcriptions of those images. At another level they will include explicit markup of person, language, and place names, to provide further points of entry to the data, and allow linking to external authority files (where possible). This multi-dimensional data model will be built up step by step and encoded in the TEI corpus by a combination of careful manual markup and the application of algorithmic methods. 
            The manual data-entry work was initially restricted to a typographical encoding of the texts simply as two-column tables with headings. The right-hand column of these tables, generally containing a comma-separated list of Indigenous words, was then marked up by an automated XSLT transformation. This naturally leads to an iterative data cleaning workflow based on a software development ‘build’ process, in which a time-consuming batch process crunches through the documents, gradually enhancing them, performing automated validation checking, and generating visualisations for manual review. We found these data visualisations a potent force for quality assurance. It is easy to spot interpretive errors made by the automated parser, and that correction can feed back, either as a refinement of the automated process or as a manual correction of the document markup, leading to a gradual improvement in the data quality.
            The dataset exists in a number of forms: a paper archive; a set of photographic images in TIFF format, and derived JPEGs; a set of TEI transcriptions that encodes the text and the tabular layout of the forms; and links to the JPEG page images. A gazetteer of places is maintained as a spreadsheet. The workflow is managed via a spreadsheet, and the source files are stored in a bitbucket repository.
            One important requirement is the ability to track the provenance of the individual words. A dataset of this scale and type has scope for numerous transcription errors, and it must be possible for a reviewer to query any word, to see the manuscript from which it came, and to view images of the source materials to establish the context in which the term appeared, and thus to check that the contextual metadata in the TEI is correct.
            The solution is to begin by building a model of the texts, rather than attempting to directly model the lexicographic knowledge they contain. The model of the texts can then be enriched with the lexicographic knowledge in the form of embedded metadata, and from this a simplified model can then be derived to serve the purpose of linguistic computation. We build the data model by parsing the text, but rather than parsing the text and populating a data model, we embed the parsed version into the text in the form of XML markup. This makes the interpretive act explicit—something that can be questioned and altered. We classified each word as either English or Indigenous, and hyperlinked each to the English to which it corresponds. Given the size of the encoding task, it was essential to minimise the amount of manual work, and reduce the scope for human error, by automating the markup process as much as possible.
            This XSLT script parses the lists into distinct words and inserts the appropriate hyperlinks to relate each Indigenous word to the English word or words to which it corresponds. Some Indigenous words have multiple corresponding English words, separated by commas or sometimes semicolons:
            
                
                    Ankle
                    Kan-ka, jinna werree, balgu
                
            
            Occasionally, the word ‘or’ is used at the end of a list:
            
                
                    Blood
                    Ngooba or yalgoo
                
            
            Sometimes the right-hand column contains additional English language glosses—generally to indicate a narrower or otherwise related term, usually written in parentheses, following the corresponding Indigenous word, e.g.,
            
                
                    Kangaroo
                    Maloo (plains), margaji (hill)
                
            
            Sometimes an additional English gloss is written before the corresponding Indigenous term and separated with an equal sign (or hyphen):
            
                
                    Woman, old
                    Wîdhu; old man = winja
                
            
            An XSLT script is easily able to handle all these cases and rapidly produce markup that is semantically correct. However, as the forms were filled out by many different people, inevitably there are some inconsistencies in the text, which can lead the XSLT script into error. Sometimes, for instance, the Indigenous words are in brackets rather than the English words, or the text is written in a more explanatory style, which is not amenable to parsing with a simple script:
            
                
                    Bandicoot
                    
                        Jiriwardu, bardari and bira - two species like a bandicoot.
                        Bardari - like a bandicoot, only with long ears and nose.
                    
                
            
            In these exceptional cases the easiest thing to do is apply some human intelligence and mark up the text by hand. To support this ‘markup by exception’ style of work, the automated markup XSLT is programmed to simply pass over any text that already contains the TEI &lt;term&gt; and &lt;gloss&gt; markup. 
            If we find something that looks odd through an analysis of the lexicographic data, how are we able to check whether it is a genuine language oddity or the result of an error? It is essential to be able to track the linguistic data back to the archival source, and that means maintaining links from the derived data that point back to the source questionnaires, and that in turn means having a data model that is able to accommodate all aspects of the data. 
            The value of the TEI is that it can link those aspects together in a single set of source files. Then the ‘normalised’ version can be extracted as needed from the fully modelled data. 
            A number of issues will be explored as we develop this project, including the possibility of automated regularising of orthographic differences between word-lists, further permitting comparison of similarities via a Levenshtein distance measure. As the underlying material is in a reusable format, it will be possible to publish electronic editions of the manuscripts and output sets of word-lists for use in schools, and to do comparative analysis of the vocabularies to infer relationships and locations (as in Nash, 2002, and more recently Embleton et al., 2013). We have used XSLT to extract a graph database in RDF-XML format from the TEI source data, and we use SPARQL to query this derived dataset to produce visualisations, and to expose it as Linked Data. 
            Funding
            This work was funded by a research grant from the Faculty of Arts at the University of Melbourne and supported in part by ARC grants DP0984419 and FT140100214.
            Note
            1. https://digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/handle/2440/69252.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Czaykowska-Higgins, E., Holmes, M. D. and Kell, S. M. (2014). Using TEI for an Endangered Language Lexical Resource: The Nxaʔamxcín Database-Dictionary Project. 
                        Language Documentation &amp; Conservation,
                        8: 1–37, http://hdl.handle.net/10125/4604.
                    
                    
                        Embleton, S., Uritescu, D. and Wheeler, E. S. (2013). Defining Dialect Regions with Interpretations: Advancing the Multidimensional Scaling Approach. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(1): 13–22.
                    
                    
                        Henderson, J. (2008). Capturing Chaos: Rendering Handwritten Language Documents. 
                        Language Documentation &amp; Conservation,
                        2(2): 212–43, http://hdl.handle.net/10125/4347.
                    
                    
                        McGregor, W. (2012). Daisy Bates’ Documentations of Kimberley Languages. 
                        Language and History,
                        55(2): 79–101.
                    
                    
                        Nash, D. (2002). Historical Linguistic Geography of South-East Western Australia. In Henderson, J. and Nash, D. (eds), 
                        Language in Native Title. Canberra: AIATSIS Native Title Research Unit, Aboriginal Studies Press, pp. 205–30.
                    
                    
                        White, I. (ed.). (1985). 
                        The Native Tribes of Western Australia. National Library of Australia, Canberra.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Enriching the HuNI Virtual Laboratory with Content from the Trove Digitized Newspapers Corpus
                
                    
                        Burrows
                        Toby Nicolas
                    
                    University of Western Australia, Australia; King's College London
                    toby.burrows@uwa.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Davidson
                        Alwyn
                    
                    Deakin University
                    alwyn.davidson@deakin.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Cassidy
                        Steve
                    
                    Macquarie University, Australia
                    Steve.Cassidy@mq.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    HuNI
                    GATE
                    named entity recognition
                    digitised newspapers
                    Trove
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            HuNI (Humanities Networked Infrastructure) is an innovative virtual laboratory that takes a new approach to the problems of integrating and linking data in the humanities and creative arts. It aggregates data from thirty Australian datasets, using a Data Model based on six core entity types. HuNI users are able to construct their own links between the individual entities in the HuNI service. This ‘social linking’ function is accompanied by the ability to create and annotate collections of entities, as well as to import and export data. 
            The initial HuNI project, funded by an Australian government grant under the NeCTAR programme (2012–2014), was completed with the launch of the HuNI service in October 2014. More than 730,000 entity records were included in this initial version of HuNI. The research community served by HuNI spans the humanities and creative arts in Australia, and includes researchers across literature, cinema and media studies, history, linguistics, Aboriginal studies, and art (Verhoeven and Burrows, 2014).
            This paper will report on a project to extend the scope and content of HuNI, using the corpus of digitized newspapers assembled by the National Library of Australia and made available as part of its Trove service (http://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper). This Trove corpus contains 13.7 million pages and 133.8 million articles, from more than 700 newspapers published between the earlier 19th century and the mid-1950s (Sherratt, 2014). An extensive crowdsourcing project has been running for several years, aimed at correcting the OCR files for the corpus.
            The project, being carried out during 2014 and 2015, has two main objectives:
             1. Testing and evaluating solutions and methods for carrying out Named Entity Recognition against the OCR files in the Trove digitized newspapers corpus.
             2. Exporting the information about entities identified from Trove so that they can be incorporated into the data aggregate that forms the basis for the HuNI service. 
            This work has the potential to expand HuNI’s content significantly. It extends HuNI’s data, for the first time, to entities derived from full-text digital resources. It is enabling the HuNI team to evaluate the usefulness of the Trove corpus for this purpose and is serving as a pilot for the development of an ongoing production service of this kind.
            The project is being carried out with the assistance of a grant for the Microsoft Azure for Research programme. The project is using the Azure cloud service to store a copy of the OCR files for the Trove newspaper corpus. It is also deploying the GATE software on Azure in order to test its capabilities against the Trove newspaper corpus. GATE is a full-lifecycle open-source solution for text processing, developed at the University of Sheffield and widely used around the world (Cunningham et al., 2011). GATE is already available as a packaged Virtual Machine for cloud deployment, and the project is extending that cloud deployment to Azure. 
            In the paper, we will report on the initial results derived from the use of GATE to identify named entities in the Trove newspapers corpus. This will include a discussion of the issues encountered, an evaluation of the results obtained, and an assessment of the effectiveness of the overall process. We will also discuss the methods being developed for packaging up these results for ingest into HuNI. This will include demonstrating and evaluating the pipeline for this process and showing how entity records added to HuNI can be used to link back to their occurrence in the Trove corpus.
            The paper will also discuss the remaining work to be carried out during this project. The final stage of the project will involve deploying Azure’s own Machine Learning tools against the Trove corpus. It will then be possible to compare the results obtained from Azure Machine Learning with those obtained through the use of GATE. Progress towards the deployment of a production service for adding Trove entities to HuNI will also be discussed.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cunningham, H., et al. (2011). 
                        Text Processing with GATE (Version 6). GATE, Sheffield.
                    
                    
                        Sherratt, T. (2014). Digitised Newspapers and the Varieties of Value. Presented at the Europeana Newspapers workshop, 
                        Newspapers in Europe and the Digital Agenda for Europe, London, http://www.slideshare.net/wragge/digitised-newspapers-and-the-varieties-of-value.
                    
                    
                        Verhoeven, D. and Burrows, T. (2014). Digital Scholarship in the Humanities and Creative Arts: The HuNI Virtual Laboratory. 
                        EDUCAUSE Review Online, May/June.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Entity Relationship Model for READ
                
                    
                        McCrabb
                        Ian
                    
                    University Of Sydney, Australia
                    ian@prakas.org
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    data model
                    philology
                    entity model
                    system design
                    workbench
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    metadata
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    asian studies
                    philology
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    translation studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This presentation will précis the underlying entity relationship model of the Research Environment for Ancient Documents (READ) and will outline some of the research methods enabled by the platform.
            The READ project commenced in 2013 with development support from a consortium of universities (Ludwig Maximillian University, Munich, the University of Washington, Seattle, and the University of Lausanne), which, together with the University of Sydney, are involved in the study and publication of ancient Buddhist documents preserved in the Gāndhārī language that originate from Afghanistan and Pakistan. READ leverages 10 years of development on gandhari.org by Stefan Baums and Andrew Glass—the site that currently supports the Gāndhārī Dictionary, Bibliography and Catalog, as well as a comprehensive textual corpus. READ model and UI design are nearing completion, and development is on track for delivery in late 2015.
            READ has been designed as a comprehensive multi‐user research workbench and publishing platform for ancient Sanskrit and Prakrit texts: manuscripts, inscriptions, coins, and other documents. READ is based on open-source software and built-to-open standards. It provides an extensible entity model, TEI support, and a published API for integration with related systems.
            This presentation will focus on design aspects as encapsulated in the entity relationship model (ERM). An ERM is an abstract way of describing a relational database, most often represented as a flowchart accompanied by precise descriptions of each entity. This approach allows one to model the entities and their relationships and determine the most effective and flexible way of structuring the data to support authoring, storage, maintenance, analysis, reporting, and publishing.
            The design approach has been to build a comprehensive set of entities, mapped to real-world objects, in order to seamlessly model both physical and textual domains. The underlying design principle is atomisation of data to its smallest indivisible components and the linking and sequencing of these entities.
            As an illustration, in the physical realm, manuscripts or other inscribed 
                Items have 
                Parts, 
                Fragments, and 
                Surfaces. 
                Images of these 
                Surfaces are segmented to provide a fixed reference system, a 
                BaseLine much like the grid laid out at an archaeological excavation. These 
                Segments are then sequenced into 
                Spans across a 
                Surface. 
                Surfaces can then be aligned and the 
                Spans sequenced into complete 
                Lines. The mapping between physical and textual is where 
                Syllables are identified with 
                akṣara (the graphical unit of the 
                kharoṣṭhī script these texts are rendered in) 
                Segments. 
                Syllables (deconstructed into 
                Graphemes) are sequenced into 
                Tokens (words or compounds) that are ultimately sequenced up through textual divisions into full 
                Editions.
            
            The philological process model adopted is one of defining each entity by applying classifying metadata and progressively sequencing these entities from the smallest upwards. This approach allows for attribution and annotation at every entity to record scholarly contribution at the finest level of granularity. Different editors’ interpretations of 
                akṣara
                Segments, 
                Syllable assignation, and 
                Token grammatical deconstruction are all attributed, and multiple versions of all entities exist in parallel to support the publishing of any number of alternative editions.
            
            In summary the design approach rests on a small number of basic principles:
             1. By designing entities and their relationships to reflect real-world objects in the domain, one can flexibly map system functions to actual philological processes. 
             2. By completely atomizing physical and textual objects, one can flexibly sequence these components into higher-level entities.
             3. The application of metadata and progressive sequencing of entities from the smallest component upwards through scale supports flexibility and granularity.
            The technology stack includes PostgreSQL with backend development in PHP and UI development using JQuery—all mainstream open-source development environments. A conventional software architecture has been adopted with
            
                
                 • A data storage system built on a relational database where entities are realized as tables with constraints and triggers to implement model logic and integrity.
            
             • A storage abstraction layer implemented as server side libraries to expose entities and entity aggregates needed to support the web services.
             • A variety of services including import, export, index, query, and data management. Services are being implemented as using Ajax for complex interactive UI functions.
             • A JavaScript User interface using JQuery frameworks.
             • A JavaScript API to provide access to libraries and core services to allow for system extensions and integration.
            A great deal of work has been undertaken on the design and development of a comprehensive system ontology. The ontology provides standardized terms for both physical and textual domains—everything from object shapes, mediums, and types to grammatical categories such as declension and conjugation values. These standard terms manifest as constraints within the system and ensure data consistency and quality.
            The system ontology has been designed to be extensible and configurable to allow READ to encompass alternative schema and new research objectives. Users can develop their own term sets within the ontology to address their own research questions. For example, my research encompasses the development of a metadata model for the analysis of formula structures in relic inscriptions, others wish to address syntactical structures, and still others questions of metre.
            A practical example of the flexibility in the ontology is the support for languages other than Gāndhārī. READ has been designed from the ground up to support all languages that have Sanskrit as their primordial. Branching in the system ontology allowing for alternative grammatical deconstructions enables READ to be easily configured for Sanskrit or Pali corpora—indeed, any Prakrit language.
            Fundamental to the design of READ is support for the import and export of TEI. The method adopted has been the development of services to export a complete XML rendition of stored data with XSLT transformation to EpiDoc TEI specifications. Import is the same process in reverse.
            A highly sophisticated parser was developed to read the existing corpus of transcriptions from gandhari.org as text strings and shred these into READ database entities maintaining linkages. This parser can be finessed for other corpora that might currently only exist in unstructured formats like Word. Fundamental to READ’s design is support for import of existing datasets and export as XML and specifically TEI.
            Indeed READ is positioned as a workbench for ancient documents, complementary to TEI-based textual repositories such as SARIT and integrated with existing Sanskrit dictionaries. Whatever format existing transcriptions were developed in, these can be consumed, elaborated upon, analyzed, and then published as research output in TEI or pdf. The data remains open-source and can be exported as a full XML archive.
            In summary, READ has been designed to function as
             • A linked repository of images, transcriptions, translations, metadata, commentary, and bibliographic records.
             • A content management system encompassing multiuser editing, maintenance, and version control.
             • A collaboration platform with comprehensive access and visibility control to support draft development, workgroup collaboration, and public presentation.
             • A research workbench with access to a dictionary, corpus of texts, catalogs, glossaries, concordances, and bibliography.
             • A publishing platform for individual transcription renditions or full scholarly editions, both print-ready and online.
             • The kernel of an integrated research network interfacing with related dictionaries, repositories of parallel texts, GIS, data visualization, image rendering, and palaeographic analysis systems.
            READ enables a very granular data structure, and whilst the level of elaboration is dependent upon the research requirement, deriving the most benefit entails an initial investment in the application of metadata at each level of sequenced entities. The dividend is that this enables a range of automated analysis outputs that support palaeographic, phonological, grammatical, orthographical, and morphological research in addition to the opportunities opened up for formulae and syntactical analysis.
        
    



    
        
            
                Exploration of Billions of Words of the HathiTrust Corpus with Bookworm: HathiTrust + Bookworm Project
                
                    
                        Auvil
                        Loretta
                    
                    University of Illinois, United States of America
                    lauvil@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Aiden
                        Erez Lieberman
                    
                    Baylor College of Medicine and Rice University, United States of America
                    erez@erez.com
                
                
                    
                        Downie
                        J. Stephen
                    
                    University of Illinois, United States of America
                    jdownie@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Schmidt
                        Benjamin
                    
                    Northeastern University, United States of America
                    bmschmidt@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Bhattacharyya
                        Sayan
                    
                    University of Illinois, United States of America
                    sayan@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Organisciak
                        Piotr
                    
                    University of Illinois, United States of America
                    organis2@illinois.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    text analysis
                    visualization
                    HTRC
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    information retrieval
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Humanities scholars are traditionally concerned with close reading of a relatively small number of texts. Yet, as new textual resources such as the Google Books project and the HathiTrust Digital Library (HTDL) emerge, there is an increasing need for tools that analyze textual resources at scale. HTDL is the largest nonprofit digital book collection in the world, containing a total of 13,026,050 volumes in over 100 languages. The goal of this project is to integrate the HTDL corpus, processed at the HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC) (Downie et al., 2012), with the Bookworm platform for text analysis, developed at the Cultural Observatory. 
             Bookworm is an open-source platform that enables real-time analysis of repositories of digitized texts. Bookworm greatly extends the type of analysis that was popularized by the Google Ngrams Viewer (Michel et al., 2011), making it possible to slice and dice the data in an arbitrary corpus, in real time, using a greatly enhanced set of content-based and metadata-based features. 
             This poster will demonstrate initial results of this project (HT+BW)—in particular, a functional Bookworm interface displaying text data from HTRC. The HT+BW will greatly increase the value of the HTRC because it will assist humanities scholars and students in their effort to delve deeper into the HathiTrust corpus and to explore more complex, multifaceted research questions. At the same time, this project will continue to develop Bookworm as an open-source platform tool, not only for HTRC, but also as a potential portal for all libraries with extensive digital content. This collaboration includes the University of Illinois, Indiana University, Rice University, Baylor College of Medicine, and Northeastern University. 
            
                Implementing Analytics at Scale
            
            One of our goals for this collaboration is to implement a greatly enhanced open-source version of the Bookworm text analysis and visualization tool designed to assist scholars to meet the challenges posed by the massive scale of the HT corpus. The enhanced Bookworm will enable many important new features—for instance, enabling scholars to better customize sets of text for their personal analyses (HTRC worksets), and to identify new HTRC texts to add to their corpora in real time. We will also be improving the APIs used by Bookworm to leverage a Solr index, an index used by many libraries and digital archives. 
            
                Identify Valuable Metadata Formats for Humanities Scholars
            
            The effort to curate and deploy metadata is essential to any digital library effort, especially given the painstaking effort of cataloging by librarians. We have identified certain metadata fields that will be useful for examination of HTRC data. For instance, many raw MARC fields (year of publication, country, language) have been added. Some fields can be easily computed: page counts and word counts. Still other fields, such as author gender, can be recovered with high reliability by analysis of author names and comparison with external data repositories. We expect that the following metadata fields will be integrated into the HathiTrust Bookworm: Class, Subclass, Fiction, Genre, Language, Issuance, Author Gender, Page Count, Word Count, Publication Country, and Publication State. Thus, by combining the HathiTrust data with Bookworm analytics, scholars of English literature can study word frequencies in English novels, regional historians can limit their search to publishers from particular places, and historians of science can compare chemistry texts to those in biology. The use of facets can serve as an easy means for testing hypotheses that could previously have been probed only with extensive research. See Figure 1 showing the usage of the term ‘freedom’ with facets of ‘Genre’ in ‘government publication’ and ‘periodical’.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The HTRC Bookworm showing the usage of the term ‘freedom’ when faceting ‘Genre’ by ‘government publication’ and by ‘periodical’ for the Non-Google digitized Public Domain corpus from HathiTrust.
             Textual data at a massive scale shifts the landscape of possibilities for the analysis of text corpora, allowing exploration to expand from the syntactic questions that linguistic corpora have excelled at answering, to capturing subtle cultural trends that underlie changes in the usage frequency of words or phrases. The goal of the HT+BW project is to create a tool that can help scholars realize this enormous potential.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Downie, J. S., Plale, B., Kowalczyk, S., MacDonald, R. H., Poole, M. S. and Unsworth, J. M. (2012). HathiTrust Research Center: Expanding the Frontiers of Large-Scale Text Analytics. 
                        Proceeding of 2nd Annual Conference of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities, 15–17 September 2012, University of Tokyo.
                    
                    
                        Michel, J.-B., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray, M. K., Pickett, J. P., . . . and Aiden, E. L. (2011). Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books. 
                        Science, 
                        331(6014): 176–82. 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Exploratory Search Through Interactive Visualization of Topic Models
                
                    
                        Jähnichen
                        Patrick
                    
                    Natural Language Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    jaehnichen@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Österling
                        Patrick
                    
                    Image and Signal Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    oesterling@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Liebmann
                        Tom
                    
                    Image and Signal Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    liebmann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Heyer
                        Gerhard
                    
                    Natural Language Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    heyer@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Kuras
                        Christoph
                    
                    Natural Language Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    ckuras@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Scheuermann
                        Gerik
                    
                    Image and Signal Processing Group, University of Leipzig, Germany
                    scheuermann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    text visualization
                    topic models
                    corpus analysis
                    graphical user interface
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    content analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper addresses exploratory search in large collections of historical texts. By way of example, we apply our method to a collection of documents comprising dossiers of the former East German Ministry for State Security and classical texts. The bases of our approach are topic models, a class of algorithms that define and infer themes pervading the corpus as probability distributions over the vocabulary. Our topic-centered visual metaphor supports exploring the corpus following an intuitive methodology: First, determine a topic of interest; second, suggest documents that contain the topic with ‘sufficient‘ probability; and third, browse iteratively through related topics and documents. Our main focus lies on providing a suitable bird’s-eye view onto the data to facilitate an in-depth analysis in terms of the topics contained.
            * * *
            When dealing with large collections of digitized historical documents, very often only little is known about the quantity, coverage, and relations of contained topics. In order to get an overview of the topics covered, an interactive way to explore the data is needed that goes beyond simple ‘lookup’. The notion of exploratory search has been coined by 
                614BA154-38B9-44B4-845F-7F12C3EC56810AA07F8EE-8B67-4AA3-8DDF-0D59F4DB8D0C4910.1145/1121949.1121979From Finding to Understanding4199200604001200000000220000Marchionini:2006bl400Exploratory Search440046ACMCommunications of the ACM-100-100F23FBD16-F4EC-4097-BB5E-BBC9ABA9E02AGaryMarchionini?> to cover such cases.
            
            Consider a large corpus of documents. Typically, we know the source and the broader scope of such corpora, but not necessarily the content of individual documents. One classical option to explore this data is based on keyword search. While this approach is useful when the user ‘knows’ what she is looking for, an iterative exploration of the corpus is not possible. Our approach is a structured one. We provide the user with a bird’s-eye view of the data. She then identifies topics of interest and finds the documents related to them. Additionally, documents can also be related to other topics, a connection that helps to reveal new and interesting insights previously unknown. We are also able to identify different contexts, i.e., topics, in which specific terms appear. Especially when working with historical texts, this might help to reveal new aspects of known concepts.
            Topic modeling 
                87D87CAA-344F-42B7-940C-3760714AC9471471Text Mining: Classification, Clustering, and ApplicationsTopic models2D13442E-D924-4088-9B19-63E6C7F73A48-1000CRC Press-1000Blei:2009ub99200900000000000000200000DavidMBleiJohnDLaffertyAshokNSrivastavaMehranSahami?> has become one of the main tools for unsupervised text analysis and for gaining insight into corpora via exploratory search and analysis by identifying semantic classes of words in the corpus, coined ‘topics’. An introduction on how topic modeling can help humanists in their research is given in 
                43CFE8AD-492B-41CC-83A4-ADD8EC53DA7A221Topic Modeling and Digital HumanitiesE3DE6C46-ABB4-4EBB-A84A-3DE833C7B7CE400400Blei:2012ud99201201001200000000210000MT_FUZZY_MONTH_01_WINTERJournal of Digital Humanities-100-1001C9667CB-06D1-4769-B7CB-219398551600DavidMBlei?>. 
            
            However, little effort has been made to develop methods to use the outcome of these models in applications 
                visually.
            
            Traditional linguistic approaches such as the vector space model 
                1514FCF4-B2E7-43B5-AD23-F24DA5074370324991988000000000000002000005513Term-Weighting Approaches in Automatic Text Retrieval6CC5EE37-8B0F-483D-9C47-75924F6B8EF8400523400Salton:1988p4433http://www.google.de/search?client=safari&amp;rls=en-us&amp;q=Term-weighting+approaches+in+automatic+text+retrieval&amp;ie=UTF-8&amp;oe=UTF-8&amp;redir_esc=&amp;ei=ycmDTKOTC8qmOJzSkfUOInformation processing &amp; management-100-100CA1FDD1F-3C91-4D1B-B307-CFD118401177GerardSaltonCBuckley?> translate documents into high-dimensional feature vectors (typically in combination with, e.g., the tf-idf 
                AC410B7F-559F-4B02-8816-B0A751055699400E2A96C-A2F9-42E0-8E64-4D0CE15C1C30281199197200001200000000200000http://www.emeraldinsight.com/journals.htm?articleid=1649768&amp;show=abstractJones:1972vw400A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrievalMCB UP Ltd140021Journal of documentation-100-10072DA469A-C667-46A3-B725-353F44267388KarenSparckJones?>] term weighting). Visualizing such high-dimensional structures is a research field on its own. Established approaches include projective techniques, like the Text Map Explorer 
                F8A0E3CE-B6D9-4789-9C1E-FD55BE98F6BC59920060000120000000020000024510.1109/IV.2006.104Text Map Explorer: a Tool to Create and Explore Document MapsE97F8F5E-FB19-4150-A99B-D537229631EF400IEEE400251http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1153927.1154683&amp;coll=DL&amp;dl=GUIDE&amp;CFID=481038063&amp;CFTOKEN=25042524Tenth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV'06)-100-1005199EC1A-235E-4D3E-A74E-B3076956D340FVPaulovichRMinghim?>, Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) 
                A98EB46A-4362-47B2-B113-FDF89A7C2B39699197800001200000000200000no. 11Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences93Multidimensional ScalingBB656566-DCB1-4522-8220-294B537F04370SAGE Publications0joseph1978multidimensionalhttp://books.google.de/books?id=ZzmIPcEXPf0C&amp;dq=mulitdimensional+scaling&amp;hl=&amp;cd=4&amp;source=gbs_apiJosephBKruskalMyronWish?>, Sammon’s mapping 
                8B0D531C-1C38-4DA1-AD18-E80CE4EC6750740099196900001200000000200000A nonlinear mapping for data structure analysishttp://tsrenderer.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/papers/01671271.pdf40071CF8445-4813-4BBD-B83E-F8CA525E6F61IEEE Transactions on Computers-100-100A10A0DDD-B0BB-417F-B5D6-07BD1680C5C2JWSammon?>, and neuro-computational algorithms like Self Organizing Maps (SOM) 
                B5006DF5-88E2-4BB0-8A1E-061A3872A70D899200101011200000000222000501Self-Organizing Maps8224AFAB-0E22-4B35-ABB7-4615E9C2A0EB0Springer Science &amp; Business Media0http://books.google.de/books?id=e4igHzyfO78C&amp;printsec=frontcover&amp;dq=kohonen+self+organizing+maps&amp;hl=&amp;cd=1&amp;source=gbs_apiTeuvoKohonen?>. 
            
            Compared to the algorithms used in this paper, the insights obtained from a pure vector space model are rather limited. In fact, we reduce the dimensionality of the space in which documents are defined from the size of the vocabulary to a number of semantic classes (topics) that appear across documents. 
            Topic Models
            A topic model is a Bayesian hierarchical probabilistic model. It defines an artificial generative process for document generation, describing how the actually observable data (the words in the documents) get into their place. In a topic model, this is controlled by two latent factors: the topics themselves and the documents’ topic proportions. A topic is defined as a probability distribution over the word simplex—i.e., in every topic each word has a certain probability, and the probabilities in each individual topic sum to 1. The set of words with the highest probability is assumed to describe the individual topics thematically. The second factor, the document topic proportions, is again a set of probability distributions (one for each document) defined over the topic simplex. Every topic gets some probability in a document, and their probabilities sum to 1. Simply put, the words that we see in a document are then generated by first finding a topic through the document’s distribution over topics and then finding a word from the chosen topic. Both choices are random draws from their respective distributions. During inference, we reverse this process in order to get approximations for the governing latent factors that best give rise to the observed words—that is, we want to find the setting of the latent factors for which the observed words are highly likely. In most cases, the outcome of such models is presented as a set of sorted word lists for each topic, topic similarity is being neglected, and only hand-picked topics are selected as examples. 
            Visualization Approach
            Visualization is our method of choice to inspect the knowledge uncovered from the data. However, the model outcome is obviously inappropriate for direct visualization. Without using thresholds, presenting entire probability distributions as sorted lists of words and values is not very handy and quickly results in information excess and cluttered visualizations. Even working with thresholds does not immediately lead to parameter settings that are independent of the input data, e.g., how many words are actually necessary to obtain a reasonably good impression of a topic found by the model. That is, depending on the semantic quality of words and topics, a flexible level of detail is necessary to identify meaningful information in a topic, i.e., in a distribution over words. On the other hand, the amount of information relevant for each element of the topic model is assumed to be rather small. Therefore, the visual implementation of these elements should focus on the pivotal parts of the distributions, while increasingly disregarding irrelevant parts. In the end, the relations between the input documents, the latent topics found by the model, and the actual probabilities of a topic’s keywords are the elements containing interesting insights about the data.
            We present an interactive visual analysis tool to find and display these relations. Our approach is closely related to that of 
                AE131A8D-06F7-4ACF-9330-9504E484B22C999201200000000000000200000Visualizing Topic ModelsChaney:2012vr400400F600BB14-AD13-4F1E-972E-BB58262103DASixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media-100-10026630F73-0EBC-4B20-AEFC-618C2952C2A4AllisonChaneyDavidMBlei?>, who also attempt to directly visualize the output of topic models. However, their approach generates a set of static websites that can be browsed to explore the dataset, providing a lightweight but largely text-based application to solve the visualization tasks. There exists an overview over the different topics, but each topic is described by the three most probable words only. There is no possibility to further investigate a topic 
                and to keep track of the others. As a framework for our visualization we chose OpenWalnut.
                1 This framework primarily aims at medical imaging but is highly modular and can be easily reused to fit our requirements.
            
            We define the following distinct exploration tasks that a topic model is fit to execute:
             1. 
                Examining a topic. Examining a single topic is difficult because it is a probability distribution. In the visualization, this information helps the user to quickly identify key words and their relative importance for a topic. 
            
             2. 
                Overview of the Topics. This task visually summarizes the set of latent topics found by the topic model. 
            
             3. 
                Finding Different Semantics of Polysems and Homonyms. One advantage of topic models is the automatic disambiguation of semantic meanings of words into topics. 
            
             4. 
                Identifying Documents Covering a Topic. This task is at the core of exploratory analysis: Having identified a topic of interest, explore a set of documents covering it. 
            
             5. 
                Finding Related Topics of a Document. Inspect topics related to a document, or, in a transitive way, documents related to these topics. 
            
            We present visual implementations for these tasks to provide the user with interactive means to browse through relations between documents, topics, and words. This way, the user uncovers expected or (more interestingly) unexpected facts that eventually lead to interesting documents. Using smooth level-of-detail transitions and by interacting with topic distribution charts, the user freely navigates through the data by concatenating single exploration tasks—following focus-and-context concepts and an intuitive methodology: overview first, details on demand.
            Experiments
            We report use cases of fitting topic models to two different datasets. One of the datasets is the series of publications ‘The GDR through the Eyes of the Stasi: The Secret Reports to the SED Leadership’ (German: ‘Die DDR im Blick der Stasi. Die geheimen Berichte an die SED-Führung’) that reveal the Stasi’s
                2 specific view of the GDR, containing references to real and perceived oppositional conduct as well as to economic and supply problems. 
            
            The second dataset is the ECCO-TCP,
                3 a set of classical literature and non-fiction texts.
            
            In Figures 1 through 5 we pictorially describe how the defined exploration tasks are met using our visualization. Note that we omitted the application’s control panel in Figures 1–3 for spatial reasons.
            
                �
                
                    unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                Figure 1. Visually solving task 1, the examination of a specific topic. (left) A topic covering several classical drama authors and their work from the ECCO-TCP dataset. (right) A topic covering Communist Party propaganda in connection with the youth from the Stasi files dataset.
            
            
                �
                
                    unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                Figure 2. Visually solving task 2, giving an overview over the topics. (left) Example topics from the ECCO-TCP dataset. (right) Examples from the Stasi files data set.
            
            
                
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    Figure 3. Visually solving task 3, resolving polysems and homonyms. (left) Different usages of the term ‘greeks’ in the ECCO-TCP dataset. Usages in connection with religion, literature, science, and politics are apparent. (right) Usages of the term ‘untersuchungen’ (Eng.: investigations) from the Stasi files dataset. The term is used in connection with the ever suspicious Stasi (topics dealing with addresses, name, Berlin, ‘wohnhaft’ etc. but also with investigations of accidents in factories (‘veb’ meaning ‘Peoples-owned enterprise’) and the state railroad (‘reichsbahn’).
                    
                
            
            
                �
                
                    unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                Figure 4. Solving task 4, finding documents related to topics. (left) Documents from the ECCO-TCP dataset that are related to the topic about ‘indians‘, ‘cape‘, ‘anchor‘, ‘spaniards‘, etc.; the documents are mainly travel reports and reports from English colonies. (right) Documents from the Stasi dataset related to the topic about problems in medical care in the former GDR. The documents are mainly statistical reports, one about the unions’ evaluation to the problem and the planned departure of a physician.
            
            
                
            
            
                �
                
                    unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                Figure 5. Solving task 5, finding topics related to a document. The selected document reads ‘The analyst: or, a discourse addressed to an infidel mathematician. Wherein it is examined whether the object, . . . and inferences of the modern analysis are more distinctly conceived, or more evidently deduced, than religious mysteries . . . By author of The minute philosopher‘ and has been found by first selecting the ‘science‘ topic (experiments, velocity, fluid, organs, magnitude, etc.). A second topic contained by this document has typical words like Jesus, saviour, spiritual, salvation, etc., as would be expected considering the document’s title.
            
            Notes
            1. http://www.openwalnut.org.
            2. Literally, Stasi abbreviates ‘STAatsSIcherheit‘, i.e. State Security.
            3. The Eighteenth Century Collection Online Text Creation Partnership, available at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/ecco/.
        
    



    
        
            
                Exploring Community Engagement in the Design of an Online Archive
                
                    
                        Carletti
                        Laura
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    laura.carletti@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Munoz
                        Angeles
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    amcivantos@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Blum
                        Jesse
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    jesse.blum@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Goulding
                        James
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    james.goulding@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Shipp
                        Victoria
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    victoria.shipp@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Robinson
                        Joanna
                    
                    University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    joanna.robinson@nottingham.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Community
                    Archive
                    Theatre
                    Participatory Design
                    Engagement
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    interface and user experience design
                    metadata
                    software design and development
                    information architecture
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper presents the socio-technical implications of designing and deploying an interactive, community-driven, and community-contributed archive. 
            In 2015 the Theatre Royal Nottingham (UK) will be celebrating its 150th anniversary, having first opened its doors in September 1865. This is a major landmark for Nottingham and the ideal time and catalyst to explore the venue’s past and engage the city and its residents with its performance heritage. At present, there is a large amount of records available related to the history of the Theatre Royal Nottingham. However, an archive has not been developed yet, and there is the need of establishing a system to organise the records and ultimately make them accessible to the public and the researchers interested in exploring them. This archive will allow understanding, preserving, and enriching the history and the integrity of the Theatre Royal, and constructing the memory of the building by creating a bridge between information and the community. 
            Building an archive is considerably expensive, and it requires a significant amount of time and human effort (Poole, 2010). The maintenance of the archive resources in the long term implies additional investments, and therefore sustainability becomes a key issue. It is then vital to ensure that such effort in financial resources, time, and research is balanced with the public and community engagement. In the research library and archive sector, it is reported that at least £130 million of UK public money has been spent in digitisation in a decade (Bültmann et al., 2005). Despite the significant expenditure, it is hard to find ‘evidence of use’ of the digitised resources (Warwick et al., 2008), and research shows that about one-third of the digital resources in the humanities are not accessed (Warwick et al., 2006). 
            To improve the balance between available digital resources and access by the public, cultural institutions are progressively exploring alternative paths of involvement of their audiences in the use and appropriation of their on-site and online assets. In this framework, models of public participation have been identified (Simon, 2010), and crowdsourcing-based initiatives have been classified (Carletti et al., 2013; Oomen and Aroyo, 2011) to provide insights into the nature of those emerging relationships. The participatory culture—nurtured by the Web 2.0 expansion—has amplified the scope for diverse collaborations between organisations and the public and, at the same time, raised audiences’ expectations to have an active role and to become ‘prosumers’ (producer and consumer), rather than simply consumers of cultural activities.
            The technological infrastructures are at the core of those new collaborations. The value of involving the public in the design and development of interactive systems is widely acknowledged, and a rich literature on participatory design has been produced by the Human-Computer-Interaction research community. However, it is essential to acknowledge that participation goes beyond the involvement of the participants as informants in design. Participation is an ongoing engagement and should aim for learning and long-term empowerment of the people involved (Dearden and Rizvi, 2008). Community participation in the design of interactive systems can represent the first step to assure a dynamic and permanent commitment in the deployment. 
            With this sociotechnical scenario in mind, we launched a participatory design process involving the Theatre Royal audiences to elicit their relationships with the archival materials, as well as suggestions for the development of the interactive system. Three focus groups were planned and designed to investigate audience engagement with physical and digital archival resources, and to inform the design of an online archive. When the Theatre Royal opened the call for interest, almost 150 people expressed their intention to participate in the focus groups. This overwhelming and unexpected response was interpreted as a clear sign of the will of the people to be involved actively in the ‘life’ of the Theatre. Due to logistic constraints (e.g., time, space, budget), we were able to involve 38 people in the three events targeted, respectively, at theatregoers under 26 years old, theatregoers over 26 years old, and nontheatregoers. 
            In the three focus groups, we addressed two main questions: 
             1. How do we design and promote audience engagement with cultural resources? 
             2. How do we design interactive systems entailing the collaboration between cultural institutions and their public? 
            For the focus groups, intersubjective meaning-making tasks were designed to experiment how to engage the different target groups with the physical and the digital resources. Different levels of engagement were observed during the three events. Engagement was observed in terms of spontaneous or incited interaction with other people and/or the archive, time spent interacting, and additional interactions not expected and/or requested by the facilitators. Based on our observations, four critical activities were also identified to create, manage, and display a collaborative online archive: 
             1. Developing a suitable database structure.
             2. Digitising the archive and storing data in a suitable format.
             3. Interface development.
             4. Curating experiences. 
            Through a rapid prototyping technique, Chronopticon, a timeline prototype, was also developed in response to the public feedback on the design of an interactive system for the Theatre. 
            The focus groups revealed that there is space and interest both to design on-site and online interactive experiences, thus offering alternative and personalised ways to access archives. There is also scope to develop innovative tools designed for audience engagement, as well as co-constructed with the public. The design of the database and the framing of the community participation seem to represent the critical factors to focus on and to curate. When initiating a co-created project, it is central to ensure the long-term public engagement with the resource, as well as its maintenance. Involving the community beginning with the first phases seems to be a potential solution to address the sustainability concerns. Besides that, the experience and knowledge of local communities constitute an important part of the sense-making process of archive materials. 
            In this paper, we present the results of this pilot project, and recommendations to translate the findings into future actions to design and develop a community-driven and community-contributed archive. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Benkler, Y. and H. Nissenbaum. (2006). Commons-Based Peer Production Virtue. 
                        Journal of Political Philosophy, 
                        14(14): 394–419. 
                    
                    
                        Bültmann, B., R. Hardy, A. Muir, and C. Wictor. (2005). Digitised Content in the UK Research Library and Archives Sector. JISC/CURL. 
                    
                    
                        Carletti, L., McAuley, D., Price, D. and Giannachi, G. (2013). Digital Humanities and Crowdsourcing: An Exploration. 
                        Selected Papers from Museum and the Web 2013, Portland, OR, pp. 223–36. 
                    
                    
                        Chrisbatt Consulting. (2009). 
                        Digitisation, Curation and Two-Way Engagement. JISC Report. 
                    
                    
                        Damodaran, L. and Olphert, W. (2006). 
                        Informing Digital Futures: Strategies for Citizen Engagement. Springer, Dordrecht. 
                    
                    
                        Dearden, A. and Rizvi, H. (2008). Participatory IT Design and Participatory Development: A Comparative Review. In 
                        Proceedings of the 10th Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 (PDC ’08), Bloomington, IN, 30 September–4 October 2008, pp. 81–91. 
                    
                    
                        Holley, R. (2010). Crowdsourcing: How and Why Should Libraries Do It? 
                        D-Lib Magazine,
                        16(3/4). 
                    
                    
                        Klaebe, H. and Burgess, J. (2008). Co-Creating Heritage: Innovative Uses of Oral History and Life Narrative in Australian Libraries. In 
                        XV International Oral History Conference, Guadalajara, 23–26 September 2008.
                    
                    
                        Oomen, J. and Aroyo, L. (2011). Crowdsourcing in the Cultural Heritage Domain: Opportunities and Challenges. 
                        Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Communities and Technologies, Brisbane, 29 June–2 July 2011. New York: ACM.
                    
                    
                        Poole, N. (2010). 
                        The Cost of Digitising Europe’s Cultural Heritage. Comité des Sages of the European Commission. 
                    
                    
                        Roberts, S. and Carletti, L. (2012). Digital Engagement and the History of Advertising Trust Ghostsigns Archive. History Workshop Online. 
                    
                    
                        Shirky, C. (2010). 
                        Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age. Penguin Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Simon, N. (2010). The Participatory Museum. http://www.participatorymuseum.org/read/. 
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2010). Digital Curiosities: Resource Creation via Amateur Digitization. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        25(4): 425–38. 
                    
                    
                        Van der Elst, J., Richards-Rissetto, H. and Garcia, J. (2011). Creating Digital Heritage Content: Bridging Communities and Mediating Perspectives. In Lytras, P., Ordóñez de Pablos, E. and Diaz, L. (eds), 
                        Digital Culture and E-Tourism: Technologies, Applications and Management Approaches. IGI Global Publishing, pp. 139–57.
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C., Terras, M., Huntington, P., &amp; Pappa, N. (2006). The LAIRAH Project: Log Analysis of Digital Resources in the Arts and Humanities. AHRC Report. 
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C., Terras, M., Huntington, P., &amp; Pappa, N. (2008). ‘If You Build It, Will They Come?’: The LAIRAH Study: Quantifying the Use of Online Resources in the Arts and Humanities through Statistical Analysis of User Log Data. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23 (1): 85–102.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Exploring Large Datasets with Topic Model Visualizations
                
                    
                        Montague
                        John
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    jmontagu@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Simpson
                        John
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    john.simpson@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Rockwell
                        Geoffrey
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ruecker
                        Stan
                    
                    Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
                    sruecker@id.iit.edu
                
                
                    
                        Brown
                        Susan
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; University of Guelph, Canada
                    sibrown@ualberta.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Topic Models
                    Graphs
                    Big Data
                    Visualization
                
                
                    philosophy
                    text analysis
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            How can topic model visualizations aid in the exploration of large datasets? The standard method for visualizing topic models involves a two-stage process that begins with the use of a tool specifically designed to construct topic models on a specified corpus. MALLET (McCallum, 2002), a command line tool that implements the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) algorithm described by Blei et al. (2003), provides output in the form of text files that can be shared directly with other tools and seems to be the default tool of choice for the first stage. Regardless of the topic modeller used, its output is then passed to a separate tool for the second stage in the production of the visualization. These separate tools are either general visualization tools or topic model specific visualization tools. The use of general visualization tools is attractive because it typically requires a lower technical competency and allows the user to leverage skills they already have, but general tools provide fewer targeted affordances for exploration. Still, despite the existence of at least a dozen tools that have been used to visualize topic models, it remains the case that none of them are particularly well suited to exploring large datasets comprising thousands or millions of entries in a corpus distributed over a wide range of time and with a correspondingly large set of candidate topics produced by topic modelling. 
            This paper provides a solution to this problem by describing a tool that has been designed specifically to address this problem and that is now entering production. Before describing the tool and providing a short demonstration of its functionality, we summarize the current landscape of topic model visualizations and provide recommendations based on various use-cases. 
            
                Topic Modelling Visualizations
            
            The visualization methods used across these tools can be fruitfully categorized using a set of modified categories drawn from work done by Katifori et al. (2007) on ontology visualizations: 
             • 
                Traditional charts (Bar, line, pie, scatterplot, etc.): D-VITA (Gunnemann et al., 2013); Tableau (Sharkey and Ansari, 2014); ParallelTopics (Dou et al., 2011); NIPS (Iwata et al., 2008); MetaToMATo (Snyder et al., 2013).
            
             • 
                Network graphs: Gephi (Chen et al., 2013); Topicnet (Gretarsson et al., 2012). 
            
             • 
                Zoomable tools: an unnamed tool by Chaney and Blei (2012). 
            
             • 
                2D matrix: Serendip (Alexander et al., 2014); Termite (Chuang et al., 2012).
            
            The variety of visualization techniques being pursued are evidence of the difficulties related to displaying relevant information from topic modelling, as each visualization method has been developed or chosen with a particular application in mind. The tools that particularly focus on exploring the underlying data and revealing connections are Serendip and MetaToMATo, neither of which is a graph-based visualization, and both of which become overwhelmed by large datasets. Gephi is a general-purpose graph-based visualization tool that has been used to visualize large datasets (Munster, Jockers), but the images it produces are static and it does not easily lend itself to sharing information derived from topic models. Drawing on lessons from a review of all these tools, but Serendip, MetaToMATo, and Gephi in particular, the tool we report on constructing is targeted at exploration using graph-based visualizations of topic models on large corpuses. 
            
                Topic Modelling Philosophy Journals
            
            Motivation for this project has been brought about in part by work done over the past year with a corpus of philosophy journals acquired from JSTOR (Simpson et al., 2014). While investigating this corpus we made use of chart-based visualizations with R after preprocessing with MALLET. While there was much to be learned from the changing prevalence of particular topics over time, there were also a number of things that the visualizations were not able to tell us. In particular, our first visualizations made it difficult to easily see connections between the different topics, to see relations between the different journals, and to have this information present itself with increasing detail as required for the investigation. This challenge arose in large part because the dataset covered 27,536 journal articles from 10 different journals published between 1876 and 2008. Datasets of this size and diversity are becoming increasingly common, and so we moved to pursue a tool capable of visualizing the results of topic modelling. Not finding a suitable one for the exploration of large datasets, we set about designing a new one. 
            
                Visualizations in 3D
            
            MacEachren et al. (1994) suggest that all visualizations are meant to principally perform one of the following tasks: clearly present previously discovered information, analyze a particular dataset, combine multiple datasets, or explore data for knowledge discovery. It is the last category on which our visualization research team has been particularly focused: visualizations that allow the user to not simply understand or analyze a dataset, but to explore it in hopes of uncovering new information. 
            As Lauren Frederica-Klein says in her 2013 digital humanities start-up grant application for the Interactive TOpic Model and MEtadata Visualization (TOME) project
                , regarding Wise et al.’s Galaxies visualization, ‘By forcing all thematic differences into a single two-dimensional presentation, information is inevitably lost’. In an effort to minimize this information loss, we are now creating an exploration tool for the purpose of experiencing a topic-modeled corpus in 3D space, using the free, open-source JavaScript framework 
                Famo.us. 
            
            The 
                Famo.us framework is designed to help ‘create smooth, complex UIs for any screen’, and will provide us some substantial benefits, first and foremost being that its CSS-like styling code is relatively straightforward to learn and implement. Additionally, using physics-based animations, three orientation axes, and opacity control, it is capable of rendering a touch-screen manipulable, three-dimensional environment, the interactivity afforded by which is something we believe will help greatly foster user exploration. As explained by Card et al. (1999), ‘This additional [3rd] dimension projects from the viewpoint toward infinity, creating a large visible workspace’, a decidedly beneficial quality when visually exploring a large dataset. 
            
            Chuang et al. (2012) describe the illegible results of experimenting with topic modelling visualizations where text is displayed directly in the visualization matrix. To reduce the volume of unwanted information, our design implements Healey’s (1996) notion of ‘knowledge discovery’, allowing the user to 
                filter unwanted data, and what Petre and Green (1992) describe as ‘secondary notation; the use of layout and perceptual cues which are not formally part of the notation (elements such as adjacency, clustering, whitespace, labeling and so on)’. Like Healey, we believe this will help ease any display or perception bottleneck and afford the user a unique opportunity to discover and explore unknown trends and relationships in the data. The user will customize the visibility of elements of the dataset and secondary notation by adjusting a series of controls to make alterations to the sensitivity of, for instance, clustering algorithms, labeling, or the visibility of edges in a network. 
            
            Since any single visualization is fundamentally limited in its ability to communicate very complex relationships, like Andrew Goldstone’s DfR browser (2013), and Snyder et al.’s Metadata and Topic Model Analysis Toolkit (MetaToMATo) (2013), our concept merges multiple visualizations into what Snyder et al. term ‘a single faceted browsing paradigm for exploration and analysis of document collections’. Word clouds generated via topic modelling, histograms, line graphs, and network diagramming are all experienced via a zoomable user interface (ZUI). Snyder et al. (2013) explain that ‘effectively exploring and analyzing large text corpora requires visualizations that provide a high level summary’. Figure 1 shows how the viewer will be able to move from that high-level summary, ‘flying’ deeper and deeper into the data, simultaneously experiencing multiple visualizations from unique vantage points, and, as espoused by Chuang et al. (2012), ‘drilling down’ into additional layers of information as desired. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. As the user navigates deeper into the dataset, more and different relationships are revealed. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alexander, E., Kohlmann, J., Valenza, R., Witmore, M. and Gleicher, M. (2014). Serendip: Topic Model-Driven Visual Exploration of Text Corpora, https://graphics.cs.wisc.edu/Papers/2014/AKVWG14/Preprint.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. 
                        Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
                        3: 993–1022. 
                    
                    
                        Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D. and Shneiderman, B. (1999). 
                        Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.
                    
                    
                        Chaney, A. J.-B. and Blei, D. M. (2012). Visualizing Topic Models. 
                        Proceedings of the Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Dublin, Ireland, 4–7 June 2012, http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM12/paper/download/4645%26lt%3B/5021. 
                    
                    
                        Chen, A. T., Sheble, L. and Eichler, G. (2013). Topic Modeling and Network Visualization to Explore Patient Experiences. 
                        Visual Analytics in Health Care, Washington, DC, 16 November 2013, http://ruby.ils.unc.edu/~atchen/pubs/Chen_Sheble_Eichler_VAHC2013.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Chuang, J., Manning, C. D. and Heer, J. (2012). Termite: Visualization Techniques for Assessing Textual Topic Models. Capri Islands, Italy, http://vis.stanford.edu/files/2012TermiteAVI.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Dou, W., Wang, X., Kraft, T. and Ribarsky, W. (2011). Identifying Topical Trends in Social Media with Topic Modeling. University of North Carolina, Charlotte. http://vialab.science.uoit.ca/textvis2011/papers/textvis%202011-dou.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Frederica-Klein, L. (2013). TOpic Model and MEtadata Visualization Project (TOME), digital humanities startup grant application. 
                    
                    
                        Goldstone, A. (2013). drfbrowser: Take a MALLET to Literary History, http://agoldst.github.io/dfrbrowser/web. 
                    
                    
                        Gretarsson, B., O’Donovan, J., Bostandjiev, S., Höllerer, T., Asuncion, A., Newman, D. and Smyth, P. (2012). Topicnets: Visual Analysis of Large Text Corpora with Topic Modeling. 
                        ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 
                        3(2): 23. 
                    
                    
                        Günnemann, N., Derntl, M., Klamma, R. and Jarke, M. (2013). An Interactive System for Visual Analytics of Dynamic Topic Models. 
                        Datenbank-Spektrum, 
                        13(3): 213–23. 
                    
                    
                        Healey, C. (1996). Effective Visualization of Large Multidimensional Datasets. Department of Computer Science Thesis, University of British Columbia. 
                    
                    
                        Iwata, T., Yamada, T. and Ueda, N. (2008). Probabilistic Latent Semantic Visualization: Topic Model for Visualizing Documents. In 
                        Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Las Vegas, 24–27 August 2008, pp. 363–71, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1401937. 
                    
                    
                        Jiao, Z. L., Liu, Q., Li, Y.-F., Marriott, K. and Wybrow, M. (2013). Visualization of Large Ontologies with Landmarks. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics Theory and Applications and International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and Applications, Barcelona, pp. 461–70, http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~mwybrow/papers/jiaoivapp2013.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Katifori, A., Halatsis, C., Lepouras, G., Vassilakis, C. and Giannopoulou, E. (2007). Ontology Visualization Methods Survey. 
                        ACM Computing Surveys,
                        39(4) (2 November): 10–es, doi:10.1145/1287620.1287621. 
                    
                    
                        MacEachren, A. M., Bishop, I., Dykes, J., Dorling, D. and Gatrell, A. (1994). Introduction to Advances in Visualizing Spatial Data. In 
                        Visualization in Geographical Information Systems. London: John Wiley &amp; Sons, pp. 51–59.
                    
                    
                        McCallum, A. K. (2002). MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu. 
                    
                    
                        Petre, M. and Green, T. R. G. (1992). Learning to Read Graphics: Some Evidence That ‘Seeing’ an Information Display Is an Acquired Skill. 
                        Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 
                        4: 55–70. 
                    
                    
                        Sharkey, M. and Ansari, M. (2014). Deconstruct and Reconstruct: Using Topic Modeling on an Analytics Corpus. In 
                        LAK Workshops, http://ceurws. org/Vol1137/ lakdatachallenge2014_submission_1.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Simpson, J., Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (2014). The Epidemiology of Ideas. 
                        Canadian Society for Digital Humanities Annual Conference, Brock University, May 2014. 
                    
                    
                        Snyder, J., Knowles, R., Dredze, M., Gormley, M. and Wolfe, T. (2013). Topic Models and Metadata for Visualizing Text Corpora. 
                        Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013 Demonstration Session, Atlanta, 10–12 June 2013, pp. 5–9.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Extracting Key Phrases for Suggesting Annotation Candidates from Japanese Historical Document
                
                    
                        Sato
                        Takafumi
                    
                    Ritsumeikan University、Japan
                    is0069kh@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Goto
                        Makoto
                    
                    The National Institutes for the Humanities, Japan
                    m-goto@digitalhistory.jp
                
                
                    
                        Kimura
                        Fuminori
                    
                    Ritsumeikan University、Japan
                    fkimura@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Maeda
                        Akira
                    
                    Ritsumeikan University、Japan
                    amaeda@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Annotation Suggestion
                    Historical Documents
                    Web-based System
                    Machine Learning
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Recent progress in digitizing historical documents has made it easier to work with the documents by enabling use of annotations and text analysis (Nagasaki et al., 2011). Di Donato et al. developed a system for annotating digitized historical documents (2013). Systems for analyzing historical documents focus on annotating not only text but also various kinds of objects such as images and figures and constructing an interface to facilitate annotating. 
            In the field of history and humanities, thorough annotation for a target document is carried out as research. However, efficiently annotating text in historical documents is not an easy task. Moreover, deciding which text should be annotated is challenging. Therefore, automatically suggesting annotations would be an invaluable resource for researchers. 
            We have been developing a system in which researchers can collaboratively annotate digitized Japanese historical documents. A team of Japanese historical researchers are currently annotating ‘Todaiji Yoroku’, a Japanese historical document written in the 12th century. However, progress has been slow because annotating requires specialized knowledge, and collaborative annotating involves a time-consuming process of face-to-face discussions and consensus among researchers. We aim to facilitate collaborative annotating through a web-based interface that enables annotation of the same document by multiple users simultaneously (Sato at al., 2014).
            We developed a method for extracting key phrases from Japanese historical documents, and it will be used in our system for automatically suggesting annotations. We define a key phrase as a personal name, the name of a temple, or a Buddhist term.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Outline of proposed method.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Flow of proposed method.
            
                Proposed Method
            
            Figure 1 shows the outline of our proposed method, and Figure 2 illustrates the flow of the proposed method. Patterns of characters surrounding existing annotations are found in an annotated text by using support vector machine (SVM), and key phrases are extracted from a non-annotated text by utilizing these patterns. One of the unique characteristics of the proposed method is that the estimated word segmentation is used as a feature during the learning process. The ability to segment words is particularly important for analyzing ancient Japanese because the Japanese writing system does not use spaces between words, and automatic extraction of words from text in ancient Japanese is especially challenging.
            
                Word Segmentation
            
            In the word segmentation process, sentences are divided into words. In Japanese, there are three kinds of scripts: cursive Japanese syllabary (hiragana), angular Japanese syllabary (katakana), and Chinese characters (kanji). ‘Todaiji Yoroku’ was written as a transcription of classical Chinese into classical Japanese. In the transcriptions from classical Chinese into classical Japanese, hiragana characters were inserted into original sentence written in classical Chinese in order to adapt to Japanese syntax. The cursive Japanese syllabary is often used, particularly for postpositional particle of auxiliary verbs. Therefore, we can assume that most nouns consist of only Chinese characters. The boundary between Chinese characters and hiragana characters can possibly be regarded as segmentation. 
            
                Key Phrase Extraction
            
            In the key phrase extraction process, patterns of characters surrounding key phrases are found by using SVM. SVM is applied to words that are found by the word segmentation process to learn where patterns of characters appear around key phrases and to attach tags to them. Key phrases are extracted by utilizing the results of SVM by referring to the attached tags and presented as suggested annotations.
            Experiment
            We conducted an experiment to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method for extracting key phrases from the text of ‘Todaiji Yoroku’ by using existing annotations as the training data. We used 5-fold cross-validation. We achieved a 75% precision rate. Even though we have not yet closely examined whether the obtained results are appropriate as annotation suggestions, many of the extracted key phrases that were not judged as relevant were actually good annotation suggestions. This means that the proposed method should be an effective tool for suggesting annotations. 
            Conclusion
            We developed a method for extracting key phrases from digitized Japanese historical documents. We believe that automatically suggesting annotations will be an effective tool for annotating historical documents. We are planning to evaluate the appropriateness of key phrases extracted by the researchers using our method who are actually studying and annotating ‘Todaiji Yoroku’.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Di Donato, F., Morbidoni, C. and Fonda, S. (2013). Semantic Annotation with Pundit: A Case Study and a Practical Demonstration. In 
                        Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Collaborative Annotations in Shared Environment: Metadata, Vocabularies, and Techniques in the Digital Humanities (
                        DH-CASE’13), Florence, Italy, 10 September 2013.
                    
                    
                        Nagasaki, K., Tomabechi, T. and Shimoda, M. (2011). Toward a Digital Research Environment for Buddhist Studies. In 
                        Book of Abstracts of Digital Humanities 2011, Stanford, CA, 19–22 June 2011, pp. 342–43.
                    
                    
                        Sato, T., Goto, M., Kimura, F. and Maeda, A. (2014). Developing a Collaborative Annotation System for Historical Documents by Multiple Humanities Researchers. 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Science and Information Technology 2014 (ICCSIT2014), Barcelona, Spain, 22–24 December 2014. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Feminism and the digital: towards a database of Argentine women artists
                
                    
                        Gluzman
                        Georgina Gabriela
                    
                    Universidad de San Andrés, Argentine Republic
                    georginagluz@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    database
                    women artists
                    Latin America
                
                
                    art history
                    gender studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital humanities are slowly beginning to take shape in Argentina, hand in hand with the country’s economic growth in the last decade. So far, the most important digital efforts have been undertaken by researchers from the fields of literature and history.
            But what happens when digital humanities meet art history in the Argentine context? A few digital art history projects have been active since the 2000s, funded by several governmental institutions and private museums. However, most of them are repeating the art historical canon, maintaining a narrative organised around styles and masterpieces, while obliterating the careers of women in art.
            Gender studies in art history are still thin on the ground in Argentina. In scholarship terms, research focused on women artists is very recent, having begun in the 1990s. There is much to do ahead, fostering the investment of undergraduate students, museums’ staffs, and the public.
            So what happens when digital humanities meet feminist efforts in art history? This paper aims to discuss and present a digital humanities project that has developed from my doctoral dissertation research. This project will attempt to encourage visitors to contribute information on women artists, helping to destabilise art historical narratives and to encourage the interest in women artists from Argentina. MArEAr (Spanish for ‘making dizzy’) hopes to make widely available the information collected for my doctoral dissertation, which will encompass the careers of women artists from the 1880s to the 1920s. These artists are not featured in survey books and are also absent from many encyclopedias. Their works are scattered in museums and private collections. They are, even today, little-known names not connected to any work visible in museums’ galleries.
        
    



    
        
            
                Finding the Same Artworks from Multiple Databases in Different Languages
                
                    
                        Kimura
                        Taisuke
                    
                    College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Japan
                    is0013hh@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Batjargal
                        Biligsaikhan
                    
                    Kinugasa Research Organization, Ritsumeikan University, Japan
                    biligsaikhan@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Kimura
                        Fuminori
                    
                    Kinugasa Research Organization, Ritsumeikan University, Japan
                    fkimura@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Maeda
                        Akira
                    
                    College of Information Science and Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Japan
                    amaeda@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    multilingual record linkage
                    Japanese arts
                    Ukiyo-e
                    GLAM
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    metadata
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper discusses a method for identifying the same artworks across multiple databases by using textual metadata written in different languages. As more and more libraries, museums, galleries, and archives are making their collections available online, it is essential to develop methods for accessing these vast and valuable collections of cultural heritage easily and thoroughly. 
            We aim to identify the same artworks whose metadata are in different languages since most existing methods, such as 
                record linkage (Fellegi and Sunter, 1969) and 
                duplicate detection (Bilenko and Mooney, 2003; Elmagarmid et al., 2007) use mainly one language.
            
            We have developed a method for identifying the same Ukiyo-e prints in databases in English and Japanese (Batjargal et al., 2014). This method is particularly useful since the Japanese traditional woodblock printing—
                Ukiyo-e—involves engraving, and many copies or variants of each particular work were made from the same woodblock. Most of these copies and variants were scattered around the world in the 19th century and are now stored in museums and galleries in many countries. Most of the metadata in these databases are available only in English or in the native language of each country. Titles are mostly written either as the transliteration of the original Japanese title or a translation into another language. Table 1 shows examples of metadata in databases that contain Ukiyo-e in their collections and the languages in which the titles are written.
            
            One effective approach for identifying the same artworks in multiple image databases is to use image similarity calculations. Ukiyo-e.org
                1 (Resig, 2013) provides a highly efficient method for identifying the same Ukiyo-e prints. The method exclusively uses image similarities rather than textual data to identify Ukiyo-e prints. Our textual-metadata-based method and image-similarity-based approach both have advantages and disadvantages. One of the advantages of our method is not having to harvest all the data from the databases beforehand. Furthermore, artifacts other than prints might not be suitable for identification using two-dimensional image similarities. It is better to combine both methods to obtain the most accurate results.
            
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                        Original Ukiyo-e print
                    
                    Title
                    Database
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                        
                        神奈川沖浪裏
                        (original title in Japanese)
                    
                    
                        神奈川沖浪裏
                        (original title in Japanese)
                    
                    The Edo-Tokyo Museum
                
                
                    
                    
                        Kanagawa oki nami ura 
                        (transliteration)
                        The great wave off shore of Kanagawa
                            (in English)
                        
                    
                    The Library of Congress
                
                
                    
                    
                        The great wave off Kanagawa
                        (in English)
                    
                    National Gallery of Victoria
                
                
                    
                    
                        • La grande vague
                        • Sous la grande vague au large de Kanagawa
                        • Sous la vague au large de Kanagawa
                        (in French)
                    
                    French Photo Agency
                
                
                    
                    
                        De grote golf bij Kanagawa
                        (in Dutch)
                    
                    Netherlands State Museum
                
                
                    
                    
                        De grote golf bij KanegawaFugaku Sanjrokkei
                        (in Dutch)
                    
                    Centre Céramique
                
                
                    
                    
                        • Große Woge
                        • Der Fuji hinter der großen Woge
                        • Die Welle
                        (in German)
                    
                    Bildarchiv Foto Marburg
                
            
            
                Proposed Method
            
            We extended our previous method that identifies the same artworks by comparing transliterated Japanese titles with their English translations, both of which are written in the same script, i.e., Latin, by utilizing intermediate representations such as transcriptions or transliterations (Batjargal et al., 2014). In this paper, we aim to identify the same artworks by comparing original Japanese titles with their translations in other European languages. Our method utilizes proper nouns in a title as key elements for matching, and it uses translations of other words to further improve the matching accuracy. If a given word in the title is not a proper noun, we perform a literal translation using bilingual dictionaries—that is, all the words excluding the proper nouns are translated. The similarity degree is based on the weighting of matching words among titles in different languages. The similarity degree increases as matching words are found in the titles. In addition to the weighting of matching words, the partial string matching score is considered in the similarity calculation.
            Figure 1 illustrates how the same artworks are identified from databases in different languages. First, the metadata elements are (1) translated as explained above. Then, the artworks are (2) filtered on the basis of the artist name by using our previous method that identifies uses artists’ various notations and aliases. Our previous method is capable of providing multilingual integrated access to diverse Ukiyo-e databases by generating links to miscellaneous Linked Data resources dynamically from the returned results using authority data. It allows users to access additional data about a certain artwork in multiple databases regardless of the languages and formats of each database (Batjargal et al., 2013). The proposed method then (3) calculates the similarity degree, and the artworks that have higher scores are (4) treated as the same as the given artwork just after obtaining the artworks from multiple databases. 
            
                
                Although this method has been tested only on Ukiyo-e databases, it does not depend on a particular type of art. Since this method requires only bilingual dictionaries as the language resource, it can be applied to other languages easily.
            
            Experimental Evaluation
            We have conducted preliminary experiments to evaluate the proposed method in finding the same artworks in multiple databases in different languages. In the experiments, 45 Japanese titles of the artist Katsushika Hokusai’s Ukiyo-e prints in the Edo-Tokyo Museum were checked against the 437 English titles in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where each title has at least one identical record. The proposed method has achieved 86.7% accuracy in finding the same artworks between Japanese and English by successfully identifying 39 prints out of 45 (see Table 2). Further evaluations against other languages are under examination.
            
                
                
            
            
                
                    Condition
                    
                        Success rate
                    
                    Accuracy
                
                
                    Finding the same artworks between Japanese and English from multiple databases
                    39 of 45
                    86.7%
                
            
            
                
                    Table 
                    . A preliminary experimental result of the proposed method
                
            
            Summary 
            We developed a method for identifying the same artworks across multiple databases using textual metadata written in different languages. The proposed method is useful for both humanities researchers and database administrators. It provides researchers with easy and efficient ways of finding the same artworks in other databases regardless of the language. For database administrators, aggregating multiple metadata of the same artwork from various databases makes it possible to correct and/or enrich the existing metadata records to improve the quality of their database. The proposed method can be used to link the same or similar artworks across different databases, and it will contribute to enriching the Linked Open Data in the field of humanities (Batjargal et al., 2013).
            Our future work includes extending the proposed method to other humanities disciplines and conducting evaluations against other languages.
            Note
            1. http://ukiyo-e.org/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Batjargal, B., Kuyama, T., Kimura, F. and Maeda, A. (2013). Linked Data Driven Multilingual Access to Diverse Japanese Ukiyo-e Databases by Generating Links Dynamically. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(4) (December): 522–30. 
                    
                    
                        Batjargal, B., Kuyama, T., Kimura, F. and Maeda, A. (2014). Identifying the Same Records across Multiple Ukiyo-e Image Databases Using Textual Data in Different Languages. 
                        Proceedings of Digital Libraries 2014: ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (
                        JCDL 2014)
                         and International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries (
                        TPDL 2014), London, 8–12 September 2014.
                    
                    
                        Bilenko, M. and Mooney, R. (2003). On Evaluation and Training-Set Construction for Duplicate Detection. In 
                        Proceedings of the KDD-03 Workshop on Data Cleaning, Record Linkage, and Object Consolidation, Washington, DC, August 2003, pp. 7–12.
                    
                    
                        Elmagarmid, A., Ipeirotis, P. and Verykios, V. (2007). Duplicate Record Detection: A Survey. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 
                        19(1) (January): 1–16.
                    
                    
                        Fellegi, I. P. and Sunter, A. B. (1969). A Theory for Record Linkage. 
                        Journal of the American Statistical Association,
                        64(328) (December): 1183.
                    
                    
                        Resig, J. (2013). Aggregating and Analyzing Digitized Japanese Woodblock Prints. 
                        3rd Annual Conference of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities, Ritsumeikan University, Kyoto, Japan, 19–21 September 2013.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Following the Stars (Under the Stars): Mapping The Film Circuits of Inter-War Outdoor Picture Gardens in Western Australia
                
                    
                        Courtney
                        Angela
                    
                    Indiana University, United States of America
                    ancourtn@indiana.edu
                
                
                    
                        Courtney
                        Michael
                    
                    Indiana University, United States of America
                    micourtn@Indiana.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    GIS
                    mapping
                    film
                    cinema
                    Australia
                
                
                    film and cinema studies
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In his 2011 exploration of using GIS and the film history, Klenotic discusses his realization of the potential that GIS technologies offer for his work in film history: 
            GIS has enabled me to think more carefully about cinema history as a history of spatial relations, and it has helped me to rethink the modalities in which historical evidence can be examined, assembled, interpreted, stored and presented to the public; modalities that are impossible to describe and explain in writing alone. (Klenotic, 2011, 58)
            Our project, 
                Following the Stars: Mapping the Film Circuits of Inter-War Outdoor Cinemas in Western Australia, seeks not only to map the geographical proliferation of outdoor cinemas but also to re-create the exhibition history of films in Western Australia between the two world wars, creating a visual representation of film exhibition. Based in large part on Ina Bertrand’s now-aged Cinemaweb database, we have compiled a list of roughly 125 outdoor cinemas in operation between the end of the First World War and the beginning of the Second. Ranging widely in design and intent, these spaces offered outdoor film exhibition opportunities for many far-flung rural communities as well as for the urban populations on the Perth environs. In light of recent interest in mapping the movies by such projects as the Australian Cinemas Map
                1 and the Cinemas and Audiences Research Project (CAARP),
                2 this project addresses a particular type of cinema space during the pretelevision era in which outdoor cinemas were particularly popular.
            
            Some of these spaces were purposely built ‘picture gardens’ such as the still-operating Sun Pictures
                3 designed specifically for film exhibition outside. Others, however, were developed through opportunistic convenience, adding a fence and deckchairs on a lawn behind a hotel, or projecting outside from an indoor cinema during summer nights when the weather cooperated. Many of these venues operated as part of a larger circuit (Goldfield Pictures, Hoyts, Nulsen’s West Touring Talkies, the Salvation Army Biorama Company, and more). 
            
            
                Following the Stars is developing maps of the circuits that we are re-creating using Omeka and the Neatline plugin via research conducted through Cinemaweb and the invaluable newspaper resources in Trove, in addition to months of months of fieldwork locating and researching cinemas or former sites. The project also features a timeline of film exhibited and develops a narrative of the history of this type of film exhibition in western Australia. 
            
            Data used in developing the project include venue names, locations, and years of operation; circuit operators and routes; film titles and dates shown; sources; images of cinemas both currently and historically when available; and lengthy bibliographies upon which the project is based.
            Notes
            1. See http://auscinemas.flinders.edu.au/.
            2. See http://caarp.flinders.edu.au/.
            3. See http://www.broomemovies.com.au/sun-pictures.html.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cinemaweb. (n.d.). www.ammpt.asn.au/CinemaWEB/SITE/ (not functional as of time of publication). 
                    
                    
                        Klenotic, Jeffrey. (2011). Putting Cinema History on the Map: Using GIS to Explore the Spatiality of Cinema. In Maltby, R., Biltereyst, D. and Meers, P. (eds), 
                        Explorations in New Cinema History: Approaches and Case Studies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell; ProQuest ebrary (accessed 19 October 2014).
                    
                    
                        Trove: Digitised Newspapers. (n.d.). https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From Crowdsourcing to Knowledge Communities: Creating Meaningful Scholarship Through Digital Collaboration
                
                    
                        Voss
                        Jon
                    
                    Historypin, United States of America
                    jon.voss@historypin.org
                
                
                    
                        Wolfenstein
                        Gabriel
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    gkw@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Frank
                        Zephyr
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    zfrank@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Heuser
                        Ryan
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    heuser@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Young
                        Kerri
                    
                    Historypin, United States of America
                    kerri.young@historypin.org
                
                
                    
                        Stanhope
                        Nick
                    
                    Historypin, United States of America
                    nick.stanhope@shiftdesign.org.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    historypin
                    history
                    mapping
                    community
                    crowdsourcing
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    content analysis
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    visualisation
                    crowdsourcing
                    maps and mapping
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Over the last three years, Stanford University’s Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis (CESTA) has jointly led a research project in partnership with Historypin to examine the potential for leveraging crowdsourced information about photographic, map, and textual content for humanities research. The project was funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and sought to study elements of user interface, user interaction, community engagement, and collaborative partnerships.
            Our work mirrors the findings of others utilizing crowdsourcing in cultural heritage, in that there is an important distinction within the realm of crowdsourcing between more straightforward knowledge gathering and more complex and collaborative tasks and processes that revolve around what we termed ‘knowledge communities’: small networks of neighbors or enthusiasts representing a group of people that could be systematically organized to share and participate in research for a common aim. Engaging with these communities often requires longer time frames than simpler task-driven crowdsourcing may allow, and is necessarily much more collaborative than extractive. Furthermore, there are important social benefits for the institutions and communities alike that fulfill the new missions of 21st-century cultural heritage and academic institutions.
            Throughout our research, we found that not only will there be a much more collaborative future among academic humanists, memory institutions, and knowledge communities, but that only through such collaborations can some questions relative to the humanities be explored.
            In this presentation, we summarize the methodology of the project and present key learnings and examples that we hope will assist academic and cultural heritage institutions that are interested in engaging with knowledge communities. In addition, we will provide a way to practically approach such projects with realistic expectations and ideas for successful implementation.
            Methodology
            In this section we describe in some detail the methodology used in each of the three projects and the different approaches and communities we were working with. We had three sub-projects: the Year of the Bay, Living with the Railroads, and the Emotions of London. Together, these projects allow us to offer a much broader range of findings and practices than we could have with a single one.
            
                Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Communities
            
            We’ve seen that digital-transcription projects on the humanities side, or ‘citizen science’ on the scientific side, tend to blend a combination of ‘crowd’ and ‘community’ (Clauser and Wallace, 2012). In the former, loosely associated individuals perform autonomous and relatively simple tasks, while the latter often requires collaboration and a more social and coordinated element (Haythornthwaite, 2009). In Living with the Railroads and Year of the Bay, we were not dealing with questions of transcription or necessarily easily defined tasks, but rather more complex questions of contextualization and even contribution with a specific goal in mind, still meeting definitions of crowdsourcing but leaning toward more complex tasks requiring an engaged community (Dunn and Hedges, 2012). In both projects, there was a collaborative approach between the participating institutions and the individual participants toward a common aim, however broadly defined—be it exploring the human and ecological history of the bay or tracing western expansion through life around the railroads. This also speaks to the potential for strengthening and measuring community ties through this work, which Nick Poole and Nick Stanhope describe as a new approach not only to digitization, ‘but of a new role for museums as places of engagement and participation in which the disciplines or curatorship, digitisation, collections management and documentation are shared with the user in a joint effort to develop shared cultural capital’ (Poole and Stanhope, 2012).
             As these projects progressed, it was helpful for us to understand and define the various communities we were increasingly in partnership with, not as users or as a crowd, but as ‘knowledge communities’. Whether they were local residents or history enthusiasts who were knowledgeable about their area, or in some cases obsessed with solving a history mystery that was presented to them, or who had specific topical knowledge about details pertaining to one railroad line, these small networks of neighbors or enthusiasts represented a group of people who could be systematically organized to share and participate in research for a common aim. After two years of working with specific individuals and groups of individuals, we came to see this as an important distinction within the realm of crowdsourcing, and an approach that is most importantly collaborative in intent and design rather than extractive and focused on the needs of an institution or a researcher. This approach has also been termed community-sourcing (Sample Ward, 2011).
            Literature on crowdsourcing generally supports the process (which remains frustratingly variably defined) on the basis of whether some sort of utilitarian goal is met: entries are added (Wikipedia), materials are transcribed (Transcribe Bentham), data is classified (Galaxy Zoo). In this, understandings of crowdsourcing, both definitional and in terms of results, remain wedded to a market model. Can you get data or analysis? Can you get it more quickly or more cheaply? These are the primary questions. The question that motivated our project—whether crowdsourcing can be useful to humanities researchers pursuing humanities projects—found a very different answer, though utilitarian goals remain. Our three sub-projects engaged three different types of crowds: the amorphous public of people interested in the Bay Area, the expert community of train enthusiasts, and the paid community of Amazon Mechanical Turkers. All three were, unsurprisingly, only partially successful in terms of the research questions initially posed. There is usable and interesting data (images and metadata uploaded to Historypin for the first two, analysis of literary passages as to emotionality in the latter). But it isn’t perfect, and in some cases doesn’t quite meet the goals of the various PIs. But the conclusions we have drawn thus far ask us—and, by extension, other researchers—to look beyond the data to the process itself.
            There is increasing segmentation of crowdsourcing approaches in cultural heritage (Ridge, 2014), with great import for the academy as well as memory institutions. Crowdsourcing offers academic humanists a different way of engaging the public, especially in collaboration with non-academic organizations. We suggest that, if researchers have flexibility in their projects, building or collaborating with knowledge communities can result in original research, and an engagement with the community that is typically missing from university-based research. Without this flexibility, crowdsourcing possibilities become more limited, though still possible, as our work with the Turkers demonstrated.
            Furthermore, we feel that museums, libraries, archives, and academic institutions alike increasingly embrace the opportunities they have to positively impact communities, not just in terms of cultural programming, but also as partners in strengthening a range of societal measures (Van Thoen, 2014). Meaningful engagement of knowledge communities can have a range of outcomes in addition to the traditional measurements of crowdsourcing for the institutions as well as the communities, such as increasing interest in and sense of ownership of institutions, strengthening community ties and associational life, and decreasing isolation among frequently marginalized sectors of society such as seniors (Thomson and Chatterjee, 2013).
            Practical Applications
            This section will be presented in detail, as it’s the heart of the practical takeaways for institutions interested in engaging knowledge communities. These are broken into three sections, including (a) design and expectations; (b) methods of engagement; and (c) skills, training, and technology. 
            Future Research
            Here we will look at key areas of future research that we’ll be pursuing to continue our work in this field.
            Acknowledgements
            We have so many people to thank for their roles in this project over the last year that it’d be impossible to name them all. The Crowdsourcing for Humanities Research project was funded by a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and led by Zephyr Frank at Stanford University, who served as the principal investigator. You can see all of the people who worked on the project on our behind-the-scenes blog,
                 http://crowdsourcingthehumanities.blogspot.com. We’d also like to thank the growing community of practitioners and scholars sharing their experience in this rapidly evolving field, not all of whom are cited below.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clauser, T. and Wallace, V. (2012). Building a Volunteer Community: Results and Findings from Transcribe Bentham. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        6(2), http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000125/000125.html.
                    
                    
                        Dunn, S. and Hedges, M. (2012). Crowd-Sourcing Scoping Study: Engaging the Crowd with Humanities Research. AHRC report, http://crowds.cerch.kcl.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/Crowdsourcing-connected-communities.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Haythornthwaite, C. (2009). Crowds and Communities: Light and Heavyweight Models of Peer Production. 
                        Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaiian Conference on System Sciences, Waikola, Hawaii, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1–10.
                    
                    
                        Poole, N. and Stanhope, N. (2012). The Participatory Museum. Collections Trust, http://www.collectionstrust.org.uk/past-posts/the-participatory-museum (modified 3 July 2014).
                    
                    
                        Ridge, M. (2014). Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage: Introduction. In Ridge, M. (ed.), 
                        Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage. Ashgate, pp. 1–13.
                    
                    
                        Sample Ward, A. (2011). Crowdsourcing vs Community-Sourcing: What’s the Difference and the Opportunity? http://amysampleward.org/2011/05/18/crowdsourcing-vs-community-sourcing-whats-the-difference-and-the-opportunity/.
                    
                    
                        Thomson, L. and Chatterjee, H. (2013). UCL Museum Wellbeing Measures Toolkit. AHRC and University College London, http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums/research/touch/museumwellbeingmeasures/wellbeing-measures/UCL_Museum_Wellbeing_Measures_Toolkit_Sept2013.pdf. (See also UCL Museums and Collections, Touch and Wellbeing, http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums/research/touch.)
                    
                    
                        Van Thoen, L. (2014). Museums Make You Happier and Less Lonely, Studies Find. Freelancers Broadcasting Network, https://www.freelancersunion.org/blog/2014/03/26/museums-good-for-you-happier-community/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From KWIC Concordance to Video excerpt or Folio facsimile: Demonstration of Multimodal and Multimedia corpora in TXM
                
                    
                        Heiden
                        Serge
                    
                    ENS de Lyon, France
                    slh@ens-lyon.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    tei
                    txm
                    transcription
                    video
                    synoptic edition
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    concording and indexing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The open-source GPL-licensed TXM software provides a classical toolbox for text analysis and mining composed of a versatile and efficient full text search engine, text reading and browsing, video playing, sub-corpus and partition building, co-occurrence analysis, factorial analysis, and clustering. It is available as a desktop application for Windows, Mac, or Linux, as well as a web portal software for a server accessed through a web browser (Heiden, 2010). The TXM platform can be downloaded for free at http://sf.net/projects/txm.
            An originality of TXM is the ability to apply analytic tools on a large spectrum of encoding formats from XML-TEI encoded sources to basic raw text, through a high-level user GUI in a desktop software or as a web portal.
            This poster will introduce the recent integration of processing capabilities for two very different modalities of textual data into TXM:
             • Written texts associated with their facsimile-scanned images or media files through pagination.
             • Speech transcriptions associated with their recordings—video or audio media files—through synchronization.
            Each textual modality is managed through the unique pivot XML-TEI TXM source format designed for TXM.
            The poster will demonstrate a live session of
             • Navigation between KWIC concordances and the synoptic display of text editions with facsimile and critical edition containing the occurrence of pivots in the online TXM portal version (see Figure 1).
             • Navigation between KWIC concordances and playing the video excerpts corresponding to the occurrence of pivots in the desktop version (see Figure 2).
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Browsing the ‘Quest del saint Graal’ manuscript edition online in a TXM portal. Lower part: A KWIC concordance of the ‘“Lancelot” word followed by a verb’ pattern. Upper part: A synoptic view of the edition of the ‘Queste del saint Graal’ manuscript, composed from left to right of the facsimile image and of three different levels of diplomatic editions, with the sixth concordance hit highlighted in pink in each diplomatic level. The browser used in this screenshot is Firefox. The ‘Queste del saint Graal’ edition can be accessed in a TXM portal at http://txm.bfm-corpus.org/?command=documentation&amp;path=/GRAAL. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Browsing the video and the transcription of dialogs of a physics course in college in TXM desktop version. 
                Lower part: A KWIC concordance of the ‘“lumière” word followed by a verb’ pattern. 
                Upper part: A synoptic view of the edition of the transcription of dialogs of a physics course in college (Tiberghien et al., 2012) on the right and the video recording of the course on the left, with the third hit of the concordance highlighted in pink. The desktop TXM used in this scenario is the Linux version.
            
            The demonstration will be based on the desktop version of TXM and on the portal version of TXM.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In Otoguro, K. I. R. (ed.), 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, 4–7 November 2010, pp. 389–98.
                    
                    
                        Tiberghien, A., et al. (2012). Partager un corpus vidéo dans la recherche en éducation: Analyses et regards pluriels dans le cadre du projet ViSA. 
                        Education &amp; Didactique, 
                        6(March): 9–17, www.cairn.info/revue-education-et-didactique-2012-3-page-9.htm
                        .
                        
                             
                        
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From lighthouse to the moon: a guiding light to the corpus of Jules Verne
                
                    
                        Hayward
                        Nicholas John
                    
                    Center for Textual Studies and Digital Humanities, Loyola University Chicago, United States of America; Department of Computer Science, Loyola University Chicago, United States of America
                    ancientlives@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    virginia woolf
                    jules verne
                    framework
                    textual studies
                    corpus
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    image processing
                    information retrieval
                    interface and user experience design
                    literary studies
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    french studies
                    information architecture
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    programming
                    translation studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The Woolf Online project,
                1 which recently completed its second phase of development at Loyola University Chicago’s Center for Textual Studies and Digital Humanities, in collaboration with the Department of Computer Science, sought to address the following fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature:
            
             • How does a literary text come into being?
             • What kinds of influence are at work upon the writer during the process of initial composition, and thereafter?
            The Woolf Online project sought to investigate various ways in which different recoverable histories of a particular text could be used to illuminate the process of its composition. By recording the history of a particular text—its cultural, political, and autobiographical contexts and their interaction—visually we began to answer some of the following important questions:
             • How is textual history related to other histories of a text?
             • What use does literary criticism make of textual and contextual histories?
            Publication of Digital Scholarly Editions
            As part of the development of the Woolf Online project, we developed an extensible development and publication framework called Mojulem,
                2 for editing, publication, and visualisation of digital scholarly editions. We are now continuing this development with the Verne Digital Corpus,
                3 which focuses upon the work of Jules Verne, including original French language editions and their myriad, often questionable, English language translations. Mojulem allows us to build on the concept of ‘knowledge sites’, as suggested by Peter Shillingsburg,
                4 supplementing a core publication framework with modules/plugins such as OCR, editors, and image viewers. 
            
            Mojulem also enables us to host multiple projects within one installed framework, thereby enabling cross-project research, where applicable, and the option to aggregate specified data. Development of Mojulem, with the Woolf Online project and Verne Digital Corpus as examples of the current ongoing working environments, initially followed the need for four underlying core structures. These structures include CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm, which are detailed as follows. 
            CorPix
            Manuscripts and printed texts materially unite the iconic and lexical, the autographic and allographic,
                5 whereas all digital representations separate these constituent elements into images and transcriptions. With Mojulem projects, the common default display reunites the image and transcription by mapping the one to the other at the pixel level. CorPix software currently includes eHinman,
                6 Transparent,
                7 TransparentOCR, Magnify, and Zoom. For example, pixel-level positioning and coordinate fixing is an inherent feature of both Transparent and TransparentOCR, within both editor and visualisation tools. eHinman is a digital adaptation of the original Hinman collator, and enables fade from the image of a page from one copy to another, thereby enabling a visual collation of multiple copies. Transparent is used within both the visualisation and editing stages of a project’s development, enabling editor and user alike to view the image as the primary entry consideration for the project.
            
            CorTex
            The CorTex is the stable resource containing the merged or compacted plain text transcriptions of the variant expressions of a work. It stores all information about text and variations, ready to be extracted for display of variation amongst versions; it is not necessary to recompute them. The CorTex is the entity to which all standoff properties (markup, annotations, links, etc.) point and on whose stability the system depends. It is the source of each version’s text and variation from other texts. The stability and endurance of the CorTex is protected by multiplying duplicate copies locked with a digital signature, which verifies for each user that a CorTex copy is viable. Analysis of the CorTex variable forms provides statistical feedback to guide the production of a conflated text—for example, with the English language translations of a given Verne edition. Whilst these statistical results are no guarantee of an ultimately correct translation, they offer a conflated text with the highest viable agreement amongst the provided collated texts. Textual disagreements are currently resolved by assigning probability values, a higher value defining a greater probability of accuracy and agreement amongst the collated texts. Using such probability results, we are currently able to filter problematic passages in each translation to conflate a text with the highest probability of agreement amongst the translations per edition. 
            These results can then be provided for further research and assessment, and act as a suitable starting guide for further analysis of the conflated text, and translation in the example of Verne’s texts.
            CorCode
            CorCode is the add-on value of analysis, argument, and explanation. Mojulem stores markup separately, as standoff properties, applying it as the user invokes it for the rendering of a specific item’s image or text within a given visualisation, such as a transparent view of a page of the Initial Holograph Draft of ‘To the Lighthouse’.
                8 To do this, Mojulem includes an editor that saves text and encoding separately, and filters for converting legacy, code-embedded transcriptions, including TEI-encoded documents, into separate forms with markup analysed into properties, and filters for reversing this process. 
            
            CorForm
            A CorForm
                9 is a CSS stylesheet, containing special formatting rules, used to transform the overlapping properties of the CorCode into HTML. Each CorCode has a default CorForm, but other CorForms can be used in combination or as alternatives. Since a CorTex may have many CorCodes, and each CorCode many CorForms, structuring or formatting of the text can be attained by specifying some combination of already available resources, or by supplying new ones.
            
            The CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm are aggregated for a project within the Mojulem framework. Each such item is identified by a unique key, which is used as an index into the repository or database.
            In addition to the initial four cores, identified above, we have begun development of CorAssess, allowing effective assessment and analysis of Cor data for the Verne translations and conflated English language texts.
            CorAssess
            CorAssess works in tandem with the CorTex to provide analysis of statistical and end results relative to the conflated text output. CorAssess allows us to visualise where text has been conflated based upon resolved disagreements, the points of disagreement and resultant probabilities between collated texts per edition, and variance between collated texts, and also visualise alternative resolution patterns relative to variation distance for given points of disagreements in the conflated text. With Verne texts, for example, we will be able to visualise conflation decisions and offer alternatives for given decisions and disagreements, where applicable, in our conflated English language translations.
            Why Verne?
            After Woolf Online, we chose to focus upon the corpus of Jules Verne, including original French language editions and English language translations. We have begun collecting, collating, and preparing digitised copies of as many digitised editions as extant online. We have also been digitising early editions to provide an ever-growing dataset of Verne material. 
            The nature of early English language translations of Verne’s editions is a continuing source of frustration for those interested in the works of Jules Verne. His early categorisation as predominantly a children’s author in English language countries, unlike the publishing by Hetzel, coupled with early restricted access to original French language editions, simply compounded the issue.
            The corpus of Jules Verne offers an interesting opportunity for literary and contextual analysis coupled with data processing and automated analysis. The myriad existing digitised English language translations, including US and British variant editions, often more prevalent than their counterpart—the original French editions in our current digitised corpus—allows us to examine the development of those texts by comparing agreements, disagreements, omissions, and continuing revisions in said translations since a novel’s first edition. We are hoping to use this analysis to filter the noise of years of collective translations to collate a unified English translation for each French language edition.
            We will then be offering a comparison of French language edition against a filtered, collated English language edition. This will allow further consideration of the requisite merits of the English language translation directly juxtaposed to the original French language edition.
            Conclusion
            The development and combination of the initial four cores, CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm, within the modular and adaptable framework Mojulem, allowed the second phase of the Woolf Online project to begin to approach the fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature, as briefly outlined in the introduction. With the addition of CorAssess, we are now beginning to address additional issues with the publication, transmission, and development of texts. We are also testing, and proving, the viability of Mojulem beyond the Woolf Online project.
            The corpus of Jules Verne provides a particularly fascinating opportunity to test these cores and provide a resultant conflated, English language translation per extant French language edition. 
            This paper will briefly introduce the Mojulem framework and its initial four cores, grounded in the example of the Woolf Online project, and detail the ongoing developments to augment this work with the above new work on the corpus of Jules Verne, and the ongoing Verne Digital Corpus.
            Notes
            1. Project site is available at 
                http
                ://
                www
                .woolfonline
                .
                com. 
            
            2. Our current test framework for the Woolf Online project, as of 3 November 2014, can be viewed at 
                http://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                projects
                /
                edfu
                /.
            
            3. Initial development project site is available at 
                http
                ://
                www
                .scifidocs
                .
                com
                /.
            
            4. P. L. Shillingsburg, 
                From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts (Cambridge University Press, 2006).
            
            5. Nelson Goodman noted this distinction to separate art forms with a unique authentic form—for example, painting and sculpture—from art forms that are performative with multiple copies, including writing and music.
            6. An earlier stand-alone example can be viewed at 
                http
                ://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /testing
                /
                imaging
                /
                ehinman
                -
                dep
                /
                v
                6/.
            
            7. A test example page of the Initial Holograph Draft can be viewed at 
                http
                ://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                projects
                /
                edfu
                /?
                node
                =
                content
                /image
                /
                gallery
                &amp;
                project
                =1&amp;
                parent
                =2&amp;
                taxa
                =6&amp;
                content
                =353&amp;
                pos
                =21 and transcription = 
                http
                ://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                projects
                /
                edfu
                /?
                node
                =
                content
                /
                text
                /
                transcriptions
                &amp;
                project
                =1&amp;
                parent
                =2&amp;
                taxa
                =6&amp;
                content
                =5136&amp;pos
                =21. 
            
            8. For example, Image = 
                http
                ://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                projects
                /
                edfu
                /?
                node
                =
                content
                /
                image
                /
                gallery
                &amp;
                project
                =1&amp;
                parent
                =6&amp;
                taxa
                =24&amp;
                content
                =385&amp;
                pos=49 and transcription = 
                http
                ://
                dhdev
                .ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                projects
                /
                edfu
                /?
                node
                =
                content
                /
                text
                /
                transcriptions
                &amp;
                project
                =1&amp;
                parent
                =2&amp;
                taxa
                =6&amp;
                content
                =5164&amp;
                pos
                =49.
            
            9. An earlier TEI-derived stand-alone example of this concept, using material from the Malory project, can be viewed at 
                http://
                dhdev
                .
                ctsdh
                .
                luc
                .
                edu
                /
                testing
                /
                tei
                /
                teiparser
                _
                full
                /.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From Mapping the Republic of Letters to Humanities +Design Research Lab: Creating Visualization Tools for Humanistic Inquiry
                
                    
                        Coleman
                        Catherine Nicole
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    cncoleman@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Caviglia
                        Giorgio
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    giorgio.caviglia@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Comsa
                        Maria
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    mcomsa@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Braude
                        Mark
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    braude@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Edelstein
                        Dan
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    danedels@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Ceserani
                        Giovanna
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    ceserani@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    knowledge design
                    interface design
                    open design
                    visualization
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    knowledge representation
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            What does it mean to build visualization tools that support the research process in the humanities? In this paper we will trace the evolution of our thinking about data-driven tools beginning with case studies in early modern intellectual history and eventually including a wide range of projects from classics, social history, performance studies, and other fields. We will give concrete examples of how individual tools were designed and whether those tools ultimately failed or succeeded to provide scholars with a means to gain insights into historical data. Through these examples, this paper argues for the role of an open design process in the development of visualization tools for humanities research that brings designers, developers, and scholars into deep collaboration to build nuanced and rigorous tools for humanities research. 
            Mapping the Republic of Letters
            Mapping the Republic of Letters was formed on the assumption that intellectual history is one of the fields that stands the most to gain from the influx of big data. By combining metadata from library catalogues and large-scale digitization projects, the project seeks to maximize the transformative effect of all this information. The cartographic, chronological, and network visualizations ultimately produced allow researchers to examine some of the big questions that intellectual historians have long struggled with: How do intellectual networks function? How interconnected are they? How independent are these networks from other social networks? 
            The 2009 Digging Into Data Challenge grant award launched an active tool development phase in the Mapping the Republic of Letters (MRofL) project at Stanford. In partnership with DensityDesign Research Lab in Milan, the team began to engage in a tool design process in response to concrete research questions. The data—based on individuals and their correspondence, travel, and publications—were multidimensional and qualitatively rich. It became clear that historians who wish to bring data visualization tools to bear on the study of the past face a number of challenges. Many available tools had a steep learning curve and were ultimately of limited help for humanists. These tools rest on assumptions about the completeness and empirical value of data that often do not hold true for humanities research. Historical data can be incomplete and messy: statistical analysis can be a helpful to a limited extent, but interpretation at the most fundamental level is required to uncover meaning. Humanists also ask questions about the data that cannot be answered by numerical analysis. We needed tools that help us filter, contextualize, compare, and see the gaps in our data. 
            Humanities + Design
            
                Humanities + Design, a research lab founded in 2012 by Dan Edelstein, Paula Findlen, and Nicole Coleman, emerged directly out of lessons learned and opportunities for humanities data analysis discovered through MRofL. The mission of the lab is to produce, through the lens of humanistic inquiry, new modes of thinking in design and computer science to serve data-driven research in the humanities. We believe that humanistic inquiry, grounded in interpretation, has much to contribute to the development of technologies if they are to help us reveal ambiguity and paradox, allowing human-scale exploration of complex systems. In the laboratory environment, theoretical and methodological discussions happen side by side with hands-on work with digital materials. Humanities scholars and students, designers, engineers, and computer scientists engage together in ongoing tool design as defined by the specific needs of participating humanities projects.
            
            Palladio Project
            The award of the 2012 NEH Implementation Grant for Networks in History allowed the lab to pursue the development of visualization techniques and rich interaction with data that supports ‘thinking through data’ rather than using prescribed algorithms for data analysis. Palladio is a web-based demonstration application that allows any researcher to upload, visualize, and explore complex and multidimensional data, directly in a web browser. 
                It has been designed for humanistic inquiry, with a special focus on historical research. 
                The Palladio visualization system combines a primary view (for example, Map, Network Graph, and Tabular views) with filters to make it easy to query a dataset. 
                There is no need to create an account, nor do we store any data
                . 
                Researchers can save and shared the work they have done in the browser as a Palladio Project. Palladio’s TimeLine and TimeSpan filters encourage filtering and sorting temporal data, and allows the filtering of two or more discontinuous time periods. A Facet filter is also particularly useful when exploring multidimensional datasets and drilling down to specific aspects of one’s data. Using case studies (examples listed later in this document) we will discuss how scholars have used Palladio, highlighting those instances when uses of the tool diverged from our expectations or led us toward new insights that we incorporated (or plan to incorporate) in future versions.
            
            Open Design
            
                The development of Palladio has been an iterative process. We have been eliciting and incorporating feedback from the academic community concerning Palladio’s current and potential features and uses. Most specifically, we have engaged in sustained discussion with a small and inter-disciplinary group of scholars, known as Open Design Contributors. Our paper will offer insight into this design process and the ways that it has directly influenced current and future iterations of Palladio, as well as other tools.
            
            Summary
            The core innovation of our project is the design of visualization techniques that emphasize the contextualization and interpretation of data in cases where we lack the metrics for useful quantitative analysis. The two other key innovations both involve the leveraging of novel technologies that are particularly important to the study of cultural heritage data: we use new flexible data models to let individual scholars create and apply their own data categorizations, and we use open linked data sources to reconcile datasets against established authority files, in order to link entities across datasets and thereby explore networks across collections.
            
                Additional Case Studies to Be Discussed
            
            
                Case Study: Toward More Complex Ways of Displaying Travel
            
            
                Kate Elswit, Lecturer in Theatre and Performance Studies at the University of Bristol, ‘Ballet, Digital History, and the Cold War: Visualizing the Labor of Dance Touring’
            
            Dance scholar Kate Elswit has been using Palladio in her research on the labor of dance touring. She writes, ‘Such [visualization] techniques enable us to feel the passage of time differently.’ Following discussion with Elswit and other scholars interested in tracing travel routes, we have been thinking about how to display point-to-point travel in ways that go beyond simple flight-path-like visualizations. How to account for the differences in traveling at night rather than in the day? How to represent different levels of comfort, safety, and efficiency in travel?
            Case Study: Questions of Scale and Incomplete Data
            
                Molly Taylor-Poleskey, PhD Candidate, Department of History, Stanford: Food Culture in Brandenburg-Prussia
            
            
                Taylor-Poleskey uses a large base of manuscript sources detailing the yearly consumption of one of the palaces of Prince-Elector Friedrich Wilhelm of Brandenburg-Prussia. She argues that the elector’s cultural agenda helped transform his territories over the course of his reign from dilapidated and war-torn to stable and powerful. To support her argument, she wants to see how tastes and consumption patterns changed over time, to consider how such changes might reveal the court’s aesthetic values and cultural ambitions. Creating visualizations in Palladio have helped her analyze what proportions of different foods or food groups were consumed. We have worked with Taylor-Poleskey toward creating visualizations that privilege the display of relative magnitude, and that are especially sensitive to working in different registers and scales. As some of the years in the sources she studies have incomplete or missing data, her use case has also aided us in thinking about how best to work with and represent incomplete data in ways that are not misleading or overly simplistic.
            
            Case Study: Toward New Palladio Data-Visualization Iterations
            
                Office of the Historian, US State Department, Foreign Relations of the United States
            
            We will share results from our ongoing work with Thomas Faith at the Office of the Historian at the US Department of State, with whom we have been working toward the goal of producing an integrated version of Palladio that would function as a visual browser for extant online data concerning the foreign relations of the United States. The State Department project is one of many we are working on, as we look to help other researchers to implement customized versions of Palladio that can be used as search, analysis, and visualization exploratory tools within extant large-scale research projects.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Balsamo, A. 
                        (2009). Design. 
                        International Journal of Learning and Media,
                        1
                        (4): 1–10.
                    
                    
                        Berry, D. M. 
                        (2012). 
                        Understanding Digital Humanities.
                         Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
                    
                    
                        Buchanan, R. 
                        (2001). Design Research and the New Learning. 
                        Design Issues,
                        17
                        (4): 3–23.
                    
                    
                        Burdick, A. 
                        (2009). Design Without Designers. 
                        Conference on the Future of Art and Design Education in the 21st Century
                        , University of Brighton, England, 29 April 2009.
                    
                    
                        Burdick, A. and Willis, H. 
                        (2011). Digital Learning, Digital Scholarship, and Design Thinking.
                        Design Studies,
                        32
                        (6): 546–56.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. 
                        (2009). SpecLab. In 
                        Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative Computing.
                         University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. 
                        (2011). Humanities Approach to Interface Theory. 
                        Culture Machine,
                        12
                        : 1–20.
                    
                    
                        Friedman, K. 
                        (2003). Theory Construction in Design Research: Criteria, Approaches, and Methods. 
                        Design Studies,
                        24
                        (6): 16.
                    
                    
                        Fuller, M.
                        (2008). Software Studies. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Ivanhoe.
                         (n.d.). http://www2.iath.virginia.edu/jjm2f/old/IGamehtm.html. 
                    
                    
                        Lunenfeld, P., Burdick, A., Drucker, J., Presner, T. and Schnapp, J. P.
                        (2012).
                        Digital_Humanities
                        . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Mandala Browser. 
                        (n.d.). http://mandala.humviz.org/.
                    
                    
                        Masud, L., Valsecchi, F., Ciuccarelli, P., Ricci, D. and Caviglia, G.
                        (2010). From Data to Knowledge: Visualizations as Transformation Processes within the Data-Information-Knowledge Continuum. In Banissi, E., Bertschi, S., Burkhard, R., Counsell, J., Dastbaz, M., Eppler, M., Forsell, C., et al. (eds),
                        Information Visualisation IV, 2010 14th International Conference
                        , pp. 445–49.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. 
                        (2003). 
                        Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science.
                         Vol. 2. 2nd ed. New York: Dekker, pp. 1224–35.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. and Samuels, L. 
                        (2004). Deformance and Interpretation. In 
                        Radiant Textuality.
                        New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (
                        2005). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees.
                         Verso Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B.
                        (2004). 
                        Speculative Computing: Instruments for Interpretative Scholarship.
                         Ph.D. thesis, University of Virginia.
                    
                    
                        Orbis.
                        (n.d.). http://orbis.stanford.edu/.
                    
                    
                        Pope, R. (
                        1995). 
                        Textual Intervention: Critical and Creative Strategies for Literary Studies.
                        Routledge, London.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. 
                        (2011a). On Building, 11 January, http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/onNbuilding.html.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. 
                        (2011b). Who’s In and Who’s Out, 8 January, http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whosNinNandNwhosNout.html.
                    
                    
                        Ruecker, S., Radzikowska, M. and Sinclair, S.
                         (2011). 
                        Visual Interface Design for Digital Cultural Heritage.
                         Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Schnapp, J. and Presner, T. 
                        (2009). The Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0, 17 June, www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Schon, D. A. 
                        (1983). 
                        The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action.
                        1st ed. Basic Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Temporal Modeling. 
                        (n.d.). http://www2.iath.virginia.edu/time/time.html.
                    
                    
                        Voyant.
                         (n.d.). http://voyant-tools.org.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From Text and Image to Historical Resource: Text-Image Alignment for Digital Humanists
                
                    
                        Stutzmann
                        Dominique
                    
                    Institut de Recherche et d'Histoire des Textes (CNRS), France
                    dominique.stutzmann@irht.cnrs.fr
                
                
                    
                        Bluche
                        Théodore
                    
                    A2iA, France
                    tb@a2ia.com
                
                
                    
                        Lavrentev
                        Alexei
                    
                    ICAR, Interactions, Corpus, Apprentissages, Représentations (ENS de Lyon – UMR 5191), France
                    alexei.lavrentev@ens-lyon.fr
                
                
                    
                        Leydier
                        Yann
                    
                    LIRIS Laboratoire d’Informatique en Image et Systèmes d'information (INSA de Lyon – UMR 5205)
                    yann@leydier.info
                
                
                    
                        Kermorvant
                        Christopher
                    
                    Teklia, France
                    kermorvant@teklia.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Digital Palaeography
                    TEI
                    Text-Image Alignment
                    Interactivity
                    Interdisciplinarity
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    image processing
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    medieval studies
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    xml
                    content analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    standards and interoperability
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Written texts are both abstract and physical objects: ideas, signs, and shapes, whose meanings, graphical systems, and social connotations evolve through time. Beyond authorship and writer identification or palaeographical dating of textual witnesses, the materiality of text and the connexion between the ideas and their written instantiations are a matter of cultural history, historic semiology, and history of communication and representations. In the context of large, growing digital libraries of texts and digitized medieval manuscripts, the question of the cultural significance of script and the ‘dual nature’ of texts may at last be addressed. 
            Several research projects, interfaces, and software allow for a closer text-image association during the editing process (TILE,
                1 T-PEN,
                2 MOM-CA
                3) and for data visualisation (Mirador,
                4 DocExplore
                5), with interoperable annotations schemas (SharedCanvas
                6). But in most cases, the finest granularity is at line-level with an alignment being done by hand on small amounts of text (a few pages).
            
            In this paper, we present a new method, derived from Handwritten Text Recognition, to automatically align images of digitized manuscripts with texts from scholarly editions, at the levels of page, column, line, word, and character. During the Oriflamms project funded by the French National Research Agency and Cap Digital,
                7 it has been successfully applied to two datasets: ‘
                Graal’ (130 pages, 13th c. manuscript, online edition at http://catalog.bfm-corpus.org/qgraal_cm) and ‘
                Fontenay’ (104 pages, 12th–13th c. charters). Partial results of alignment at word and character level are online: http://oriflamms.a2ialab.com/Charsegm/. 
            
            Our contention is that such an alignment method is the only way to gain access to new questions on a large-scale basis and massively transfer the results of traditional humanities and textual scholarship into digital humanities. The automation causes not only a change of scale (larger corpora) but also a change in granularity (page-by-page or line-by-line alignment to word and character alignment). It avoids the tedious task of drawing boxes by hand around characters and allows a systematic analysis of the data. It outmatches the preceding attempts made to more closely associate both aspects of text and also opens perspectives on automated transcription.
            Methodology
            Text-image alignment from existing transcripts is a newly opened, specific challenge. It has relevance for the humanities, as scholars work with a large set of already transcribed texts from manuscripts (handwritten texts). In other fields, the priority was given to pure (handwritten) text recognition. OCR-free methods have been proposed by our team (Leydier et al., 2014) and others (Hassner et al., 2013), which requires a precise transcript at line level, with either lesser results or no metrics on evaluation. In the present method, we use Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR), which aims to automatically transcribe the image of a handwritten text (‘text image’) into an electronic text, and implement it as an alignment method.
            
                ‘Forced Alignment’: From HTR (Handwritten Text Recognition) to Handwritten Text Segmentation
            
            Most of the current HTR models are based on the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) associated with a sliding window approach to segment the input image. These models may produce a precise character segmentation of the ‘text image’ as a by-product. When the transcript of a line image is known, the HMM focuses on the retrieval of characters’ positions and forces the output to correspond to the actual sequence of characters (so-called forced alignment). If only the whole document transcript is available, and not the positions or transcript of the words or lines, we can use line detection methods and map the transcripts to the detected lines. Such methods also relax the annotation effort needed to produce character segmentation.
            A method to automatically segment and annotate handwritten words from line images using forced alignments was proposed by Zimmermann and Bunke (2002). The problem has then shifted to mapping the whole transcription of historical documents to segmented words or lines (Kornfield et al. 2004). When the word or line segmentation is not known, a global forced alignment of the full transcript is possible, as proposed by Fischer et al. (2011), or at different levels (word, line, sentence, page), as proposed by Al Azawi et al. (2013). Our model is similar to the last one, but is based on both on A2iA proprietary image processing libraries and on Kaldi, an open-source toolkit for speech recognition, which has been adapted for the task of text-image alignment. This system adds yet another level of complexity since it also deals with abbreviations and handwritten cursive text with no blank space between the letters, for which the character segmentation cannot easily be found. 
            
                Proposed Method for Handwritten Text Character Segmentation
            
            The character segmentation results of an incremental process (Figure 1): (1°) we convert the image to gray scale and remove black borders; (2°) we apply a text line segmentation algorithm, adapted from Zahour et al. (2007) to the full page; (3°) we keep the pages with a correct number of detected lines; (4°) we assign the line transcript to the line images and use them to train a first Hidden Markov Models based on Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM-HMM) recognizer, which is (5°) used to align the line transcription with the line images as described in Bluche et al. (2014). (6°) Based on this result, we train a new recognizer. This process is repeated until all text lines are correctly transcribed. Afterwards, we train a final text recognizer based on deep neural network HMMs. This model is trained with a discriminative criterion and yields better transcription results and segmentation accuracy than the standard GMM-HMM (example of forced alignment at word and letter level in Figures 2a and 2b).
            
                Evaluation of Alignment Accuracy (
                Graal
                , 
                Fontenay
                )
            
            Two methods were applied to evaluate the automatic alignment at word level. First, a tabular view is used to validate/reject each occurrence of a word, evaluate average accuracy, and spot problematic lines. Then a complete validation is performed by a palaeographer line by line. The accuracy is computed by the distance in pixel between the automatic segmentation and the ground-truth word boundaries (distribution in Figures 3 and 4). In 
                Graal, 95% and 89%, respectively, of the left and right boundaries are correct with a 10px (0.84mm) tolerance. In 
                Fontenay, the results are 91.8% and 89.4%, respectively, with a 30px (3.58mm) tolerance and 85% and 74.4%, respectively, with a 15px (1.79mm) tolerance, less than half of the average character width (23px, i.e., 1.94mm in 
                Graal and 45px, i.e., 5.37mm in 
                Fontenay): this is a great achievement.
            
            The alignment was also performed at a character level on 
                Graal and 
                Fontenay. The immense number of characters makes the validation difficult. Samples show a very high accuracy rate for complex graphic structures (e.g., 100% for st-ligature), but further tools are needed to measure the accuracy. The results of evaluation partly depend on the validator’s skills in reading ancient scripts.
            
            
                Evaluation of Transcription Accuracy (
                Graal
                )
            
            The HTR-based system was also tested for recognition and evaluated according to the word and character error rate criterion (WER/CER) by splitting the corpus into a training set (101 pages) and a test set (29 pages). For the recognition, we used a lexicon of 7,005 unique words and 4gram statistical language model estimated on the train set. The standard GMM-HMM achieved 23.0% WER and 6.9% CER, whereas the hybrid deep neural network HMM achieved 19.0% WER and 6.4% CER—that is, more than 80% of words and 93% of characters are accurately recognised.
            Granularity and Scalability
            This method unlocks a new level of granularity and allows modelling of different letterforms (‘allographs’, e.g., s/ſ/S). In 
                Graal, palaeographers provided the analysis of the graphical chain, and the system had to choose between identified possible solutions (Figure 5). In 
                Fontenay, the system had to create several character models without any previous knowledge, resulting in allograph clustering. 
            
            Even at this fine level of granularity, this system is scalable to large corpora. 
                Graal includes 130 pages, 10,700 lines, 114,268 words, and more than 400,300 characters; 
                Fontenay includes 104 pages, 1,341 text lines, 22,276 words, and more than 99,900 characters. In comparison, the historical databases ‘Saint-Gall’ and ‘Parzival’ comprise, respectively, 60 pages, 1,410 text lines, 11,597 words; and 47 pages, 4,477 text lines, and 23,478 words. The four-year DigiPal project produced a database encompassing 61,372 manually annotated images of letters, without text transcriptions. 
            
            The system is furthermore robust (book hands and diplomatic scripts), and the data format is fully TEI compliant.
            Human in the Loop: Evaluation, Verifiability, and Ergonomics
            In interdisciplinary research, humanities and computer sciences scholars must articulate their respective systems of proof and uncover underpinnings and pre-assumptions, in order to produce efficient systems that present data in a way that scholars on all sides can understand, evaluate, and trust (Stutzmann and Tarte, 2014). During this research, we observed many times that the so-called ground-truth was not 100% accurate or did not correspond to what the system was expected to produce (e.g., transposed words are edited in the order one should read them, while the alignment can only match the words in their order on the line), so that we had hesitations and explored new paths. This is a challenge for future developments: large resources will all contain inaccuracies or not automatable information. Likewise, some inconsistencies in evaluation may appear. Increasing the interactivity of software tools is a solution, not only to overcome shortcomings of strictly automatic approaches, but also to correct the ground-truth and improve the tools and the data models. Therefore, this project also developed a user-friendly software (Leydier et al., 2014). Agile development and interoperability concern software creation, but also corpus enhancement, to use humanist, computer scientist, and machine competences at their maximum. The alignment was performed in three person-months. This is obviously less than by manually drawing boxes around words (or even letters). Our tools and system open a large-scale, standardized, interoperable approach of historical scripts. The human in the loop is part of an interdisciplinary work and process, avoiding tautological approaches and allowing better results, user-friendly tools, and a better understanding on all sides. 
            Notes
            1. http://mith.umd.edu/tile/.
            2. http://t-pen.org/.
            3. http://www.mom-ca.uni-koeln.de/mom/home.
            4. http://showcase.iiif.io/viewer/mirador/.
            5. http://www.docexplore.eu/.
            6. http://iiif.io/model/shared-canvas/1.0/index.html.
            7. http://www.agence-nationale-recherche.fr/projet-anr/?tx_lwmsuivibilan_pi2[CODE]=ANR-12-CORP-0010.
            
                
                    Figures
                
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. HTR-alignment.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2a. Forced alignment at word level.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2b. Forced alignment at character level.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. 
                Graal alignment accuracy (number of occurrences / correction on left or right boundaries, in pixels).
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. 
                Fontenay alignment accuracy (number of occurrences / correction on left or right boundaries, in pixels).
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Modelling allographs and graphical connexions.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Al Azawi, M., Liwicki, M. and Breuel, T. M. (2013). WFST-Based Ground Truth Alignment for Difficult Historical Documents with Text Modification and Layout Variations. 
                        Proceedings of the SPIE, Burlingame, CA, 
                        Document Recognition and Retrieval, vol. 20 (4 February), doi:10.1117/12.2003134.
                    
                    
                        Bluche, T., Moysset, B. and Kermorvant, C. (2014). Automatic Line Segmentation and Ground-Truth Alignment of Handwritten Documents. 
                        International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition.
                    
                    
                        DigiPal: Digital Resource and Database of Manuscripts, Palaeography and Diplomatic. (2011–2014). London. http://www.digipal.eu/. 
                    
                    
                        Fischer, A., Frinken, V., Fornés, A. and Bunke, H. (2011). Transcription Alignment of Latin Manuscripts Using Hidden Markov Models. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing.
                    
                    
                        Hassner, T., Wolf, L. and Dershowitz, N. (2013). OCR-Free Transcript Alignment. 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition.
                    
                    
                        Kornfield, E. M., Manmatha, R. and Allan, J. (2004). Text Alignment with Handwritten Documents. 
                        First International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries.
                    
                    
                        Leydier, Y., Eglin, V., Bres, S. and Stutzmann, D. (2014). Learning-Free Text-Image Alignment for Medieval Manuscripts. 
                        International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition. 
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. and Tarte, S. (2014). Executive Summary. In Hassner, T., Sablatnig, R., Stutzmann, D. and Tarte, S. 
                        Digital Palaeography: New Machines and Old Texts (
                        Dagstuhl Reports), 
                        4(7): 112–34, 112–14, 132.
                    
                    
                        Zahour, A., Likforman-Sulem, L., Boussellaa, W. and Taconet, B. (2007). Text Line Segmentation of Historical Arabic Documents. 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition.
                    
                    
                        Zimmermann, M. and Bunke, H. (2002). Automatic Segmentation of the IAM Off-Line Database for Handwritten English Text. 
                        16th International Conference on Pattern Recognition.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                From the Holocaust Victims Names to the Description of the Persecution of the European Jews in Nazi Years: the Linked Data Approch and a New Domain Ontology. The Italian Pilot Project.
                
                    
                        Mazzini
                        Silvia
                    
                    regesta.exe, Italy,
                    smazzini@regesta.com
                
                
                    
                        Brazzo
                        Laura
                    
                    Fondazione Centro di Documentazione Ebraica Contemporanea CDEC.
                    laurabrazzo@cdec.it
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    holocaust
                    names
                    LOD
                    digital library
                    ontology
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    ontologies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    internet / world wide web
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    semantic web
                    Italian
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Musei e Memoriali della Shoah, così come celebrazioni e commemorazioni della Shoah, trovano nel ricordo dei nomi delle migliaia di vittime dello sterminio nazista, uno dei principali motivi della loro esistenza. 
            
            
                Nel corso degli ultimi decenni, a partire almeno dagli anni ’80, parallelamente all’intensificarsi della ricerca storica e storiografica sulla Shoah, si sono moltiplicati anche i luoghi dedicati ai nomi delle vittime: non più solo monumenti 
                ad memoriam
                collocati in luoghi geografici significativi per la storia e la memoria della Shoah, ma anche 
                memorial books 
                e, più di recente, memoriali virtuali. 
            
            
                La ricerca sui nomi delle vittime è ancora un campo di ricerca fluido: grafie dei nomi così come dati anagrafici e biografici sono soggetti a revisioni dovute talvolta alla scoperta di nuove fonti documentarie, talvolta all’intervento diretto di discendenti delle vittime in grado di correggere le informazioni esistenti e più spesso di fornirne di nuove, prima mancanti. Da questo punto di vista il web appare dunque come il luogo più idoneo e congeniale alla pubblicazione dei nomi: sia per la sua intrinseca flessibilità, sia per l’alto numero di visitatori che è in grado raggiungere. Il principale limite di tutte queste pubblicazioni, incluse quelle sul web, deriva dalla loro dispersione e impossibilità di connessione dei dati disponibili. 
            
            
                Il segnale forte di questo limite è arrivato nel 2010 con l’avvio del progetto europeo EHRI—European Holocaust Research Infrastructure
                1
                 che ha come obiettivo la creazione di una infrastruttura internazionale per gli archivi sulla Shoah e la condivisione, tramite un unico punto di accesso, delle fonti e delle informazioni per la storia della Shoah (Speck et al., 2014). 
            
            Stato della Ricerca 
            
                Lo stato attuale delle pubblicazioni dei nomi delle vittime della Shoah si caratterizza per la duplicazione dei nomi e l’assenza di collegamenti fra di essi. 
            
            
                La vastità del fenomeno persecutorio nazista, la difficoltà di reperimento di fonti documentarie utili e al contempo la diversità delle fonti di volta in volta disponibili, hanno portato alla costruzione di numerosi elenchi, basati su criteri ogni volta diversi: la nazionalità delle vittime (come è nel caso della Germania o della Grecia o del Belgio o ancora dell’Austria), oppure il luogo di residenza al momento dell’arresto (come nel caso dell’Olanda), il paese da cui è avvenuta la deportazione (come nel caso della Francia o dell’Italia), il campo nazista di internamento (Auschwitz, Mauthausen, etc.). 
            
            
                Lo scopo principalmente commemorativo di queste liste ha fatto sì che per lungo tempo non sia stata presa in sufficiente considerazione la questione degli spostamenti— ovvero delle migrazioni e fughe di ebrei che hanno caratterizzato tutto il periodo che va dal 1933 al 1945—e con esso il connesso fenomeno della duplicazione dei dati relativi alle medesime persone. I nomi di ebrei, per esempio, nati in Germania, emigrati in Francia, fuggiti in Italia e deportati dall’Italia in Francia e infine ad Auschwitz, si ritrovano in almeno quattro banche dati diverse (quella tedesca, quella francese, italiana e quella di Yad Vashem) ciascuno associato ad informazioni che variano a seconda delle fonti documentarie utilizzate. 
            
            
                La tecnologia Linked Open Data, da questo punto di vista, sembra offrire importanti opportunità e strumenti per il superamento di tale situazione. Essa consente l’individuazione univoca dei nomi, la riconciliazione dei nomi stessi presenti in banchedati diverse presenti nel web, e rende unitili operazioni di migrazione, estrazione di dati, creazione di nuovi repositories. 
            
            
                I Lod per la Descrizione della Shoah
            
            
                La Fondazione CDEC di Milano, principale istituto per la storia della Shoah in Italia, ha avviato a partire dalla fine del 2012 un progetto di lungo periodo per la creazione di una LInked Data Digital Library. Primo obiettivo del progetto era la pubblicazione delle risorse d’archivio per la storia e la memoria della Shoah in Italia. A questo scopo, la prima necessità emersa è stata quella di integrare in un unico repository descrizioni archivistiche e catalografiche, documenti digitalizzati e banche dati autonome create ciascuna per differenti scopi. La seconda esigenza è stata quella di individuare degli elementi di raccordo e quindi di accesso alle diverse fonti informative. Tali elementi sono stati individuati nei nomi di persona—sui quali è stata imperniata l’intera struttura archivistica dell’istituto sin dalla sua nascita—e in particolare quelli contenuti nel database sulle vittime della Shoah in Italia—che è diventato poi il perno dell’intero processo di integrazione e pubblicazione dei dati. 
            
            
                I caratteri propri di questo database verranno illustrati nel corso dell’intervento al fine di presentare non solo uno dei momenti chiave dello sviluppo del progetto, ma anche e soprattutto per dimostrare come grazie alla rappresentazione concettuale delle informazioni disponibili, sia stato possibile ripensare l’approccio stesso ai nomi, considerati cioè non più a partire dalle funzioni svolte o esperienze vissute dal soggetto (deportato, partigiano, autore, fotografo) ma dal loro rappresentare un Soggetto, ovvero un’entità reale ed unica. 
            
            
                La costruzione di un ontologia sul dominio specifico ‘Shoah’ ha costituito il naturale completamento del lavoro sui nomi: le classi e le proprietà che ne sono alla base hanno permesso infatti la realizzazione di una rete concettuale in grado di ricondurre ad una singola entità ‘Persona’, informazioni distribuite su più sistemi informativi. 
            
            
                L’ontologia definita (cfr. versione beta http://cdec.opendams.org/lod/shoah/shoah.rdf), grazie alla sua naturale flessibilità, consentirà la progressiva modellazione nel tempo di altre specifiche porzioni di dominio (non considerate nel progetto iniziale) e con essa lo sviluppo di una costruzione bottom--‐up decentralizzata, come suggerito dalle metodologie Linked Data. Al momento l’ontologia comprende 9
                classes
                , 27 
                object properties
                e 26 
                datatype properties
                ; sono stati creati indici sui nomi dei campi di concentramento e sterminio nazisti, sui luoghi di raccolta e detenzione, sui convogli e gli eccidi avvenuti in Italia prima della deportazione. Attraverso la creazione di IRI univoche per tutte le risorse del dominio, è stato possibile ricondurre tutte le informazioni a ‘nodi’ univocamente riconosciuti nel dominio senza la proliferazione di informazioni. 
            
            
                Nello sviluppo complessivo del progetto, un ruolo chiave è stato svolto dall’introduzione di una piattaforma di lavoro trasversale e comune ai vari settori dell’Istituto, in grado di soddisfare le esigenze specifiche di lavoro di ciascun settore. Tale piattaforma è stata realizzata seguendo le raccomandazioni del W3C sulle Linked Data Platform
                2
                 ed è conforme all’ontologia creata. Attraverso questa piattaforma oggi tutti i dipartimenti del Centro—specializzati ciascuno in diverse aree di attività di conservazione e ricerca—possono lavorare a partire da un unico elenco di Persone, con informazioni biografiche univoche e, attraverso le IRI univoche, collegare tali Persone a descrizioni archivistiche, catalografiche, documenti digitalizzati. 
            
            
                Il progetto ha cercato di sperimentare tutti i vantaggi legati alle tecnologie semantiche per la pubblicazione del patrimonio culturale (su questo tema si veda ad esempio [Coyle, 2013; Edelstein et al., 2013; Summers and Salo, 2013]) e a tal fine è stato realizzato un test di 
                interlinking
                tra i dati CDEC relativi ai deportati e i dati pubblicati dall’Archivio Centrale dello Stato secondo le medesime teconologie (http://dati.acs.beniculturali.it) nel Fondo archivistico ‘A4 Bis , internati stranieri e spionaggio 1939–1945’, della Direzione Generale di Pubblica Sicurezza del Ministero degli Interni. Assumendo come valide le sole connessioni che hanno dimostrato una totale sovrapposizione di nome, cognome, data e luogo di nascita, è stato possibile riconciliare circa un centinaio di nomi completando da una parte il profilo biografico su queste persone e aprendo, dall’altra, molte altre criticità legate alla presenza di varianti linguistiche dei nomi di persona e di luogo. 
            
            
                Consapevoli delle criticità legate all’
                interlinking
                automatico da cui possono scaturire ‘sameAs’ scorretti (si vedano ad esempio Halpine et al. [2009] e Glaser and Halpine [2012]), il 
                testbed
                di interconnessione con un dataset esterno è stato molto efficace poiché ha attribuito una maggiore certezza al dato pubblicato e parallelamente ha ampliato il grafo di conoscenza di partenza. Questa interconnessione tra risorse è possibile e semplice attraverso le tecnologie LOD che sono oggi a disposizione, ma necessita senz’altro di un accurato controllo manuale. 
            
            
                Un ulteriore vantaggio legato alla pubblicazione LOD riguarda il 
                reasoning
                dei dati esposti attraverso il quale è possibile inferire nuova conoscenza dedotta dalla struttura dei dati utilizzata per la rappresentazione; il 
                reasoning
                applicato sulle relazioni familiari, ad esempio, è in grado di far emergere inconsistenze ed errori di cui altrimenti non si avrebbe conoscenza e allo stesso tempo può aiutare nella ricostruzione virtuale degli alberi genealogici. 
            
            
                Conclusioni e Sviluppi Futuri
            
            
                Gli sviluppi futuri legati a questo progetto sono diversi e molto ambiziosi: se da una parte l’obiettivo principale di creazione di una piattaforma comune per il lavoro interno del Centro è stato realizzato con successo, dall’altra si sono aperte numerose strade che si vorrebbe investigare per capire quanto questo modello sia riutilizzabile su una più ampia scala. I numerosi istituti e centri di ricerca dedicati alla storia della Shoah sparsi in Europa, negli Stati Uniti, in Israele, potrebbero essere il principale banco di prova e sperimentazione del modello messo a punto, nonchè soggetti attivi di una collaborazione decentralizzata. I vantaggi sarebbero molteplici, a cominciare dalla possibilità di ottenere dati più precisi sul numero effettivo delle vittime attraverso la riconciliazione di nomi duplicati o triplicati. La rintracciabilità in un unico punto di accesso, di informazioni provenienti da più fonti, spesso sconosciute, consentirebbe inoltre l’arricchimento della conoscenza non solo dell’identità anagrafica delle persone ma anche delle loro personali biografie. Laddove vi sia la disponibilità dei dati, la tecnologia linked data consentirebbe inoltre la ricostruzione virtuale dei nuclei famigliari distrutti o dispersi. Il carattere proprio dell’ontologia, da un lato, e la natura del processo descritto dall’altro, lasciano intravedere inoltre possibilità di applicazione dell’ontologia stessa per la descrizione di fenomeni simili. 
            
            Notes
            1. Ehri Project: http://www.ehri-project.eu/project-description.
            2. http://www.w3.org/TR/ldp/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Coyle, K. (2013). Library Linked Data: An Evolution. http://leo.cineca.it/index.php/jlis/article/view/5443/7889.
                    
                    
                        Edelstein, J., et al. (2013). Linked Open Data for Cultural Heritage: Evolution of an Information Technology. http://academiccommons.columbia.edu/catalog/ac%3A168445. 
                    
                    
                        Glaser, H. and Halpine, H. (2012). The Linked Data Strategy for Global Identity. http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/333924/3.hasCoversheetVersion/IC-16-02-Lnkd.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Halpine, H., et al. (2009). When owl:sameAs Isn’t the Same: An Analysis of Identity in Linked Data. In 
                        International Semantic Web Conference, pp. 305–20.
                    
                    
                        Speck, R., Blanke, T., Kristel, C., et al. (2014). The Past and the Future of Holocaust Research: From Disparate Sources to an Integrated European Holocaust Research Infrastructure. http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1405/1405.2407.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Summers, E. and Salo, D. (2013). Linking Things on the Web: A Pragmatic Examination of Linked Data for Libraries, Museums, and Archives. Library of Congress, http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1302/1302.4591.pdf. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Function word stylistics and interpretation: Elizabeth Cary's Mariam
                
                    
                        Connors
                        Louisa
                    
                    University of Newcastle, Australia
                    Louisa.Connors@newcastle.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Early modern drama
                    stylistics
                    cognitive grammar
                
                
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Introduction
            
            This paper describes the results of a computational study of Early Modern Tragedy with particular reference to Elizabeth Cary’s 1613 closet play, 
                The Tragedy of Mariam. Critical responses to 
                Mariam are contradictory and this paper explores the extent to which a function word study can provide insights that complement or clarify criticisms arising from more orthodox approaches. 
            
            
                Theoretical Framework
            
            This paper suggests that Langacker’s Cognitive Grammar provides a theoretical framework to support an interpretive application of computational stylistics. Cognitive Grammar is aligned with other functional approaches to linguistics and appears to provide a theoretical explanation at the linguistic level for the results that are produced in a function word study, providing: 
            • a framework for the types of authorship studies that have dominated computational 
            stylistics; and 
            • a way of extending the results in a more interpretive context. 
            Key to this paper is Langacker’s view of function words, which he argues “make a semantic contribution to the constructions they appear in, even though this contribution may be fairly schematic” (
                Theoretical 19). This is through the role function words play in the construal of meaning. 
            
            This paper considers 
                Mariam in the context of other plays from the period. The study 
            
            includes a total of 60 plays printed between 1580 and 1641. Within this group of 60 there 
            are 12 closet plays and 48 plays written for the commercial stage. As well as 
                Mariam, the set of texts includes the other eleven closet tragedies associated with the “Sidney Circle”. The only other female-­‐authored text in the group, Mary Sidney’s 
                Antonius, is a translation, as is Thomas Kyd’s 
                Cornelia. 
            
            The Sidnean closet tragedies have been described as “strikingly alike, and strikingly unlike any other dramas in English” (Witherspoon 179). Their known authorship, along with their formal similarity, makes these plays an interesting set for non-­‐authorship study. Critical responses to 
                Mariam are divided on several key questions including ideas about women’s speech, notions of performance and privacy, and how closet drama relates to early modern literary and dramatic culture. Much of the criticism is strongly biographical in its approach, reading the play in the context of Cary’s conversion to Catholicism in 1626 and related conflicts. 
            
            Mimetic readings are further encouraged by the existence of a biography of Cary by one of her daughters. Although biographically informed arguments of 
                Mariam have been developed in more complex ways, Cary’s textual engagement is typically considered in terms of ideological and personal constraints as a text that is about a woman’s right to freedom of conscience within the bounds of marriage. It is then suggested by analogy that these claims extend to relationships between subjects and rulers, drawing on the common Early Modern metaphors of state as a commentary on the failings of patriarchal systems of government. 
            
            Results of these analyses, however, are somewhat conflicting. Suggestions that the play is the most stageable of the closets sit uncomfortably alongside claims that the play is
            rejection of female performativity in favour of interiority. Closet drama is acknowledged as a specifically political form and male-­‐authored closet texts are commonly seen as reflecting Jacobean anxieties over the relation between monarch and advisor and engaging with the
            ‘advice’ genre. This is not, however, the case with 
                Mariam. One study, by William Hamlin, resists the tendency to consider 
                Mariam in terms of constraints on agency and reads it instead as an exercise in moral philosophy that explores the problem of doubt and epistemological uncertainty. Given the diversity of critical responses to Mariam, the application of computational stylistics seemed to offer a way to contribute something new to this body of criticism.
            
            
                Method and Results
            
            As a first step a discriminant analysis on the basis of the frequency scores of 241 function words was carried out to see what sorts of differences, if any, would be picked up between the two groups of plays.
                1 The discriminant analysis used 563, 2000 word segments (104 from closet plays and 459 from stage plays). Step-­‐wise leave-­‐one-­‐out analysis was used to cross-­‐validate the results. A step-­‐wise discriminant analysis used only 38 function words from the full list to identify 100 per cent of the segments correctly as either a closet segment or a stage segment. Figure 1 graphs the discriminant scores and shows the groups
            
            separating into two distinct sections, both of which represent something close to separate normal curves.
            
                
            
            Figure 1: Histogram of discriminant scores for public and closet play segments from 60 tragedies in 200 word segments
            
                �
                
                    unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                
                1 The list of function words is based on an existing list used by the Centre for Literary and Linguistic Computing at the University of Newcastle.
            
            These results were subjected to a range of further tests to exclude the possibility of artefact playing a role in the delineation of closet or non-­‐closet status. In all cases, the results showed that discriminant analysis continues to find evidence of a difference between closet and non-­‐closet plays on the basis of function words, even when the test is not ‘told’
            whether the segment in question is a closet segment or a stage segment.
            As a way of understanding how Cary’s play relates to other plays from the period, the texts were subject to a Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Given that 
                Mariam conforms very closely with the formal requirements of neo-­‐classical tragedy, is constrained by an adherence to a strict rhyme scheme, and that Cary would have been subject to a restrictive set of gendered cultural assumptions concerning authorship and publication, the identification of 
                Mariam as more like a play for the stage than any of the other Sidnean texts was a surprising result (Figure 2).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2: Principal component analysis for 60 tragedies in 4000 word segments for 100 most frequently occurring function words
            The stage texts with which 
                Mariam bears the closest relationship appear to be Jonson’s 
                Sejanus (1603) and 
                Catiline (1611), as well as Marston’s 
                Wonder of Women (1606), Chapman’s 
                Revenge of Bussy D’Ambois (1613) and Goffe’s, 
                The Courageous Turk (1632). Jonson’s two texts draw heavily on classical dramatic traditions but were first performed at the Globe and so are treated as plays for the public stage in this study, although they have been described as “even more classical, though less specifically Senecan than the School of Pembroke” (Lucas 112).
            
            In order to identify the function words that occur most frequently in 
                Mariam in comparison to the other texts in the study, a table of 
                z-­‐scores was produced. Table 1 lists the fifteen highest z scores for 
                Mariam grouped by word class.
            
            
                
            
            Table 1: Fifteen highest 
                Mariam z-­‐scores -­‐ 241 function words in 60 tragedies
            
            Discussion
            The study aims to link particular variables that are identified as markers for 
                Mariam with a specific rhetorical strategy. The paper argues that Cary’s use of auxiliary verbs, modal auxiliaries and conjunctions can linked to Hamlin’s reading of the text, especially the notion of epistemological uncertainty, the consideration of issues from multiple perspectives, and the struggle to achieve emotional stability and a position of psychological strength and stability.
            
            Using Cognitive Grammar as a framework, the paper argues that Cary’s use of function words operates a structural level to reinforce the themes explored in the play. Auxiliary verbs function to control the extent to which the reader engages emotionally with the text and control how the elements of a sentence being profiled relate to the conception of reality that is being discussed. Cary’s frequent recourse to particular auxiliary forms points to conditional constructions and is a grammatical sign that the counterfactual space is in focus (Fauconnier, "Mental Spaces" 357-­‐8).
            At a fundamental level, the modals that are selected as significant in 
                Mariam reveal the type of internal conflict with which the characters are engaged: they struggle with difficult moral questions about conscience, duty, and integrity as well as challenges to their autonomy. In terms of conjunctions, the effect is one of “mental juxtaposition” (Langacker, 
                Investigations
            
            354) relating to cognitive phenomena associated with notions of “dynamicity, fictivity, and mental spaces” (Langacker, 
                Investigations 354). Cary’s use of conjunctions, like her use of modals and auxiliaries, can be linked to features of the genre in which she is writing, and to the lack of equilibrium that characterises the internal world of the characters who employ these forms.
            
            Conclusion
            Through a computational stylistic analysis, the contradictory readings associated with 
                Mariam begin to make sense. The text is the most theatrical of the closets, but many other features signal a strategic alignment with classical conventions and literary/philosophical discourses typically associated with closet texts. The idea of contradiction is present at a very basic linguistic level and is central to understanding the inconsistencies identified by scholars working in more orthodox traditions. Computational Stylistics provides an insight into the text as a work of moral philosophy, highlighting the way the variables function to
            
            construct the world of the play and the readers as interpreters, providing subtle clues about the uncertainty and doubt that prevails in the text and in the world.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Fauconnier, G. 2007. Mental Spaces. 
                        In: GEERAERTS, D. &amp; CUYCKENS, H. (eds.) 
                        Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
                    
                    
                        Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
                    Hamlin, W. M. 2003. Elizabeth Cary's Mariam and the Critique of Pure Reason. 
                        Early Modern Literary Studies
                    
                    [Online], 9. Available: 
                        http://extra.shu.ac.uk/emls/09-­‐1/hamlcary.html.
                    
                    Langacker, R. W. 1987. 
                        Foundations of Cognitive Grammar: Theoretical Prerequisites, Stanford, California, Stanford University Press.
                    
                    Langacker, R. W. 2009. 
                        Investigations in Cognitive Grammar, Walter de Gruyter. Lucas, F. L. 1973. 
                        Seneca and Elizabethan Tragedy, New York, Gordon Press.
                    
                    Witherspoon, A. M. 1968. 
                        The Influence of Robert Garnier on Elizabethan Drama, New York, Phaeton Press.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Game of Thrones for All: Model-based Generation of Universe-appropriate Fictional Characters
                
                    
                        Parker
                        Matthew
                    
                    California Polytechnic State University, United States of America
                    themparker@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Khosmood
                        Foaad
                    
                    California Polytechnic State University, United States of America
                    foaad@calpoly.edu
                
                
                    
                        Pickett
                        Grant
                    
                    California Polytechnic State University, United States of America
                    gpickett@calpoly.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    games
                    interactive fiction
                    non-player characters
                    immersion
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    games and meaningful play
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Providing rich narrative assets for games featuring interactive storytelling is both difficult and expensive. Of particular concern to us is the problem of believability for non-player-characters (NPC) in video games and interactive worlds. In addition to art and voice assets, which can be substantial, a good NPC requires narrative assets such as universe-appropriate character background, life history, personality, speech mannerisms, and behavioral peculiarities. 
            In this paper, we discuss our tool for generating NPCs for use in Interactive Fiction (IF) projects. The tool is intended to assist IF authors with NPC creation. Discussed are the two parts of our character creation process: the statistical model-based generator and the translator for interfacing with a game engine. A user study of 40 subjects is conducted to assess utility of this tool for IF authors, based on the system generating characters from the 
                Game of Thrones universe. Most subjects indicate that the system would be useful for IF authors. The results are positive and demonstrate that such a technique could work for creating believable characters in an interactive fiction context.
            
            
                Creating Narrative Assets
            
            Traditionally, interactive entertainment character narratives, including all possible dialogue, is developed by the project writing staff. There are no quality tools for automated mass character creation and realistic procedural vocalization. Therefore, the process yields limited content and often limited ranges of expression. This limitation in character expression is a limitation on the potential of video games as a storytelling medium. The most popular solution in games where characters are critical is to only flesh out certain key characters with whom the player is supposed to interact. Generally these NPCs have names and can be engaged in conversation. Most traditional role-playing games take this route. They tend to create a small, set number of ‘named’ characters that have responses to player action and a large number of generic characters (e.g., ‘commoners’) who all have identical or formulaic responses to the situation. These other characters in the world are left as nearly blank husks, having at most a few lines of general response and not interacting with the player in any meaningful way. 
            To make NPCs interesting requires a large budget and is out of reach of all but the most well-funded studios. The most basic character for an independent low-budget 2D fighting game can cost upwards of $150,000 USD (Plunkett, 2012). The salaries of relevant staff are constantly growing: $102,000 USD average for a video game writer, with voiceover artists averaging $128,000 USD in the United States.
                1 Another solution is to limit the amount of exposure that a player has to other characters. This can be done at the expense of player experience. Large crowds (such as busy city scenes or other large gatherings) become off limits or are moved into the scenery. As a result the game world can come to feel very empty and small, even if the scenery is incredibly expansive. Lankoski and Bjork (2007) address this problem in their examination of character believability in the context of a character from 
                The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion.
            
            Presented here is a procedural method to create unique characters with diverse personalities that can then be imported into a game and interact with the player—in this case, an Inform 7 work of interactive fiction. Inform 7 is an English-like declarative programming language and development environment for interactive fiction.
                2 It was chosen because it could provide a proof of concept with many characters without requiring visual representations of characters. What results is a pool of characters with diverse personalities and detailed experiences that should be depended upon to act as more realistic extras, complete with personal histories, ambitions, and relationships.
            
            
                Related Work
            
            While there are a wide variety of rudimentary character generators for pen-and-paper-type games available online, these focus on specific rule sets,
                3 with application to role-playing games. Bayesian networks have been explored in natural language generation research, but almost none specifically for large-scale personality or character generation. Corradini’s group sets out to focus on creating a single realistic depiction of a very specific character, in this case, Hans Christian Anderson (Corradini et al., 2005). Lebowitz goes a long way toward establishing a story generation system for creating believable worlds and descriptions by emphasizing the need for consistency and coherency (Lebowitz, 1984). Kienzle et al. (2007) demonstrate the use of a generational model to create variety in NPC character action, with the emphasis on in-game abilities rather than personality or social interaction. Merrick also focuses on behavior, discussing a technique for making persistent non-player characters (such as those in massively multiplayer games) more realistic by having them change and react to changes in the environment over time (Merrick and Maher, 2006). Lankoski and Bjork (2007) examine what makes a character believable in the context of 
                The Elder Scrolls video game series and role-playing games in particular. 
            
            
                System Overview
            
            Our system is broken into two largely independent portions. The first part generates the features of the characters. In order to establish realistic characters, it was necessary to implement a Bayesian Belief Network of different character features and events and use these to build a person structure from which language describing the character could be generated. The second step in the character representation process is to translate the features and stories that the character has experienced into a format that a player can interact with. 
            Character Model and Generator
            The first nondeterministic trait to be generated per character is the location where the character is from. In the universe of 
                A Song of Ice and Fire this is very important to cultural and political identity. The location distribution is limited to broader geographical regions. This is primarily because, being a fictional universe, there is no reliable way to estimate the populations of smaller regions without more evidence (Various, 2012). The names generated come from a list of the characters (in this case, male) in the novels. The list itself includes about 1,400 individual characters.
                4 These names are then chosen at random (some combination of the first and the second) and assigned to the character. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. How the ‘profession’ event interacts with the rest of the model.
            The next set of traits to be created for a character are those that are present from birth. These are physical traits (blue-eyed, tall, strong, short, etc.) and a limited number of psychological traits (such as level of intelligence and initial temperament) as well as social class.
            Stochastic Life Events
            The next step in creating a realistic character is to give it a series of life events to build a story arc for the individual. For the purpose of this generator, the character’s life has been broken into nine different life event categories ranging from early childhood trauma to marriage to late life-changing events. Not all of these event categories will happen to everyone (some have less than a 50% of occurring) while others (like profession) are guaranteed for everyone. Each event category has a range of possible outcomes. Initially, the probability of each of the events in the category is the same, but each event has a number of potential influencing traits and a corresponding multiplier that changes the distribution (after normalizing) of the event list. The influences can cascade across multiple events.
            Translator and Game Interface
            The translator takes the Bayesian model for the character and transforms it into usable Inform 7 code. The conversations that the users have with the characters generated through the generator and translator are facilitated by one of the many extensions available to the Inform 7 IDE, Conversation Framework
                5 by Eric Eve. This framework allows the user to ask the character about specific topics from within the interactive experience.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. User distribution of familiarity with the Game of Thrones universe (5= ‘most familiar’).
            User Study
            All 40 participants in the study are computer science undergraduate students at California Polytechnic State University (Cal Tech). About two-thirds of the participants are from the Interactive Entertainment Engineering class, and have experience with Inform 7 and interactive fiction authoring due to having completed class projects. The overall familiarity with Inform 7 is around 
                80 to 85%. Tutoring and supervision are offered for all participants.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Believable background and conversation scores (5=most believable). X axis represents portion of users. 40 subjects were surveyed.
            The participants are then asked a series of questions about their familiarity with the 
                Game of Thrones (or 
                Song of Ice and Fire) universe, the believability of their character in the context of the universe, whether they would use this character in one of their own works, and how helpful they thought this generation method could be making realistic secondary characters for interactive fiction.
            
            People find the generated characters to have a believable backstory. The average score was a 3.7 out of 5 in that area. The best result from the generator was that 54% of the people polled would be willing to use the character unedited in a work of interactive fiction. The rest stated that they would use the character with some editing. None of the people polled responded that they would not use the generated character in any form.
            When asked about their willingness to use the unaltered generated character as a non-major character, the generator received an average score of 4.1 out of 5. The average score for using an unedited version of the generated character as a major player in a work of interactive fiction was a 2.3. This was foreseen as the generator was never meant to supplant major characters driving a main plotline but as more complex NPCs meant to provide context and exposure. When looking at individuals who had a higher than average (4 or 5) familiarity with the 
                Game of Thrones universe, the number of people willing to use the character unedited went down a small amount to 50%, but those who did say they would use the character gave the primary character the same average score (2.3) while giving the non-major character a significantly higher score at an average of around 4.5. Finally, when asked the question ‘Do you think this kind of character generation can be helpful to interactive fiction authors?’ the average score was a 4.23.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Subject responses to ‘Are you willing to use this character in your own story?’ (5= ‘most willing’). 40 subjects surveyed.
            
                Notes
            
            1. http://www.indeed.com/salary/q-Video-Game-Writer-l-United-States.html.
            2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inform.
            3. See, for example, http://www.pathguy.com/cg35.htm.
            4. http://www.namenerds.com/uucn/listofweek/icefire.html.
            5. Ibid.
            Sample Output
            
                
                    Sample translated code to create character ‘Josmyn’ in Inform 7
                    Sample game playthrough with same character
                
                
                    
                        The quizzing table is the Table of ComplexNPC0 Answers.
                        Table of ComplexNPC0 Answers 
                        subject response rule response table suggest 
                        ...
                        adolescence -- Table of ComplexNPC0 adolescence 3
                        Table of ComplexNPC0 adolescence
                        response
                        ‘A couple of friends and I went on a fun adventure’.
                        ‘I became more diligent in my adolescent years’.
                        ‘I traveled between Oldtown and Volantis as a cabin boy’.
                    
                    
                        &gt;greet Josmyn
                        Greetings
                        (You could ask him about himself, home, life, class, childhood or adolescence.)
                        &gt;ask about adolescence
                        A couple of friends and I went on a fun adventure.
                        &gt;ask about adolescence
                        I became more diligent in my adolescent years.
                        &gt;ask about adolescence
                        I traveled between Oldtown and Volantis as a cabin boy.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Corradini, A., Mehta, M., Bernsen, N.-O., and Charfuelan, M. (2005). Animating an Interactive Conversational Character for an Educational Game System. In 
                        Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’05, New York, pp. 183–90.
                    
                    
                        Kienzle, J., Denault, A., and Vangheluwe, H. (2007). Model-Based Design of Computer-Controlled Game Character Behavior. 
                        ACM/IEEE 10th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, October 2007.
                    
                    
                        Lankoski, P. and Bjork, S. (2007). Gameplay Design Patterns for Believable Non-Player Characters. In 
                        Situated Play, University of Tokyo, September 2007.
                    
                    
                        Lebowitz, M. (1984). Creating Characters in a Storytelling Universe. 
                        Poetics,
                        13(3): 171–94.
                    
                    
                        Merrick, K. and Maher, M. L. (2006). Motivated Reinforcement Learning for Non-Player Characters in Persistent Computer Game Worlds. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology, ACE ’06, New York: ACM.
                    
                    Plunkett, L. (n.d.). It Will Blow Your Mind to See How Much It Costs to Add One New Character to a Fighting Game. Kotaku.com (accessed February 2012).
                    Various (2012). A Forum of Ice and Fire: How Many People Live in Westeros? In Each Kingdom? westeros.org (accessed January 2012).
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Gender Markers: Distinctive Words in Male and Female Authorship
                
                    
                        Weidman
                        Sean G.
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University, United States of America
                    sgw143@psu.edu
                
                
                    
                        O'Sullivan
                        James
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University, United States of America
                    josullivan@psu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    gender
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    authorship
                
                
                    gender studies
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Methodology and Results
                Craig’s Zeta (Hoover, 2008; Burrows, 2004) was the primary methodology deployed, as was the case in Hoover’s original study. Our Zeta analysis was conducted using Stylo (Eder et al., 2013), with a text slice length of 2,000, text slice overlap of 1,000, and an occurrence and filter threshold of 2 and 0.1, respectively. Initially, we produced standard most frequent wordlists using Delta, with a list of stopwords applied. Comparing these results, we saw little separation between the genders. Zeta, as a measure designed to detect distinctive words, yielded more fruitful data. When comparing authors from across all periods, our results confirm Hoover’s in that there are some stereotypical words that do emerge. On the female side, most notable are ‘household’, ‘smile’, and ‘mother’, while on the male side, ‘country’ and ‘famous’ stand out. ‘America’ is also present in the distinctive male words. The male words are arguably reflective of a dataset that contains slightly more male American authors than it does female American authors—suggesting that Hoover is also correct to point towards nationality as a further potential classifier—but the difference is not so great that it should yield significant skewing. However, while there is a clear presence of stereotypical markers, there is also some significant crossover between authors. This is less pronounced across different periods, but when author sets are considered as a whole (see Figure 1), the macro-separation is not as pronounced as in Hoover’s findings.
                
                    
                
                Figure 1. All authors.
                As suggested by Hoover, we also analyze authors chronologically, comparing male and female authors across their respective periods. Once again, there are substantial correlations with Hoover’s wordlist, with stereotypes appearing in all sets, across all periods. But, as noted, the crossover between genders fluctuates throughout periods, with contemporary authors sharing the greatest similarities (see Figures 2, 3, and 4). This would suggest that gender distinctions between authors fluctuate across literary epochs. 
                
                    
                
                Figure 2. Victorian authors.
                
                    
                
                Figure 3. Modernist authors.
                
                    
                
                Figure 4. Contemporary authors.
                Our methodological implications do require brief commentary. A Zeta analysis introduces its own inherent limitations, forming as it does a list of words preferred and avoided by one dataset (e.g., female literature) insofar as they relate to another dataset (e.g., male literature). In Delta, the data speaks for itself, whereas in Zeta we use a mode of classification, so the separation we receive is partly a result of our dataset preparation. Rather than the data establishing its own distinctions, we (in a way) privilege and impose the gender split in our separation of the male and female datasets. There are literary and mathematical justifications for this, but it is worth acknowledging, and certainly worth discussing in the context of a gender-specific study. However, taking into account the data from our Delta analysis, the results of which turned up inconclusive, the subsequent Zeta can be seen to merely refine an already existent pattern. That being said, this particularity is something we will focus on further as we fine-tune our analysis for presentation. In doing so, we will computationally compare results across all of the lists, including Hoover’s, to see if any correlations may have been missed in this initial stage, which will ultimately allow us to conduct a closer analysis of the distinctive gender markers.
            
            
                Conclusions
                Worth noting is that the ongoing dispute in literary studies concerned with gender and writing style is wide and varied, and the scope of our research does not immediately affect the debates of gender theory or the potentiality of a distinct form of 
                    écriture feminine. In the parameters of such literary discourses, however, our project does provide a quantitative means to approach an overwhelmingly qualitative discussion. Specifically, our preliminary analyses lend evidence to the claims that such gender differences are evident in writing across periods, but that these differences are less distinguishable depending on the period in question.
                
                Studies that have included multiple genres or mediums in their stylistic analyses and text classifications have concluded that stylistic features often depend more heavily upon genre than gender (Herring and Paolilo, 2006; Janssen and Murachver, 2004; Argamon et al., 2003). Yet what these studies have consistently shown is that gender and genre both seem to reveal stylistic and thematic qualities historically associated with male and female language application. Our goal in limiting the mode of our corpus to fiction novels (and novel-length collections of short stories) is to refine the results of prior studies with more generalized scopes (e.g., Koppel et al., 2002; Argamon et al., 2003) and place similar conclusions within a periodized context, ideally providing ample opportunity for literary application.
                While we follow in the methodological footsteps of such studies, we have shifted the focus of our investigation away from style, in the macro-analytical sense, to period and its relation to gender-differentiable terminology. A number of projects (Argamon et al., 2003; Burrows, 2004; Schler et al., 2005; Pennebaker, 2011) have concluded that the use of function words—pronouns (taken customarily as female markers) and determiners and prepositions (taken customarily as male markers)—provide a reliable basis for gender identification in writing. None of them, markedly, has sufficiently addressed the issue of modernity and the evolution of language and its changes over time, though Hoover has suggested that this is the way forward. Our research separates from such work in that we aim to do just that: distinguish how gender differences have evolved over and between selections of specified, canonical literary periods, focusing on distinct, rather than functional, word choices. Admittedly, this is a first step, and akin to Hoover in his initial study, we acknowledge the need for a larger corpus and more refined dataset—this, of course, is the constant nature of the computational beast. But we can at least view this is a next step. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J. and Shimoni, A. R. (2003). Gender, Genre, and Writing Style in Formal Written Texts. 
                        Text,
                        23(3): 321–46.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2004). Textual Analysis. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds),
                         A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2007). All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        22(1): 27–47.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Sylometry with R: A Suite of Tools. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, pp. 487–89. 
                    
                    
                        Herring, S. C. and Paolilo, J. C. (2006). Gender and Genre Variation in Weblogs. 
                        Journal of Sociolinguistics,
                        10(4): 439–59. 
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2008). Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies.’ In Schreibman, S. and Siemens, R. (eds),
                         A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 517–33.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2013). Textual Analysis. In Price, K. M. and Siemens, R. (eds), 
                        Literary Studies in the Digital Age. Modern Language Association of America, http://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/textual-analysis/.
                    
                    
                        Janssen, A. and Murachver, T. (2004). The Relationship between Gender and Topic in Gender-Preferential Language Use. 
                        Written Communication,
                        21: 344–67.
                    
                    
                        Koppel, M., Argamon, S. and Shimoni, A. R. (2002). Automatically Categorizing Written Texts by Author Gender. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        17(4): 401–12.
                    
                    
                        Pennebaker, J. W. (2011). 
                        The Secret Life of Pronouns: What Our Words Say about Us. Bloomsbury, London.
                    
                    
                        Schler, J., Koppel, M., Argamon, S. and Pennebaker, J. (2005). Effects of Age and Gender in Blogging. Symposium paper for 
                        American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Genetic Criticism and Digital Editing
                
                    
                        Van Hulle
                        Dirk
                    
                    University of Antwerp, Belgium
                    dirk.vanhulle@uantwerpen.be
                
                
                    
                        Neyt
                        Vincent
                    
                    University of Antwerp, Belgium
                    vincent.neyt@uantwerpen.be
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    automatic collation
                    modern manuscripts
                    digital scholarly editing
                    genetic criticism
                    Samuel Beckett
                
                
                    scholarly editing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Writing is often inspired by external source texts. Including an author’s personal library is a crucial aspect of mapping creative invention at work, which is the aim of genetic criticism. In the field of genetic criticism (the study of modern manuscripts), Raymonde Debray Genette made a useful distinction between endogenesis (the part of a composition process that involves the writing of draft versions) and exogenesis (the part of the genesis that relates to external source texts—for instance, when an author consults an encyclopedia or makes notes on a book s/he is reading). Most digital genetic editions focus on the endogenesis, but it is also possible to incorporate the exogenesis. In the context of digital scholarly editing, the combination of these two aspects of a work’s genesis involves a form of digital editing that takes into account at least three approaches: (1) a documentary, (2) a textual, and (3) an intertextual approach. 
            Recent developments in genetic editing (notably including the work of the TEI) have increasingly drawn due attention to the importance of the ‘document’, rather than the ‘text’, as the core of the edition. In the meantime, the textual and intertextual aspects should not be neglected, though, especially if one considers the collation of versions as a central element in any scholarly edition. 
            The specific challenge faced by scholarly editors collating modern manuscripts is the complexity of the documents. Autograph manuscripts typically contain numerous cancellations, substitutions, and additions, which complicate the comparison. To examine the possibility of digital collation of modern manuscripts, this paper studies the case of the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project (www.beckettarchive.org), a project that is made possible thanks to an ERC Grant (‘CUTS: Creative Undoing and Textual Scholarship’) and whose digital infrastructure is developed as part of the Marie Curie ITN ‘DiXiT’ (Digital Scholarly Editions).
            
                Documentary Approach
            
            Modern manuscripts (notes, sketches, drafts) are not ‘texts’ but ‘protocols for making a text’, as Daniel Ferrer describes them in 
                Logiques du brouillon: Modèles pour une critique génétique (2011). This has consequences for scholarly editing, as Hans Walter Gabler notes in ‘The Primacy of the Document in Editing’, because ‘it is documents that we have, and documents only. In all transmission and all editing, texts are (and, if properly recognised, always have been) constructs from documents. For to edit texts critically means precisely this: to construct them’ (2007, 199). As a consequence, the inclusion of digital facsimiles has almost become a sine qua non in digital scholarly editing. This trend has been a considerable help in making modern manuscripts more accessible, especially when the facsimiles are accompanied by a transcription. But if this transcription is conceived in terms of a document-oriented approach, it often treats every word as a separate ‘island’ (linked to a particular set of coordinates on the facsimile), not as part of a syntactic entity. This is where a textual approach becomes useful.
            
            
                Textual Approach
            
            In addition to the documentary approach, a textual approach can make modern manuscripts more accessible by offering a plausible interpretation of the ‘protocol’ (to employ Ferrer’s term). If a word is crossed out and an alternative is written above the line, the chronology of these writing acts can—in many cases—be reconstructed, and this editorial interpretation can be usefully employed to feed into the alignment table of the collation software. In collaboration with the Huygens ING Institute (The Hague), we integrated the automated collation software tool CollateX in the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project (BDMP) and developed a model to incorporate all of these writing acts into the collation (Haentjens Dekker et al., 2014), to be included in a next version of CollateX. 
            In the meantime, a new bout of intense collaboration between the lead developers of the BDMP and CollateX (using the existing version 1.5 of CollateX) has resulted in a working alternative to this theoretical model. Deleted and added words are fed into the algorithm with an added property declaring them as such, collated against the text of other witnesses and visualized in the resulting alignment table in the same way as they are visualized in our transcriptions. Complex substitutions can push the software to its limits, and to that end corrective mechanisms were developed to guide the automatic collation to produce improved results.  
            Intertextual Approach
            In addition to the documentary and textual approaches, a digital genetic edition may also be expected to map the relations between endo- and exogenesis. To that end, it is possible to integrate a writer’s personal library. But in many cases, only a fraction of what an author has ever read is still extant. In addition to the ‘extant’ library (based on digital facsimiles of the marginalia in the books preserved in Beckett’s apartment in Paris), the BDMP therefore tries to reconstruct and integrate a ‘virtual’ library (based on Beckett’s reading notes in notebooks). Exogenesis defines the contours and the specific form of intertextuality that will be discussed in the paper. 
            * * *
            These three approaches enable users to compare (1) the digital facsimiles of modern manuscripts with the transcriptions, (2) the multiple versions of the drafts (by means of a digital collation tool to mark the variants), and (3) the author’s manuscripts with the source texts to which they refer or allude. Working with these three dimensions, the paper proposes a model for digital scholarly editions that map the interaction between endo- and exogenesis, formulating a set of criteria for the inclusion of various types of source texts to address the issue of a virtual library’s boundaries as one of the main challenges of exogenesis in digital editions. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Debray Genette, R. (2007). Génétique et poétique: le cas Flaubert. 
                        ITEM,
                        http://www.item.ens.fr/index.php?id=187284.
                    
                    
                        Ferrer, D. (2011). 
                        Logiques du brouillon: Modèles pour une critique génétique. Seuil, Paris.
                    
                    
                        Gabler, H. W. (2007). The Primacy of the Document in Editing. 
                        Ecdotica,
                        4: 197–207.
                    
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker, R., Van Hulle, D., Middell, G., Neyt, V., and Van Zundert, J. (2014). Computer-Supported Collation of Modern Manuscripts. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1093/llc/fqu007.
                    
                    
                        Shillingsburg, P. (2006). 
                        From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Geo-Language Games: An Agent-Based Model of the Role of Terrain in Language Diversity
                
                    
                        Hendery
                        Rachel Marion
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    r.hendery@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Magee
                        Liam
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    l.magee@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    language change
                    agent based modelling
                    simulation
                    linguistic diversity
                    mapping
                
                
                    linguistics
                    visualisation
                    anthropology
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            One of the enduring questions in the field of linguistics is why some regions are linguistically diverse, while others remain or become relatively homogeneous. For example, New Guinea is home to 13% of the world’s languages, while having only 0.1% of the world’s population and 0.4% of the land area (Nettle and Romaine, 2000, 80). It has often been assumed that terrain plays a role in the different amounts of diversity in different regions, as near-impassable terrain means that population movement results in isolated groups without further contact, while flat terrain without significant obstacles or easily traversable bodies of water lead to continual long-term contact between different language groups (cf. Marck, 1986; 2000). In recent years the impact of terrain on the diversity of New Guinea languages has been overshadowed by research on other proposed factors, such as economic, social, cultural, and linguistic structural predictors (cf. Pawley, 2007; Currie and Mace, 2009; Lupyan and Dale, 2010; Greenhill, 2014). None of the existing research, however, fully accounts for the diversity question. With recent advances in the accessibility of mapping technology, 3D rendering, and satellite imagery, the time is ripe to consider terrain as a possible factor in language change models.
            Agent-based modelling (ABM) represents a useful approach for considering the plausibility of terrain as one determinant of linguistic diversity. Agent-based models assume one or more computer-based autonomous, linguistic, reactive, proactive, and intentional agents who interact with each other and their environment (Wooldridge and Jennings, 1995; Gilbert and Troitzsch, 2005). Given an initial set of states distributed across a group of agents, and a finite set of rules, these interactions can then show interesting emergent patterns over time (Axelrod, 1997). As both Axelrod (1997) and Epstein (2008) argue, agent-based models can be useful as much for their explanatory as for their predictive value—as sorts of ‘thought experiments’ (Axelrod, 1997, 4) for elucidating how complex phenomena might emerge from simple assumptions. Increasingly, ABMs have been applied to social phenomena such as economic systems (Farmer and Foley, 2009), political cooperation and decision-making (Axelrod, 1997), urban development (Batty, 2007), social networks (Macy and Willer, 2002)—and language change (Steels, 1997). 
            However, agent-based modelling remains an underexplored—if tantalising—approach to understanding models of language change. As one example, Parkvall et al. (2013) proposed an agent-based model for the evolution of creoles in which agents follow extremely simple rules about talking to each other and updating their lexicon to ‘learn’ new words from each other during interactions. They tested this model for various combinations of founder languages, and found that it successfully predicts the lexifier language in the resulting creole. 
            The idea behind such a simulation is not to include 
                all possible factors in language change but to pare them down to the minimum needed to get a realistic outcome. This shows us which elements are most important in language change. Elements that have been considered in previous agent-based simulation of language change include social networks (Troutman et al., 2008), genetic predisposition of the agents to language learning (Baronchelli et al., 2012), and diversity of founding population (Parkvall et al. 2013), but to our knowledge, no one has included geographical factors.
            
            Here we present a model of language change in two sample regions: Palmerston Island (Cook Islands) and a range of terrain types in Papua New Guinea using a GIS-based agent-based model. In the first case the terrain is extremely flat, with no rivers or other potential obstacles to divide groups. The only terrain effects that could affect language change are the relative density of bushland that makes certain paths across the island easier to traverse than others. People are therefore more likely to encounter those who live near those paths than those who live in the denser bushland. In Papua New Guinea, on the other hand, we consider hilly terrain, rivers, and swampland as well as bush, so that population movement is much more constrained. 
            We argue relatively simple ABMs can represent complex emergent patterns typical of language differentiation among these relatively geographically proximate groups.
            We build upon existing work with a web-based ABM framework, Fierce Planet (Magee, 2012; 2014). The affordance of this framework over more established ABM frameworks such as NetLogo, Repast, and CORMAS (e.g., Bajracharya and Duboz, 2013) is the relative accessibility of simulations; these can be easily deployed and shared with other researchers and communities. We adapt that framework for three-dimensional rendering using WebGL and Three.js, and import geographical models for both locations. For Papua New Guinea, we import DEM models developed by USGS. For Palmerston Island we construct a DEM model using World Machine since it is too small and low-lying to be picked up by satellite. 
            Both height and foliage act as cost-based constraints on the movement of members of different tribal groups. As a general rule, this constrains interactions between groups, while reinforcing bonding ties within groups. Our model shows that, given a common linguistic origin, over time geographical constraints act as a factor in the gradual divergence of dialect and language between two groups. This is especially so when one or both groups are exposed to exogenous influences. We also model a range of alternative scenarios, where connections between groups become easier or more difficult due to alterative pathways between them. 
            We make two contributions with our paper. First we demonstrate how linguistic diversity can be partially but plausibly explained by longitudinal accumulation of linguistic and other social interactions within versus between groups. We show that geographical influences can shape this accumulation. Second we show how complex geographic ABMs can be developed using current web standards. This facilitates broader engagement with the assumptions and algorithms of ABMs, and encourages critique and feedback from other researchers and the public.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Axelrod, R. M. (1997).
                         
                        The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of Competition and Collaboration. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA. 
                    
                    
                        Bajracharya, K. and Duboz, R. (2013). Comparison of Three Agent-Based Platforms on the Basis of a Simple Epidemiological Model (WIP). In
                         
                        Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Modeling &amp; Simulation-DEVS Integrative M&amp;S Symposium. Society for Computer Simulation International, p. 7.
                    
                    
                        Baronchelli, A., Chater, N., Pastor Satorras, R. and Christiansen, M. H. (2012). The Biological Origin of Linguistic Diversity.
                         PLOS One, 7.10:e48029. 
                    
                    
                        Batty, M. (2007).
                         
                        Cities and Complexity: Understanding Cities with Cellular Automata, Agent-Based Models, and Fractals. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Currie, T. E. and Mace, R. (2009). Political Complexity Predicts the Spread of Ethnolinguistic Groups. 
                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA, 
                        106: 7339–44. 
                    
                    
                        Epstein, J. M. (2008). Why Model? 
                        Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 
                        11(4): 12.
                    
                    
                        Farmer, J. D. and Foley, D. (2009). The Economy Needs Agent-Based Modelling. 
                        Nature,
                         
                        460(7256): 685–86.
                    
                    
                        Gilbert, N. and Troitzsch, K. (2005).
                         
                        Simulation for the Social Scientist. McGraw-Hill International.
                    
                    
                        Greenhill, S. (2014). Demographic Correlates of Language Diversity. In Bowern, C. and Evans, B. (eds), 
                        The Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics. Routledge, London.
                    
                    
                        Lupyan, G., and Dale, R. (2010). Language Structure Is Partly Determined by Social Structure. 
                        PLoS One, 5.1: e8559.
                    
                    
                        Macy, M. W. and Willer, R. (2002). From Factors to Actors: Computational Sociology and Agent-Based Modeling.
                         
                        Annual Review of Sociology, pp. 143–66.
                    
                    
                        Magee, L. (2012). Simulating a ‘Fierce Planet’: A Web-Based Agent Platform and Sustainability Game. In
                         
                        Proceedings of the 2012 SpringSim Poster &amp; Work-In-Progress Track, Society for Computer Simulation International, Orlando, FL, 26–29 March 2012, 9.
                    
                    
                        Magee, L. (2014). Fierce Planet: Sustainability Priming through Online Gaming and Simulation. 
                        Proceedings of SimTecT, Adelaide, 25–28 August 2014.
                    
                    
                        Marck, J. (1986). Micronesian Dialects and the Overnight Voyage. 
                        Journal of the Polynesian Society, 
                        95(2): 254–58.
                    
                    
                        Marck, J. (2000). 
                        Topics in Polynesian Language and Cultural History. Pacific Linguistics, Canberra.
                    
                    
                        Nettle, D. and Romaine, S. (2000)
                         
                        Vanishing Voices: The Extinction of the World’s Languages: The Extinction of the World’s Languages. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Parkvall, M., Jansson, F. and Strimling, P. (2013). Simulating the Genesis of Mauritian.
                         
                        Acta Linguistica Hafniensia,
                         
                        45(2): 265–73.
                    
                    
                        Pawley, A. (2007). Why Do Polynesian Island Groups Have One Language and Melanesian Island Groups Have Many? Patterns of Interaction and Diversification in the Austronesian Colonization of Remote Oceania. 
                        Migrations Conference, Porquerolles, France, 
                        http://www.vjf.cnrs.fr/lacito/colloque/diaporamas/Pawley.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Steels, L. (1997). The Synthetic Modeling of Language Origins.
                         
                        Evolution of Communication,
                         
                        1(1): 1–34.
                    
                    
                        Troutman, C., Clark, B. and Goldrick, M. (2008). Social Networks and Intraspeaker Variation during Periods of Language Change. 
                        
                            University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics,
                        
                        14(1): art. 25.
                    
                    
                        Wooldridge, M. and Jennings, N. R. (1995). Intelligent Agents: Theory and Practice.
                         
                        Knowledge Engineering Review
                         
                        10(2): 115–52.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Global Perspectives on Digital Humanities Expertise
                
                    
                        Spiro
                        Lisa
                    
                    Rice University, United States of America
                    lisamspiro@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Cawthorne
                        Jon
                    
                    West Virginia University, United States of America
                    jcawthor@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Lewis
                        Vivian
                    
                    McMaster University, Canada
                    lewisvm@mcmaster.ca
                
                
                    
                        Wang
                        Xuemao
                    
                    University of Cincinnati, United States of America
                    wang2xm@ucmail.uc.edu
                
                
                    
                        Fraistat
                        Neil
                    
                    University of Maryland, United States of America
                    fraistat@umd.edu
                
                
                    
                        Hsiang
                        Jieh
                    
                    National Taiwan University, Taiwan
                    jieh.hsiang@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Siemens
                        Ray
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    siemens@uvic.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ma
                        Feicheng
                    
                    Wuhan University, China
                    fchma@whu.edu.cn
                
                
                    
                        Spence
                        Paul
                    
                    King's College London, United Kingdom
                    paul.spence@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    global digital humanities
                    skills and competencies
                    training and education
                    collaboration
                    benchmarking
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            1. A Global Benchmarking Study of Expertise in Digital Scholarship
            Cawthorne, J. 
            West Virginia University
            Lewis, V. 
            McMaster University
            Spiro, L. 
            Rice University 
            Wang, X.
            University of Cincinnati
            There is increasing awareness of the geographical and linguistic diversity of digital humanities (Russell, 2014), but insufficient knowledge of what shape expertise takes around the world. Supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, we conducted a global benchmarking study to understand the skills and competencies necessary for digital scholarship. We interviewed faculty, research staff, administrators, and graduate students at leading digital humanities and digital social science organizations in eight countries/regions, asking about the expertise important to their work, how they acquired this expertise, and how the organization nurtures it. This panel brings together leaders of five organizations that we visited to offer their perspectives on the human dimensions of digital scholarship. 
            We will begin the panel by giving a 10-minute summary of key findings and lessons learned. Through our site visits, we witnessed different models for supporting digital scholarship, including centers, labs, departments, and networks. We learned that many organizations face common challenges in recruiting and retaining staff and examined strategies for contending with such challenges, including facilitating a community of practice and offering dedicated research time. We hope that our study will contribute to a deeper understanding of the diversity of digital scholarship. 
            Brief presentations by leaders of DH organizations will provide examples of this diversity. Each DH center leader will give an approximately five-minute talk, raising a few key questions or provocations. The rest of the session will be devoted to discussing these contributions and engaging with questions and comments from the audience.
            2. Fellows No More: DH Centers and Post-Project-Centered DH 
            Fraistat, N.
            University of Maryland
            The digital humanities center has been a crucial institution for helping humanists develop digital competencies, primarily through offering fellowships for project development. The fellowship/project model, still prevalent in today’s centers, originally was based on the widespread model that humanities centers used so successfully: fellows received a year off from teaching to work on a book project, in return for which they would be resident at the center.
            As transferred to DH centers, especially the University of Virginia’s Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (IATH) in the early 1990s, the ‘fellows model’ was extraordinarily successful and influential. It served well to meet the needs of a historical moment in which the great majority of humanists were uninterested at best and suspicious at worst of digital scholarship. We are now in quite a different moment, when there is widespread interest among humanities faculty and students in developing digital competencies. The fellowship model now constitutes an over-investment in the few at the expense of the many. Rather than developing digital competencies in faculty fellows, it has often resulted in faculty relying almost completely on the competencies of center staff without developing any new ones of their own. This, in turn, leads to all sorts of problems in the life of the project once a fellowship period has ended. I will turn to our experience at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) to argue that DH centers need to think beyond the ‘fellow’ and the ‘project’ as the best means for developing these competencies, discussing our DH Incubator program as one means of doing so.
            
                3. Building Digital Archive Systems for Scholarly Use 
            
            Hsiang, J. 
            National Taiwan University
            In 2007, computer scientists founded National Taiwan University’s Research Center for Digital Humanities (RCDH). RCDH focuses on creating archives of Chinese language materials (which pose research challenges) as well as building the system methodology and tools for scholarly use of digital archives. This differs from the model where a humanist brings her problem and data to a DH center and develops solutions with technologists.
            Our emphasis on system design grew out of observing humanities scholars’ frustration in using digital archive systems, which are based on the conventional precision/recall model. Since historical research can be construed as a study of contexts, a digital archive system for historians should provide an environment for exploring relationships as well as retrieving documents.
            Developing such a methodology required understanding how historians use a digital system. We built a digital archive, observed how historians used it, and developed new features based on their feedback. After two years of iteration, we revised the Taiwan History Digital Library to their liking. Through this process, we developed a new methodology: digital archive systems with context discovery. Using this methodology, we have built 33 digital archive systems that host about 4 million metadata records, 30 million images, and 400 million Chinese words, as well as over 20 tools designed for specific collections. They are widely used by historians working with Chinese materials.
            We view a good scholarly digital archive system as an ongoing, close collaboration among system builders, domain experts (in our case, historians and anthropologists), and data curators. RCDH draws its staff mainly from the fields of computer science, library science, geology, history, and anthropology. The ability to work with people from different disciplines is our top priority. We also conduct workshops and provide scholarships to attract young scholars to use our systems and provide feedback. 
            4. Reflections toward Building Collaborative, Methods-Centred Community in the Digital Humanities 
            Siemens, R. 
            University of Victoria
            Discussion around establishing the Electronic Textual Cultures Lab (ETCL) at the University of Victoria, before I took up its Canada Research Chair in Humanities Computing in 2004, pointed in several directions. One was that U Victoria already had a small research computing support unit. Another was that the fellows model of IATH, MITH, King’s College London, and elsewhere was demonstrating success in building champions of a digital approach to humanities teaching and research as well as internationally significant research interventions. Further, the field was starting to reap considerable benefit from the early investment made by groups at Toronto, Princeton, Oxford, and elsewhere in training institutes, instilling computational skills in local constituents and enabling those from elsewhere to participate. In the context of such considerations, the most important decision we made in establishing ETCL was to view the end of what we were doing not so much as a creating a physical entity as creating something viewed in terms of its function and facilitative potential—including, but beyond, any single physical space.
            From that focus away from a physical/institutional imprint flowed many other decisions that have shaped the growth of digital humanities at the University of Victoria. The extant support group continued providing local humanities-specific support, at the same time as ETCL assumed a broader mandate across teaching, research, and service activities, with cross-disciplinary local, regional, national, and international impact understood. Further, the Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI) was embraced locally not only as a venue for on-site training but also as an international meeting point for understanding DH-pertinent tools, techniques, and technologies; our undergraduate minor in DH, joint with computer science, builds on this, as does our recent DHSI-based graduate certificate in DH, offered in partnership with the DH Training Network and beyond. So, too, with projects such as Implementing New Knowledge Environments, a network of researchers at over 20 institutions working with a similar number of invested research partners—having a centre in ETCL, but ultimately comprising spaces across the larger research community. This approach also facilitated embracing more than one physical locus for community- and practice-based work, the most significant being the MakerLab and the shared sense of enterprise between it and ETCL.
            My contribution will focus on these elements, and this approach, toward building collaborative, methods-centred community in the digital humanities.
            5. Digital Humanities Center of Wuhan University 
            Ma, F. 
            Wuhan University
            The Digital Humanities Center of Wuhan University (DHWU) focuses on knowledge service, knowledge networking, semantic technologies for cultural resources, ontology, semantic publishing, information retrieval, etc. DHWU researchers come from diverse disciplines, including library and information science, computer science, natural language processing, GIS, literature, and art. Most have rich experience in interdisciplinary research. As a virtual research center, DHWU plays a key role in scientific communication. To strengthen researchers’ academic abilities, DHWU holds workshops and seminars in which they can share research achievements and collaboration experience, inspire new ideas, and establish partnerships. 
            6. Digital Humanities as an Academic Department
            Spence, P.
            King’s College London
            Digital humanities has a long tradition at King’s College London, but its evolution from a service centre to a research active unit was formalized in 2001–2002 when it was granted status as an academic department (DDH) within what is now a Faculty of Arts &amp; Humanities. Over the years, DDH has lived through many debates about the best model to facilitate innovative but sustainable engagement between the humanities and digital culture, and the result has been a unit that corresponds more closely to the makeup of sister departments within the Faculty. This includes a stronger emphasis on teaching (DDH operates or co-manages four MA programmes, a PhD programme, and is now launching an undergraduate programme in digital culture), in addition to its historic strengths in performing funded research. This greater diversification has strengthened the department but has also presented challenges in career development, academic progression, and credit. I will explore the opportunities and tensions in the formal academic departmental model from a DH perspective, focusing on how growth can be driven by arts and humanities students’ increasing appetite for a close engagement with digital technology, which is theoretically grounded but also provides hands-on experience, and how this in turns influences the academic fabric necessary to sustain it.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Russell, I. G. (2014). Geographical and Linguistic Diversity in the Digital Humanities. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28 March, doi:10.1093/llc/fqu005.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Gradient-domain Noise for Realistic Degradations in Historical Documents Images
                
                    
                        Seuret
                        Mathias
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    mathias.seuret@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Eichenberger
                        Nicole
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    nicole.eichenberger@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Liwicki
                        Marcus
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    marcus.eichenberger-liwicki@unifr.ch
                
                
                    
                        Ingold
                        Rolf
                    
                    University of Fribourg, Switzerland
                    rolf.ingold@unifr.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    historical document image processing
                    degradation
                    noising
                
                
                    image processing
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    programming
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We developed a novel method for adding realistic degradations to color document images in order to generate large sets of training data for computational processing. We extract and process patches of real noise from degraded documents and paste them into the target document image using the gradient domain in order to achieve independence from the hue of the document. We will describe the novel algorithm and present an expert’s opinion on the data generated.
            * * *
            Historical documents suffer from different kinds of damages during their conservation, caused by either constant use (e.g., stains, fingermarks, ink strokes or spots, scratches, degradation of ink by abrasion), by inappropriate storage conditions (such as mildew caused by humidity), by historical catastrophes like wars, or by the material itself (such as ink corrosion). These damages can affect the readability of the manuscripts and also pose a severe challenge for digital processing of such documents.
            Developing robust digital processing algorithms requires machine learning, which relies on huge amounts of realistic training data, i.e., large sets of document images together with their corresponding ground truth (which refers to the expected labeling of the document). The high cost of ground-truthing limits the number of available training and testing documents. This motivates the development of methods that artificially add noise to existing ground-truthed documents in order to increase the number of available training documents.
            Fischer et al. (2013) presented a method to generate training samples by deforming binarized text lines. They showed that the accuracy of text recognition could be increased by up to 3.23% by their method.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. An document image sample (left) and its degraded version (right).
            Kieu et al. (2012) have presented a local noise generation method for historical document gray-scale images. They evaluated their method with optical characters recognition (OCR) software and found a linear relation between the quantity of the noise and the recognition error rate. Several other methods have been developed, but they all work either on the red, green, and blue values of images, or on binary (black-and-white) images.
            Methodology
            The main novelty of our method is, contrary to previous work, to work in the gradient domain of color images, i.e., using the difference of values between pixels, and to use patches of real degradations from existing document images.
            To insert degradation patches in the gradient domain, we first compute the gradients of the document image and of the degradation patches, then paste the gradients of the degradations on the gradients of the document image, and finally reconstruct the document image from its modified gradients. This method is illustrated in Figure 1. Working in the RGB color space would lead to inconsistencies if the document from which we extracted the degradations does not have a very similar background color as our target document image. Working in the gradient domain to avoid this is the main novelty of our method.
            Our method is inspired by the Poisson image editing method presented by Pérez et al. (2003). First, we compute the horizontal and vertical gradients of the image. Then we apply the degradations on these gradients. Finally, we construct the result image from the modified gradients.
            Scholar’s Point of View
            From a manuscript scholar’s point of view, the method for adding synthetic noise presents advantages and disadvantages regarding its verisimilitude. One advantage is that the inserted patches are based on real degradations appearing in historical documents; thus, they represent realistic historical degradations. This method provides a rather realistic impression for small-sized details of a manuscript page. However, the overall impression of an entire page looks less realistic, because the degradation patches are spread repeatedly, following a uniform random distribution over the page, and can easily be recognized as artificially added. Thus, the gradient method is appropriate for simulating degradations such as stains, scratches, and ink spots, which mostly overlap the script or the background, but doesn’t have a direct impact on the script (as, for example, abrasion and humidity do). It works best on small-scale details.
            Discussion
            Our method can be used to generate document images to train machine learning algorithms. The settings of the software that we developed are easy to manipulate by non–computer scientists. However, precautions have to be taken in order to clarify that the resulting degraded documents do not represent the actual state of the real historical document. As future work, we will compute statistics about the position of the degradations while extracting patches in order to generate more realistic distribution models.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                            Fischer
                            ,
                             A., 
                            Visani
                            ,
                             M., 
                            Kieu
                            , 
                            C. V. 
                            and 
                            Suen
                            ,
                             C. Y.
                        
                        (2013). Generation of Learning Samples for Historical Handwriting Recognition Using Image Degradation. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing
                        , pp. 73–79.
                    
                    
                        
                            Kieu
                            , 
                            C. V., 
                            Visani
                            ,
                             M., 
                            Journet
                            , N., 
                            Domenger
                             J.-P.
                            and
                            Mullot
                            ,
                             R.
                        
                        
                             
                        
                        (2012). A Character Degradation Model for Grayscale Ancient Document Images. In 
                        21st International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR),
                         pp. 685–88.
                    
                    
                        Pérez, P., Gangnet, M. and Blake, A. (2003). Poisson Image Editing. In 
                        ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), pp. 313–18.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Grove - Creating An Ecology of Flows
                
                    
                        Richards
                        Kate E.S
                    
                    UWS, Australia
                    kate.richards@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    affect; affordance; media arts; heterotopia; ecology; immersive
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    interface and user experience design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Media artists are increasingly concerned with creating intense audience experiences or immersive works that are opportunities for participants to engage with spaces, mobility, and embodiment. This research paper asks what it is to 
                move audiences in mediated environments and offers understandings and insights into creating media art for audiences now attenuated to intense embodied experience in everyday life. Along with illustration of a practice-led component—an installation called 
                grove—this research paper provides an emphasis on different key concepts for analysis of current and future media art installations. Through the artwork 
                grove and by analysis of other exemplars, the research argues for a schematic sequence by which a participant can engage with an ecology. 
            
            Specifically the research argues for the centrality of movement in perception and in participant engagement in mediated environments by drawing on current and attenuated theories of affordance and affect. It explains how we perceive 
                through movement—that is, difference and change—in always changeful environments that can be understood as ecologies, comprising flows of information that afford us stimulation across multiple modalities. Movement is core to triggering affects, the precursors to feelings, actions, and cognitions. This research paper hypothesises that to 
                move an audience in media art installations is to afford them opportunities for affective actions and reactions in a dynamic environment with which they are one—in short, an ecology. Over time, ‘moving’ experiences become significant events, accumulating and predisposing us to similar responses. 
            
            The hypothesis was explored in the creation of a major work called 
                grove, a 10m x 10m installation comprising a dynamic light array in the form of a grove of moving, programmed lights, set in a moat of reflective darkness. Documentation of the installation will be used in the paper. The grove itself is animated by the moving lights in a 25-minute sequence that engages light with light, exploring their characters, diameters, effects, and colour, and which also plays on the grove’s terrain molded from black rubber crumb, criss-crossed by paths of glittery salt. The choreography of light-as-media is rhythmic and gently changeful, exploring the inherent materiality of light, its ‘faktura’—reflectivity, transparency, colour, volume—and their 
                others: absorption, opacity, and void. Like all groves, the installation space is literally and metaphorically animated and made sacred by light. 
            
            The installation aimed to provide audiences with an immersive and contemplative space of refuge from the urban hubbub. Accordingly, it drew on minimalist aesthetics. Light is the medium; its materiality and variables provide the means to animate it. There is no content per se, other than the signification of the metaphor of the grove. By eschewing content and ostensible interactivity and with its minimalist palette (of light and its antonym, darkness), 
                grove invites visitors into a quiet ecology in which to dwell and be immersed in these core registers of visual and spatial perception: 
                grove affords audiences a sense of interiority. 
            
            The research demonstrates how 
                grove and other media arts installations can be analysed and interpreted as heterotopia—bounded spaces where time, inclusion, and sense of place are altered. The research argues that heterotopia provides a historic and cultural framework for understanding the capacity for changed relations within 
                and between audiences. By drawing on contemporary theories of heterotopia as sites of flow, this research provides a nuanced argument for media arts installations as ecologies of flows of opportunities for perception, and embodied and affective engagement. In short, this practice-led research hypothesises that to 
                move an audience is to afford them affective responses in an ecology of flows with the audience as interdependent participants in that system, integrated across various sensory modalities and physiological scales. The research also explores the rich cultural metaphor and metonymy of the grove, a bounded yet semi-permeable space full of potential aesthetic delights—an archetypal soft architecture that draws one in and offers a reflection space of high cultural value.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Historical And Demographic Database: Russian Experience And Prospects
                
                    
                        Mazur
                        Liudmila
                    
                    Ural Federal University, Russian Federation
                    lmaz@mail.ru
                
                
                    
                        Gorbachev
                        Oleg
                    
                    Ural Federal University, Russian Federation
                    og_06@mail.ru
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    historical demography
                    databases
                    census data
                    Urals in 18-20 c
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    historical studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            New computer technologies are rapidly changing the information base of historical research. The most significant progress is observed in historical demography. International projects aimed at creating the Big Data Base (IPUMS-USA, NAPP, Mosaic, Viennese Database on European Family History Church books, Demographic Database Umeå, and others) help establish a new research paradigm that eliminates the national boundaries of research practices and allows conduct of cross-national analysis of family history, birth and mortality rates, nuptiality, and migrations. Accessibility of the Big Data Base, its flexible interface, different modes of search, sampling, and data processing enable researchers to model their own resource with regard to the aims and targets of a specific research project. As a result, not only the information environment of Russian science changes dramatically, but also its methodology and research technologies. 
            The first experience of creating databases containing mass historical data goes back to the early 1980s. The process was enhanced by the establishment of Association ‘History and Computer’, founded in 1992. The most interesting results were achieved in the sphere of historical demography. In the 1990s–2000s the following large-scale projects were realized: in St. Petersburg State University, a group of historians supervised by Prof. S. G. Kashenko built up a database drawing on the register books of Olonets 
                guberniya of the 18th to early 20th centuries. Somewhat later, the same source was used by historians led by Prof. V. V. Kanishev, from Tambov State Technical University. Census records (
                revizskie skazky) and census records of homesteads (
                podvornye opisi) became the object for modelling databases for several 
                uezds of Penza 
                guberniya in the 18th and 19th centuries (Research of Historical Demography of the Russian Empire, 2013). Another centre for creating historical demographic databases was Altai State University. This is where the remaining records of the first general Russian population census of 1897 were found. They were used as a foundation for a database that was further expanded by adding the data of parish records. 
            
            Therefore, several regional centres gave rise to a new trend in historical demography that can be called ‘Digital Historical Demography’. The peculiar feature of this trend is that digital resources are based on primary historical sources. All projects were focused on specific locations—that is, they researched specific settlements, 
                uezds of Russia in the 18th and 19th centuries. Since the databases were developed for specific research projects, they were not made widely accessible to historians, except for the information and reference system created under the supervision of Prof. V. N. Vladimirov. It was called Historical Occupation Studies and included the database Population of Barnaul in the 19th to Early 20th Centuries, based on register books, consolidated records of the first general Russian population census of 1897, and other large-scale resources. Among the most interesting recent projects is Database of Demographic Indices in the Regions of Russia and Other Countries, which has been developed by the National Research University Higher School of Economics since 2011. 
            
            In 2014 the research laboratory International Centre of Demographic Studies of Ural Federal University started developing its network resource, Ural Historical Digital Archive. The project’s main target is to create a multipurpose digital resource, based on archival materials. The resource is to take the form of a database and full-text selection of digitized library and archival documents, maps, photographs, and image documents (e-archive) on regional history. The first stage (2014–2015) includes building up the following databases: (1) based on register books of several parishes in Ekaterinburg Diocese of 1800–1918; (2) based on All-Russia Census of Members of the Russian Communist Party of 1922–1924; (3) database All-Soviet Census of 1959, Sverdlovsk Region; (4) database Population of Cities and Rural Settlements of the Middle Urals in the 19th to 21s Centuries; and (5) database Subpolar Census of 1926/27. At the next stage (2016–2017) it is planned to extend the archive by digitizing and providing archeographic description of 
                revizskie skazky of Perm 
                guberniya—census records of homesteads and books. 
            
            The project developers have chosen to abide to the following principles: 
             1. Orientation towards primary large-scale historical sources (population census records, register books, and others), containing personal information.
             2. All-inclusive coverage of all existing documents and records.
             3. Application of the data format that provides storage, import, and integration of diverse resources and their collective use
             4. Openness and accessibility of the resource for the international academic community. 
            Taking into account the fact that the documents stored in Russian archives—for example, original census report forms—can be incomplete and fragmentary, it is necessary to formalize and digitize all the preserved diverse document complexes on the Ural history of the 18th, 19th, and early 20th centuries. 
            As practice shows, it is possible to overcome scientific isolation of researchers spread across the world. Historian-demographers from a number of countries have been successfully realizing the European Historical Population Samples Network (EHPS-Net) project, aimed at developing general-format Intermediate Data Structure (IDS) for over 20 demographic databases. If the Ural Historical Digital Archive gets included into the EHPS-Net environment, it will become possible to compare the Russian demographic processes with European and world ones, and determine their peculiarities and future prospects. Integration with the IDS will enable Russian researchers to study the natural population change as well as distinctive features of ethno-confessional communities.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Research of Historical Demography of the Russian Empire at the Department of Source Studies of Russian History, St. Petersburg State University. (2013). Newsletter of Association ‘History and Computer’, no. 41 (December): 137–41.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                How about Tools for the whole range of scholarly activities?
                
                    
                        Bradley
                        John
                    
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London, United Kingdom
                    john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital tools in the humanities
                    user experience
                    tools for cognition
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    user studies / user needs
                    other
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The production of digital tools and the debate about how they fit with the humanities has a long history. Much of it has the character of frustration. Many digital tools have been built, but almost all them have had little or no effect upon the humanities as a whole. This has been a theme of mine for many years (see Bradley 2005; 2009), but the phenomenon has certainly been noted by many others. Edwards reports that Martin Mueller conducted a distant reading of the titles of monographs and articles in scholarly journals to measure mainstream interest in what he terms ‘literary informatics’ and concluded that it remains a niche activity with ‘virtually no impact on major disciplinary trends’ (Edwards, 2012, 216). The 2005 Summit on Digital Tools at the University of Virginia reports, ‘Only about six percent of humanist scholars go beyond general purpose information technology and use digital resources and more complex digital tools in their scholarship’, and I suspect that no one thinks that the number is much higher today. More recently, in an article titled ‘Building Better Digital Humanities Tools,’ Gibbs and Owens note that ‘despite significant investments in the development of digital humanities tools, the use of these tools has remained a fringe element in humanities scholarship’ (Gibbs and Owens, 2012, abstract). 
            Gibbs and Owen present a User Experience (UX) perspective drawn largely from interviews of humanist scholars, and tool builders will definitely benefit from many of the observations that they make. However, I believe that the challenge is more fundamental than trying to find out what potential users say they want. If we are looking for a sea change in humanities scholarship driven by the uptake of our tools, we should, instead, remember two innovators who both achieved one through their innovations and who understood the limitations of the UX user-oriented perspective. Henry Ford is reputed to have said, ‘If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses’, and Steve Jobs claimed, ‘It’s really hard to design products by focus groups. A lot of times, people don’t know what they want until you show it to them’ (Ott, 2013). Perhaps a perspective on why digital tools for humanists are not being taken up needs to go outside of a set of (albeit valuable) UX observations.
            So, if the UX perspective is not the whole story, what else is there? Here I take a different approach, centered on the way many DH toolmakers think of the word ‘tool’, and attempt to broaden this idea of tool to fit it better with more of what goes on in the humanities, and therefore to make digital tools more influential there. My contention is that we need a more fundamental rethinking of tools and their function.
            I start with Ramsay and Rockwell’s observation that ‘Digital artifacts like tools could . . . be considered as “telescopes for the mind” that show us something in a new light’ (Ramsay and Rockwell, 2012, 79). The striking thing about this metaphor is that it draws parallels with a particular kind of tool—the scientific instrument. One way of seeing the assumptions that come loaded with this categorization is to look into the history of the conception of the telescope itself as a tool within science: something Malet (2005) reviews in his discussion of the early conceptualisation of telescopes in the 16th and 17th centuries. As a tool for ‘knowing’ and ‘discovery’—as something that revealed problems rather than solving them, opening discussions rather than closing them (238)—Malet claims that it became evident that, like this kind of humanities-oriented digital tool, the telescope needed to find a theoretical basis for what it did. Malet tells us of the evolution of this thinking over the 16th and 17th centuries—beginning with a view of the telescope as being essentially theoretically transparent: first as a kind of intimate extension of the eye (Malet, 2005, 245) or a kind of prosthesis for human vision (260) but eventually, starting with Kepler, to see the need for a theoretical basis that drew on optics and perspective, as to why materials seen through the telescope could be taken to have veracity (261). Of particular relevance to us is that Malet makes evident the separation of a theoretical basis for the telescope (drawn from optics and perspective) from a theoretical basis for what it revealed (such as the moons around Jupiter, or the lunar craters).
                1 How did these two very different research domains successfully connect with the telescope? DH toolmakers need a similar discussion: How does the theoretical basis of text analysis tools actually successfully connect and enrich discussions in the very different theoretical world of modern literary criticism?
            
             Although viewing humanities digital tools as analogues of scientific instruments is one paradigm, there are others, and we see alternatives in James Feibleman’s (1967) classification scheme for (nondigital) tools. The closest category he has to Malet’s 
                tools for knowing is his ‘tools for receptors’: the class of tools that ‘like spectacles, telescopes and vibrating membranes[,] extend the receptors’ in humans, allowing us to observe things that otherwise we cannot, or only with difficulty, experience. But Feibleman reminds us that there is a more familiar use of the word 
                tool than this—tools like spades or bicycles that ‘extend the effectors’, the parts of humans that allow us to make things, things like holes in the ground or trips to the grocery store (Feibleman, 1967, 330). These kind of tools in fact fit more naturally with the more conventional use of the word 
                tool, as is implied with ‘woodworking tools’ or ‘gardening tools’. Once this is noticed, we can see, perhaps, that Steve Jobs’ early classification of computers as ‘bicycles for the mind’ (see Popova, 2011) involves a very different sense of the potential of digital tools than we find in Ramsay and Rockwell’s seemingly parallel phrase ‘telescopes for the mind’. 
            
            The DH has had a significant history of tool making of this kind, too. One thinks of TuStep (2014) (for the making of sophisticated academic publications), for example, and Zotero (for the making of bibliographies), and we can see in the significant uptake of Zotero that the right tool, solving the right problem, can have a significant impact. The consideration of this kind of tool opens up a different perspective on issues, including on questions such as the UX’s 
                ease of use. Are woodworking tools, or a good violin, ‘easy to use’? Do they produce results easily? If not, why is this 
                not a reason that they have failed to find a user community? In fact, these tools help us to better understand the place of expertise in tool use, and its significance in the process of producing, in the hands of a master, good things from tools—an idea one can see in TuStep as well.
            
            A third category of tools that brings significant relevant insights is ‘tools for cognition’—tools that are meant to help us think better. An extended and useful description of the idea of cognitive tools (although for the related field of tools to facilitate learning) appears in Kim and Reeves (2007), and they, in turn, make frequent reference to the idea of cognitive tools from its original definition by Netchine-Grynberg (1995). Tools for cognition are interesting because they combine characteristics of both Feibleman’s tools for receptors and effectors in potentially powerful ways. Whereas tools for effectors allow us to better execute ideas we already have in our head to produce something external to it, and tools for receptors take things outside our heads and put new ideas in our heads, tools for cognition—because the product they produce are ideas in our heads, too—form a kind of positive feedback loop, perhaps of the kind characterised by Jerome McGann as 
                autopoietic systems (McGann, 2004, 200).
            
            Kim and Reeves use mathematical notation as an example of a tool for cognition. Mathematical notation not only serves to communicate ideas (tool for effectors), but is used by the person working on a problem to help him or her struggle with his or her research: scientists put mathematical fragments in their notebooks to help them think. Perhaps mathematics is not the right tool for humanities scholarship, but scholarly writing can act as a tool for cognition, too: many scholars write notes for this same purpose. Indeed, my Pliny environment (Bradley, 2008) is meant to explore how a tool to support the writing of fragments, as scholarly notes, might help humanities research.
            Scholarship in the humanities involves an interconnection of tasks that could benefit from both Feibleman’s tools for receptors and effectors, and in the task of working with the materials, involving cogitative work that tools for cognition could support. Perhaps a discussion that engages with these three kind of activities might move us better to understanding where digital tools could fit with the humanities?
            Note
            1. For various reasons, this issue is even more evident in the history of the microscope. See Hacking (1981).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bradley, J. (2005). What You (Fore)See Is What You Get: Thinking about Usage Paradigms for Computer Assisted Text Analysis. 
                        Text Technology,
                        14(2): 1–19, http://texttechnology.mcmaster.ca/pdf/vol14_2/bradley14-2.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Bradley, J. (2008). Pliny: A Model for Digital Support of Scholarship. 
                        Journal of Digital Information,
                        9(1 [26])
                        , http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/view/209/198.
                    
                    
                        Bradley, J. (2009). What the Developer Saw: An Outsider’s View of Annotation, Interpretation and Scholarship. In Siemens R. and Shawver, G. (eds), 
                        New Paths for Computing Humanists: A Volume Celebrating and Recognizing Ian Lancashire. Digital Studies / Le champ numérique, 1(1) (13 May), http://www.digitalstudies.org/ojs/index.php/digital_studies/article/view/143/202.
                    
                    
                        Edwards, C. (2012). The Digital Humanities and Its Users. In Matthew, G. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 213–32.
                    
                    
                        Feibleman, J. K. (1967). The Philosophy of Tools. 
                        Social Forces, 
                        45(3) (March): 329–37, DOI:10.2307/2575191, http://www.jstor.org/stable/257519.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. and Owens, T. (2012). Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward Broader Audiences and User-Centered Designs. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        6(2), http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000136/000136.html.
                    
                    
                        Hacking, I. (1981). Do We See through a Microscope? 
                        Pacific Philosophical Quarterly,
                        62: 305–22.
                    
                    
                        Kim, B. and Reeves, T. (2007). Reframing Research on Learning with Technology: In Search of the Meaning of Cognitive Tools. 
                        Instructional Science,
                        35: 207–56, DOI:10.1007/s11251-006-9005-2.
                    
                    
                        Malet, A. (2005). Early Conceptualizations of the Telescope as an Optical Instrument. 
                        Early Science and Medicine,
                        10(2): 237–62, http://www.jstor.org/stable/4130312.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. (2004). Marking Texts of Many Dimension. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 198–217.
                    
                    
                        Netchine-Grynberg, G. (1995). The Functionality of Cognition According to Cassirer, Meyerson, Vygotsky, and Wallon: Toward the Roots of the Concept of Cognitive Tool’. In Lubek, I., Hezewijkvan, R., Pheterson, G. and Tolman, C. W. (eds), 
                        Trends and Issues in Theoretical Psychology. New York: Springer, pp. 207–13.
                    
                    
                        Ott, G. C. (2013). 
                        Why Steve Jobs Didn’t Listen to His Customers. http://www.helpscout.net/blog/why-steve-jobs-never-listened-to-his-customers/.
                    
                    
                        Popova, M. (2011). 
                        Steve Jobs on Why Computers Are Like a Bicycle for the Mind. Brain Pickings, http://www.brainpickings.org/2011/12/21/steve-jobs-bicycle-for-the-mind-1990/.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. and Rockwell, G. (2012). Developing Things: Notes toward an Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 75–84.
                    
                    
                        Summit. (2006). 
                        Summit on Digital Tools for the Humanities: A Report on the Summit on Digital Tools. University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 28–30 September 2005.
                    
                    
                        TuStep. (2014). TuStep Text Processing Tools. http://www.tustep.uni-tuebingen.de/tustep_eng.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                How To Edit a Map in TEI
                
                    
                        Jenstad
                        Janelle Auriol
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    jenstad@uvic.ca
                
                
                    
                        McLean-Fiander
                        Kim
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    krdmf@uvic.ca
                
                
                    
                        Newton
                        Greg
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    gregster@uvic.ca
                
                
                    
                        Holmes
                        Martin
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    mholmes@uvic.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    TEI
                    editing
                    maps
                    graphics
                    collation
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    scholarly editing
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    renaissance studies
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            To document unprecedented editorial interventions to a map, we adapted for graphical editing the existing TEI mechanisms for handling textual-critical apparatus. The historical map underlying The Map of Early Modern London was originally printed in seven sheets that cannot be cleanly joined because of differences of scale and missing information. To create a coherent and navigable graphical user interface for georeferenced data, we skewed, resized, and shifted the sheets, and interpolated new conjectural material. To document our emendations and interpolations, we treat each graphic witness and reconstruction as a TEI &lt;surface&gt; element linked to a &lt;witness&gt; in &lt;listWit&gt;. We use the &lt;zone&gt; element to identify areas, then create an apparatus based on these definitions, treating the idealized map as the lemma, and the other related &lt;surface&gt;s and &lt;zone&gt;s as readings. We use custom values for the intervention @type, @resp for persons/roles responsible, and @source to document supporting evidence. 
            Background
            Most GIS projects use maps to display georeferenced data. Theoretically, any georeferenced surface will suffice, with the latitude and longitude coordinates serving to pin the data to the surface, but historical GIS projects sometimes wrestle with a historical map or map-like object. Locating London’s Past
                1 has georeferenced and georectified
                2 the Rocque map of London to display data from 1660 to 1800. The Map of Early Modern London (MoEML)
                3 is a literary GIS project that takes an even earlier map-like object as the site’s main interface.
                4 The Agas Map of 1560s London, a hybrid genre combining plan, bird’s-eye view, and landscape, does not lend itself well to georeferencing and georectification and is in many ways an inconvenient surface for displaying data, historical or literary. However, when MoEML took shape in 1999 as an early experiment in digital humanities, the goal was to mark up a digital surface and identify all its features—a procedure very much like annotating a text. As the project has matured, we have come to conceive of the Agas Map not just as one of a number of graphical user interfaces (GUI) that permit exploration and visualization of MoEML gazetteer data but also as an editable text in its own right. 
            
            These two treatments of the map demand the coherence and navigability that make a GUI an effective skin for data,
                5 and the application of the rigorous editorial principles and practices that inform MoEML diplomatic transcriptions and editions. We conceive of our structured composite of map witnesses as an ‘edition’. This edition includes our ‘copytext’ in the form of the 2013 digital scans we took as our starting point, as well as a reconstructed ‘reading text’ that meets the criteria of coherence and navigability. Users can compare the two ‘texts’ to see where they differ, but we also plan to document all emendations to the copytext, which include skewing, resizing, shifting, and most importantly, interpolating new material drawn by a graphic artist based on our historical research. In textual critical terms, we aim to produce a thorough textual apparatus documenting our editorial process. As a Text Encoding Initiative project, MoEML records editorial emendations using TEI markup. The TEI Guidelines provide mechanisms for handling critical apparatus in textual work.
                6 We have repurposed those mechanisms for graphical editing in order to document our textual interventions to a map. 
            
            The Map
            Creating a single unified Agas Map ‘surface’ for MoEML was a multi-step process. For copytexts, we had imperfect textual witnesses and surrogates (print and digital) of those witnesses. First printed in ca. 1561, the Agas Map of Tudor London survives in three 1633 copies of an altered Jacobean version: one in the London Metropolitan Archives (LMA); one at the National Archives, Kew; and one at the Pepys Library, Cambridge. We gain a possible glimpse of the earlier Tudor map through an unreliable 18th-century witness, George Vertue’s 1737 pewter-plate version that shows houses where the 1633 witnesses depict the Royal Exchange (opened in 1571), and the Elizabethan arms instead of the later Stuart arms. In 1905 the London Topographical Society (LTS) used the LMA witness to create new lithographs of seven true-to-size sheets. Around 1981, in association with the Guildhall Library, publisher Harry Margary reproduced facsimiles of the LTS sheets.
            Because the LTS and LMA maps were originally printed in seven sheets, any attempt to produce a single map requires stitching. We have stitched together freshly scanned (in 2013) hi-res images of the Margary sheets. These sheets, like their LTS and LMA predecessors, do not match along their edges. Previous attempts to stitch the sheets together, including our own 2006 stitching, have normally involved simply joining sheets along their edges. This practice produces a number of jarring and confusing areas on the map where streets do not line up, buildings are chopped off in the middle, or whole strips appear to be missing, as in this image of the join running through the Smithfield area (Figure 1). 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Infelicities along the sheet boundaries.
            The gap makes it difficult to ‘read’ the map in this area. Furthermore, when a site belongs properly in the gap between sheets where data appears to be missing, there is no zone on the surface to which we can point in order to locate the site in London’s topographical space.
                7
            
            We therefore decided to create an ‘idealized text’ of the map. We allowed ourselves to make changes both minor (skewing, stretching, and redrawing sections and lines) and major (adding in significant missing buildings, and filling empty space with plausible content based on historical evidence) to create a new artifact that satisfies the need for a continuously legible surface. This lengthy process involved careful historical research, consultations of other maps, contributions by a graphic artist, and many hours of altering lines on the computer. The result is shown in Figure 2 below.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Idealized reconstruction of the Agas Map showing repaired join in the Smithfield area.
            
                Documenting Our Editorial Interventions
            
            Such substantive interventions must be carefully documented. First, we must be able to identify source documents (witnesses). TEI P5 provides straightforward mechanisms for identification of witnesses. Each distinct object (each Margary sheet, each historical map, each fragment created by the graphic artist, and our complete idealized reconstruction) can be encoded as a TEI &lt;surface&gt; element, as in TEI Example 1, where each &lt;surface&gt; is identified by a unique @xml:id, given Cartesian coordinates (where the x,y coordinates of the upper-left corner are always 0,0), and associated with a graphic object (a .jpg in these cases).
            
                
            
            TEI Example 1. TEI elements for a Margary sheet and for the constructed ideal map.
            In one case, a single Margary sheet contains two ‘pages’, the top left piece and the bottom left piece (although they are arranged horizontally). We can deal with this sheet by creating a single &lt;surface&gt; with two &lt;zone&gt;s, as in TEI Example 2, where each &lt;zone&gt; is given a unique @xml:id and defined by its four pairs of x,y coordinates on the &lt;surface&gt;:
            
                
            
            TEI Example 2. A single Margary sheet containing two segments of the map.
            Each of these primary &lt;surface&gt;s and &lt;zone&gt;s can be linked to &lt;witness&gt; elements in a witness list. TEI Example 3 shows that each &lt;witness&gt; has a unique @xml:id and a prose description.
            
                
            
            TEI Example 3. Witness information is linked to &lt;surface&gt;s and &lt;zone&gt;s through the @facs attribute.
            Second, we need to define ‘areas of interest’ on these surfaces, also using &lt;zone&gt; elements in the &lt;surface&gt; element. For each of the other witnesses, we can define a &lt;zone&gt; on the &lt;surface&gt; of the idealized map to which the witness attests, as in TEI Example 4, where we indicate which part of the ideal map corresponds to the witness with the @xml:id of ‘w_margary_top_2’:
            
                
            
            TEI Example 4. A &lt;zone&gt; on the idealized map corresponding to a cleaned-up version of one of the Margary sheets.
            We can now create an apparatus based on these definitions, treating the constructed idealized map as the lemma, and the other related surfaces and zones as readings. In TEI Example 5, we use the &lt;lem&gt; and &lt;rdg&gt; elements to link one of the Margary sheets to a &lt;zone&gt; on the idealized map. The @type attribute allows us to declare the relationship between stemma and lemma:
            
                
            
            TEI Example 5. An apparatus entry linking one of the Margary sheets to its corresponding &lt;zone&gt; on the idealized map.
            We can now document the interpolation of missing material. In Figure 3, we see that, because of a bad join, much of a significant building, Durham House, is missing.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Durham House is missing along this join.
            Figure 4, including TEI code, shows the supplied image of Durham House in the idealized map; the people responsible are identified through pointers to &lt;respStmt&gt; elements that identify them and their role in this work (editor, researcher, artist), and several sources supporting the emendation are listed, including a 17th-century floor plan for the building and another map. 
            
                
            
            Figure 4. The insertion of Durham House, with (simplified) TEI encoding that documents it.
            Conclusion
            In a literary forum, taking a textual-critical approach to a graphical text is unprecedented. Normally, one would expect to see a lag between developments in textual theory and a Text Encoding Initiative response, since new conceptions of textuality stretch the capacities of the TEI. However, our new model for editing graphical texts uses existing TEI markup to document textual interventions. Our innovative use of the TEI textual apparatus captures in great detail the nature of an editorial change, the person(s) responsible, and the supporting evidence. Our next challenge is to generate the apparatus for collating emendations to this map-like text.
            Notes
            1. 
                Locating London’s Past: A Geo-Referencing Tool for Mapping Historical and Archaeological Evidence, 1660–1800. See http://www.history.ac.uk/projects/research/locating-london, and the project itself at
            
            http://www.locatinglondon.org/.
            2. See ‘Mapping Methodology’, http://www.locatinglondon.org/static/MappingMethodology.html.
            3. Janelle Jenstad, ed., The Map of Early Modern London, mapoflondon.uvic.ca, 2006–present.
            4. See MoEML’s description of the Agas Map at http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/map.htm.
            5. See JISC Digital Media’s Graphical User Interface Design: Developing Usable and Accessible Collections, at
            http://www.jiscdigitalmedia.ac.uk/guide/graphical-user-interface-design-developing-usable-and-accessible-collection.
            6. See chapter 12 of the TEI Guidelines, ‘Critical Apparatus’, at 
                http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/TC.html.
            
            7. The scope of this paper does not allow for detailed discussion of how we encode our location files in order to point locations to specific zones on the Agas Map. We record the correct point, line, or polygon on the Agas Map using facsimile, surface, graphic, and zone elements. See ‘The Facsimile Element’ in Landels et al., ‘Understand MoEML’s Website and Document Structure’, http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/website_structure.htm#website_structure_location_docs.
        
    



    
        
            
                Hypergraph Based Collaborative Film Archive
                
                    
                        Biddala
                        Sandeep Reddy
                    
                    International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIIT-H), India
                    biddala.sandeepreddy@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Singh
                        Navjyoti
                    
                    International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad (IIIT-H), India
                    navjyoti@iiit.ac.in
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    CinemaScope
                    Hypergraph
                    Cinema
                    Data Model
                    Annotation.
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    film and cinema studies
                    metadata
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    knowledge representation
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital film archives in addition to preserving cinema should also accommodate and provide for the computation of its cinemas by means of the metadata provided to represent the content in them. The provision for the computation of cinema could lead to various applications like semantic search, automatic genre clustering and classification, special visualization tools, and robust comparisons of movies.
            This paper describes a data model for storing the metadata of a film in an archive based on a discrete theory of cinema that has been in development for the past four years based on Indic theories and other theories of drama and film (Muni, 1996). This theory reduces cinema to a hypergraph composed of tags that assume its full form only with collaborative tagging and extensive visual and textual computing. A system called CinemaScope is also being developed based on this data model which uses HypergraphDB as its database and is being designed and developed to be a semiautomated annotation database system.
            
                Overview of Theory
            
            Cinema is ontologically a three-tier structure:
             1. Spatio-temporal flow controlled play of light and sound.
             2. Mere-temporal ‘flow’, which is visually created by a play of 25 fps.
             3. Trans-temporal content, which is embedded in a ‘flow’.
            Cinema concludes in a thematic unity. Unit of a discrete contiguum of cinema is punctuation. Idea of punctuation is inspired by Leibnizian distinction between ideal point and actual point on the one hand and continuum and discrete contiguum on the other (Leibniz, 2013). Punctuation is a form of an actual point that tells apart two recognizable and non-identical discernible contents. It has a structure &lt;entity1|entity2, relational context&gt; or graphically &lt;node1|node2, edge&gt;. 
            There are three classes of punctuations based on the three tiers of ontology of cinema:
             1. Temporal punctuation. 
             2. Vectorial punctuations between embedded content.
             3. Mereological punctuations between vectorial contents and the thematic conclusion of cinema.
            This way the form of punctuation constitutes discrete contiguum of cinema, which is computationally reducible to a giant graph that tells truth about cinema as art. 
            Ontologically there are categories of discrete content that are embedded in punctuated units of flow like shot and episodes. Some of the categories form the content part of the cinematic narrative (like locale, characters, events, and actions) while the rest (camera work, editing, re-recording) form the expressive part of it (Chatman, 1978). Forces operative on these entities as vector punctuations create kinetics of cinema toward thematic conclusion. The motion in films is through the movement of story or plot from the beginning to the conclusion. Such a motion towards theme is punctuated by points of events and points of considerations. It is through the sequence of events that connection to the theme is established. These events are punctuated with points of considerations. Story can be rendered as sequence of the points of events, and under each event there are several considerations (Dhananjaya, 2004). There are scalars between the sequences of cinema that are merely informative and do not account for the motion of the plot.
            
                Overview of Data Model
            
            In Hochin (2006) and Hochin and Tatsuo (2000), a data model called Directed Recursive Hypergraph Data Model (DRHM) has been described in which the content of multimedia is reduced to nodes and edges of a hypergraph. In Radev et al. (1999a; 199b), the structural and behavioral aspects of data that form multimedia information systems have been modelled as a graph-based object-oriented model, and a possible data model for film is shown. These approaches suggest that a graph-based data model for cinema based on the discrete theory of cinema proposed in the previous section would best represent it. Punctuation or point &lt;node | node, edge&gt; can be seen as triple of tags. This will make possible computing of the discrete contiguum of cinema as a graph. Also there are complex relations between the various entities of cinema which is best represented by hyperedges.
            The graph data model should accommodate the various ontological entities and their punctuations, the mereological punctuations as well as the vectors between episodes and the considerations between events. The partial data model for the cinematic hypergraph described is represented in the form of Venn diagram as shown in Figure 1.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Venn diagram of cinematic hypergraph—data model.
            Architecture of CinemaScope
            The architecture of the tagging system we propose for CinemaScope is a web-based collaborative one. The annotation schema for the hypergraph data model in theory captures the whole graph. But in practice manual tagging, which is required for the annotating the themes, considerations, meanings, and vectors of cinema, reveals only a sub graph of the original graph. This is because the graph also contains codes and conventions (which are many times dependent on the individual viewer’s perspective) that regulate the narratives and enrich their pure meaning. It is therefore essential that the tagging of the cinema be made social so that most of the graph is captured. The high-level architecture of CinemaScope is given in Figure 2.
            
                .
            
            Figure 2. Basic architecture of CinemaScope.
            Methodology of CinemaScope
            The database for the system is built on both relational database and graph database (HyperGraphDB). The relational database is used to store all the direct information about the cinema, like its cast, basic plot structure, related files (like script and subtitles), and other relevant information. The graph database is used to graph the tags which have a graphical relation between them. HypergraphDB is a graph-based as well as an object-oriented database with a Java-based API that allows objective modelling of all categories of tags. For example, ontological categories are modelled as follows:
            
                public class
                OntologicalEntity{
            
            
                private
                String entityName
                ;
                //Entity Name
            
            
                private
                Map
                &lt;
                String
                ,
                Object
                &gt;attributesNameAndType 
                =
                new
                HashMap
                &lt;
                String
                ,
                Object
                &gt;();
                //Contains the attributes with their names and values
            
            
                public void setEntityName
                (
                String entityName
                ){
            
            //Setting The entity Name
            }
            
                public
                String getEntityName
                (){
            
            
                return entityName;
            
            }
            
                public
                Object getAttributeValue
                (
                String attribute
                ){
            
            
                return attributesNameAndType
                .
                get
                (attribute
                );
            
            }
            
                public void fillAttribute
                (
                String value
                ){
            
            /*Code for filling the attributes*/
            }
            }
            The pre-processing stage involves identification of shots, episodes, and the tagging of basic ontological entities. The pre-processing step cannot be completely automated owing to the limitations of current vision and audio processing algorithms. But this stage of the annotation can be aided with a number of supporting files and techniques. For example, movie screenplays and subtitles that are freely available on the Internet help in giving hints of annotation to the user. Even the processes that are completely automated require manual intervention and editing. There are various shot transition detection methods (Boreczky and Rowe, 1996) along with techniques for identification of camera properties like depth, movement, and angle (Benini et al., 2010). The camera properties identified are dependent on the definitions used in the methods, and they are not completely accurate. The tagging system should provide options for manually editing and supervising the shots and camera properties.
            Film scripts and subtitles aid in the tagging of ontological entities by supplying hints. The script is first aligned with the subtitles for time stamps based on the work of Ronfard and Theung (2003). A basic version of this has been implemented based on the work of Larissa Munishkina et al. (2013). An example hint given by the system for the film 
                Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark is as follows:
            
            E.g. Scene #1 (0:00–2:15)
             Characters: Indiana Jones, Baranaca
             Locale: High Jungle, Peru
             Things: Gun, Idol
             Events: Shooting, Running
            The Collaborative or Social tagging follows the pre-processing step, and it helps in the creation of tags and links in cinema. The user is given the provision of defining the relations, which is made possible by the use of HyperGraphDB. Hertzum et al. (2002) suggests that collaboration of film archives should facilitate different archives in identifying a common ground on which to base a collaborator and in acknowledging the distinctiveness of each archive. The architecture of CinemaScope allows identifying a common ground, in terms of pre-processing tags as well as distinctiveness, by allowing the users of different background to provide interpretations and considerations of the story in terms of vectors, relations, and links (each with a different label).
            The various relations added by the user and the tags obtained from the pre-processing stage build up the graph, which could later be used for various applications like searching. For example, the following code snippet answers semantic queries like ‘Find all the camera properties used when character is holding the whip’:
            
                HyperGraph graph 
                =
                new
                HyperGraph
                (
                HyperGraphLocation
                );
            
            
                List
                &lt;
                CameraTemporalRelations
                &gt; cameras 
                = hg
                .getAll
                (hg
                .type
                (
                CameraTemporalRelations
                ));
            
            
                List
                &lt;
                CharacterThingTemporalRelations
                &gt; CTR 
                = hg
                .getAll
                (hg
                .
                and
                (hg
                .type
                (
                CharacterThingTemporalRelations
                .
                class
                ), hg
                .eq
                (
                "spatial_relation"
                ,
                "hold"
                ), hg
                .eq
                (
                "thing_name"
                ,
                "whip"
                )));
            
            
                Summary
            
            The paper describes the discrete theory of cinema and explains the hypergraph data model of cinema. The paper also describes CinemaScope, a semi-automated web-based collaborative film archive based on the hypergraph data model for annotating the film. This project is different from other movie annotation projects (ANSWER, 2009; Jewell et al., 2005); Lombardo and Damiano, 2010), which fail to capture the flow of cinema and make the computational representation of cinema in a database very descriptive and computationally infeasible.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Prototype of CinemaScope annotation system.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ANSWER Annual Report. (2009). http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/content-knowledge/docs/answer-annual-report-2009.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Benini, S., Canini, L. and Leonardi, R. (2010). Estimating Cinematographic Scene Depth in Movie Shots. Multimedia and Expo (ICME), 2010 IEEE International Conference.
                    
                    
                        Boreczky, J. S. and Rowe, L. A. (1996). Comparison of Video Shot Boundary Detection. 
                        Journal of Electronic Imaging,
                        5(2) (April): 122–28.
                    
                    
                        Chatman, S. (1978). 
                        Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
                    
                    
                        Dhananjaya. (1100). Dasarupaka, Dr. Keshavrao Musalgaunkar. Hindi Dasarupaka, 2004.
                    
                    
                        Hertzum, M., Pejtersen, A. M., Cleal, B. and Albrechtsen, H. (2002). An Analysis of Collaboration in Three Film Archives: A Case for Collaboratories. 
                        CoLIS4: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science. Libraries Unlimited, pp. 69–83.
                    
                    
                        Hochin, T. (2006). Graph-Based Data Model for the Content Representation of Multimedia Data. Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems. 
                        Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
                        4252 (1182–90).
                    
                    
                        Hochin, T. and Tatsuo T. (2000). A Directed Recursive Hypergraph Data Model for Representing the Contents of Multimedia Data. 
                        Memoirs of the Faculty of Engineering, Fukui University, 
                        48: 343–60.
                    
                    
                        Jewell, M., Lawrence, K., Tuffield, M., Prugel-Bennett, A., Millard, D., Nixon, M. and Shadbolt, N. (2005). OntoMedia: An Ontology for the Representation of Heterogeneous Media. 
                        Proceedings of SIGIR Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval. ACM.
                    
                    
                        Leibniz, G. W. (2013). 
                        The Labyrinth of the Continuum: Writings on the Continuum Problem 1672–1686. Translated, edited, and with an introduction by Richard T. W. Arthur. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    
                    
                        Lombardo, V. and Damiano, R. (2010). Narrative Annotation and Editing of Video. Interactive Storytelling. 
                        Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
                        6432, 62–73.
                    
                    
                        Muni, B. (1996 [300 BC]). 
                        Nāṭya śāstra. With Abhinavagupta’s Commentary; with Hindi Commentary by Dwivedi Parasnath. Sampurnanand Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya, Varanasi.
                    
                    
                        Munishkina, L., Parrish, J. and Walker, M. A. (2013). Fully Automatic Interactive Story Design from Film Scripts. Interactive Storytelling. 
                        Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
                        8230: 229–32.
                    
                    
                        Radev, I., Pissinou, N. and Makki, K. (1999a). Film Video Modeling. 
                        Proceedings of IEEE Workshop on Knowledge and Data Engineering Exchange, KDEX 99, Chicago, IL, November 1999.
                    
                    
                        Radev, I., Pissinou, N., Makki, K. and Park, E. K. (1999b). Graph-Based Object-Oriented Approach for Structural and Behavioral Representation of Multimedia Data. 
                        Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Kansas City, MO, 2–6 November 1999, pp. 522–30.
                    
                    
                        Ronfard, R. and Thuong, T. T. (2003). A Framework for Aligning and Indexing Movies with Their Script. 
                        Proceedings of ICME, Baltimore, MD, 6–9 July 2003.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Identifying Classical and Written Vernacular Chinese Language: A Statistical Study based on Texts from New Youth Magazine (1915-1922)
                
                    
                        Ho
                        Li-hsing
                    
                    National Tsing-hua University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    lillianlhho@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Yue
                        Ching-Syang Jack
                    
                    National Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    csyue@nccu.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Cheng
                        Wen-huei
                    
                    National Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    wenhuei_cheng@yahoo.com.tw
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Stylistic Analysis
                    May 4th Movement
                    New Youth magazine
                    Function Words Analysis
                    Species Diversity
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    asian studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The year 2015 marks the 100th anniversary of 
                New Youth magazine (1915–1922), the single most influential periodical in the history of modern Chinese literature and language. It was in 
                New Youth that the progressive writers advocated to replace classical Chinese with written vernacular as the standard of modern written Chinese language. At first, just like other literati in late the Qing and the early republic, they wrote most of their arguments on language changing in classical Chinese. The dramatic shift of language happened after the May Fourth movement in 1919, and the practice of writing vernacular in every genre spread from the magazine to other publications across the country, finally changing the landscape of written Chinese for good. For a century, scholars have emphasized the importance of 
                New Youth but failed to answer questions such as how long it took for the literati as well as the general public to accept the use of a new written standard and exactly how the new standard spread. Teaching computers to distinguish between classical and written vernacular Chinese may make it possible to bring in more digitized texts from that period to study and find the answers. 
            
            In this study, we adapt the concept of statistical learning theory and propose two types of quantitative analysis, supervised learning and unsupervised learning, to explore the writing style of classical Chinese and modern Chinese. These two types of methods differ in whether the researchers provide keywords. The unsupervised methods, unlike the supervised methods, are data-driven and determine keywords based on the data attribute and pattern. Since there is no standard operating procedure for applying the unsupervised methods, we will apply the idea of species diversity to determine the keywords. 
            Supervised learning has long been used in linguistics to differentiate authorship via keywords, and we choose 10 function words each for classical and modern Chinese as the keywords. Together with a proposed dispersion measure G* index, we can evaluate the trend of function words used in volumes 1 and 11 of 
                New Youth magazine. For example, the following graph (Figure 1) shows the trends of G* indices for 20 function words chosen. Note that, if the G* curve of a function word is always under the diagonal line, then the frequency of this word is increasing. On the other hand, the G* curve of a function word over the diagonal line indicates that the word frequency is decreasing. In other words, the function words of classical Chinese become infrequent while those of modern Chinese become more common in 
                New Youth magazine. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. G* curves of 20 function words (black line: classical Chinese; red line: modern Chinese).
            For the unsupervised learning, we will focus on comparing species (or vocabulary) richness, unevenness, and sentence structure. We use numbers of words and vocabularies to measure the richness. There are quite a lot of unevenness measures, such as Gini’s index, entropy, and Simpson’s index, and they are often used for measuring the statistical dispersion. The analysis of sentence structure includes its length and the punctuation in a sentence. We will use an example to demonstrate our approach by judging the species richness and unevenness. Table 1 shows the related statistics of 11 volumes of 
                New Youth magazine. The number of words is increasing from volume 1 to volume 11, but the number of vocabularies shows a decreasing pattern. This indicates that the species diversity becomes lower. The unevenness measures reveal similar information, and earlier volumes have higher species diversity. Note that a smaller value of Simpson’s index (and a larger entropy value) indicates higher species diversity. Based on these analyses, it seems that later volumes have lower species diversity and people can read the articles without recognizing many words, which matches the purpose of the May Fourth Movement.
            
            
                
                    Volume
                    Words Count
                    
                        Vocabularies
                        Count
                    
                    Simpson Index
                    Entropy
                
                
                    1
                    248,833
                    4,379
                    0.004568
                    6.654036
                
                
                    2
                    291,848
                    4,344
                    0.004500
                    6.649539
                
                
                    3
                    290,038
                    4,227
                    0.004954
                    6.541824
                
                
                    4
                    305,020
                    4,298
                    0.004172
                    6.539378
                
                
                    5
                    343,519
                    4,125
                    0.004672
                    6.461579
                
                
                    6
                    389,407
                    3,848
                    0.005749
                    6.348547
                
                
                    7
                    586,942
                    3,850
                    0.006053
                    6.328604
                
                
                    8
                    461,731
                    3,753
                    0.006035
                    6.320355
                
                
                    9
                    437,748
                    3,745
                    0.005574
                    6.322103
                
                
                    10
                    342,778
                    2,980
                    0.005700
                    6.177278
                
                
                    11
                    489,223
                    3,093
                    0.005712
                    6.212699
                
            
            Table 1. Descriptive statistics for 
                New Youth magazine.
            
            In addition, we will apply the measures in this study and use them to classify an article for whether it belongs to the group of classical or modern Chinese. First, the articles from all 11 volumes of 
                New Youth magazine are identified manually into the groups of classical or modern Chinese. Next, we use cross-validation to determine feasible classification functions (and the best one, if possible). We separate the articles in 
                New Youth magazine into two sets: training data and testing datasets. The training data are used to select important variables and construct the classification function, and this function is used to determine the labels of the testing data. We then calculate the classification error (or prediction error) of the testing data, and the function with the smallest error is treated as the best model. The process of cross-validation is often repeated several times (e.g., 1,000 times) to reduce the influence of chance. Usually we choose the classification function with the smallest average prediction error from 1,000 replications. Also, we can check the important variables in the classification function and examine possible interpretations of these variables. We expect the interpretations are helpful in differentiating the styles between classical Chinese and modern Chinese. 
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Identifying Synonymous Word Groups in the Synoptic Gospels: A Quantitative Analytical Approach
                
                    
                        Murai
                        Hajime
                    
                    Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
                    h_murai@valdes.titech.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Synoptic Gospels
                    the synoptic problem
                    synonyms
                    factor analysis
                
                
                    text analysis
                    theology
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper is concerned with comparative analysis of the Synoptic Gospels, or, more specifically, the 
                synoptic problem. In order to examine the synoptic problem scientifically, average synonymous word groups were first extracted based on the interrelationship between words in the Greek New Testament and various translations thereof. In the next step, those synonymous word groups were used as parameters for factor analysis. Thirty-four factors were identified, most of which pertain to theological concepts. Factor scores were then used to identify the major themes of each Synoptic Gospel. The major theme of Matthew was identified as ‘justice’; of Mark, ‘miracles’ and ‘salvation’; and of Luke, ‘missionaries’ and ‘what disciples should do’.
            
            * * *
            The so-called 
                synoptic problem pertains to the complexity involved in editing the first three New Testament Gospels (the Synoptic Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke), largely due to the similarity in content between them. The similarities and differences between these texts have been analyzed extensively in the field of Bible studies using traditional humanities’ methodologies, though descriptive statistics were utilized in some cases (Rosché, 1960). In such studies, the synoptic problem has been mainly divided into two themes: the first regards how the texts are edited, and the second regards the differences between the texts. In other words, there exists both diachronic (process of editing) and synchronic (differences in the texts) research into the synoptic problem in the field of Bible studies.
            
            However, with the rapid development of information technologies, it has become easier to quantitatively analyze texts, and in the digital humanities field, the Bible has become one of the major research targets. Regarding the synoptic problem, for example, Miyake et al. (2005) were able to automatically extract similar parts of the Synoptic Gospels and created Natural Language Processing–based synoptic tables. In another project, Murai (2007) quantitatively extracted background theological focus points about the editorial process based on relationships between similar text parts. Until now, however, such quantitative research into the synoptic problem has largely focused on the diachronic problem. 
            
                Research Aim
            
            In light of this research gap, it is necessary to analyze the synoptic problem synchronically using quantitative methodologies. Although superficial differences between the texts, such as word or phrase frequency, have been analyzed manually since the 19th century, no quantitative analysis has been conducted into the differences between theological concepts.
            One of the major difficulties in analyzing theological concepts is the diversity of expressions and words used in the original Greek New Testament. The same theological concept is expressed using many different words. Therefore, the relationship between synonymous words should be identified in order to conduct intertextual analysis of theological concepts. Moreover, because several theological concepts are mixed in each pericope (small story) in the Bible, it is necessary to use some methodology to separate out these concepts.
            For the reasons outlined above, theological concepts cannot be extracted directly simply by counting the words. Therefore, in this research, the first step is to develop synonymous word groups and then to develop highly related word groups in the Synoptic Gospels by factor analysis of frequently appearing words. The resultant groups of highly related words would include theological concepts that are composed of co-occurring words.
            Method and Results
            
                Identifying Synonymous Word Groups
            
            The nuance of word meaning in the Bible has been frequently contended in the field of Bible studies. There are numerous hypotheses and interpretations regarding the meanings of the original Greek words, so it is difficult to propose a neutral thesaurus for the biblical Greek. Therefore, in this research, an average of several interpretations was used to extract synonymous word groups. 
            The average interpretation of word relationships between the original Greek and subsequent translations was extracted. In order to identify the relationship between the original text and translations, the Asymptotic Correspondence Vocabulary Presumption Method (ACVPM) was used (see Murai, 2010). This method enabled the extraction of multiple word relationships for each word in order to form a bipartite network of original and translational words (see left network of Figure 1). Based on this network, two original words are connected when they share a corresponding translational word; in this way, a network of original words can be created (see right network of Figure 1) that signifies the relationships between original Greek words (Murai, 2013). Moreover, this method enables to compare characteristics of translational languages and background ideologies (Murai, 2012).
            A separate network of original words can be constructed from each translation of the Bible. If many different networks of original words have a common edge between some two original words, it suggests that the two words are very similar in meaning. Therefore, by combining networks from several translations, and by extracting strong edges, average synonymous word groups are extracted as partial connected graphs of that network (Figure 2).
            In this research, four English translations (the New Jerusalem Bible, the New King James Version, the New Revised Standard Version, and the New American Bible) and four Japanese translations (the Colloquial Japanese, the New Japanese, the Franciscan Japanese, and the New Interconfessional Translation) of the New Testament were analyzed and edges were extracted when more than four translations had that edge in common. Using this method, 224 similar word groups were obtained.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. An example of extracting a network of original Greek words from a bipartite network of original and translational words.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. An example of creating combined networks and extracting stronger edges.
            
                Factor Analysis of the Synoptic Gospel
            
            In previous research, several methods have been used to extract concepts from texts—for example, LSA (Latent Semantic Analysis) or the Topic Model (Hoffman, 1999). Because LSA is used to analyze specific words, it is not suitable for whole text analysis. While the Topic Model enables the extraction of an arbitrary number of topics from target texts with a high degree of accuracy, it does not indicate the number of essential topics. Therefore, in this research, factor analysis, which allows indication of the number of essential topics, was used to extract factors composed of synonymous word groups from the Synoptic Gospels. 
            For this stage of the research, pericopes were adopted as the units of analysis. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke each contain 145 pericopes, while the Gospel of Mark contains 81 pericopes. From these, 175 synonymous word groups were selected, comprising those that appeared in more than 10% of all pericopes. The parameters used for factor analysis were the frequencies of those synonymous word groups in each pericope. The rotation method used was promax. According to the results of Parallel Analysis, 34 factors were identified, and the cumulative contribution ratio of those 34 factors was 0.785. The names of obtained factors and synonymous word groups with greater than 0.5 factor loadings are shown in Table 1. In Table 1, synonymous word groups are represented by one of the included Greek words.
            The largest factors concern ‘the salvation of sinners’. These are followed by factors concerning ‘the beginning and the end’, ‘bread in the wilderness’, ‘journey to Jerusalem’, ‘hypocrisy of the Pharisees’, and ‘parables’. Apart from Factor 12 (‘numeral’), all identified factors were related to important theological concepts.
            
                
            
            Table 1. Factor names and synonymous word groups.
            In order to compare the major themes of the Synoptic Gospels, characteristic factors were identified based on factor scores. The average factor scores in each Gospel are shown in Table 2. In Matthew, Factors 6 (‘hypocrisy of the Pharisees’), and 23 (‘good and evil’) are found to be influential, which may allow us to consider the major theme of Matthew’s Gospel to be justice. In Mark, Factors 4, 8, 10, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, and 31 are influential, which may lead to the conclusion that Mark’s major themes are miracles (‘bread in the wilderness’, ‘exorcism’, ‘resurrection’, and ‘awe of people’) and salvation (‘parables of sower’, ‘leading to faith’, ‘salvation for the people’). In Luke, Factors 2, 5, 9, 11, 14, 19, and 29 are influential, so the major theme of Luke may relate to missionaries (‘travel to Jerusalem’, ‘missionary’) and what disciples should do (‘thanks by sinners’, ‘announcements to Maria’, ‘the lord and servant’).
            
                
            
            Table 2. Average factor scores in each Synoptic Gospel.
            
                Conclusion and Future Work
            
            In this research, average synonymous word groups were extracted using a quantitative method. These word groups were used to extract theological concepts from the Synoptic Gospels by utilizing factor analysis in a falsifiable way. Moreover, the theological differences between the three Synoptic Gospels were identified based on the average factor scores in each text. Unlike conventional exegetic methods, these results are reproducible, and third-party evaluation is possible because they are based on scientific methodology.
            For future work, detailed analysis and consideration of obtained factors should be conducted. In addition, other books of the Bible should be analyzed and compared in order to understand the theological concepts of the Gospels and the Bible.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hofmann, T. (1999). Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis. 
                        SIGIR 99 Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Berkeley, CA, 15–19 August 1999, pp. 50–57.
                    
                    
                        Miyake, M., Akama, H., Nakagawa, M. and Makoshi, N. (2005). The Computed Synoptic Table-Tele-Synopsis for Biblical Research, 
                        Proceedings of ACH/ALLC 2005, Victoria, BC, 15–18 June 2005, pp. 152–54.
                    
                    
                        Murai, H. (2010). Extracting the Interpretive Characteristics of Translations Based on the Asymptotic Correspondence Vocabulary Presumption Method: Quantitative Comparisons of Japanese Translations of the Bible. 
                        Journal of Japan Society of Information and Knowledge, 
                        20(3): 293–310.
                    
                    
                        Murai, H. (2012). Semantic Networks between Texts in Different Language Based on the Asymptotic Correspondence Vocabulary Presumption Method. 
                        Information Processing Society of Japan Symposium Series,
                        2012(7): 61–68.
                    
                    
                        Murai, H. (2013). Exegetical Science for the Interpretation of the Bible: Algorithms and Software for Quantitative Analysis of Christian Documents. 
                        Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing Studies in Computational Intelligence, Vol. 492. Springer International Publishing, pp. 67–86.
                    
                    
                        Murai, H. and Tokosumi, A. (2007). Network Analysis of the Four Gospels and the Catechism of the Catholic Church’. 
                        Journal of Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics,
                        11(7): 772–79.
                    
                    
                        Rosché, T. R. (1960). The Words of Jesus and the Future of the ‘Q’ Hypothesis. 
                        Journal of Biblical Literature,
                        79(3): 210–20. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Implementing and Sustaining a DH Infrastructure – “The HUMlab Experience”
                
                    
                        Palm
                        Fredrik
                    
                    Umeå University, Sweden
                    fredrik.palm@humlab.umu.se
                
                
                    
                        Mähler
                        Roger
                    
                    Umeå University, Sweden
                    roger.mahler@humlab.umu.se
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    sustainability
                    supporting processes
                    knowledge sharing
                    software development
                
                
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            To curate processes within the digital humanities, an elaborate infrastructure of technology, supporting processes, physical spaces, competences, and human attitudes is needed, which can be challenging to create and sustain in the academia of humanities. In this poster we will share our experiences, good as well as bad, and how we have tackled the challenges of working within the digital humanities. 
            The physical spaces of HUMlab are open and accessible, where technicians, students, and researchers from a wide variety of fields can meet and collaborate. The spaces in HUMlab have been designed with the aim of creating an appealing and attractive ‘meeting place’ with a technological infrastructure that breaks interdisciplinary barriers. The codesign of digital research methodologies and tools also functions across the disciplines and joins knowledge from different fields. 
            The supporting processes, and the way they are executed, emphasise collaboration, knowledge sharing, and joint venture. The project model used in software development is based on an agile approach that has been adapted to the special needs and demands of academia and research within the humanities. Supporting workflows have been specified and implemented (e.g., stakeholder discussion, project initialization) with tollgates and templates. The real challenge is to create formalized workflows that promote new ideas, quality, creativity, innovation, and individual development. 
            An open mindset is required to achieve and sustain interdisciplinarity and collaboration on equal terms. The working process must allow mistakes and encourage new ideas. Part of the challenge is to build trust and share knowledge in a dialogue that translates scholarly needs with technology to give added values. 
            Technology plays an important part of HUMlab (e.g., a multitude of screen scapes), but even more important is the critical attitude towards the technology and how it is used. It is vital to understand the underlying epistemology of different technologies, and the methods and tools, and to have transparency on how they are applied in order to achieve certain (research) objectives. 
            A real challenge is to sustain the numerous competences needed within the fields of digital humanities and humanities computing (especially when you don’t know the needs of the next collaboration). At HUMlab, this is done by so-called pet projects (freedom to work with personal projects), focus projects (small projects to expand knowledge in certain areas, and to step out of your ‘comfort zone’), assigned fields of interest (personal responsibility to sustain knowledge for a specific fields), and a competence matrix at an organizational level that is based on HUMlab’s needs and vision for the future, but also dynamic and flexible and adapting to an ever-changing world. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Improving Burrows’ Delta – An empirical evaluation of text distance measures
                
                    
                        Jannidis
                        Fotis
                    
                    Universität Würzburg, Germany
                    fotis.jannidis@uni-wuerzburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Pielström
                        Steffen
                    
                    Universität Würzburg, Germany
                    pielstroem@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Schöch
                        Christof
                    
                    Universität Würzburg, Germany
                    christof.schoech@uni-wuerzburg.de
                
                
                    
                        Vitt
                        Thorsten
                    
                    Universität Würzburg, Germany
                    thorsten.vitt@uni-wuerzburg.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Burrows' Delta
                    Argamon
                    stylo
                
                
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Since John Burrows first proposed Delta as a new stylometric measure (Burrows, 2002), it has become one of the most robust distance measures for authorship attribution (Juola, 2006; Stamatatos, 2009; Koppel et al., 2009). It has been shown to render very useful results in different text genres (Hoover, 2004a) and languages (Eder and Rybicki, 2013). Nowadays, Delta is widely used not the least because there is the free 
                stylo package in R (Eder et al., 2013). There have been several proposals to improve Delta (Hoover, 2004b; Argamon, 2008; Eder et al., 2013; Smith and Aldridge, 2011; Kestemont and Rybicki, 2013). In the following, we report on a series of experiments to test these proposals using collections of novels in three languages. Our results will show that one of Hoover’s and one of Argamon’s measures show good results, but are outperformed in general by Burrows’ Delta and by Eder’s Delta. Most notably, the modification of Delta proposed by Smith and Aldridge shows a remarkable improvement of the results in all languages and has the advantage of providing a stable increase of performance up to a specific point, unlike the other measures, which are very sensitive to the amount of most frequent words (mfw) used. These results also allow discussion of some of the theoretical assumptions for the success of these measures, even if we are still far away from providing a ‘compelling theoretical justification’ (Hoover, 2005) for their success.
            
            Material and Methods
            Text Collections
            We built three collections of novels (English, French, German), each consisting of 75 texts: 25 authors, each represented with three novels. The collection of British novels contains texts published between 1838 and 1921 coming from Project Gutenberg (www.gutenberg.org). The collection of French novels contains texts published between 1827 and 1934 originating mainly from Ebooks libres et gratuits (www.ebooksgratuits.com). The collection of German novels consists of texts from the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries, which come from the TextGrid collection (http://www.textgrid.de/Digitale-Bibliothek).
            Text Distance Measures
            Argamon (2008) proposed three variants of Delta, each one improving on one aspect of Burrows’ Delta. 
            He argues that Burrows’ Delta inherently assumes that the distribution of a particular word across multiple texts follows the multivariate Laplace distribution, but it uses the standard deviation as a normalization factor, which only makes sense for a Gaussian distribution. Quadratic Delta assumes a multivariate Gaussian distribution of the words. Linear Delta, on the other hand, adjusts the normalization to take into account the calculation of spread for a Laplace distribution. Like Burrows’ Delta, both variants are based on the (implausible) assumption that the frequencies of the words are independent. The third variant, Rotated Delta, rotates the frequency differences into a space where they are maximally independent. It also assumes a Gaussian distribution. An analysis of the word frequency distribution in our English test set shows indeed that the normal distribution represents the data much better than the Laplace distribution (Figure 1a). The same is true for German high-frequency words (Figure 1b). We should therefore expect Rotated Delta to perform best, and Quadratic Delta to yield better results than Linear Delta or Burrows’ Delta. Eder’s Delta slightly increases the weights of frequent words and is meant to perform better with highly inflected languages. It should perform better for German and French than for English. Smith and Aldridge replace the Manhattan distance used by Burrows with cosine based on findings in text mining that the latter shows greater reliability with large word vectors (Smith and Aldridge, 2011). Their experiments show an impressive improvement for English texts.
            We implemented these measures in Python, using the output of 
                stylo, where a parallel implementation existed, as a benchmark (see the appendix for the formulas).
            
            Evaluating Distance Measures
            In order to provide useful performance indicators for these measures for authorship attribution, we concentrated on the question of how well a particular distance measure allows distinguishing between a situation where two compared texts are written by the same author from a situation where two texts are from different authors. Besides relying on the Adjusted Rand Index as a well-known but rather abstract measure for clustering quality (Everitt et al., 2011, 264f.), we also established a simple algorithm to count clustering errors representing the researcher’s intuition of correct clustering. In order to obtain another more subtle performance indicator independent of any clustering algorithm, we grouped the calculated distance scores into two sets: ingroup comparisons containing distances between texts actually written by the same author, and outgroup comparisons. The larger the difference between the ingroup distances and the outgroup distances, the better a distance measure is assumed to perform. After evaluating several potential performance indicators (for example, t-values, or using proportions of distribution overlap) in terms of how well they correlate with the number of clustering errors, we settled on the simple difference of z-transformed means because it showed the best correlation with the clustering error measure.
            Results and Discussion
            Most interestingly, we could not only confirm the findings of Smith and Aldridge on our English texts, but also show that Cosine Delta outperforms all other measures on our three collections (Figures 2–4). Equally important, it proves to be more stable with increasing mfw size. While Burrows’ and Eder’s Delta usually show a peak around 1,000–1,500 mfw, and then behave a bit erratically on longer word vectors, Cosine Delta reaches a plateau at 2,000 and stays there (Figure 5). As Smith and Aldridge argue, based on their very different data, that using word vectors longer than 500 words doesn’t improve the performance, we assume that this number is a function of the corpus size.
            Our empirical tests did not substantiate Argamon’s theoretical arguments. Eder’s variant didn’t show consistently better results with more highly inflected languages like German and French and performed similarly to Burrows’ Delta. Both Quadratic Delta and Rotated Delta perform much worse than should be expected on theoretical grounds. And Linear Delta, although being among the top-five distance measures, seems to be an improvement over Burrows’ Delta only under special circumstances. Argamon’s modifications were based on correct assumptions about the kind of distributions Delta is working on, but nevertheless those algorithms did not perform better, something that points to the operation of factors not yet understood. The fact that those algorithms consistently perform differently in different languages and that these differences cannot, or at least only partially, be explained by the degree of inflection (Eder and Rybicki, 2013), adds to this enigma at the moment. There is almost no other algorithm in stylometry we know as much about as Delta, and yet there is still no theoretical framework that can explain its success.
            Future Work
            We tried to assemble corpora similar in genre, time, etc., but there is the real possibility that the variation we attribute to the languages is really only one between the specifics of the corpora. So it is important to test the robustness of our findings using different corpora. Another line of future investigations is the testing of more variations of Delta, using Cosine Delta as a starting point. Also, a systematic study of how the length of the mfw list determines Cosine Delta’s performance in relation to the size of the texts and the corpora could allow the automatic choice of the best parameters. And last but not least we have to analyze the connection between the performances of some variants of Delta and specifics of different languages in order to gain a deeper theoretical insight into the working of Delta in general.
            _____
            The python script implementing these distance measures can be found at 
            https://github.com/fotis007/pydelta.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Empirical distribution of word frequencies compared to idealised Gauss and Laplace distributions. Indicated for the three most frequent words in the English (a) and German (b) dataset.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Performance of distance measures on English texts. Indicated in terms of both the difference between z-transformed means of ingroup (same author) and outgroup distances, as Adjusted Rand Index (higher values indicate better differentiation), and in terms of clustering errors (lower values indicate better differentiation). Distance measures are sorted according to their maximum performance in all test conditions.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Performance of distance measures on French texts. For a detailed explanation, see Figure 2. 
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Performance of distance measures on German texts. For a detailed explanation, see Figure 2. 
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Difference between z-transformed means of ingroup and outgroup distances as a function of word list length. Indicated for selected delta measures on the German text collection.
            Appendix: Text Distance Measures
            Most delta measures normalize features first and then apply a basic distance function.
            
                
                    Distance Measure
                    Basic Distance Function 
                    Feature Normalisation
                    
                
                
                    Burrows’ Delta
                    Manhattan Distance
                    z-score
                
                
                    Argamon’s Linear Delta
                    Manhattan Distance
                    diversity
                
                
                    Eder's Delta
                    Manhattan Distance
                    z-score · Eder's Ranking Factor: 
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                        -
                                        
                                            
                                                n
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        +
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Eder’s Simple Delta
                    Manhattan Distance
                    square root
                
                
                    Manhattan Distance
                    Manhattan Distance
                    –
                
                
                    Argamon’s Quadratic Delta
                    Euclidean Distance
                    z-score
                
                
                    Argamon’s Rotated Delta
                    Euclidean Distance
                    Stripped-down eigenvectors of covariance matrix
                
                
                    Euclidean Distance
                    Euclidean Distance
                    –
                
                
                    Cosine Delta
                    Cosine Distance
                    z-score
                
                
                    Cosine Distance
                    Cosine Distance
                    –
                
                
                    Correlation Distance
                    Cosine Distance
                    center
                
                
                    Hoover's Delta-P1
                    (own measure)
                    z-score
                
                
                    Canberra distance
                    Canberra Distance
                    –
                
                
                    Bray-Curtis distance
                    Bray-Curtis Distance
                    –
                
                
                    Chebishev Distance
                    max abs. distance
                    –
                
                
                    Basic Distance Function
                    Definition
                
                
                    Manhattan Distance
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    ∑
                                    
                                        i
                                        =
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                
                                
                                    ∣
                                
                                
                                    
                                        f
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                (
                                D
                                )
                                -
                                
                                    
                                        f
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                (
                                D
                                ʹ
                                )
                                ∣
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Euclidean Distance
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            ∑
                                            
                                                i
                                                =
                                                1
                                            
                                            
                                                n
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            ∣
                                        
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        
                                            
                                                )
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                        -
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        ʹ
                                        
                                            
                                                )
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Cosine Distance
                    
                        
                            
                                1
                                -
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            ⃗
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        )
                                        ⋅
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            ⃗
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        ʹ
                                        )
                                    
                                    
                                        ∥
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            ⃗
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        )
                                        
                                            
                                                ∥
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                        ∥
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            ⃗
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        ʹ
                                        )
                                        
                                            
                                                ∥
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Canberra Distance
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    ∑
                                    
                                        i
                                        =
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            ∣
                                            
                                                
                                                    f
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                            (
                                            D
                                            )
                                            -
                                            
                                                
                                                    f
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                            (
                                            D
                                            ʹ
                                            )
                                            ∣
                                        
                                        
                                            ∣
                                            
                                                
                                                    f
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                            (
                                            D
                                            )
                                            ∣
                                            ∣
                                            
                                                
                                                    f
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                            (
                                            D
                                            ʹ
                                            )
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Bray-Curtis Distance
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        ∑
                                        ∣
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        )
                                        -
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        ʹ
                                        )
                                        ∣
                                    
                                    
                                        ∑
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        )
                                        +
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        ʹ
                                        )
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Hoover’s Delta-P1
                    
                        
                            
                                (
                                
                                    
                                        P
                                    
                                    ¯
                                
                                +
                                1
                                
                                    
                                        )
                                    
                                    
                                        2
                                    
                                
                                -
                                
                                    
                                        N
                                    
                                    ¯
                                
                                 
                                ,
                                P
                                =
                                {
                                
                                    
                                        z
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                ∣
                                
                                    
                                        z
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                ≥
                                0
                                }
                                ,
                                N
                                =
                                {
                                
                                    
                                        z
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                ∣
                                
                                    
                                        z
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                &lt;
                                0
                                }
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    z-score
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                f
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        (
                                        D
                                        )
                                        -
                                        
                                            
                                                μ
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                σ
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Diversity
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                
                                
                                    ∑
                                    
                                        j
                                        =
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        m
                                    
                                
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                    f
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                            (
                                            
                                                
                                                    D
                                                
                                                
                                                    j
                                                
                                            
                                            )
                                            -
                                            
                                                
                                                    a
                                                
                                                
                                                    i
                                                
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                                 
                                ,
                                 
                                
                                    
                                        a
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                =
                                m
                                e
                                d
                                i
                                a
                                n
                                (
                                ⟨
                                
                                    
                                        f
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                (
                                
                                    
                                        D
                                    
                                    
                                        1
                                    
                                
                                )
                                ,
                                ⋯
                                ,
                                
                                    
                                        f
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                                (
                                
                                    
                                        D
                                    
                                    
                                        m
                                    
                                
                                )
                                ⟩
                                )
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Eder’s Ranking Factor
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                        -
                                        
                                            
                                                n
                                            
                                            
                                                i
                                            
                                        
                                        +
                                        1
                                    
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Argamon, S. (2008). Interpreting Burrows’ Delta: Geometric and Probabilistic Foundations. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23(2): 131–47.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’—A Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        17(3): 267–87.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. Lincoln: University of Nebraska-Lincoln, pp. 487–89.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Do Birds of a Feather Really Flock Together, Or How to Choose Training Samples for Authorship Attribution. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(2): 229–36.
                    
                    
                        Everitt, B., et al. (2011). 
                        Cluster Analysis. 5th ed. Chichester.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. (2004a). Testing Burrows’ Delta. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                         19(4): 453–75.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. (2004b). Delta Prime? 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        19(4): 477–95.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. (2005). Delta, Delta Prime, and Modern American Poetry: Authorship Attribution Theory and Method. 
                        Proceedings of the 2005 ALLC/ACH Conference, http://tomcat-stable.hcmc.uvic.ca:8080/ach/site/xhtml.xq?id=73.
                    
                    
                        Juola, P. (2006). Authorship Attribution. 
                        Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval
                        ,
                        1(3): 233–334.
                    
                    
                        Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2009). Computational Methods in Authorship Attribution. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
                        60(1): 9–26.
                    
                    
                        Rybicki, J. and Eder, M. (2011). Deeper Delta across Genres and Languages: Do We Really Need the Most Frequent Words? 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        26(3): 315–21.
                    
                    
                        Smith, P. and Aldridge, W. (2011). Improving Authorship Attribution: Optimizing Burrows’ Delta Method. 
                        Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 
                        18(1): 63–88.
                    
                    
                        Stamatatos, E. (2009). A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                        60(3): 538–56.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Improving Compliance With Evolving Standards Using Computed Transformation of Digital Collections
                
                    
                        Peter
                        Cornwell
                    
                    University of Westminster, United Kingdom
                    p.cornwell@westminster.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Granville
                        Dan
                    
                    Data Futures Ltd., United Kingdom
                    dan.granville@data-futures.org
                
                
                    
                        Eveleigh
                        Alexandra
                    
                    University of Westminster, United Kingdom
                    a.eveleigh@westminster.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Decker
                        Eric
                    
                    Heidelberg University, Germany
                    decker@asia-europe.uni-heidelberg.de
                
                
                    
                        Henriot
                        Christian
                    
                    University of Lyon, France
                    christian.henriot@univ-lyon2.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    annotation
                    collections transformation
                    sustainability
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    metadata
                    asian studies
                    xml
                    cultural infrastructure
                    linking and annotation
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Factors adversely affecting the sustainability of digital collections have multiplied during the last decade. Many early implementations were inextricably connected with online projects, making them vulnerable to rapid technical evolution and ensuing obsolescence. There has been considerable research effort directed at decoupling Internet presentation from collection management and at exploiting network-distributed and virtualized collection deployment. Further, contemporary collection ecosystems have adopted internationally recognized metadata standards to gain a level of independence from deployment technologies. However, these trends have only shifted the focus of concern to the stability of such standards themselves: little research attention has focused on the portability of metadata infrastructure, which continue to evolve rapidly and grow in complexity. The proliferation of metadata definition activities and frequent revision of standards has made it difficult to develop implementation roadmaps, and standards has also become tainted by the competing interests of territorial industry associations and government agencies. Additionally, research funding by collections remains committed predominantly to new metadata development work, with only marginal consideration of long-term migration as standards evolve.
            A related and potentially more serious problem arises from the growing recognition that 
                annotation metadata must be structured independently of 
                object metadata. As early as 1992 Bearman observed, ‘Descriptive standards for libraries and archives have historically been much more thorough in specifying how to describe the things within a collection than in specifying how to describe the context surrounding those things’. By 2009 the Open Annotation Collaboration was more specific, claiming, ‘The importance of annotating as a scholarly practice [and] limitations of existing tools supporting annotation of digital content has had a retarding effect on the growth of digital scholarship’.
                1 While progress has been made in sustainability of collection deployments and of object metadata, significant benefits and long-term effectiveness of annotation metadata—set out comprehensively in Lee’s ‘Framework for Contextual Information in Digital Collections’ paper (2011)—remain on the horizon. Even if standards-based metadata elements have been employed in creating a digital collection, there is little alternative today but to incorporate annotation information ad hoc into the ‘miscellaneous’ mechanisms provided by object metadata containers. This practice leads to both difficulty of use of annotation in research projects and the frequent loss of investment in annotation when collections must be migrated to new deployment technologies or metadata standards. The Open Annotation Data Model (OADM)
                2 Phase III US roll-out commenced in April 2013,
                3 with Europe following a few months later, and OADM remains the leading activity addressing the ‘creation, capture and preservation of contextual information’. However, OADM is natively RDF-based,
                4 and its effective integration with predominately XML-based collection ecosystems is currently challenging. Only after development of annotation tools that overcome this hurdle can sustainable metadata standards enter widespread use that address annotation as well as object metadata in a coherent manner. Significantly, such a breakthrough will itself create pressure for re-implementation of existing digital collection metadata solutions. Effective long-term accessibility of annotation metadata, even by current standards-based schemes, will require redistribution of annotation in existing collections and its encoding using structured annotation methodologies such as OADM. In turn, this will influence the future development of standards for object metadata encoding.
            
            
                Gains in both accessibility and sustainability made through adoption of metadata standards are therefore contingent, for a multiplicity of reasons, on periodic re-implementation of collection metadata infrastructures as standards evolve. Strategies requiring human intervention on a per-asset basis to achieve this rapidly become untenable in large collections—even in the absence of funding restrictions. Developing alternate strategies to enable collections repeatedly to migrate metadata infrastructures is critical, not only to remain compliant with emerging standards, but also to gain the real functionality benefits sought from structured annotation by Bearman and Lee and, ultimately, for long-term sustainability. This paper presents progress with techniques for automating the transformation of metadata in response to evolution of standards—thereby making such migration possible. 
            
            Our approach arose in collaboration between the University of Westminster (UOW), the University of Heidelberg (UHEI), and the Institut d’Asie Orientale CNRS-Lyon (IAO-CNRS) on managing collections of contemporary Chinese imagery. In particular, after developing software migration tools for reclaiming existing digital collections at UOW that had become difficult to maintain because of obsolescence of support technologies, we elected to create new collections compliant with the VRA Core4 standard.
                5 This was achieved by building a mapping-driven exporter for our NoSQL migration platform (
                freizo),
                6 which generated VRA asset-by-asset. In this way, the results of the transformation could be viewed using the collection management interface and the exporter mapping updated to tune the VRA profile that was implemented—providing an iterative transformation cycle that, when approved, could be applied to the complete legacy collection. The resulting test collection—of Mao-era posters—was transferred to the UHEI Tamboti
                7 collection ecosystem to validate its VRA implementation. We report subsequent creation of a VRA-compliant digital collection combining the assets of both the UOW and UHEI poster collections. During this work, however, we noted the necessity of representing annotation (relatively mature in the case of the UOW collection, which was based on reclamation of an Internet project dating from 2001) within VRA description containers. The transformation approach enabled us to produce multiple versions of the poster collection automatically—implementing different annotation solutions in order to support research into linking both annotation tools and virtual research instruments with the collection. Consideration of potential response to VRA Core4 being superseded by future versions was also evaluated in terms of revision of the transformation mapping. 
            
            Parallel work in collaboration with IAO-CNRS, concerning historic photographs of Shanghai—part of the large-scale Virtual Cities
                8 project initiated by IAO—had highlighted similar concerns about sustainability of annotation using VRA description mechanisms. IAO has developed a range of innovative virtual research instruments able to exploit extensive geo-location information, which forms part of the annotation of this collection. Creating a VRA version of the collection using 
                freizo transformation created potential vulnerabilities when interfacing the virtual research tools to the VRA collection; such tools might cease to operate correctly in the event of VRA Core4 being superseded were geo-location information to be encoded in miscellaneous VRA description containers. In contrast, we report results with an OADM-based annotation solution implemented using IIIF annotation extensions generated through an alternate 
                freizo transformation of the collection.
            
            Notes
            1. http://www.openannotation.org/about.html (accessed 23 February 2015).
            2. 
                http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/ (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
            3. 
                http://www.openannotation.org/phaseIII.html (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
            4. 
                http://www.w3.org/RDF/ (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
            5. 
                http://chinaposters.westminster.ac.uk/zenphoto/ (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
            6. http://www.data-futures.org/freizo.html (accessed 23 February 2015).
            7. 
                http://www.asia-europe.uni-heidelberg.de/de/hra-portal.html
                 (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
            8. 
                http://www.virtualshanghai.net/Photos/Albums (accessed 23 February 2015).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bearman, D. A. (1992). Documenting Documentation. 
                        Archivaria, 
                        34: 33–49.
                    
                    
                        Lee, C. A. (2011). A Framework for Contextual Information in Digital Collections. 
                        Journal of Documentation, 
                        67(1): 95–143, doi:10.1108/00220411111105470.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                In The Spotlight: Digitization And The Keith/Albee Vaudeville Theater Collection
                
                    
                        Baumgartner
                        Justin Lee
                    
                    University of Iowa, United States of America
                    justin1982@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    theatre
                    digitisation
                    access
                    research
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2014 the National Endowment for the Humanities awarded the University of Iowa Libraries a $300,000 grant to fund a project for the stabilization and preservation of a series of vaudeville theater scrapbooks from the Keith/Albee Vaudeville Theater Collection, housed in the University of Iowa Special Collections and University Archives. This collection is among the largest collections of materials related to the vaudeville era in the United States. The 150 scrapbooks document in great detail the Keith/Albee theater in Providence, Rhode Island, from the 1890s to the 1930s, encompassing newspaper clippings and programs as well as detailed managers’ reports. These scrapbooks give a rare glimpse into the full context of the vaudeville era, looking into not only the performances but also the business side of vaudeville, giving researchers a full historical understanding of the topic. Unfortunately, the physical state of these materials has been deteriorating for some time, causing some of the volumes to be restricted from usage, a major blow to such a heavily used collection.
            The ultimate goals of the three-year Keith/Albee project are primarily the stabilization, digitization, and online accessibility of all collection materials. It involves the full attention of a conservator and digital librarian, both hired solely for this project. Newly purchased equipment, including a digital reprographic system and Capture One software, will be in use for it, requiring additional training for the project staff. Additionally, complex workflows have been put into place involving the interdepartmental collaboration of a number of different actors. This includes contributors from the special collections, preservation/conservation, cataloging/metadata, and digital publishing departments. 
            A comprehensive digitization project of this size has been rather unprecedented for the University of Iowa Libraries. At the end of the three-year project, the entire contents of the Keith/Albee Collection are expected to be available to the public for online access. Those researching the early history of film and early-20th-century entertainment will be assisted greatly by the digital access to this collection. It will also encourage and accelerate future research on the history of vaudeville theater. The importance of vaudeville theater in the history of modern entertainment cannot be understated. While it was chiefly an American entertainment, its influence spread worldwide, especially on the early film industry. This collection is rare and invaluable in its detail and completeness in documenting vaudeville and its decline over several decades. While there are a number of vaudeville collections in the United States, the Keith/Albee Theater Collection is one of 
                the premier vaudeville archives due to this detail and abundance of behind-the-scenes information, fleshing out the history of this important entertainment. 
            
            Overall, a careful amount of planning has been put into place in the implementation of this project. However, there have been a number of different issues involving the stabilization and digitization of the collection scrapbooks. Many of these issues are related to the size and fragility of the collection materials. The conservation librarian has taken many steps to stabilize and improve the condition of the collection, but many careful precautions still need to be taken during the digitization process, especially due to the fact that some of these scrapbook pages are flaking and falling apart upon even the most delicate of handling. Additionally, the overlapping and layered nature of some scrapbook pages has created a challenge for the digitization and online presentation of some of these items. The limited options available in content management systems such as CONTENTdm have created problems for the presentation of complex scrapbooks in an accessible online format. Because of these issues, it has become a challenge to present these scrapbooks in a fully accessible form that also accurately represents the material. A final issue involves keeping this project on target for the entire three-year period, maintaining a consistent level of output in which to complete the project on time. This could prove challenging with possible future unforeseen circumstances within the project and its respective workflows. Some of the above issues have been resolved in interdepartmental meetings on the Keith/Albee digitization project. However, other issues are still currently in discussion. Since this is a recently started three-year project, while we anticipate a number of future challenges, with close interdepartmental collaboration we anticipate the outcome to ultimately be successful. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Infrastructure Requirements For A UNESCO World Heritage Archival Infrastructure
                
                    
                        Champion
                        Erik Malcolm
                    
                    Curtin University, Australia
                    nzerik@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    world heritage sites
                    3D
                    infrastructure
                
                
                    archaeology
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Creating Public Accessible Virtual Heritage Models
                Why is this necessary? Hal Thwaites (2013) wrote in ‘Digital Heritage: What Happens When We Digitize Everything’:
                In the very near future some critical issues will need to be addressed; increased accessibility to (and sharing of) heritage data, consistent interface design for widespread public use and re-presentations of work, the formalization of a digital heritage database, establishment of a global infrastructure, institutionalized, archival standards for digital heritage and most importantly the on-going curation, of work forward in time as the technology evolves so that our current digital, heritage projects will not be lost to future generations. We cannot afford to have our digital heritage disappearing faster than the real heritage or the sites it seeks to ‘preserve’ otherwise all of our technological advances, creative interpretations, visualizations and efforts will have been in vain.
                So there is an international need to collate and store digital heritage models of heritage sites (Reinhard, 2013). We also lack a way to provide access to the models, sites, and paradata, which the London Charter (Denard, 2009) defines as ‘information about human processes of understanding and interpretation of data objects’). Although there are charters such as the London Charter and the Seville Charter, as there are few publicly accessible models (Barsanti et al., 2014), there is also no shared standardised evaluation data, and many scholars have complained about user experience issues and a scarcity of suitable pedagogical material (Economou and Pujol, 2008). 
            
            
                Technical Obstacles
                A serious technical obstacle is the absence of a shared, secure, feature-rich format for 3D models (Koller et al., 2009). International efforts to remedy the above issues include work by 3D Icons 
                    (3D HOP) in CIDOC CRM, Europeana, Smithsonian Institute X3D BETA, Fraunhoefer (X3DOM ON GITHUB), Ariadne, CARARE, EU EPOCH, and V-MUST. 
                
                Long-term, we wish to investigate how 3D models can be better linked to library and archival systems of literature and multimedia that communicate important historical and cultural aspects of the simulated heritage site. Current journals that feature papers and 3D models typically lack integration with text resources, and they also have limited interactivity and immersion (Elsevier). A second long-term aim is to develop evaluation mechanisms to understand how the viewed and downloaded heritage models and simulations are used. Choosing a format that is robust, durable, well-supported, free, highly interactive, cross-platform, and easy to create or export to or export from is a serious challenge.
            
            
                In Australia
                This is also an Australian problem. CSIRO (CSIRO, 2014) have released a report, stating, ‘Australia’s cultural institutions risk losing their relevance if they don’t increase their use of digital technologies and services’. Michael Brünig (Mansfield et al., 2014) has stated that the Australian GLAM industry is worth 2.5 billion Australian a year, roughly only a quarter is digitalized, and there are 629km worth of archival material. Brünig notes there is a shift to open-access models and greater collaboration with the public, but that we need to explore new approaches to copyright management that stimulate creativity and support creators. We also need to build on aggregation initiatives such as the Atlas of Living Australia, standardise preservation of born-digital material to avoid losing access to digital heritage, and exploit the potential of Australia’s Academic and Research Network (AARNet) and the National Broadband Network (NBN) for collection and collaboration. 
                There is another problem. Australian heritage includes large rock art sites, and the Gigapixel photographs, panoramas, and 3D data require a large amount of storage and new ways of navigating via online databases. There are 19 UNESCO World Heritage listed sites in Australia, including some of the oldest rainforests and one-third of the world’s protected marine areas. So we have vast and remote natural landscapes where pre-tour visits are expensive, 3D models and landscapes are not part of ICOMOS reports, and the Australian Burra Charter only recently reflects 3D. Of course there are also copyright, contestation, and forbidden knowledge issues that require legal experts and indigenous consultants.
            
            
                Current Status
                For the presentation of this short paper I will discuss the above issues, our data management plan, and our communication with UNESCO to tackle these problems. Our research development unit will support the venture with funding for postdoctoral scholars and postgraduate students. I have proposed to UNESCO that our group will collate and archive the related heritage data, provide training material that can be developed and expanded by others, and recommend ways in which 3D models can be better linked to scholarly articles and related digital material and can be included in classroom teaching. We have linkages and ongoing relationships with other relevant universities in Australia and the wider Asian area, and organisations in Europe like DARIAH, NeDiMAH, and Europeana Cloud, and have an understanding from iVEC Curtin for storage of the initial models and related assets, but we are interested in talking to organisations about longer-term storage. The first task is to survey and develop a library of heritage models using a robust data management plan. However, a secondary task is to develop strategies to encourage scholars to submit to an agreed format, and then develop a workflow to provide models suitable for dissemination and general learning. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barsanti, S. G., Remondino, F., Fenández-Palacios, B. J. and Visintini, D. (2014). Critical Factors and Guidelines for 3D Surveying and Modelling in Cultural Heritage. 
                        International Journal of Heritage in the Digital Era,
                        3: 141–58.
                    
                    
                        CSIRO. (2014). 
                        Australian Museums Must Innovate or Risk Becoming ‘Digital Dinosaurs’. http://www.csiro.au/Portals/Media/Australian-museums-risk-becoming-digital-dinosaurs.aspx.
                    
                    
                        Denard, H. (2009). The London Charter for the Computer-Based Visualization of Cultural Heritage. London.
                    
                    
                        Economou, M. and Pujol, L. (2008). Educational Tool or Expensive Toy? Evaluating VR Evaluation and Its Relevance for Virtual Heritage. In 
                        New Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage. London: Routledge, pp. 242–60.
                    
                    
                        Elsevier.
                        Three-Dimensional U3D Models in Online Journal Articles. http://www.elsevier.com/about/content-innovation/u3d-models.
                    
                    
                        Koller, D., Frischer, B. and Humphreys, G. (2009). Research Challenges for Digital Archives of 3D Cultural Heritage Models. 
                        Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage,
                        2(3) (December): art. 7.
                    
                    
                        Mansfield, T., Winter, C., Griffith, C., Dockerty, A. and Brown, T. (2014). Innovation Study: Challenges and Opportunities for Australia’s Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums. Australian Centre for Broadband Innovation, CSIRO and Smart Services Co-operative Research Centre.
                    
                    
                        Reinhard, A. (2013). Publishing Archaeological Linked Open Data: From Steampunk to Sustainability. http://dlib.nyu.edu/awdl/isaw/isaw-papers/7/reinhard/.
                    
                    
                        Thwaites, H. 2013. Digital Heritage: What Happens When We Digitize Everything? In Ch’ng, E., Gaffney, V. and Chapman, H. (eds), 
                        Visual Heritage in the Digital Age. London: Springer.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Interactive Similarity Analysis of Early New High German Text Variants
                
                    
                        Medek
                        André
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    andre.medek@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Ritter
                        Jörg
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    joerg.ritter@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Molitor
                        Paul
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    paul.molitor@informatik.uni-halle.de
                
                
                    
                        Kösser
                        Sylwia
                    
                    Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
                    sylwia.koesser@germanistik.uni-halle.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    genetic edition
                    manuscript
                    text comparison
                    visualization
                    early new high german
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    lexicography
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    programming
                    german studies
                    visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this paper we present an intuitive and interactive visualisation of comparison results on Early New High German manuscript records supporting the scholar to determine clusters of similar records. Based on detailed comparison results generated by the framework LAKOMP, an easily accountable similarity graph is dynamically generated. By selecting portions of text and manuscript records of interest, the scholar can explore the commonalities and divergences by witnesses linked to the graph elements. 
            * * *
            Philologists studying the genetic origin of texts with multiple available records face the challenge of identifying genetically close records. To the end, for every two records the witnesses for similarities or divergence have to be listed. Done manually, a pair-wise comparison of records is a tedious task that would vastly benefit from automatic tool support. Here we present such tool support for Early New High German manuscripts. Searching for similarities and divergences between manuscripts of this stage of the German language is a particular challenge because of the lack of a common orthography. Actually, our tool is a semiautomatic multistage approach that leads to an interactive similarity graph that represents the similarities of records in an intuitive and transparent way. This graph gives an overall view of the relationships between the different records. Together with the possibility to ‘jump’ to the witnesses for similarities, it allows philologists to confirm or confute previously formulated hypotheses about the clustering of records. This similarity graph is based on witnesses for similarities of records identified by our framework LAKOMP (Medek et al., 2014; 2015) that is being developed in the interdisciplinary project Semi-automatic Difference Analysis of Complex Text Variants (SaDA), in which Germanists, Romanists, and computer scientists develop software tools for supporting philological text comparison projects. Existing tools for comparing multiple text records such as Juxta (Juxta, 2014) or collateX (Dekker and Middell, 2011) do offer visualisations for their comparison results also, but lack a good scalability for large amounts of texts and do not make use of annotation data such as lemmata, which is crucial for comparing Early New High German manuscripts. 
            We present our approach through the example of the 15th-century manuscript ‘Wundarznei’ by Heinrich von Pfalzpaint, a forefather of plastic surgery and one of the most famous surgeons in the late Middle Ages. While the original manuscript has been lost, 11 manuscript records written by different copyists in the 15th and 16th centuries are known. One of these records is presumed lost; the other 10 records are available to science and are now subject to a detailed comparison by Germanists at the Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg. Figure 1 shows a facsimile of a page of one of these records. Besides the detailed listing of differences among the records for corresponding text passages as critical apparatus, a goal of the text comparison is the grouping of records according to their similarities. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. A facsimile of the manuscript Dresden 292 of the ‘Wundarznei’. Source: SLUB Dresden/Handschriftensammlung, Signature: [Mscr.Dresd.C292, fol. 151v].
            Approach 
            A prerequisite for visualising similarities is a detailed comparison of the records. For an automatic comparison of the manuscripts of the ‘Wundarznei’, a particular challenge arises due to the lack of a common orthography in Early New High German. Because of very different spellings of the same word form even within a single record, an automatic identification of word forms is not possible. A founded identification de facto requires manual intervention of the philological researchers for nearly every word in the manuscript records. We meet this problem by using lemmata of the word forms instead of the word forms themselves for the comparison of the records. An appropriate semiautomatic tool for lemmatisation of Early New High German manuscripts is integrated in our framework LAKOMP 
                (Medek et al., 2014)
                . It offers the philologist an intuitive, user-friendly, and very fast interface to enter lemmata for all word forms of a text.
                1 Currently, it is applied in multiple philological projects. 
            
            After the lemmatisation of the manuscripts, the comparison is done in two steps, covering two levels of detail. In the first step, corresponding text passages among the records are identified. For this purpose, the records are split into small segments, e.g., sentences or parts of sentences. These segments are aligned in a tabular manner such that corresponding segments of different records are placed next to each other. In this table, each column contains consecutive segments of a record identified by its siglum. Figure 2 shows an excerpt of an alignment resulting from the first comparison step computed in LAKOMP using an alignment algorithm that is based on fingerprints of the segments and was developed within our project.
                2
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Alignment of corresponding text passages. Here segmentation and alignment can be modified. Words marked in dark grey lack annotation data such as lemma or morphological data. A click on a word opens the annotation dialogue.
            In a second step, the corresponding segments are compared in detail on word level, resulting in a fine-grained alignment as shown in Figure 3. Here, each line contains a segment (as defined above) of a record. As a result, corresponding words of different records are placed in the same column. Every column in a word-level-based alignment in which two records have an entry is called a witness for the similarity of these two records. Counting the witnesses for each pair, the scholar obtains an objective measure to judge the genetic proximity of records. Pairs of records having a lot of witnesses are genetically closer to each other than pairs with only few witnesses. This information can be displayed graphically. An intuitive presentation is a similarity graph, in which each record is represented by a node. The similarities between two records are represented by an edge between their nodes. For each edge, a weight is determined by the witnesses, , e.g., by simply using the number of witnesses or by categorizing the witnesses and prioritising the numbers per category. Having annotation data such as part-of-speech tags, witnesses of word type noun can be weighted heavier than those of type conjunction. Highly weighted edges are drawn stronger and shorter than others, leading to a closer proximity of nodes. Figure 4 shows a similarity graph generated by LAKOMP applied to a large portion of the ‘Wundarznei’. As it is very crucial for scholars to understand the relation between a visualisation and the underlying data, LAKOMP allows interactive exploration and manipulation of the graph in a web browser. Current technology for dynamic web content by jQuery (jQuery, 2014) and visualisation by D3.js (D3, 2014) allow respectable and sophisticated renderings. Moving the mouse on an edge, the number of witnesses leading to this edge is displayed. By clicking on an edge, a list of all witnesses for this edge is presented, allowing the user to directly jump to the word-level-based alignments that contain the witnesses. Additionally, scholars can select the text passages and the records for which the similarity graph should be drawn. 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Detailed comparison of records.
            Preliminary Results 
            In the case of the ‘Wundarznei’, Germanists are furthermore interested in finding groups of records, such that close records share a group. Until now, the existence of two groups has been assumed, group A containing the records with sigla H, Bu, D3, E, Br, and group B containing the records with sigla B8, B9, D2, P, St. However, the similarity graph shown in Figure 4, generated for a section of the text over all 10 available records, shows the existence of two clusters. Each cluster is a subset of one of the assumed groups, but the three records St, E, and P cannot be assigned to exactly one of these groups with certainty, either because of shared similarities to multiple groups or because of missing text in the considered section. The generated similarity graphs are fundamental for discussions of assumed groups, being an objective measure to support or reject assumptions by the clusters found. 
            Funding
            
                This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) [grant number 01UG1247] as part of the project Semi-automatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten under the direction of Professor Dr. Thomas Bremer, Professor Dr. Paul Molitor, Dr. Jörg Ritter, and Professor Dr. Hans-Joachim Solms. 
            
            Figure 4. A similarity graph with edges linked to witnesses.
            Notes
            1. LAKOMP also supports the annotation with part-of-speech tags and morphological data, which can also be used for comparing the records.
            2. There are existing alignment algorithms used in statistical machine translation such as those implemented in tools like Giza++ (Liang et al., 2006) or Berkeley Aligner (Denero, 2007). These approaches compute alignments of two texts on the word level but require a huge training corpus providing pairs of corresponding sentences among the text variants. We did not use them because of their limitation to an alignment of two text variants at once, which leaves the problem of a generalization to more text variants unsolved. Another issue is their expensive training phase, which requires manually created training data for each pair of text variants.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dekker, R. H. and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-Supported Collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. In Maegaard (ed.)., 
                        Supporting Digital Humanities, Conference Proceedings, Copenhagen, 17–18 November 2011. 
                    
                    
                        Denero, J. (2007). Tailoring Word Alignments to Syntactic Machine Translation. 
                        Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of ACL.
                    
                    
                        D3. (2014). D3—Data-Driven Documents. http://d3js.org. 
                    
                    
                        jQuery. (2014). jQuery—Write Less, Do More. http://jquery.com.
                    
                    
                        Juxta. (2014). Juxta—Compare—Collate—Discover. http://www.juxtasoftware.org.
                    
                    
                        Liang, P., Taskar, B. and Klein, D. (2006). Alignment by Agreement. 
                        Proceedings on Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pp. 104–11.
                    
                    
                        Medek, A., Pöckelmann, M., Bremer, Th., Solms, H. J., Molitor, P. and Ritter, J. (2015). Differenzanalyse komplexer textvarianten: Diskussion und werkzeuge. 
                        Datenbank-Spektrum, Themenheft ‘Informationsmanagement für Digital Humanities’, 
                        15(1) (March): 25–31, http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs13222-014-0173-y.
                    
                    
                        Medek, A., Ritter, J., Molitor, P., Kösser, S. and Leipold, A. (2014). User-Friendly Lemmatization and Morphological Annotation of Early New High German Manuscripts. 
                        Digital Humanities, DH2014, Lausanne, 7–12 July 2014.
                    
                    
                        SaDA. (2014). Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg: SaDA—Semi-automatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten. http://www.informatik.uni-halle.de/sada.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Interactive Visual Analysis Of German Poetics
                
                    
                        John
                        Markus
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    markus.John@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Koch
                        Steffen
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    steffen.Koch@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Heimerl
                        Florian
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    florian.Heimerl@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Müller
                        Andreas
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    andreas.mueller@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Ertl
                        Thomas
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    thomas.ertl@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
                
                
                    
                        Kuhn
                        Jonas
                    
                    Universität Stuttgart, Germany
                    jonas.kuhn@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    visual analytics
                    document analysis
                    literary analysis
                    distant reading
                
                
                    text analysis
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    german studies
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Information visualization plays an important role in analyzing and understanding large amounts of quantitative data, a task getting evermore important in our age of big data. The increasing volumes of digital data sources being created and the growing use of quantitative methods for their analysis in the digital humanities additionally motivates the application of information visualization approaches in this particular discipline. It is no surprise that visualization techniques, including network visualization, trees, and all kinds of diagrams and charts, rise in popularity in the digital humanities as an elegant means to convey knowledge and insights buried deep inside large heaps of quantitative data. 
            Information visualization does not have to stop at the stage of creating static images, which it is still largely used for. Adding interaction can be a game changer in many respects. Visual representations are often not authoritative, since they were created based on quantitative data, which in turn may have been derived through automatic processing steps. Such automatic processing can be a source of uncertainties and errors that are then reflected in visual representation. Even with an entirely noiseless data source, such as manually prepared data, inadequate mappings to visual representations may lead to misinterpretations. For those two reasons, uncritical interpretation of such visual representations is likely to cause problems.
            Interaction can be used to let users navigate to the data sources of visualizations and make the methods abstracting this data more transparent for users to understand and control their accuracy and validity. For text documents as the data source, interaction helps to bridge the gap between distant and close reading, to use Moretti’s terminology (2005).
            Thinking further along these lines, the next logical step would be the introduction of facilities for updating, steering, and improving the analytic processes through interactive feedback on the visual representation. With the mentioned interaction methods achieving a new level of control, the development of a visual analytics approach offering such possibilities comes into reach.
            In the following we illustrate our effort towards this goal for the analysis of text documents with approaches developed in the context of the project ePoetics—Corpus Analysis and Visualization of German Poetics Towards an ‘Algorithmic Criticism’.
                1
            
            Interactive Visualization Concepts
            We developed two interactive visualization methods to support literary analysis with the help of advanced navigation concepts. Both visualize text documents at different levels of abstraction, including the distribution of various details. These include search terms, available annotations, and automatically extracted information, e.g., named entities or derived concepts. With the simultaneous depiction of overview and detail, visually emerging patterns can be readily perceived and the reason for their occurrence can be identified quickly.
            While the approaches were developed with the goal of offering both overview and detail at the same time, they differ in their scope of application. The first one provides a multi-level visual abstraction of a single literary work (Koch et al., 2014). It supports researchers in analyzing text from different ‘distances’, acknowledging the inherent hierarchical structure of a document. The second approach offers just two abstraction levels but is designed to let researchers compare an aspect of interest between different texts (John et al., 2014).
            Data
            The ePoetics project aims at analyzing and visualizing a digitized collection of very specific historic documents, namely 20 selected German poetics from the years 1770 to 1960 (Richter, 2010). Poetics are secondary sources including discussions and criticism of literary texts that can be regarded as one of the building blocks of modern literary studies. The corpus was digitized through a double-keying process, and layout, structure, and contained literary concepts were manually annotated. 
            Approaches 
            The multi-level visualization approach enables a researcher to browse and inspect documents based on the inherent structure of the document, e.g., chapters, subchapters, pages, and lines (Figure 1). It encompasses several views to show abstractions of the text, results of search requests, and annotations appropriate to the user’s needs. These views can be attached to each level, as is most adequate for the task at hand. The hierarchical visualization and the navigation concept are based on the SmoothScroll approach (Wörmer and Ertl, 2013). It provides analysts with means to navigate through the visualization and to keep track of the current position across all aggregation levels. 
            As an interactive visual approach to literary text analysis, it combines the concepts of distant and close reading. Analysts are provided with a complete overview of the document and visual representations of different levels of abstraction that depict aggregated information about text passages of different lengths.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Schematic representation of a three-layer SmoothScroll view. The left layer displays a coarse view of the entire text document, the right layer a detailed but clipped view of individual lines. Highlights indicate which portion of the less detailed layers correspond to the section visible on the detail layer (see Koch et al., 2014).
            Several abstract views can be attached to each layer, including word clouds, bar charts, and pictograms. The word clouds highlight prominent concepts and serve as a summarization of a text passage. Exploring these concepts may lead to further analyses and is conducive to the development of new hypotheses and ideas. Bar charts show the number of occurrences of annotations—e.g., persons, quotes, or search terms in a section of the text—while pictograms display the location on a small multiple of the respective page. This gives users an overview of the distribution annotations and helps them to find passages for further analysis. An additional feature is to display facsimiles of the original pages. This gives the analysts immediate access to all non-textual information. This may include handwritten text or pictures, which will typically look different when converted to a digital text format.
            The approach assists in literary text analysis with a flexible combination of different visual abstractions that can be adapted to summarize all the information that is important for the task at hand. An analysis example is shown in Figure 2. In the depicted configuration, the term ‘Wallenstein’ (3rd word cloud) arouses the analyst’s interest. After selecting ‘Wallenstein’ the bar charts and pictograms show the distribution of this term and let her navigate quickly to all relevant text passages. In this case, additional literature related to ‘Wallenstein’ is of particular interest to the analyst. As all citations are automatically identified and highlighted on multiple levels of abstraction, she can easily find and analyze them, and thus quickly gain a valuable resource for further studies.
            Figure 2. Emil Staiger’s ‘Grundbegriffe der Poetik’ divided into layers, showing chapters (word clouds), subchapters (bar charts and pictograms), pages (pictograms), lines of text, and scanned images of the actual pages.
            The second approach we want to discuss is designed to support and expedite the analysis of multiple texts in parallel. The implementation is depicted in Figure 3. Three selected text sources are displayed next to each other as a ribbon. Users can select text passages for analysis, which open up a text box for the document at the corresponding position. Green bars show the position of the selected annotations. The selected text passages are placed next to each other for easy comparison. The scrollbars allow navigation through the documents. For further analysis, users can search for arbitrary terms whose distribution is displayed as orange bars on the ribbons.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Three selected texts are displayed. Each of the sources has a scale indicating the page number of the original documents to the left, a ribbon showing the position of the selected annotations (green bars), and another for the search results (orange bars).
            The focus + context technique of this approach supports a smooth switching between distant and close reading of scholarly sources. It allows the comparison of text passages across different documents to contrast and compare texts from, e.g., different authors or different periods of time. The overview visualization enables the comparison of multiple documents on an abstract level with respect to the distribution annotations and terms chosen by the analyst, while the text boxes allow for free navigation through the single texts and make it easy to find interesting passages for comparison.
            Future Work
            The approaches have been evaluated through expert feedback that suggests that they are both effective for literary analysis. For future work, we are planning a comprehensive study of their effectiveness compared to existing text analysis approaches and are aiming at examining different analysis strategies accommodated by the approaches.
            As previously mentioned as a general goal, we are currently working towards a comprehensive analysis approach, including automatic processing of text and other data that can be steered and adapted interactively according to users’ needs. We have already conducted multiple experiments to include such methods into our approaches, and we plan to extend these techniques for various new applications.
            We believe that the analysis of other types of text and literary works can benefit considerably from the visualization and interactive techniques developed in the ePoetics project.
            Note
            1. ePoetics (www.epoetics.de) is an ongoing research collaboration between the University of Stuttgart and the Technical University Darmstadt funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        John, M., Heimerl, F., Müller, A. and Koch, S. (2014). A Visual Focus+Context Approach for Text Comparison Tasks. In 
                        Proceedings of
                        
                             
                            VisLR
                             Workshop, LREC 2014. 
                        
                    
                    
                        Koch, S., John, M., Wörner, M. and Ertl, T. (2014). VarifocalReader—In-Depth Visual Analysis of Large Text Documents. In
                        
                            Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
                            20(12), IEEE
                        
                        , pp. 1723–32. 
                        Moretti, F. (2005). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. Verso Books.
                    
                    
                        Richter, S. (2010). 
                        A History of Poetics: German Scholarly Aesthetics and Poetics in International Context, 1770–1960. De Gruyter.
                    
                    
                        Wörner, M. and Ertl, T. (2013). SmoothScroll: A Multi-Scale, Multi-Layer Slider. In 
                        Computer Vision, Imaging and Computer Graphics—Theory and Applications, Communications in Computer and Information Science 274, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 142–54.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Interrogating Our Collections; Interrogating Ourselves
                
                    
                        Denoon
                        Louise
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    louise.denoon@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
                
                    
                        Edmonds
                        Elise
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    elise.edmonds@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
                
                    
                        Franks
                        Rachel
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    rachel.franks@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
                
                    
                        Neville
                        Richard
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    richard.neville@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Access
                    Curation
                    Digitisation
                    Library
                    World War I
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The State Library of NSW is custodian for a suite of extraordinary collections documenting the heritage of Australia and Oceania. In an age where technology has become entrenched in everyday life, the Library is working to transition digitisation of these collections from ‘a special project’ to ‘business as usual’. In this way the Library seeks to ensure collections are more meaningful to more people.
            
                Interrogating Our Collections
            
            Increased access to collections is highlighted here through the lens of the Library’s diaries from World War I. Commemorations of the war have generated significant community enthusiasm for learning about the history of this conflict, particularly the personal stories of Australian servicemen and women. In response to increased interest in the diaries, and associated materials, the Library embarked on a project to transcribe (in 2008) and digitise (in 2013) over 1,100 diaries. An important, resource-intensive, and parallel project was the upgrading of the provenance history of the diaries and a close examination of their copyright status (which is varied). Considerable work was also undertaken to enhance descriptive metadata (including authority records)—the very foundation of subsequent data-sharing projects linking these diaries to other data repositories.
            This has facilitated significantly easier access to the collection and simultaneously presents opportunities to interrogate this material in new ways, including patterns that might be revealed from a geo-location analysis. There are also options for general crowdsourced tagging and high-level interactions with the diaries, to track individual word usage and assist in unpacking broader themes around grief and loss or post-traumatic stress disorder. Such research will enable the identification of trends that are there—anticipated and unanticipated—but also those trends that we might expect but are missing.
            
                Interrogating Ourselves
            
            Interrogating a collection such as this demands that the Library interrogate its own practices. How do we curate collections and subsequently allow for easy navigation of content in an increasingly digital world? For the State Library of NSW, another key question is how do the neat and polished presentations of digitised material convey the complexity of the Library’s holdings? The World War I diaries, for example, are in sharp contrast to the symmetrical war service records—formatted information on standardised index cards—of those who served. The diaries, which like many collections have their own peculiarities, are very much a suite of personal objects with differences between volumes, including binding type, paper type, handwriting styles, and the inclusion of sentimental objects such as flowers and postcards, while some diaries have been taken apart and mounted into albums. This has generated critical conversations around not only which collection should be digitised but also how much detail from each collection needs to be captured (core content only or core and peripheral content?) to meet the needs of researchers and maximise the potential of the digital environment.
            Additionally, the Library needs to ask how it structures meaningful relationships to avoid being simply a cipher of content. How do we manage the risk of privileging certain kinds of content? In a space where datasets are made available with a ‘take it and play’ philosophy, how do we measure interaction with, and scholarly outputs from, materials made available? Indeed, all libraries need to ask questions that support the future of data collection and data use. Decision making needs to be transparent and produce results that align collections with digital humanities researchers; especially those looking to distribute content in a less labour-intensive, mediated way.
            Conclusion
            Digitisation is a great equaliser, democratising knowledge, yet this has the potential to merely change repositories from onsite to online. Collecting institutions can be fantastic interpreters of their often unique collections and need to maintain this role. They also need to be prepared to share, as research projects can be enhanced through the combination of new data sources such as transcriptions and geo-coding and traditional metadata, all of which have resource implications. The authors argue that the questions asked of the World War I materials held by the State Library of NSW can also be asked of some of the other collections for which the Library is a custodian. Moreover, potential to explore these collections within a digital humanities framework needs to be examined, and new opportunities explored: What would happen, for example, if war images were put through facial recognition software? Of particular importance, alongside the creation of new knowledge, is the generation of new ways of storytelling and how traditional research can intersect with creative practice to produce different ways of seeing and understanding. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Inversed N-gram viewer: Searching the space of word temporal profiles
                
                    
                        Buntinx
                        Vincent
                    
                    EPFL (École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne), Switzerland
                    vincent.buntinx@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Kaplan
                        Frédéric
                    
                    EPFL (École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne), Switzerland
                    frederic.kaplan@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    inversed n-gram viewer
                    n-gram viewer
                    temporal profiles
                    words frequencies
                    curves fitting
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    information retrieval
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    linguistics
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Studies based on the visualization and analysis of temporal profiles of words using a so-called n-gram approach have been popular in recent years (Michel et al., 2011; Delahaye and Gauvrit, 2013). However, most of the studies so far discuss the case of remarkable words that are mainly found due to the researcher’s intuitions for finding ‘interesting’ curves using the n-gram viewer. In this paper, we investigate how we could inverse the problem and automatically explore the space of temporal curves in search for words. For instance, we could be interested in asking the system to retrieve all curves ‘similar’ to a given one. This would entail the definition of a method to describe temporal profiles and classify them according to a predefined distance.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Four examples of curves: (1) The word ‘1889’ is very popular in the year 1889 but ceases to be as interesting quickly after; (2) the term ‘olympique’ is very popular every four years; (3) the term ‘informatique’ keeps getting more popular over time; (4) the term ‘URSS’ is very popular only between 1950 and 1990.
            The study presented in this paper uses a database of 4 million articles covering a period of 200 years and is composed of digitized facsimiles of ‘Le Journal de Genève’ and ‘La Gazette de Lausanne’. Each article has been OCRed and indexed in an SQL database. For each indexed word, the yearly temporal profile showing the relative number of word occurrences in the corpus has been pre-computed. We designed an n-gram viewer that allows for the simultaneous comparison of up to four words. In order to compare these curves with one another and therefore be able to retrieve ‘similar’ curves automatically in the database, we need to find a simple way of describing them. The problem could be approached in a very general manner (how to describe an unknown curve by approximating it on a given decomposition base) or could take into account the fact that we are dealing with temporal profiles that could be described by a given limited number of archetypical curves. The second option implies having some a priori knowledge about the kind of curves one might encounter but has the advantage of allowing for a very compact description of general curves using a family of possible profiles. We choose this second option in this paper. 
            The first step of our curve analyzer is to associate a given curve to a preexisting curve family. This can be done in a hierarchical manner. At this stage of our research, we decompose curves into four basic families: ‘Dirac’ curves (with a single peak), periodic curves (with regular peaks of popularity), monotonic linear curves (either increasing or decreasing) and ‘square’ curves (associated with a predefined period). It is clear that these four families do not cover the entire spectrum of possible curves but they do provide a possible starting point for investigating the space of ‘remarkable’ curves. To determine if a given curve can be reasonably approximated by one of the four families, we carry out a sequence of tests, starting with the periodicity of the curve. To evaluate whether a curve is periodic we simply compute its Fourier transform and automatically check for hidden periodicity. If the curve is detected to be periodic we extract the period and try to fit a ‘comb’ function as defined by the following formula:
            
                
                    
                        f
                        
                            
                                x
                                ;
                                a
                                ,
                                b
                                ,
                                m
                                ,
                                t
                            
                        
                        =
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                0
                                                ,
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                i
                                                f
                                                 
                                                x
                                                &lt;
                                                m
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                a
                                                ,
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                
                                                i
                                                f
                                                 
                                                x
                                                ≥
                                                m
                                                 
                                                 
                                                a
                                                n
                                                d
                                                 
                                                 
                                                
                                                    
                                                        x
                                                        -
                                                        m
                                                    
                                                
                                                 
                                                m
                                                o
                                                d
                                                u
                                                l
                                                o
                                                 
                                                t
                                                =
                                                0
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                b
                                                ,
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                
                                                i
                                                f
                                                 
                                                x
                                                ≥
                                                m
                                                 
                                                 
                                                a
                                                n
                                                d
                                                 
                                                 
                                                
                                                    
                                                        x
                                                        -
                                                        m
                                                    
                                                
                                                 
                                                m
                                                o
                                                d
                                                u
                                                l
                                                o
                                                 
                                                t
                                                ≠
                                                0
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                The fitting is done using Particle Swarm Optimization method (PSO) (Trelea, 2003), and the quality of the fitting with the theoretical curve is measured using the classical least squares error (minimizes the sum of squared 
                residuals).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Temporal profile (blue) of the word ‘olympique’ with fitted curve (green) and Fourier transform (right).
            Using the model, the extracted period becomes a way of comparing periodic curves with one another. Figure 3 shows different curves sorted by periodicities.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Temporal profile (blue) of the words ‘olympique’, ‘fifa’, ‘recensement’, and ‘halley’ with fitted curve (green).
            For each curve, the sum of the squared 
                residuals between the actual curve and the fitted curve is calculated, which then represents the error of the comparison between them. This measure is used to optimize the fitting and allows for determining the category the actual curve belongs to when the optimization is done for all predefined categories of curves. 
            
            For ‘peaks’ we try to fit the curve with a classical model used in the analysis of ‘fads’ (e.g., the use of this model in the context of the analysis of Internet Memes [Bauckhage et al., 2013]) by using the Fréchet curve (Alves and Nevers, 2010) as defined by the following formula:
            
                
                    
                        f
                        
                            
                                x
                                ;
                                a
                                ,
                                s
                                ,
                                m
                            
                        
                        =
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                
                                                    
                                                        a
                                                    
                                                    
                                                        s
                                                    
                                                
                                                
                                                    
                                                        
                                                            
                                                                
                                                                    
                                                                        x
                                                                        -
                                                                        m
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                                                        s
                                                                    
                                                                
                                                            
                                                        
                                                    
                                                    
                                                        -
                                                        a
                                                        -
                                                        1
                                                    
                                                
                                                
                                                    
                                                        e
                                                    
                                                    
                                                        -
                                                        
                                                            
                                                                
                                                                    
                                                                        
                                                                            
                                                                                x
                                                                                -
                                                                                m
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                                s
                                                                            
                                                                        
                                                                    
                                                                
                                                            
                                                            
                                                                -
                                                                a
                                                            
                                                        
                                                    
                                                
                                                ,
                                                 
                                                i
                                                f
                                                 
                                                x
                                                &gt;
                                                m
                                                 
                                                a
                                                n
                                                d
                                                 
                                                s
                                                &gt;
                                                0
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                0
                                                ,
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                e
                                                l
                                                s
                                                e
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                                 
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            Using this model, fitted curves can be described using the position and value of the peak, allowing optimization with only one degree of freedom. These three parameters can be used to compare curves with one another as shown in Figure 4.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. The year 1889 is much like 1906 using the fitted Fréchet curves. The years 1848 and 1940, because of their historical significance, have rather different parameters despite the fact that they belong to the same family. For the years 1900 and 1914, the error of fitting is higher, meaning that they might belong to a different category of curves.
            The same approach can be conducted with linear monotonic curves and ‘squared’ curves. 
            We believe that inversing the problem of n-gram visualization by enabling automatic search in a space of curves could profoundly transform research in this area, going beyond the intuitive search for remarkable curves. It is likely that many different levels of information, combining semantics and grammatical constraints with historical contexts, are implicitly coded in n-gram temporal profiles.
            Understanding how to classify and study these curves is important for harnessing the power of this set of statistical tools. The solution based on families of simple archetypical curves briefly described in this article is certainly not the only way of approaching this question but constitutes an initial attempt to demonstrate the potential of this overall research goal. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                            Bauckhage
                            , C., 
                            Kersting
                            , 
                            K. and 
                            Hadiji
                            .
                            F. (2013). Mathematical Models of Fads Explain the Temporal Dynamics of Internet Memes. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Cambridge, MA, 8–11 July 2013.
                        
                    
                    
                        Delahaye, J.-P. and Gauvrit, N. (2013). 
                        Culturomics: Le numérique et la culture. O. Jacob, Paris. 
                    
                    
                        
                            Fraga
                             Alves, M. I. and 
                            Neves
                            , C. (2010). Extreme Value Distributions. In Lovric, M. (ed.), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 493–96,
                        
                    
                    doi
                        :10.1007/978-3-642-04898-2.
                    
                    
                        Michel, J.-B., et al. (2011). Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books. 
                        Science,
                        331(17), doi:10.1126/science.1199644.
                    
                    
                        
                            Trelea
                            , I. C. (2003). The Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm: Convergence Analysis and Parameter Selection. Information Processing Letters, 
                            85(6): 317–25, ISSN 0020-0190, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0020-0190(02)00447-7.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Ivanhoe: A Platform for Textual Play
                
                    
                        Chawla
                        Swati
                    
                    University of Virginia, United States of America
                    sc2wt@virginia.edu
                
                
                    
                        Ferguson
                        Andrew
                    
                    University of Virginia, United States of America
                    af3pj@virginia.edu
                
                
                    
                        Grayburn
                        Jennifer
                    
                    University of Virginia, United States of America
                    jng3au@virginia.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    pedagogy
                    storytelling
                    collaboration
                    content management
                    theory
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    social media
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As members of the 2014–2015 Praxis Program cohort at the UVA Scholars’ Lab, we set ourselves the task this year of updating Ivanhoe—the digital platform for roleplaying and textual intervention first formulated by Jerome McGann, Johanna Drucker, and Bethany Nowviskie. In its initial conception, the idea of Ivanhoe as a space for creative interaction and intervention grew out of ‘dissatisfaction with the limitations inherent in received forms of interpretation’; the players ‘wanted to develop a more imaginative form of critical methodology, a form closer in spirit and method to original works of poetry and literature’ (McGann and Drucker, 2003).
            This concretized thought experiment has seemed ideal for use in classroom curricula (McGann et al., 2004) that draw increasingly on notions of play and games for pedagogical outcomes (Willett et al., 2009). Play, generally, tends to be defined by what it is not: play is not work. Yet, over the past century, scholars and instructors have recognized and embraced play as a vital component of the learning process (Patton, 2014). As a result, games and play have been theorized and applied to curricula as a way to engage students in high school and college. While theory behind play education seems well-established, however, there is a strong disconnect between that theory—what we as educators believe we are doing—and what college students understand and internalize. In fact, by requiring such interactions, it seems that we eliminate the spontaneity and self-motivation so effective in play and ultimately induce student confusion, frustration, and anxiety (Ludewig and Ludewig-Rohwer, 2013). As we evaluated our goals for the purpose and design of Ivanhoe, we found ourselves wrestling with the classic question of digital classroom tools: How to make a program that students engage with by choice, rather than by force?
            In response to this question, we find ourselves investigating how textual intervention plays out in communities with long-running histories of sustained roleplay: tabletop and paper gaming, alternate history-making, fan fiction sites, and others. This has moved us away from concentrating on designing for classroom use alone (with its implicit inequalities of available resources, educational opportunity, and so on), and towards a more flexible tool designed to allow for textual creativity by a wide range of interactive, interpretive communities. By focusing on accessibility and ease of use across platforms—improving the desktop version on which Ivanhoe presently resides, but also making better use of WordPress’s mobile functionality—we aim to produce an updated Ivanhoe capable of fostering textual play as something sought out as its own end, rather than for the purpose of earning badges or engaging in other methods of gamification.
            At present, we envision such a resource as building on the presently available WordPress theme designed by the previous year’s Praxis group, keeping its emphasis on sustained roleplay and mutual commentary. However, we also look to draw on social media tools such as Yikyak and Snapchat that value anonymity, ephemerality, and asynchronous response time. This flexibility provides space for players to negotiate their roles and the conditions of their participation in a variety of emergent communities of play. As time allows, we hope also to incorporate improved functionality, with the capacity to incorporate not only a variety of media but also scripts, stylesheets, and other interactive elements—while maintaining a simple learning curve so that the platform can be used by players of any computing experience level.
            At the DH 2015 conference, we propose to demonstrate Ivanhoe in both static and dynamic formats—the former as a demonstration of sessions already played within Ivanhoe, showing the capabilities of the platform; the latter as a interactive play session that will run for the duration of the conference. Through this new build, we aim to realize the playful spontaneity inherent in the early Ivanhoe sessions of McGann, Drucker, Nowviskie, et al., while opening up the possibility of participation beyond the small groups of the classroom to a vastly expanded base of users.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ivanhoe. (n.d.). http://ivanhoe.scholarslab.org.
                    
                    
                        Ludewig, A. and Ludewig-Rohwer, I. (2013). Does Web-Based Role-Play Establish a High-Quality Learning Environment? Design versus Evaluation. 
                        Issues in Educational Research,
                        23(2): 164–79.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. (in collaboration with J. Drucker and B. Nowviskie). (2004). Ivanhoe: Education in a New Key. 
                        Romantic Circles. December, http://www.rc.umd.edu/pedagogies/commons/innovations/IVANHOE.html.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. and Drucker, J. (2003). The Ivanhoe Game. http://www2.iath.virginia.edu/jjm2f/old/IGamehtm.html. 
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2009). Sketching Ivanhoe. June 5. http://nowviskie.org/2009/sketching-ivanhoe/. 
                    
                    
                        Patton, R. M. (2014). Games That Art Educators Play: Games in the Historical and Cultural Context of Art Education. 
                        Studies in Art Education,
                        55(1): 241–52. 
                    
                    
                        Pill, S. (2014). Game Play: What Does It Mean for Pedagogy to Think Like a Game Developer? 
                        Journal of Physical Education, Recreation &amp; Dance,
                        85(1) (January): 9–15.
                    
                    
                        Rao, D. and Stupans, I. (2012). Exploring the Potential of Role Play in Higher Education: Development of a Typology and Teacher Guidelines. 
                        Innovations in Education and Teaching International,
                        49(4) (November): 427–36.
                    
                    
                        Willett, R., Robinson, M. and Marsh, J. (eds). (2009). 
                        Play, Creativity, and Digital Cultures. Routledge, New York.
                    
                    
                        Wills, S., Leigh, E. and Ip, A. (2011). 
                        The Power of Role-Based E-Learning: Designing and Moderating Online Role Play. Routledge, New York. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Kapital: An Interactive Fiction Game
                
                    
                        Milstein
                        Dana
                    
                    Yale University, United States of America
                    dana.milstein@yale.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    serious game
                    Marxism
                    Python
                    interactive fiction
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    knowledge representation
                    games and meaningful play
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    programming
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    cultural studies
                    german studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Japanese publisher East Press published a manga edition of Karl Marx’s multivolume 
                Das Kapital in 2007, and in that same year released 507,000 copies. Several scholars have written on (and created) the practice of transposing difficult philosophy or classic literature into graphic novels and comic books. However, what happens when the manga themselves are transposed into a more interactive art form? 
            
            Visual novels are interactive fiction games that incorporate game play and are usually centered on dialogue, non-linear narratives, and multiple perspectives. In this presentation I immerse the audience in 
                Kapital using Ren’Py, a visual novel engine based on simplified Python scripting. (Please see the game’s information site here: http://campuspress.yale.edu/marxifg/.)
            
            Session Audience
            Teaching and learning professionals / faculty / instructional designers, frontline practitioners.
            Session Description
            The focus of this presentation is to immerse our audience in game play of 
                Kapital. I anticipate that audience participation will serve as experiential learning for the visual novel as a serious game, and will therefore lead to a robust discussion about the merits and pitfalls of this learning approach. For learners of 
                Kapital, I am concerned that long philosophical documents that hold importance for current cultural issues are, nevertheless, inaccessible to the majority of students because they are dense, weighty, and of astronomical length. I endeavor through gameplay to have players embodied in the philosophy, to learn theory through doing, and to react in ways that will reveal that they are able to make appropriate decisions using their new knowledge base. 
            
            Value of Serious Games and Interactive Fiction for Higher Education
             1. This is a method for promoting literacy of and exposure to inaccessible philosophical texts whose ideologies are vogue in culture and criticism. 
             2. The form of the visual novel is gaining popularity and will find some use value in education (is it serious game, edutainment, or literary?). 
             3. The issues of digital learning—to code in Python, techniques for storyboarding, and translation issues—are paramount. Increasingly, IT will need to develop these types of games, offer workshops to support student and faculty learning of programming, and mentor groups in project management and theories of game design. 
            Learning Outcomes
             1. Understand and apply critical concepts from 
                Kapital.
            
             2. Engage in and comprehend the structure and form of the visual novel.
             3. Identify the process for designing an IF game.
             4. Envision use value for the genre in learning environments.
            Of interest to the presentation is the unique collaborative background for this project: The presenter is partnering as a staff-faculty member with undergraduate student Alex Lew to create 
                Kapital. They have successfully presented the game design, history, and practice in two conferences, including the inaugural presentation of Yale’s Performance Studies Working (fall 2014), and in the first session of the INKE (Implementing New Knowledge Environments) Conference (Chicago, 2014). They have also submitted this proposal to Educause 2015 for joint presentation of the interactive demo. 
            
        
    



    
        
            
                KinDigi Social: A Mobile-centered Social Annotation Platform for the Kindai Digital Library
                
                    
                        Hashimoto
                        Yuta
                    
                    Kyoto University, Japan
                    yhashimoto1984@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Araki
                        Yasuyuki
                    
                    National Diet Library, Japan
                    ya-araki@ndl.go.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    social annotation
                    digital collections
                    online collaboration
                    open annotation
                
                
                    historical studies
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    programming
                    social media
                    crowdsourcing
                    semantic web
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The Kindai Digital Library (KDL) is an online collection of out-of-copyright books published in Japan in the 19th and 20th centuries run by the National Diet Library (NDL) of Japan.
                1 It offers full access to images scanned from books previously only available in the NDL. As of November 2014, the total number of volumes in the collection has grown to around 360,000. Although digitized text of the scans is not available due to the technical difficulties of applying OCR to old Japanese type fonts, the collection has been a precious resource for studies of the history of modern Japan since its start in 2003.
            
            KinDigi Social is an online platform for social annotation of digitized books in KDL; it offers iOS and Android clients to browse books in the KDL collection and provides a set of features to create and share annotations and tags, allowing users to exchange and discuss historical knowledge and ideas concerning the books. The project is one of the experimental projects supported by the NDL Lab, an R&amp;D section of NDL,
                2 and is going to be available at http://kindigi-social.org/ by the spring of 2015. In this paper, we will discuss the aims, methods, and implementation of the KinDigi Social platform.
            
            Aim of the Project
            The past several years saw growing interest in the use of social media for humanities studies in the digital humanities world. Possibilities of online collaboration for research in the humanities have been discussed on various occasions and put into practice in a number of research projects (Siemens et al, 2012; Barr and Tonra, 2014). Our research attempt is to apply the methodologies and techniques suggested by the results of those studies to the KDL. The need for such an attempt becomes clear when we see the numerous references and comments on books in the KDL made by professional and amateur historians not only in their academic papers but also in their blogs and social media posts (search ‘kindai.ndl.go.jp’ on Twitter, for instance). Although this sort of user-generated content is often quite valuable in that it can provide better understandings of the historical context of books, it has been left scattered over the Web and has not been archived for later references, which has resulted in a great loss of intellectual resources. Thus KinDigi Social aims to be a platform that aggregates and accumulates such annotations, and enables interdisciplinary discussion and collaboration among scholars for the purpose of further knowledge creation.
            Methods
            KinDigi Social allows its users to create annotations on both image region parts of a book and on the text itself. Each annotation accepts replies from other users so that idea-exchanging and discussion can take place. It is also possible to label each annotation with Twitter-like hashtags. On the other hand, the mere capacity to create annotations is not enough to build a sustainable social medium that will keep driving engagement of users and that can endure long-term use as an archive of historical knowledge; there are difficulties concerning user interfaces, information sharing, archiving and reuse of user-generated content, among other issues. Therefore we took the following three additional measures:
             • 
                Mobile first development: Since currently the KDL doesn’t offer a user interface optimized for mobile devices, its users need to keep their eyes on PC displays to read the books held in the KDL. The loss of productivity derived from the limitations of this user interface cannot and should not be ignored. Although a desktop client is also planned for KinDigi Social, we have especially focused on building a rich mobile client that enables users to access the KDL almost anywhere using their iPads or other mobile devices, and provides them the same user experience gained from the use of mobile readers such as the Amazon Kindle (see Figure 1). One large problem with displaying scanned book images on mobile devices is their size; the images from the KDL have margins surrounding the actual books. For this we developed a lightweight image analysis library that automatically detects edges in a book image and removes unnecessary margins from it (see Figure 2). The code is open-source and available on Github.
                3
            
             • 
                Support for real-time collaboration: As the recent success of social media shows, real-time communication between users is indispensable for their continual engagement. In order to support this kind of collaboration, KinDigi Social implements the following Twitter-like system: user activities, such as the creation of an annotation, will immediately prompt a notification sent to the user’s ‘followers’ through their social feeds, for real-time responses and information sharing (see Figure 3). Likewise it is possible to ‘watch’ any book in KDL just like a GitHub repository so that the user will get a notification when an annotation is created on a book. This system also contributes to forming loosely bound clusters of users. For those who do not want to make their annotations public, support for private annotations is also planned.
            
             • 
                Data modeling following the Open Annotation specification: As a description model of user-generated annotations, KinDigi Social implements the Open Annotation Data Model, an RDF-based framework designed for modeling annotations on web content whose specification has been developed by a W3C community group (Hunter, 2010).
                4 It provides controlled and machine-friendly vocabulary for modeling not only annotations but also replies from other users, folksonomy tags, and links to other resources. The adoption of the Open Annotation framework makes it possible to store and serialize user-derived content in an interoperable and reusable way for their long-term preservation and for secondary uses such as text analysis.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The iOS client of KinDigi Social running on an iPad.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. An example of the automatic detection of book edges.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. An example of social feed of user activities.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. System architecture of KinDigi Social platform.
            Implementation
            As shown in Figure 4, KinDigi Social is a server-client system. The web server is written in Ruby on Rails and is hosted on a physical server in the NDL Lab where it retrieves scanned images and the bibliographic metadata of books in the KDL through the APIs provided by the NDL. It also exchanges JSON messages with its iOS and Android clients through its REST API. The mobile clients are built with HTML5 using the Apache Cordova framework,
                5 so that a single source code will generate distributions for different platforms. 
            
            Annotation data generated by users is at first stored in a relational database (PostgreSQL), and is regularly converted and dumped into an RDF database and made public through its SPARQL endpoint. In this way annotation data can be easily retrieved and processed by standard semantic web technologies. We chose a relational database as a primary method of data storage purely for performance and maintenance reasons.
            The user authentication is done via OAuth 2.0 protocol; users need to use their Facebook or Twitter account to log in to KinDigi Social (Authentication via OpenID is also planned). This implementation is intended to make it easy to connect with other social media platforms and to prevent vandalism by anonymous users. 
            Conclusion and Future Directions
            Our basic standpoint is that every historical digital collection should behave like a living organism; it should continue to grow, absorbing its users’ knowledge and ideas and connecting to other historical resources. The online collaboration of scholars enhanced by real-time and mobile computing, and the standardized archive system built with Open Annotation model will contribute to the transformation of currently static digital collections into such dynamic organisms.
            Although our project is still in its very early stages and we first need to evaluate how KinDigi Social can contribute to humanities research based on digital resources, a possible extension of our project would be to include support for multiple digital archives, and collections other than the KDL. A prime candidate is the digital archive administered by the Japan Center for Asian Historical Records (JACAR),
                6 which holds the official documents of the Japanese Cabinet dating from the period prior to World War II. If it were possible to search the annotations created in both the KDL and JACAR seamlessly with a single query, that would greatly benefit studies of the history of modern politics in Japan, and we therefore hope to offer this functionality with our project.
            
            Notes
            1. Kindai Digital Library. http://kindai.ndl.go.jp/?__lang=en.
            2. NDL Lab, http://lab.kn.ndl.go.jp/cms/.
            3. Kindai-cropper (a github repository). https://github.com/yuta1984/kindai-cropper.
            4. Open Annotation Data Model, http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/.
            5. Apache Cordova, http://cordova.apache.org/.
            6. Japan Center for Asian Historical Records, http://www.jacar.go.jp/english/index.html.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barr, R. A. and Tonra, J. (2014). Crowdsourcing Annotation and the Social Edition: Ossian Online. 
                        DH2014.
                    
                    
                        Hunter, J., et al. (2010). The Open Annotation Collaboration: A Data Model to Support Sharing and Interoperability of Scholarly Annotations. 
                        Digital Humanities 2010: Conference Abstracts, pp. 175–78.
                    
                    
                        Siemens, R., et al. (2012). Toward Modeling the Social Edition: An Approach to Understanding the Electronic Scholarly Edition in the Context of New and Emerging Social Media. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        27(4): 445–61. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Knowledge Networks, Juxtaposed: Disciplinarity in the Encyclopédie and Wikipedia
                
                    
                        Heuser
                        Ryan
                    
                    Stanford University
                    heuser@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark
                    
                    Stanford University
                    malgeehe@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Bender
                        John
                    
                    Stanford University
                    bender@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    encyclopedia
                    knowledge
                    network
                    Enlightenment
                    disciplinarity
                
                
                    historical studies
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The disciplines now maintained in universities have changed sharply since the 18th century, when they were still largely theological. However, the 18th century’s academies and encyclopedias set the stage for this transformation. How can the digital humanities help us understand and articulate such changes in the disciplinary structure within systems of knowledge?
            Specifically, our project is designed to use methods of network analysis and visualization to explore commonalities and differences between the 
                Encyclopédie (1751–1772), Diderot’s landmark encyclopedia of the 18th-century Enlightenment, and the Wikipedia of today. One of Diderot’s powerful innovations was a pervasive system of cross-references, networking the many thousands of articles into a navigable system. Wikipedia is built upon a similar system, both hyperlinking its articles together and recommending related articles under the heading of ‘See also’. Our project wagers that a juxtaposition of these cross-reference networks allows us to historicize the particular structures of knowledge interconnectedness as manifested in the 
                Encyclopédie and in its modern Wikipedia descendant. Our results show that, perhaps unintuitively, cross-references more commonly ‘cut across’ demarcations of Enlightenment-born disciplines in Diderot’s 
                Encyclopédie than in Wikipedia.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The article cross-reference network of the 
                Encyclopédie. Each node is an article; each edge, or link, indicates a cross-reference between them. Articles without cross-references are not displayed here. The network was visualized in the software Gephi and colored by its network modularity algorithm with default settings.
            
            Although 65 times larger than the 
                Encyclopédie, Wikipedia, like Diderot’s encyclopedia, works within categories and operates by selection.
                1 One covert but powerful principle of selection within Wikipedia is that of modern disciplines. Although Wikipedia is not specifically organized by disciplines, they figure powerfully. Just one specific instance is that of the well-known article on the ‘philosopher’ in the 
                Encyclopédie, assigning the broadest possible intellectual role to the kind of man of letters Diderot signified by the term. In Wikipedia, by contrast, ‘philosopher’ is specifically about practitioners of the modern formal discipline of philosophy.
            
            Below, we compare these two encyclopedias by combining interpretive readings of cross-reference networks drawn from particular articles (Experiment 1) with a large-scale computational approach (Experiment 2). For the digitized text of the 
                Encyclopédie, we turned to ARTFL, a comprehensive database of thousands of 18th-century French texts, including all 74,000 articles in Diderot’s 
                Encyclopédie (‘ARTFL 
                Encyclopédie Project’, n.d.). Mark Olsen and other researchers involved in the project have computationally identified and hyperlinked the 
                renvois, or cross-references, embedded in its articles (‘Renvois Navigation’, n.d.)
                . Gilles Blanchard and Mark Olsen have published on the relationship between the 
                Encyclopédie’s ‘tree of knowledge’ and its 
                renvois, as two distinct models of knowledge organization, showing which parts of the tree are more strongly connected via cross-references than others. In this project, we juxtapose and compare the cross-reference networks of two encyclopedias created more than two centuries apart, in order to make visible and better understand the historicity of knowledge networks.
            
            Experiment 1: Case Studies of Key Article Networks
            First we drew up a list of articles on a wide range of topics that reflected a diversity of disciplines and that contained a large number of cross-references in both encyclopedias. These articles include, for instance, ‘philosopher’, ‘commerce’, ‘agriculture’, ‘nature’, and ‘existence’. For each selected article, we created a network linking it to all of the articles it cross-references; then we repeated this process only once for each of the cross-referenced articles. The resulting network is a directed cross-reference network with a depth of 2. For this experiment, we considered as cross-references all 
                renvois of the 
                Encyclopédie article, and all links under ‘See also’ in the corresponding English Wikipedia article.
                2
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. An article cross-reference network, centered on the article ‘commerce’ in the 
                Encyclopédie, emanating two levels deep.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3: An article cross-reference network, centered on the article ‘commerce’ in the English Wikipedia, emanating two levels deep.
            For example, one of the most striking comparisons we’ve found is the article on ‘commerce’. The 
                Encyclopédie links ‘commerce’ to such diverse topics as art, navigation, and agriculture at the first level, and poetry, mathematics, and construction at the second (Figure 2). Wikipedia’s version of ‘commerce’, by contrast, is tightly disciplinary (Figure 3). At the first level of cross-references, nearly all of the headings are from business, trade, and manufacture. At the second level, at the furthest reach from the core of economics, we have ‘shoplifting’ and ‘classical liberalism’. Clearly, when it comes to ‘commerce’, the unannounced, implicitly defined discipline adhered to by Wikipedia is business management—no room for categories such as tolerance, winter, magnetism, the military, or poetic theory.
            
            In these case studies, we see over and over again an increase in disciplinarity of the sort we see in ‘commerce’—but also a move to technical practices more generally, some of which are disciplinary, some of which are commercial, and some of which are institutional abstractions.
            Experiment 2: Large-Scale Network Comparison
            A potential objection to these English Wikipedia examples lies in our translation of 18th-century French concepts into 21st-century English. The translation of the words from French to English potentially introduces some inconsistencies. With this in mind, we move from particular article networks to a big-data approach, comparing the overall citational structure of the 
                Encyclopédie to that of the French Wikipedia (hereafter 
                Wikipedie). Although the French version is about a third smaller than the English, it is still 20 times larger than the 
                Encyclopédie. In order to compare it to the 
                Encyclopédie, therefore, we reduced both to the subset of headwords appearing in both encyclopedias. This left us with about 16,000 articles. Because the 
                Wikipedie is smaller than its English equivalent, and less likely to have maintained ‘See also’ sections, we decided to consider as cross-references all of the hyperlinks in each article. This is a departure from our earlier practice (see note 2).
            
            For every possible pair of the remaining articles, we calculated the shortest path between them, in the cross-reference networks of both the 
                Encyclopédie and the 
                Wikipedie. Then we looked at which links in each network were the most traversed among all of the shortest paths taken. By shortest path, we mean the smallest number of 
                renvois necessary to reach a second article from a first. These most traversed links are, literally, structurally central to each system of knowledge: if one were navigating either encyclopedia by its cross-references, these would be the connections that you would be most likely to cross. In network theory, this type of centrality is known as 
                betweenness centrality.
            
            Our study of these central links showed a significant difference in the types of relationships so central for the two encyclopedias.
                3 By classifying them in terms of their analogical relationship, we discovered important differences in the way in which the two cross-reference networks are structured. In the 
                Encyclopédie, these relationships are most often characterized by a ‘structuring’ or ‘governing’ analogy (Figure 4). For instance, ‘langue’ is governed by ‘gammaire’, ‘terre’ by its ‘axe’, ‘destin’ by ‘Dieu’, ‘religion’ by ‘foi’, and ‘justice’ by ‘droit’.
                4 In each case, the two concepts are distinct in kind, but they are brought together by a type of relationship in which the first concept depends on the second to give it order and form.
            
            
                
                    
                    
                
            
            Figures 4 (left) and 5 (right): Links with greatest betweenness centrality, in the 
                Encyclopédie (left) and 
                Wikipedie (right) networks, respectively. Here, nodes consist only of articles present in both encyclopedias, and edges only the cross-references between them.
            
            In the 
                Wikipedie, none of the most important links are characterized by this type of analogy (Figure 5). Instead, the most frequent type of relationship is one of membership between two concepts of the same kind. For example, an ‘ecclesiastique’ is a member of the ‘clerge’; ‘vin’ is a type of ‘esprit’; ‘addition’ is a type of ‘arithmetique’.
                5 Although the governing relationships in the 
                Encyclopédie place the entries in large conceptual hierarchies, the taxonomic relationships in the 
                Wikipedie point to disciplinary relationships, where knowledge is interrelated along an axis of specialization and depth. Compared with the 
                Encyclopédie, the 
                Wikipedie is less likely to make the metaphysical connection between arithmetic and, for example, logic; instead, it connects arithmetic to its constituent parts: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. We believe this juxtaposition of cross-reference practices and network structures reveals a notable shift toward disciplinarity in modernity, made visible by a combination of computational and hermeneutic methods.
            
            Conclusion
            From our research, then, it appears that the broad inclusivity of Wikipedia is, if anything, more deeply disciplinary than even the planned knowledge system of the 
                Encyclopédie. It is worth wondering about how powerfully Wikipedia is driven by formal disciplines despite its largely informal surface structure. We are finding that where Wikipedia is not more clearly disciplinary, many articles still move toward a greater level of abstraction and institutional formation than in the 
                Encyclopédie.
            
            
                
            
            Notes
            1. The English Wikipedia contains 4.6 million articles. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Size_of_Wikipedia (accessed 2 November 2014).
            2. In this experiment, we decided to leave aside the interlinear hyperlinks within most Wikipedia articles, because we believe they more poorly reflect the intentional editorial decisions of Diderot and his collaborators in making the 
                renvois than do the cross-references contained under the ‘See also’ section. We decided to use the English Wikipedia in this experiment because, as the largest Wikipedia, it has received the most editorial attention and is most likely to contain the ‘See also’ section.
            
            3. For this experiment, we annotated the type of analogy evident in the top-15 most central links from the shortest-path traversals of both encyclopedias’ cross-reference networks.
            4. English translation: For instance, language is governed by grammar, Earth by its axis, destiny by God, faith by religion, and justice by right.
            5. English translation: For instance, a clergyman is a member of the clergy; wine is a type of spirits; addition is a type of arithmetic. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ‘ARTFL Encyclopédie Project’. (n.d.). Morissey, R. and Roe, G., eds. University of Chicago, https://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/.
                    
                    
                        Blanchard, G. and Olsen, M. (2006). Le Système De Renvoi Dans L’Encyclopédie: Une Cartographie Des Structures De Connaissances Au XVIIIe Siècle. 
                        Recherches Sur Diderot Et Sur L'Encyclopédie,
                        31–32: 45–70.
                    
                    
                        ‘Renvois Navigation’. (n.d.). 
                        ARTFL Encyclopédie Project. Morissey, R. and Roe, G., eds. University of Chicago, https://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/content/renvois-navigation.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Language, Cultural Influences and Intelligence in Historical Gazetteers of the Great War
                
                    
                        Warren
                        Robert
                    
                    Dalhousie University, Canada
                    rwarren@math.carleton.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Linked geo data
                    war mapping
                    Great War
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    semantic web
                    maps and mapping
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This talk concerns itself with the binarization of British and German Western Front maps during the Great War and their modelling using Linked Open Data (LOD) ontologies. Through the use of image processing algorithms, the scanned images of British and German trench maps were binarized into vector representations that allow us to compare each actor’s perception of the other as well as infer military intelligence activities by tracking the provenance of toponyms. 
            * * *
            As with many armed conflicts, the initial intentions and plans of the belligerents were quickly changed when the outcomes of their actions were unsatisfactory. All sides expected a war of maneuver using the classical arms of previous conflicts: infantry, cavalry, and artillery. Commanders from the previous centuries would have been comfortable with the pre-war planning of both sides. However, terrain and innovations in artillery and small arms rate of accurate fire constrained the parties to a war of attrition where movement was no longer possible. Military thinking moved from planning large strategic maneuvers to limited tactical engagements that required local planning.
            Having to deal for the first time with large numbers of tactical situations requiring good maps, the different groups of belligerents began looking for mapping solutions. The British Expeditionary Forces fighting on Belgian and French soil benefited from Belgian cartographic knowledge from the onset that was then augmented from other French sources (Jack, 1920). The Germans were faced with the problem of invading a hostile country with uncooperative officials and having to build a mapping system from the ground up using opportunistically captured material (Boelcke, 1920; Hinks, 1919; Great Britain War Office, 1917) as well as previous large-scale maps.
            This talk will cover the geometry and cartography of the 
                Battle of Vimy Ridge in 1917 as a case study using both British and German cartographic material. 
            
            Merging Geometries
            The military maps were created from an amalgam of Belgian and French sources augmented by field surveys and aerial photography. Overlaying these maps allows us to determine what each belligerent believed about his opponent at that point in time. In some cases, friendly trench details were omitted from maps to avoid leaking information in case of capture. However, what trenches are shown represent an armies’ ability to keep track of its own operational activities.
            Several editions of each map exist, and some instances of these dated editions survive and have been scanned in digital form. We binarize trench representations by separating the colour of the trench from the image while using Thiessen polygons. Registration of the digitized map is done using OpenCV’s implementation of 
                Hough Line Transform driving a web service implementation previously described in Warren and Evans (2014). 
            
            Multiple Linked Open Data vocabularies were used to record this information, including GeoSparql (OGC, 2012), 
                NeoGeo, and W3C geo:Points. By recording the individual points within the polygon in a manner similar to that of Linked Geo Data (Stadler et al., 2012), we are able to annotate individual locations within the polygon. This effectively creates polygons formed by a series of geo:Points that can each record not only the shape of the trenches but also calculated positional errors, linkages to other trenches, and trench width.
            
            Depending on the specific type of trench, its width could be anywhere from two feet, six inches to one foot, six inches, depending on the application, and the depth about five feet, six inches (Great Britain War Office, 1914). The depth information is not recorded in the maps, but the width of the trench is sometimes traced from aerial photography, which allows for the measurement of high-traffic trenches. When the scaled trench trace exceeds the minimum one-foot, six-inch width, the width calculated from the pen trace on the map is used instead.
            A recent improvement brought about by GeoSPARQL is the differentiation between Feature and Geometry. The Geometry is the materialized physical location of the Feature (thing), and the separation between thing and location allows for greater flexibility, for example, in stating the existence of a place without necessarily defining where it is. It also allows us to link different representations of the same trench across maps by assigning the same trench (Feature) multiple Geometries as represented in multiple source documents at different times.
            This also allows us to reduce redundant information by merging similar geometries across maps where no change has occurred. Small variations in locations (due to wear and tear as well as minor survey errors) occur, and these are taken into account by the merging process by calculating the theoretical accuracy of both map scales against each other. For large variations of friendly trenches, the change can be assumed to be a change in the layout of the trench, while for large variation in the observed enemy trench, the change is assumed to be done through a better intelligence estimate. Comparing both these sets of trench geometries over time is a means of obtaining a quantitative measure of the quality of both military operation and intelligence activities.
            Toponyms and Intelligence
            The toponyms used on the maps varied greatly, and translated Belgian and French town names were generally used when known. Other visually prominent features such as farms, woods, or isolated trees (e.g., 
                The Lone Tree) were named on an ad-hoc basis based on local events or the cultural baggage of the unit involved in the survey work (e.g., 
                Regina Trench).
            
            A common practice for all sides was to re-use their opponent’s toponyms when these were known for printing on maps issued to frontline officers. For example, 
                Prinz Arnolf Graben, a trench near modern-day 
                Beaumont-Hamel, France, is shown on 
                British maps using the 
                German Army name and spelling. This was done for both frontline tactical purposes and making the navigation of enemy trenches easier during an attack or raid. The re-use of names also marks a turning point in British and German attitudes to military intelligence. Intelligence is no longer seen as a cloak-and-dagger craft involving shady individuals but as a core component of military operations. At the onset of the war, cavalrymen still carried a sketch board onto which they were supposed to draw enemy dispositions for a commander’s review. By 1916, the information flowed from frontline operations back to the printing sections that created maps on an as-needed basis for local tactical use.
            
            Through the use of algorithmic methods the language of trench names is isolated and their source identified across different maps. Within this specific application, this allows us to cross-reference the same trench across the maps of multiple belligerents while establishing the source, or earliest known use, of the toponyms. Previous recording of the name of things, or gazetteers, tended to record objects as a single name, occasionally with a localization (Chasseaud, 2006). Through the use of the SKOS eXtension for Labels (
                SKOS-XL) vocabulary, we improved on this by adding label-specific provenance, which allows the tracking of the original owner of the name. This recording of the nomenclature provenance can be used as a proxy that identifies the intelligence processes of the belligerents.
            
            Conclusion
            These military maps are an important source of historical locations that have been long forgotten or whose importance has changed over time. Through the binarization of scanned trench maps, the locations of smaller engagements can be extracted and the location of named features can be placed in a modern context. Some of these features, such as the location of former ammunition dumps, remain important to this day.
            In closing this presentation, the use of the semantic web will be reviewed in managing a historical gazetteer of geometries, features, and names during the Great War on the Western Front. The careful tracking of provenance information will be explained, and the novel use of existing semantic web standards allows for the discovery of both the quality of the cartographic work done by both sides and the cultural influences between belligerents.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Boelcke, S. (1920). Die engländer und das deutsche kriegsvermessungswesen. 
                        Petermanns Geographische Mitteilungen,
                        66(6–9).
                    
                    
                        Chasseaud, P. (2006). 
                        Rats Alley: Trench Names of the Western Front, 1914–1918. Spellmount.
                    
                    
                        Great Britain War Office. General Staff. (1914). 
                        Notes on Field Defenses. His Majesty’s Stationery Office.
                    
                    
                        Great Britain War Office. General Staff. (1917). 
                        Handbook of the German Army in War, January, 1917. n.p.
                    
                    
                        Hinks, A. R. (1919). German War Maps and Survey. 
                        Geographical Journal,
                        53(1): 30–40.
                    
                    
                        Jack, E. M. (1920). 
                        Report on Survey on the Western Front, 1914–1918. His Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.
                    
                    
                        OGC. (2012). OGC GeoSPARQL—A Geographic Query Language for rdf Data. 
                        Open Geospatial Consortium, Technical Report OGC 11-052r4, September.
                    
                    
                        Stadler, C., Lehmann, J., Höffner, K. and Auer, S. (2012). Linkedgeodata: A Core for a Web of Spatial Open Data. 
                        Semantic Web Journal,
                        3(4): 333–54.
                    
                    
                        Warren, R. and Evans, D. (2014). Translating Maps and Coordinates from the Great War. In 
                        Proceedings of the Terra Cognita Workshop at ISWC 2014, Riva Del Garda, Italy, October 2014. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Libraries and Digital Humanities Special Interest Group
                
                    
                        Borovsky
                        Zoe
                    
                    UCLA, U.S.A.
                    zoe@library.ucla.edu
                
                
                    
                        Courtney
                        Angela
                    
                    Indiana University Libraries, U.S.A.
                    ancourtn@indiana.edu
                
                
                    
                        Galina
                        Isabel
                    
                    Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
                    igalina@unam.mx
                
                
                    
                        Gehrke
                        Stefanie
                    
                    Biblissima, France
                    stefanie.gehrke@biblissima-condorcet.fr
                
                
                    
                        Stensrud Høsøien
                        Hege
                    
                    National Library, Norway
                    hege.hosoien@nb.no
                
                
                    
                        Potvin
                        Sarah
                    
                    Texas A&amp;M University Libraries, U.S.A.
                    spotvin@library.tamu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Stäcker
                        Thomas
                    
                    Herzog August Library, Germany
                    staecker@hab.de
                
                
                    
                        Worthey
                        Glen
                    
                    Stanford University Libraries, U.S.A.
                    gworthey@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Libraries
                    Digital Libraries
                    Librarians
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            SIG Conveners
             Zoe Borovsky, UCLA Libraries, USA
             Angela Courtney, Indiana University Libraries, USA
             Isabel Galina
                , Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
            
             Stefanie Gehrke, Biblissima, France
             Hege Stensrud Høsøien, National Library, Norway
             Sarah Potvin, Texas A&amp;M University Libraries, USA
             Thomas Stäcker, Herzog August Library, Germany
             Glen Worthey, Stanford University Libraries, USA
            We propose a poster introducing the ADHO Special Interest Group for Libraries and Digital Humanities that allows for both presentation and live discussion. The poster will present the main objectives motivating the SIG proposal, illustrate its history as an international effort, and afford the conveners an opportunity to circulate and discuss the SIG proposal face-to-face with supporters and potential members among international conference attendees. For those DH attendees not directly involved in library work, the poster will be primarily an introduction to the importance of, and issues related to, DH work in libraries internationally.
            Mission and Rationale
            The ADHO 
                Libraries and DH SIG aims to foster collaboration and communication among librarians and other scholars doing library-related digital humanities work. By establishing this SIG, ADHO serves its mission and provides the connective tissue between ADHO organizations and emerging DH initiatives within organizations of professional librarians such as the Association of College and Research Libraries (part of the American Library Association) and the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA). We believe that creating these connections will lead toward more informed ‘dual citizenship’—that is, of librarians connected to, participating in, and supported by both library- and DH-oriented professional organizations, in league with fellow DH-oriented librarians around the world. By fostering such dual citizenship, librarians and libraries will be well positioned to identify opportunities to initiate and engage with digital humanities projects and scholarship, as well as to collectively address the challenges we face. These challenges include, for example, (a) advocating for financial support, release time, training opportunities, technical infrastructure, and resources to undertake their digital humanities projects; (b) addressing the changing notions of ‘service’ and ‘research’ in light of the collaborative nature of much digital humanities work; and (c) promoting a culture of digital humanities scholarship in the library.
            
             The mission of the ADHO 
                Libraries and DH SIG will be to
            
             • Offer advice and support to these new and emergent associations of librarians engaged in digital humanities pursuits—either projects of their own making or in collaboration with nonlibrarian digital humanists.
             • Advocate for initiatives of interest and benefit to libraries as well as digital humanities (e.g., the ‘Collaborators’ Bill of Rights’ white paper, the Digital Public Library of America, the ‘Best Practices for TEI in Libraries’ guidelines, and other tools and best practices related to library-based DH).
             • Document how librarians and library-based units meet these challenges.
             • Provide information about available resources and opportunities (e.g., training, funding) that encourage collaboration between DH scholars in a variety of roles, especially in libraries.
             • Showcase the work of librarians engaged in the digital humanities.
             • Promote librarians’ perspectives and skills to the rest of the DH community.
            An initial goal of the SIG will center on developing working relationships within and across international library-oriented organizations such as the ACRL DH Interest Group, the Digital Library Federation, the TEI in Libraries Special Interest Group, the Society for American Archivists, the Association for Information Science and Technology, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, and others.
            Activities
            In terms of concrete activities, the SIG would, when possible, coordinate or collaborate with librarian organizations to accomplish the following: 
             • Researching and documenting existing librarian-led DH projects and DH organizations in which librarians are active partners (e.g., the TEI Consortium SIG on Libraries).
             • Organizing conference sessions—ones for librarians at DH conferences, and others focused on DH at conferences intended primarily for librarians (such as ALA, ACRL, ARLIS, DLF, etc.).
             • Organizing workshops, training events, and conference sessions aimed at promoting librarians’ involvement in the general DH community and showcasing library-led projects. 
            Membership is open to anyone with an interest in the issue. Currently, 130 people have actively expressed an interest in joining this SIG, but we believe the potential membership to be substantially greater worldwide. One concrete benefit of presenting a poster at DH2015 will be community outreach, with the aim of reaching these potential members.
            Note
            A related public Zotero group on the topic of DH in libraries is maintained at https://www.zotero.org/groups/adho_library_sig. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Linked Open Data and the First World War
                
                    
                        Warren
                        Robert
                    
                    Dalhousie University, Canada
                    rwarren@math.carleton.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ridge
                        Mia
                    
                    Open University, UK
                    mia.ridge@open.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Rose
                        Kathryn
                    
                    Memorial University, Canada
                    kathrynr@mun.ca
                
                
                    
                        Charles
                        Valentine
                    
                    Europeana Foundation, The Netherlands
                    valentine.charles@europeana.eu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    Linked Open Data
                    Great War
                    Semantic Web
                    GLAM
                    interoperability
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    ontologies
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    cultural infrastructure
                    semantic web
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Linked Open Data and the First World War 
            Panel Organizer: Rob Warren, Big Data Institute, Halifax, Canada (rhwarren@dal.ca)
            The year 2014 marks the centenary of the First World War. This war is arguably the first ‘industrial’ war, and as a consequence, one of the first where extensive documentation is available. This abundance of scanned documents requires GLAM organisations (galleries, libraries, archives, and museums) to make them available in a format that is both searchable and discoverable. Given the breadth and depth of the data available, this is not a trivial problem.
            Besides rich commemorative events and lowering the cost of access to primary sources for scholars, this digital availability of large archival collections enables the creation of interlinked datasets about the people, events, and places of the Great War. This centenary also coincides with the availability of Semantic Web technologies and opportune funding that has allowed archival institutions to make their document collections available through the Web.
            This event is a follow-up to an initial ‘birds of a feather’ session and dinner at 
                LODLAM2013 in Montreal, Canada. That event was primarily institutional in nature, and we propose that this panel should build on the momentum generated by presenting ‘in use’ cases for different projects and issues in creating Linked Open Data about the Great War.
            
            We believe that this panel has value in both its timeliness as a commemoration event and as a test case of what distributed researchers, archivists, and librarians can achieve using Linked Open Data. The area is much hyped but still needs a reference test case that can show the value.
            Some of the issues that the panellists will discuss:
             1. Support for the recording of differing viewpoints about events by reconciling the underlying elements of agreement and framing an effective debate. 
             2. How to support the recording of partially unknown, imprecise, and uncertain information by providing URI for their existence, reference, and discussion. 
             3. Linked Open Data allows for the separation of terms that represent the 
                thing from other properties, such as the name, location, shape, or even identity. This is an opportunity to localize information for consumption across cultures and languages. 
            
            Speakers
            
                Lasting Remembrance: Newfoundland, Labrador, and War
            
            Kathryn Rose (kathrynr@mun.ca) and Dean Seeman (dseeman@mum.ca), Memorial University, St-Johns, Canada
            Kathryn Rose is the History Liaison Librarian at Memorial University of Newfoundland and has been working to create a unified representation of the library’s holding about the Royal Newfoundland Regiment. 
            
                ‘Small Ontologies, Loosely Joined’: Developing Linked Open Data for the First World War
            
            Mia Ridge (mia.ridge@open.ac.uk), Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
            Mia is a research fellow with the CENDARI project at Trinity College Dublin. She is chair of the Museums Computer Group (MCG) and a member of the Executive Council of the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH). She maintains a 
                wiki of museum, gallery, library, archive, archaeology, and cultural heritage APIs for machine-readable open cultural data.
            
            
                Mapping the Western Front: Using British and German Coordinates Systems to Cross-Reference Archival Resources
            
            Rob Warren (rhwarren@dal.ca), Big Data Institute, Halifax, Canada
            Rob Warren is a postdoctoral fellow at the Big Data Institute and adjunct professor in mathematics and statistics at Carleton University. His research interests focus on Linked Open Data, social network analysis, knowledge discovery in databases and ontologies. An engineer by training, he had previously held research posts in industry, government, and academia both in North America and in Europe. He is a researcher on the 
                Muninn Project, which is one of the two largest Linked Open Data projects on the First World War and part of the 
                Linked Data Cloud. 
            
            
                Europeana 1914–1918, User-Generated Content, and Linked Open Data
            
            Valentine Charles (Valentine.Charles@europeana.eu), Europeana Foundation, The Hague, The Netherlands
            Valentine Charles is a Data Research &amp; Development coordinator for Europeana. She is responsible for advising, sharing knowledge and communicates Europeana's scientific coordination and R&amp;D activities. She is also coordinating the further development and adoption of the Europeana Data Model (http://pro.europeana.eu/edm-documentation) (EDM). Valentine is also Co-Chair of the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) Technical Board and Community Specification Committee (http://dublincore.org/about/technicalBoard/).
            Panel Organization
            The panel will consist of a series of talks, each 10 minutes in length with a five-minute question period. A break will take place 45 minutes into the panel for coffee or necessities as presented in Table 1. 
            
                
                    Time
                    Description
                
                
                    15 minutes
                    1st presentation and questions
                
                
                    15 minutes
                    2nd presentation and questions
                
                
                    15 minutes
                    3rd presentation and questions
                
                
                    10 minutes
                    Break and informal chat
                
                
                    15 minutes
                    4th presentation and questions
                
                
                    20 minutes
                    Group panel and discussion
                
            
            Table 
                1. Timetable for panel.
            
            The last presentation will be a 20-minute discussion panel of all of the speakers. To stimulate discussion, each panellist will be asked to respond to a series of prepared questions and/or respond to challenges from the audience.
            1. Lasting Remembrance: Newfoundland, Labrador, and War
            Kathryn Rose and Dean Seeman
            Memorial University
            St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada
            kathrynr@mun.ca, dseeman@mun.ca
            http://www.library.mun.ca/nlwar.html
            The Memorial University of Newfoundland project Lasting Remembrance: Newfoundland, Labrador, and War, integrates historical GIS data with archival resources, digital images, digitized newspapers, and historical information about the Newfoundland Regiment during the First World War. The project will assist scholars, students, and community members in their discovery and understanding of primary and secondary sources related to Newfoundland and Labrador’s First World War experience. It will provide scholars with unprecedented access to unique NL resources and will equip faculty with a valuable teaching tool.
            This project is one of the first major digital humanities projects that the library has undertaken. Four years ago, the library started to prepare information and investigate challenges inherent in making our data speak to other data by making it available in linked data format. The project has already taken significant historical and archival research and converted it to structured data as the initial basis of the resource.
            There are three components to the portal. One component contains a map of the Newfoundland and Labrador communities, as they existed during the Great War, which directs users to digitized newspapers and biographies of servicemen from those communities. Memorial University Libraries has a very strong collection of provincial daily newspapers, and has spent considerable energy and resources focusing on the digitization of issues published during the war years.
            The second component will commemorate the individual soldiers who joined the Royal Newfoundland Regiment. The database will eventually contain records for all servicemen, including members of the Regiment, the Navy, and women who served overseas as nurses and members of the Voluntary Aid Detachment. Entries include references to their biographies, service, battles fought, decorations, and the cemetery where the soldier was buried.
            The third component is a timeline function that includes a textual timeline and an interactive, map-based, visual timeline. Using ESRI’s ArcGIS technology, users can follow the Royal Newfoundland Regiment through the war as they move between theatres, front, and trenches. Events and areas noted on the map will offer users the opportunity to draw on descriptive essays written by faculty, related media, archival sources, and library holdings at Memorial. We hope to be able to include a crowdsourcing component so that end-users can enrich the content of the portal.
            The platform allows users to browse events and resources on a global scale, enriching this exploration with historical-spatial context not often present in lectures or textbooks. Students will be able to watch the progress of the war in a time-lapsed global view of battles and shifting alliances, seeing where Newfoundlanders and Labradorians traveled during periods of war and how these events impacted communities throughout the province.
            This presentation will further consider how this information being collected, curated, and stored will connect with other information on the Web. The presentation will contextualize this process in terms of progression towards linked data production and participation. Additional issues will be addressed, including the conversion of our data to URIs, sources to use for existing URIs, and whether to create our own URIs for entities not represented in these sources. The benefits of linked data in terms of this project will be discussed: Is the ideal of our data interoperating with other data in a linked data context worth the effort and infrastructure, or is a localized research tool sufficient?
            2. ‘Small Ontologies, Loosely Joined’: Developing Linked Open Data for the First World War
            Mia Ridge
            Trinity College Dublin
            Dublin, Ireland
            mia.ridge@open.ac.uk
            The centenary of the outbreak of the First World War has seen a vast number of related historical records digitised and published online and an increase in the number of people interested in researching the lives of ancestors who were affected by the Great War. While the availability of data varies hugely between combatant countries, many military records are limited to the date, place, and battalion or regiment in which a particular soldier enlisted. The task of finding and interpreting World War I records can be daunting for the novice researcher, who must find a way to learn about military hierarchies, unit movements, and engagements before beginning to understand the experience of a particular soldier in the war.
            Linked Open Data (interrelated datasets published on the open web (World Wide Web Consortium, n.d.) could underpin the development of tools to support historians. This paper reports on a short-term project (September–December 2014) undertaken during a visiting Research Fellowship under the First World War strand of the CENDARI project, which aims to provide historians with tools for contextualising and sharing their research (Cendari, n.d.; Cendari WP6 Team, 2014). The Fellowship project aimed to create tools to provide more context for a given battalion or regiment name by providing information on related higher military units (brigades, divisions, armies, and theatre of war) and the related places and activities in which they were engaged.
            However, the project quickly uncovered the lack of structured, openly available datasets online that would support such a tool. There are several reasons for this. The development of machine-readable datasets (through application programming interfaces, or APIs) is often promised as part of a museum’s, library’s, and archive projects’ published WWI records, but sometimes fails to appear. The amateur historians and special interest groups that have created much pre-existing material on WWI do not have the skills or access to infrastructure that would allow them to link their data to formal linked data vocabularies. Those few projects that have published their ontologies (models of concepts or relationships) for WWI are often highly context-specific, developed following close reading of historical sources and designed to meet the needs of particular projects (Gruber, 1995; Törnroos et al., 2013). Once relevant ontologies have been found, it is often difficult to obtain the contextual information that would enable other researchers to assess an ontology against their own requirements. Is this an inherent property of linked open data platforms, or can it be ameliorated with more thoughtful documentation? In 2009 David Weinberger wrote, ‘A system that is composed of lots of small ontologies loosely joined and multiple ontologies covering the same fields in different ways will capture more knowledge and be more robust than single ontologies that cover huge fields’. To what extent does the state of linked open data about World War I confirm or problematise this statement?
            This paper reports on the success (or otherwise) of an attempt to develop a linked open dataset of information about Allied battalions in World War I through a combination of collaboratively developing an ontology for modelling military units, the close reading of a range of historical sources, and crowdsourcing the task of populating the resulting ontology. It will discuss the tools currently available for designing and populating ontologies and consider the impact of the chosen platform on the project and collaborators. Is it possible to capture the deep knowledge of citizen historians about often highly specialised aspects of military history and World War I with technologies currently available? In many ways, the creation of ontologies to describe WWI is a process of turning closely read ‘little data’ into ‘big data’. If each of these specialised ontologies focus on a particular aspect of WWI history, can they be linked to each other in ways that respect the historical contingency and ‘messiness’ of their original sources and research questions? And why have so few ‘official’ WWI projects in museums, libraries, and archives published the authority files or simple lists of names that underlie their projects as structured data for re-use by other projects, when it could be a relatively simple task? What tools are required to support the publication of the specialised ontologies that would help link individual WWI projects into a wider ‘cloud’ of linked open data about the First World War? Finally, what tensions and expectations between the neat world of computer science and ’big data’, and the untidy, small, localised, specialised practices of history are revealed or concealed when turning small pieces into big data?
            References
            Cendari. (n.d.). First World War. Cendari: Collaborative European Digital Archive Infrastructure, 
                http://www.cendari.eu/research/first-world-war-studies/.
            
            Cendari WP6 Team. (2014). Guidelines for Ontology Building. Cendari: Collaborative European Digital Archive Infrastructure.
            Gruber, T. R. (1995). Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing? 
                International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 43(5–6): 907–28, doi:10.1006/ijhc.1995.1081.
            
            Törnroos, J., Mäkelä, E., Lindquist, T. and Hyvönen, E. (2013). World War 1 as Linked Open Data. Submitted for review at 
                Semantic Web—Interoperability, Usability, Applicability, 
                http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/world-war-1-linked-open-data.
            
            Weinberger, D. (2009). The Dream of the Semantic Web. 
                KMWorld Magazine, March, 
                http://www.kmworld.com/Articles/News/News-Analysis/The-dream-of-the-Semantic-Web-52764.aspx.
            
            World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). (n.d.). Linked Data. 
                http://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data.html.
            
            3. Mapping the Western Front: Using British and German Coordinates Systems to Cross-Reference Archival Resources
            Rob Warren
            Big Data Institute
            Halifax, NS, Canada
            rhwarren@dal.ca
            http://rdf.muninn-project.org/
            The Western Front is one of the well-known locations of the Great War, where several armies engaged in trench warfare over the course of several years.
            Mapping was still at its infancy in this age, with cavalrymen still carrying a sketch board onto which they were supposed to record enemy dispositions as they skirted and flanked enemy lines. Maps, if available at all commercially, would be at a very large scale, recording only major features or towns. With the fighting now occurring within entrenched positions, British and German high commands both needed small-scale maps with which to coordinate operations.
            The British enjoyed the advantages of defending a friendly country and obtained a set of official plates from the Belgian government in exile. From this, they extended the projection into France on an as-needed basis. The British General Staff Geographic Section grew organically from elements of the British Ordnance Survey, which meant that a group of specialists was available to produce maps standardized across all British and Dominion units. While some baffling errors remain unexplained, an imperial grid was used over a metric map, and the trench map proved to be useful tool to the British and Dominion forces.
            The Germans were handicapped by having to create a mapping system from scratch using whatever cartographic material was captured or confiscated. Further, each German Army had to fend for itself in terms of mapping material for its area of operation, which resulted in three different mapping systems being in use, including one coordinate system that was occasionally used backwards by a neighbouring army. Eventual support through the general staff does not seem to have helped the situation, nor were the initial map sets extended past immediate tactical necessities, which may be indicative of the mindset of the General Staff. 
            This paper explores the notion of place, feature, and geometry in the context of the Great War using Linked Open Data. In previous works (Warren and Evans, 2014a; 2014b; Warren and Liu, 2014), the translation of obsolete military coordinates through APIs (application program interfaces) was previously covered. We review here their use as an efficient and effective means of indexing archival documents about the war. Most war diaries, operations orders, and dispatches in British and Dominion records refer to locations using both named features and coordinates. This permits the geo-referencing of each statement within a document to find the current location in question while segmenting the document according to different spatial components. This allows for distant reading of documents by the location of interest instead of as a linear document.
            This geo-referencing also allows for the translation from one coordinate system to another, linking the archival sources of different organisations together through features referenced instead of topic or keyword. Currently most of the data being referenced in this way deals with British and Canadian units, owing to the limited amount of German Army documentation available digitally.
            
                
            
            Figure 
                1. All known geo-referenced points within the 
                Muninn SPARQL endpoint.
            
            To visually explain the scale of the problem, Figure 1 plots of all of the locations within the Muninn database. As the database deals with multiple units, countries, and theatres of war, not all of this information is of interest to scholars, and the absolute amount of data that is not relevant to the scholar’s needs increases. Thus, the ability to index information geographically enables us to reduce the cost of this search for relevancy.
            Unlike modern longitude and latitude references, the coordinate system of the British Army was hierarchical, and the length of the coordinate determined the precision of the location being given. This feature of the coordinate system in use further provides a means of searching for a particular location within documents of the Great War since through a Linked Open Data interface the specification of a large area coordinate, such as 36C.S, would contain coordinates 36C.S.22 and 36C.S.24 and retrieve documents referencing both locations.
            It is interesting to note that this effectively clusters the information contained within documents by providing a relative importance to different locations within the battlefield according to each document being inspected. The talk will feature examples based on the battles of Regina trench and Vimy Ridge.
            References
            Warren, R. and Evans, D. (2014a). From the Trenches—API Issues in Linked Geo Data. In 
                Linking Geospatial Data Workshop, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), London, March 2014. 
            
            Warren, R. and Evans, D. (2014b). Translating Maps and Coordinates from the Great War. In 
                Proceedings of the Terra Cognita Workshop at ISWC 2014, Riva Del Garda, Italy, October 2014.
            
            Warren, R. H. and Liu, B. (2014). Language, Cultural Influences, and Intelligence in Historical Gazetteers of the Great War. In 
                Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Big Data 2014 (IEEE BigData 2014), Washington, DC, October 2014.
            
            4. Europeana 1914–1918, User-Generated Content, and Linked Open Data
            Valentine Charles
            Europeana Foundation
            The Hague, The Netherlands
            Valentine.Charles@europeana.eu
            http://www.europeana1914-1918.eu/
            Europeana 1914–1918
                1 is an ongoing project that gathers and digitizes European resources on the First World War. Our cultural heritage material comes partly from national collections (the Europeana Collections 1914–1918 project
                2) and institutional film archives (the European Film Gateway 1914–1918 project
                3). It is also being contributed by citizens from all over Europe, who contribute their own stories and objects during history road shows organized by the Europeana Foundation, the University of Oxford, and local partners such as libraries and museums. To date, the Europeana 1914–1918 portal gathers over 350,000 items, and almost 12,000 user-contributed stories. The portal also aims to provide an integrated access to resources coming from New Zealand, Australia, Canada, and America, through the APIs of DigitalNZ, Trove, Canadiana, and DPLA, respectively.
            
            This presentation will explain how we have started to tackle the non-trivial problems of providing such integrated access on top of highly heterogeneous resources. Europeana 1914–1918 items are of a very different nature (films, pictures, postcards, shells, Bibles . . .). They also come from different countries, which imply that the definitions (meta-data) are in many European languages. To provide a streamlined search and browsing experience, the partners of the Europeana 1914–1918 project have created a small, controlled, multilingual vocabulary that gathers the main topics of interest they could identify, like ‘Western front’, ‘propaganda’, and ‘trench life’. The creation of the vocabulary has been facilitated by the availability of the Library of Congress headings as linked data.
                4 The partners can start gathering concepts and English label data by re-using what LoC made available, and completing it by adding translations in the main languages used by the projects. These concepts are then used for browsing through the collections, while the semantic and multilingual data are used in the search engine for completion of user queries, especially their translations in other languages. Such semantic and multilingual auto-completion allows users to find in a trustful way objects that they would have missed otherwise. 
            
            The exploitation of the vocabulary largely relies for its availability on a semantic repository service, which Europeana has deployed using the OpenSKOS concept server.
                5 Europeana 1914–1918 has served as a prototype for introducing in the more general Europeana portal some enhancements that are inspired from leading semantic web-based digital heritage projects. On the other hand, as with other Europeana objects, the items of Europeana 1914–1918 benefit from the open access settings via the main Europeana API.
                6 They also undergo a semantic enrichment process that is applied to all meta-data aggregated in Europeana. For example, items are connected to related places with the corresponding co-ordinates by means of enrichment with the data made available in the GeoNames
                7 Linked Open Data service. 
            
            We will continue similar efforts, connecting our data to other semantic resources made available in the Linked Open Data cloud, notably connecting to datasets that can make the Europeana 1914–1918 collections better serve the needs of researchers.
            Notes
            1. 
                http://www.europeana1914-1918.eu/en.
            
            2. 
                http://pro.europeana.eu/web/europeana-collections-1914-1918.
            
            3. 
                http://www.europeanfilmgateway.eu/1914.
            
            4. 
                http://id.loc.gov.
            
            5. 
                http://openskos.org/.
            
            6. 
                http://pro.europeana.eu/api.
            
            7. 
                http://geonames.org/.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                LinkedIn circa 2000 BCE: Towards a Network Model of Pušu-ken’s Commercial Relationships in Old Assyria
                
                    
                        Stratford
                        Edward
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    edward_stratford@byu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Browne
                        Jeremy
                    
                    Brigham Young University, United States of America
                    jeremy_browne@byu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Assyrian
                    Network Analysis
                    Social Network
                
                
                    archaeology
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    historical studies
                    near eastern studies
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Long before the Silk Road arose from Han Dynasty China, a ‘tin road’ supported an eastern flow of this rare metal from Central Asia to the Aegean basin. Like the Silk Road, the ancient tin road operated as a relay trade where goods were transferred between groups along segments of the route. The basics of the Old Assyrian trade are well understood (Veenhof and Eidem, 2008). From their home city Aššur, on the Tigris in northern Iraq, the Assyrian traders trucked the tin and textiles to the central plateau of modern Turkey, where they sold the goods through dozens of cities across the plateau. But aspects of the commercial organization are still debated (Larsen, 2007; Stratford, 2014). This paper describes a nascent project that applies network analysis to an Old Assyrian corpus to characterize commercial organization. 
            Approximately 23,000 Old Assyrian documents exist (written in cuneiform on clay tablets), most written between 1900 and 1850 BCE. These documents, excavated from the site of Kültepe at intervals since 1884, are stored at more than a dozen European, North American, and Turkish museums. Researchers have transcribed, photographed, and/or catalogued roughly half of them, though fewer have been translated into modern languages. 
            Working from these transcriptions and catalogues, Dr. Edward Stratford selected 538 documents that concerned a merchant named Pušu-ken and his associate, Salim-ahum. Dr. Stratford translated the documents from transcriptions, photographs, and tablets, using the University of Chicago’s Online Cultural and Historical Research Environment (OCHRE) to record the text and its associated metadata. 
            Recent attempts to model Old Assyrian commercial networks (Bamman et al., 2014) have shown promise, but several non-trivial barriers limit the accuracy of these models. First, previous analyses have analyzed co-occurrence on a document-by-document basis. Each document, in fact, describes many ‘occurrences’, such as financial transactions, commercial orders, payment disputes, etc. A more accurate analysis would define associations in terms of interactions between individuals rather than co-occurrence within documents. 
            The second barrier to an accurate analysis of Old Assyrian trade records is the confusion caused by individuals who share informal appellations (see also Bodard et al., 2014). For example, more than 100 individuals in Old Assyrian texts named Aššur-malik can be distinguished by their patronymic designations (e.g., Aššur-malik, son of Al-ahum). However, patronymics were not normally used in Old Assyrian correspondence. Experts familiar with the corpus must rely on context clues—geography, known associates, and specific roles—to deduce the identity in question. 
            Despite its tremendous utility, OCHRE’s ability to link names to individual persons—and thereby distinguish between two individuals with the same name—is still in development. Jeremy Browne worked with Stratford to develop a prototype database and interface to extract names from the corpus and help Stratford quickly map instances of names to specific individuals. 
            
                Building the Database and Preliminary Analysis
            
            This prototype relational database began with a single table to store the translated text segmented into over 2,000 occurrences. Browne wrote routines that extracted from the occurrences almost 1,000 unique non-English words, which Stratford classified as names, places, or technical terms (e.g., 
                minas). The names—which are pertinent to this project—were stored in a new data table, while places and technical terms were set aside for future use. The routines that recorded names also recorded the association between names and occurrences. 
            
            At this point Browne and Stratford could perform a preliminary analysis of the corpus. (Remember, this analysis only considers names, not individuals, within occurrences. The ongoing labor to disambiguate individuals from common names is described below.) Nearly half (287 out of 606, or 47%; see Figure 1) of the names found in the corpus only occur once. While these names represent ‘dead-end’ nodes in the commercial network, they can reveal the importance of the one or more names with which they co-occur. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. A histogram of name-frequency in the corpus. 
            Visualizing the entire network via Gephi and Elijah Meeks’ GexfD3 library proved problematic because of Pušu-Ken’s and Salim-ahu’s super-degree-centrality. Because the entire corpus was selected based on the documents’ association with those individuals, they are connected to virtually every name in the database by one or two links. Removing Pušu-Ken and Salim-ahu from the dataset revealed a much clearer preliminary picture of the network (see Figure 2). The ring of dots around the periphery represents names and occurrences who only co-occur with Pušu-ken and/or Salim-ahu, but the dots appearing in the intra-space may be very informative. 
            This analysis may provide hints as to which names represent multiple individuals. For example, Figure 3 highlights the subnetwork of Buzuliya, a name whose two occurrences are otherwise geodesically isolated. It is unlikely that one lightly connected person took part in such disparate events, so Buzuliya likely represents two individuals. 
            Figure 4 displays the constellation of occurrences in which the name Lamassi occurs. It is tempting to apply the above criteria here and conclude that this name cannot represent a single individual. However, Lamassi was the name of Pušu-Ken’s wife, who one would expect to occur in a diverse set of interactions. Despite the variety of occurrences in which this name appears, we must be cautious in blindly applying such heuristics. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. The commercial network sans Pušu-Ken. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Indication that the name 
                Buzuliya refers to two people. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Lamassi’s subnetwork. 
            
                Name Disambiguation Interface
            
            The database was expanded with the addition of a persons table that contained patronymic designations compiled by Stratford. Browne wrote routines that attempted to match these patronymics to names extracted from the corpus. If a given name in a patronymic was not found in any other patronymic, the system would link that name and all of its associated occurrences with that patronymic. Also, if a name only occurred once in the corpus, and no patronymic contained that name, then the name was added as its own patronymic, and its occurrence was linked to that new patronymic. 
            These procedures accounted for almost 300 of the 606 names found in the corpus. As the Old Assyrian expert, Stratford must comb through the remaining names. To assist Stratford, Browne created an AJAX-based web form. The interface presents two select boxes: a box above displaying the names in the corpus, and a box below displaying the known patronymics. There is also a small form at the bottom to add new patronymics to the data table (see Figure 5). 
            When the user clicks on either a name or a patronymic, the text from its associated occurrences appears on the right. For names, the occurrences appear with the name highlighted in blue. The user may click on any of the occurrences displayed for the selected name, and link them to the selected patronymic. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. The name disambiguation interface. 
            Stratford will disambiguate homonymous individuals, and, by the end of 2014, he and Browne should have more detailed and accurate analyses of this 4,000-year-old commercial network to share. It is possible that, as happened with Jackson’s (2014) analysis of medieval Scottish charters, previously unknown connections and communities will be revealed. 
            
                Moving On
            
            Besides the individual-disambiguated network analysis, Browne and Stratford plan to map specific business transactions and assets to further characterize Old Assyrian commerce and society. Methods that Suen, Luenzel, and Gil (2013) used to analyze an array of media may be adapted to uncover nuances between various types of transactions. The OCHRE metadata for the original clay tablets describe features of handwriting style, so there is an opportunity for ‘transcriptionship’ attribution. Ongoing spectral analyses of the clay tablets may reveal the place of transcription as well. Finally, Stratford and Browne are investigating various metadata standards such as SNAP:DRGN (Bodard et al., 2014) to allow OCHRE and the prototype database to interoperate with other such corpus systems. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bamman, D., Anderson, A. and Smith, N. (2013). Inferring Social Rank in an Old Assyrian Trade Network. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2013, Lincoln, NE.
                    
                    
                        Bodard, G., Depauw, M. and Rahtz, S. (2014). SNAP:DRGN—Standard for Networking Ancient Prosopographies: Data and Relations in Greco-Roman Names. Poster presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne.
                    
                    
                        Jackson, C. (2014). Using Social Network Analysis to Reveal Unseen Relationships in Medieval Scotland. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne.
                    
                    
                        Larsen, M. T. (2007). Individual and Family in Old Assyrian Society. 
                        Journal of Cuneiform Studies,
                        59 (January): 93–106. 
                    
                    
                        Stratford, E. (2014). ‘Make Them Pay’: Charting the Social Topography of an Old Assyrian Caravan Cycle. 
                        Journal of Cuneiform Studies,
                        66 (January): 11–38. 
                    
                    
                        Suen, C., Luenzel, L. and Gil, S. (2013). Extraction and Analysis of Character Interaction Networks From Plays and Movies. Paper presented at 
                        DH 2013, Lincoln, NE.
                    
                    
                        Veenhof, K. R. and Eidem, J. (2008). 
                        Mesopotamia: The Old Assyrian Period. Academic Press, Fribourg. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Local Music Repertoire and the Digitization of the International Music Industry: An Empirical Analysis, 1994 - 2013
                
                    
                        Wikstrom
                        Patrik
                    
                    Queensland University of Technology, Australia
                    patrik.wikstrom@qut.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    music industry
                    cultural diversity
                    digitization
                
                
                    music
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In some of the countries where there has been a rapid increase in the use of online music distribution technologies, analysts have reported declining sales of local music repertoire (e.g., Nordgård, 2013). The analysts are concerned about such tendencies since local music repertoire accounts for a sizable share of an average country’s total recorded music sales (e.g., IFPI, 2012). This paper searches for empirical evidence that may confirm these reports in a number of music markets in North America, Europe, and Australasia. The paper makes a contribution to the literature on the digital transformation of the music industry since it combines and analyses data sources that previously have not been used in this context and gives a new perspective on changing user consumption practices in the music industry. The paper also examines the variation of geographic diversity over time among international acts that become commercially successful in the countries covered by the study.
            In order to measure local repertoire share (LRS) and international repertoire concentration (IRC), weekly singles chart data is collected for seven countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In total, data on more than 270,000 chart items, 50,000 tracks, and 30,000 acts have been mined, processed, and analysed. By combining the chart data with location data from the music technology company the EchoNest, it is possible to attach country information to more than 93% of the data points included in the study. The local repertoire share (LRS) for each country is calculated for each year by dividing the number of chart items by local acts with the total number of chart items during that year. The IRC for a certain country during a certain year is calculated as the Herfindahl-Hirschman index, where the size of the total ‘market’ is defined as the number of chart items by international acts. The index is then calculated based on each country’s share of that ‘market’.
            Figure 1 shows how average local repertoire share varies over time. It shows that LRS remained relatively stable from the beginning of the period until the turn of the millennium. It then increased from approximately 30% and peaked at about 40% in 2006. From 2007 onwards, LRS has decreased and has been relatively stable at 33% since 2011.
            
                
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                
            
            Figure 1. Local repertoire share is flat until the turn of the millennium, increases during ’00–’06, and
                then decreases during ’07–’13.
            
            The second variable (IRC) is presented in Figure 2, which shows that the geographic concentration within international repertoire (IRC) remained relatively stable until the turn of the millennium. It then increased until 2009, and finally decreased towards the end of the period.
            
                
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                
            
            Figure 2. International repertoire concentration is relatively flat until the turn of the millennium, increases during the ’00–’09 period, and finally rapidly declines.
            There are similarities between how LRS and IRC vary over time. The paper notes that after an initially relatively stable period that ended at the turn of the millennium, music consumers listened more to music performed by local acts, and the international music that nevertheless was able to reach the charts came from a shrinking number of countries. A previous study (Wikström, 2013) has examined this period (1999–2006) based on another type of data, and showed that the increasing local repertoire share was a consequence of record companies’ changing marketing strategies. In 1999, the recorded music industry entered a period of rapidly declining sales (primarily caused by online piracy), which put severe pressure on record companies’ financials and required a number of music companies to reduce their marketing budgets and to increase their risk aversion (Wikström, 2009). An efficient way for a record company to reduce marketing budgets is to focus on a limited number of countries and to reduce the number of artists that are given the support required to promote their music beyond their local markets. As a consequence of this change, local artists’ relative commercial success increased and the number of countries with the capability to export acts internationally decreased (as illustrated by Figures 1 and 2). 
            From 2006 onwards, music listening patterns changed once again. Music listeners returned to music performed by international acts (Figure 1) and somewhat later they also increasingly listened to international acts from a growing range of countries (Figure 2). While the dynamics during the first phase can be explained by music companies’ changing marketing strategies, one has to look elsewhere in order to explain the dynamics during this period.
            By 2006, the Internet and online piracy certainly had affected the music industry during a number of years. Revenues from recorded music sales had shrunk by more than 30%, but while this in many ways had severe consequences for a number of industry players, the fundamental structures for promotion and distribution of recorded music largely remained untouched:
            First, music promotion in 2006 still was confined to traditional channels, primarily broadcast radio and television, meaning that music promotion was still structured by national boundaries (see, e.g., Wikström, 2009). Almost a decade later, in 2014, Facebook and particularly YouTube have significantly weakened these structures and have emerged as the most important tastemakers in the music industry—especially among younger music listeners (see, e.g., Chmielewski, 2013). This is a fundamental transformation of how music is promoted by producers and discovered by fans. National boundaries certainly still matter, but to a much lesser extent than in the past, and the cost of promoting an act to an international market has diminished.
            Second, even though there were a number of legal online music retailers available for music consumers in 2006 (e.g., Apple’s iTunes), the recorded music market was still dominated by physical distribution (IFPI, 2007), which means that there were still significant barriers that made it difficult for a music listener to discover new music without significant costs. In 2014, music services such as SoundCloud, YouTube, Spotify, Deezer, etc., make music instantly available and allow music listeners to make treks into musical territories that are far away from their own musical backyard. More than half of the global recorded music market is online, and in some of the countries in this study (such as Norway and Sweden), the digital market share is closer to 80% (Figure 3).
            
                
                    �
                    
                        unable to handle picture here, no embed or link
                    
                
            
            Figure 3. Digital market share in the seven countries.
            The paper combines the reasoning above with theories of cultural globalization (e.g., Kraidy, 2005; Mirrlees, 2013) and theories of cultural distribution via a low-friction network-based medium such as the Internet (e.g., Elberse, 2008; Salganik and Watts, 2009). The paper is able to provide empirical evidence that is able to confirm the observations about declining local music repertoire sales as promotion and distribution of music move online. The paper also shows that, at the same time this happens, international repertoire concentration declines as well. In other words, the music industry has become increasingly international in its character: Local audiences may listen less to local acts, but overseas opportunities open up for acts from countries that previously were unable to launch their music internationally.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Chmielewski, D. C. (2013). How YouTube and Music Companies Reach Generation C. 
                        Los Angeles Times, 15 October, http://articles.latimes.com/2013/oct/15/business/la-fi-ct-youtube-mraz-20131009.
                    
                    
                        Elberse, A. (2008). Should You Invest in the Long Tail? 
                        Harvard Business Review,
                        86(7/8): 88–96.
                    
                    
                        IFPI. (2007; 2012; 2014). 
                        Recording Industry in Numbers. International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, London.
                    
                    
                        Kraidy, M. (2005). 
                        Hybridity, or the Cultural Logic of Globalization. Temple University Press, Philadelphia, PA.
                    
                    
                        Mirrlees, T. (2013). 
                        Global Entertainment Media: Between Cultural Imperialism and Cultural Globalization. Routledge, New York.
                    
                    
                        Nordgård, D. (2013). 
                        Rapport fra Nordgård-utvalget. Oslo: Norwegian Ministry of Culture, http://www.regjeringen.no/upload/KUD/Kunstavdelingen/ Rapporter_Utredninger/ Rapport_Nordgardutvalget.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Salganik, M. J. and Watts, D. J. (2009). Web-Based Experiments for the Study of Collective Social Dynamics in Cultural Markets. 
                        Topics in Cognitive Science,
                        1(3): 439–68.
                    
                    
                        Wikström, P. (2009). The Adaptive Behaviour of Music Firms: Introducing the Music Industry Feedback Model. 
                        Journal of Media Business Studies,
                        6(2): 67–96.
                    
                    
                        Wikström, P. (2013). 
                        The Music Industry: Music in the Cloud. Polity, Cambridge, UK. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Making Digital Aural History
                
                    
                        THOMSON
                        ALISTAIR
                    
                    MONASH UNIVERSITY, Australia
                    alistair.thomson@monash.edu
                
                
                    
                        BRADLEY
                        KEVIN
                    
                    NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
                    KBRADLEY@NLA.GOV.AU
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    oral history
                    interviews
                    archives
                    database
                    orality
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    historical studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    folklore and oral history
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital technologies are facilitating a renaissance of large-scale oral history projects (Gallwey, 2013; Thomson, 2007). Big oral history projects enjoyed a heyday in the 1970s and 1980s. They were often led by sociologically trained historians who sought to create interview samples of sufficient size and diversity to enable ‘the larger insights or generalizations’ that we might gain by finding patterns across many interviews. But large oral history projects ‘receded from view’ by the 1990s as funding dried up for the expensive task of producing and transcribing multiple interviews (Armitage and Gluck, 2006). Just as important, as Armitage and Gluck acknowledge, was the redirection of researcher energy to the cultural or narrative ‘turn’ in oral history (and in history more generally), in which oral historians focused on the 
                meanings of oral narratives and mostly found it easier, and cheaper, to find and interpret those meanings if they worked with a small number of interviews. 
            
            Twenty-first-century technologies have made large oral history projects feasible and attractive again, by offering new tools for creating, managing, and accessing large collections of interviews. Digital technologies are transforming the creation, preservation, presentation, and use of oral history, whilst generating methodological challenges and stretching old ethical dilemmas in new directions (Boyd, 2011; 2013; Frisch and Lambert, 2011; Lambert and Frisch, 2013; Larson, 2013; High, 2010; Zembrzycki, 2013. See also the resources and essays on the Oral History in the Digital Age website, http://ohda.matrix.msu.edu/). 
            The Australian Generations Oral History Project, an ARC-funded collaboration between university historians, the National Library of Australia, and ABC Radio National, has pioneered digital technologies for oral history (see http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/australian-generations/). A team of nine researchers and 25 interviewers has recorded 300 life history interviews with 50 people born in each decade from the 1930s to the 1980s. We have produced 1,221 hours of digital audio recordings that are searchable via TROVE, the NLA’s aggregation and discovery system, and which will be available for online research, subject to consent agreements, by anyone, anywhere, forever. 
            Our presentation will focus on how we are preserving and documenting our interviews, and presenting and interpreting them through writing in online formats that integrate aural material. We consider the opportunities and challenges posed by an internationally cutting-edge timed summary system linked to hundreds of hours of digital audio recordings and searchable online via TROVE (Bradley, 2014); an interviewer Google site that collected interviewer discussion forum postings about each of 300 life history interviews and offers an essential finding aid to the interviews; a ZOTERO database that combines the different types of data produced by the project, which grows as researchers add notes about each interview and which will, in due course, be available to future researchers; and an aural history book that enables readers/viewers to listen to interview extracts as they read them, and to discover the aural meanings of recorded interviews. Each technological innovation has posed significant ethical issues, which we will examine in our presentation (for example, each interviewee completes an NLA Rights Agreement that specifies conditions for use of their interview, but in some cases we have closed interviews that interviewees wish to place online because of contents that are potentially defamatory or that reveal illegal activity).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Armitage, S. H. and Gluck, S. B. (2006). Reflections on Women’s Oral History: An Exchange. In Perks, R. and Thomson, A. (eds), 
                        The Oral History Reader. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, p. 74.
                    
                    
                        Boyd, D. (2011). Achieving the Promise of Oral History in a Digital Age. In Ritchie, D. (ed.), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Oral History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 285–302.
                    
                    
                        Boyd, D. (2013). OHMS: Enhancing Access to Oral History for Free. 
                        Oral History Review,
                        40(1): 95–106. 
                    
                    
                        Bradley, K. (2014). Built on Sound Principles: Audio Management and Delivery at the National Library of Australia. 
                        IFLA Journal.
                    
                    
                        Frisch, M. and Lambert, D. (2011). Case Study: Between the Raw and the Cooked in Oral History: Notes from the Kitchen. In Ritchie, D. (ed.), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Oral History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 333–48.
                    
                    
                        Gallwey, A. (2013). The Rewards of Using Archived Oral Histories in Research: The Case of the Millennium Memory Bank. 
                        Oral History,
                        41(1): 37–50.
                    
                    
                        High, S. (2010). Telling Stories: A Reflection on Oral History and New Media. 
                        Oral History,
                        38(1): 101–12.
                    
                    
                        Lambert, D. and Frisch, M. (2013). Digital Curation through Information Cartography: A Commentary on Oral History in the Digital Age from a Content Management Point of View. 
                        Oral History Review,
                        40(1): 135–53.
                    
                    
                        Larson, M. (2013). Steering Clear of the Rocks: A Look at the Current State of Oral History Ethics in the Digital Age.
                         Oral History Review,
                        40(1): 36–49.
                    
                    
                        Thomson, A. (2007). Four Paradigm Transformations in Oral History. 
                        Oral History Review,
                        34(1): 49–70.
                    
                    
                        Zembrzycki, S. (2013). Bringing Stories to Life: Using New Media to Disseminate and Critically Engage with Oral History Interviews. 
                        Oral History,
                        41(1): 98–107.
                    
                    This link will take you to all the Australian Generation interviews that are accessible online through the National Library catalogue: http://catalogue.nla.gov.au/Search/Home?lookfor=my_parent:%22(AuCNL)5973925%22&amp;iknowwhatimean=1&amp;filter[]=access_type:%22All%20online%22.
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Making Digital Histories: Developing Students as Historians
                
                    
                        THOMSON
                        ALISTAIR
                    
                    MONASH UNIVERSITY, Australia
                    alistair.thomson@monash.edu
                
                
                    
                        BELL
                        JOHNNY
                    
                    MONASH UNIVERSITY, Australia
                    johnny.bell@monash.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital history
                    digital storytelling
                    museums
                    teaching history
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    historical studies
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    folklore and oral history
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Making Histories is a level 2 History undergraduate unit taught as a collaboration between historians at Monash University and curators at Museum Victoria. Students research their own history project, drawing upon the Museum’s rich collection or their own family or local history resources of images, documents, and recordings. They develop a history project proposal based on primary and secondary research, write a film script based upon their research, and produce a three-minute digital video history. Students present their work at a Showcase event at Museum Victoria, which includes family members whose history they may have researched, and curators who may add their video histories to the Museum’s online collection. For student video histories produced in 2014, see https://vimeo.com/groups/makinghistory/albums/10825. For the Museum Victoria Making History website, a resource for both school and university students, see http://museumvictoria.com.au/discoverycentre/websites/making-history/. 
            After the Showcase event the final assessment for the unit is a class test for which students have known the question from the first day: What have you learnt about making history from making history? Thus the students not only develop a range of historical skills; they are also encouraged to become reflective practitioners and to better understand the processes and issues of historical research and production (see Cullen, 2009; Curthoys and McGrath, 2009; Gunn and Faire, 2011). Initial research using the exams suggests that the students have developed a wider understanding of what constitutes history (intimate personal histories as well as big-picture history), and that histories are always constructed though not fictional. More specifically, while they develop expertise in historical writing through the production of their research proposal, they also develop the sort of transferable skills—like succinct writing for an audience and digital video production—that are now essential tools of the trade in public history and indeed in many professions.
            The course draws upon the methodologies of digital storytelling (see Lambert, 2013; Burgess and Klaebe, 2009). Digital storytelling offers tremendous potential for historical pedagogy and for the production and dissemination of student history research. Students are engaged by the opportunity to make histories that many people will view, unlike the essays they write for one or two examiners. They are excited by seeing their own families and localities as sites of history; they enjoy gathering family photos, documents, and interviews; they see their histories in new light as they research the secondary literature on their topic; they bring extraordinary digital skills to the classroom but adapt and develop them to historical production; and they feel immense satisfaction and pride as they realise that they are history makers and not just history consumers (for historians’ use of digital storytelling see Benmayor, 2008; Coleborne and Bliss, 2011; Coventry et al., 2006). Though the three-minute digital story seems worryingly short for many students when they start the course, the time length and format does work well within the limits of a single-semester course when students have to conduct original research 
                and produce a history video.
            
            In this paper we argue, however, that the digital storytelling model advocated by Joe Lambert and others can also be a limited and problematic approach to historical research and production, because it does not require extensive research or critical thinking, and because the storytelling model and emotive intentions that underpin standard approaches to digital storytelling frame good stories that are not necessarily good histories (see Poletti, 2011). In this presentation we assess the opportunities and challenges of teaching historical skills and understandings through the production of digital video history, drawing upon our own experiences of teaching the course and student reflections upon their own learning. We argue that digital storytelling can be adapted for history research and production but with important provisos and qualifications: topics need to be underpinned with deep and extensive research; intimate stories need to be connected to larger historical forces and issues; the analysis and evocation of emotion needs to be developed with both intellectual rigour and due care.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Benmayor, R. (2008). Digital Storytelling as a Signature Pedagogy for the New Humanities. 
                        Arts and Humanities in Higher Education,
                        7(2) (June): 188–204.
                    
                    
                        Burgess, J. and Klaebe, H. (2009). Digital Storytelling as Participatory Public History in Australia. In Hartley, J. and McWilliam, K. (eds), 
                        Story Circle: Digital Storytelling around the World. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 155–66.
                    
                    
                        Coleborne, C. and Bliss, E. (2011). Emotions, Digital Tools and Public Histories: Digital Storytelling Using Windows Movie Maker in the History Tertiary Classroom. 
                        History Compass,
                        9(9) (September): 674–85.
                    
                    
                        Coventry, M., Felton, P., Jaffee, D., O’Leary, C. and Weis, T., with McGowan, S. (2006). Ways of Seeing: Evidence and Learning in the History Classroom. 
                        Journal of American History,
                        92(4): pp. 1371–77, introductory abstract.
                    
                    
                        Cullen, J. (2009). 
                        Essaying the Past: How to Read, Write, and Think about History. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, UK.
                    
                    
                        Curthoys, A. and McGrath, A. (2009). 
                        Writing Histories: Imagination and Narration. Monash University ePress. 
                    
                    
                        Gunn, S. and Faire, L. (eds). (2011). Research Methods for History. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
                    
                    
                        Lambert, J. (2013). 
                        Digital Storytelling: Capturing Lives, Creating Community. Taylor and Francis.
                    
                    
                        Poletti, A. (2011). Coaxing an Intimate Public: Life Narrative in Digital Storytelling. 
                        Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies,
                        25(1): 73–83.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mapping and Modeling Centuries of Literary Geography across Millions of Books
                
                    
                        Wilkens
                        Matthew
                    
                    University of Notre Dame, United States of America
                    mwilkens@nd.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    GIS
                    literature
                    modeling
                    georeference
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    literary studies
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    maps and mapping
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The ways in which geographic space is used in literature and in other textual materials is a topic of keen interest to researchers in the humanities (Dimock, 2006; Fetterley and Pryse, 2003; Giles, 2011; Heise, 2010; Hsu, 2010; Thacker, 2005). Yet until recently, it has been impossible to study the problem at scales beyond a handful of books or, occasionally, somewhat more broadly via bibliographic metadata and other paratextual information (Ogborn, 2012). The newest work in the field, however, uses natural language processing techniques in combination with geographic information systems to extract and analyze geographic references directly from large textual collections, a development that enables much more comprehensive treatment of historical and contemporary materials (Blevins, 2014; Cooper and Gregory, 2011; Wilkens, 2013). Nevertheless, there remain difficulties in applying such methods to truly large textual corpora (Rupp et al., 2014) and in making sense of the data they generate to answer properly literary, historical, and cultural questions. The present work describes the application of computational georeferencing to the 12 million volumes (approximately 2 trillion words) of the multilingual, international HathiTrust corpus of digitized texts, as well as a preliminary use of the generated data to analyze the relationships between patterns of literary attention and demographic and economic factors in the United States between 1800 and 2010. The findings are novel in the size of the underlying dataset, in their incorporation of modern and contemporary in-copyright texts for large-scale computationally assisted literary analysis, and in their use of statistical modeling to assess the social conditions shaping literary production. 
            Georeferencing of the source material is performed in two steps. First, named entities are identified in each volume of the HathiTrust corpus via the HathiTrust Research Center’s non-consumptive data capsule infrastructure (Borders et al., 2009; Zeng et al., 2014). The capsule infrastructure allows research code to be executed safely against the full corpus, including in-copyright volumes, without the threat of leaking reconstructable texts. The NER algorithm is adapted from Stanford’s linear-chain conditional random field method (Finkel et al., 2005; Lafferty et al., 2001) using language-specific training data for English, French, German, Spanish, and Chinese as appropriate at the page level. For English-language texts, a second, period-specific language model is used for volumes published before 1900. Identified location strings are then associated with detailed geographic information via Google’s geocoding API, tuned to the country of source publication. Disambiguation is performed in limited cases according to co-occurrence patterns in gold-standard texts. Overall accuracy (
                F
                1) approaches 0.8, but varies by language, historical period, OCR quality, and other factors. 
            
            Locations are then aggregated and mapped at the national and city levels, optionally consolidating by era of publication, source country and language, and/or source genre. This process produces cartograms of the types shown in figures 1 and 2. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Log-scale nation-level aggregated locations in 19th-century U.S. fiction. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. City-level locations in the same dataset. 
            These figures are useful because they provide an unprecedented overview of geographic usage in a corpus that, while still subject to limitations, approaches comprehensive representation of formally published literary output in recent centuries. Notable features include a heavy preponderance of locations in Europe, the eastern United States, and the Mediterranean rim, reflecting the composition of the corpus, as well as, more interestingly, a posited undercurrent of historical and cultural conservatism within literature that leads its distribution of geographic attention to lag significantly changes in economic output, population centers, and other social structures. 
            The observation concerning literary-geographic conservatism leads to the second area of investigation, an attempt to assess the viability of predictive modeling of geographic attention as a function of socioeconomic variables in the United States (and, in work not reported here, elsewhere in the world). Historical data are drawn from U.S. Census Bureau records, including state- and county-level measures of population, literacy rates, educational attainment, manufacturing output, agricultural production, racial and ethnic composition, immigration history, newspaper publishing activity, and so on. These data are then used to build a predictive generalized additive model of geographic attention by performing penalized regression analysis against the geolocation results reported above. The results for a limited case are shown in Figure 3, though one is less interested in ‘predicting’ geolocation results already in hand than in identifying outlier cases (geographic locations that are under- or over-represented relative to the model’s expected values) and evaluating the significance of the various socioeconomic factors as predictors of literary attention. A two-dimensional geonormalized plot of the prediction data in the same case is shown in Figure 4. 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Observed vs. fitted state-level location counts in U.S. fiction. Adjusted 
                R
                2 = 0.76. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Predicted geographic location intensity in the same dataset. White = high; red = low. 
            In the example shown here, which considers 19th-century U.S. fiction, significant predictors of geographic attention include total population, non-white and immigrant population, and degree of urbanization. Surprisingly insignificant as independent predictors are literacy rates, per capita newspaper publication, and manufacturing output. Three classes of locations are especially prominent in the model: cities, battle sites, and in the second half of the century, far Western locations. These facts may ultimately be assimilable within established critical narratives about the trajectory of American fiction in the 19th century, but note that they align badly with both the regionalist and Puritan hypotheses (Fetterley and Pryse, 2003; Bercovitch, 1975), while being perhaps better suited to hemispheric and transatlantic views. In any case, the results suggest a particular need to revisit issues related to urbanization and westward expansion in the period. 
            For lack of space, I’ve presented here only one brief example. But these methods are straightforwardly extensible to the other periods and national contexts included in the HTRC data. In recent decades, for instance, literary-geographic attention (in all studied languages) has once again lagged urbanization outside the Western world and correlates only weakly with economic growth, facts that align in interestingly imperfect ways with intensifying critical consideration of neoliberal tendencies in contemporary fiction. The French and British cases show striking similarities in the degree to which their domestic attention is allocated to their capital cities, though with different development curves in response to industrialization and with different allocations of foreign attention structured by their lingering colonial investments. 
            The results presented in this paper represent some of the largest-scale computational humanities work carried out to date. It has been made possible in part by the generous support of the American Council of Learned Societies, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the HathiTrust Research Center, and the University of Notre Dame Office of the Vice President for Research. Dr. Michael Clark provided substantial help with the statistical modeling work. Vienna Wagner, Angela Lake, and Jessen Baker performed much of the work to develop period-specific English-language NER training data. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bercovitch, S. (1975). 
                        The Puritan Origins of the American Self. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    
                    
                        Blevins, C. (2014). Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region: A View of the World from Houston. 
                        Journal of American History,
                        101(1): 122–47. 
                    
                    
                        Borders, K., Vander Weele, E., Lau, B. and Prakash, A. (2009). Protecting Confidential Data on Personal Computers with Storage Capsules. In 
                        Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Security Symposium. Montreal: USENIX Society, pp. 367–82. 
                    
                    
                        Cooper, D. and Gregory, I. N. (2011). Mapping the English Lake District: A Literary GIS. 
                        Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,
                        36(1): 89–108. 
                    
                    
                        Dimock, W. C. (2006). 
                        Through Other Continents: American Literature across Deep Time. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Fetterley, J. and Pryse, M. (2003). 
                        Writing Out of Place: Regionalism, Women, and American Literary Culture. University of Illinois Press, Urbana. 
                    
                    
                        Finkel, J. R., Grenager, T. and Manning, C. (2005). Incorporating Non-Local Information into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling. In 
                        Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005), pp. 363–70.
                    
                    
                        Giles, P. (2011). 
                        The Global Remapping of American Literature. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Heise, T. (2010). 
                        Urban Underworlds: A Geography of Twentieth-Century American Literature and Culture. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Hsu, H. (2010). 
                        Geography and the Production of Space in Nineteenth-Century American Literature. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Lafferty, J., McCallum, A. and Pereira, F. C. N. (2001). Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. In 
                        Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Machine Learning. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 282–89. 
                    
                    
                        Ogborn, M. (2012). 
                        Geographies of the Book. Ogborn, M. and Withers, C. W. J. (eds). Ashgate. 
                    
                    
                        Rupp, C. J., Rayson, P., Gregory, I., Hardie, A., Joulain, A. and Hartmann, D. (2014). Dealing with Heterogeneous Big Data When Geoparsing Historical Corpora. In 
                        Big Humanities Data. Bethesda, MD: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
                    
                    
                        Thacker, A. (2005). The Idea of a Critical Literary Geography. 
                        New Formations,
                        57: 56–73. 
                    
                    
                        Wilkens, M. (2013). The Geographic Imagination of Civil War–Era American Fiction. 
                        American Literary History,
                        25(4): 803–40. 
                    
                    
                        Zeng, J., Ruan, G., Crowell, A., Prakash, A. and Plale, B. (2014). Cloud Computing Data Capsules for Non-Consumptive Use of Texts. In 
                        Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Scientific Cloud Computing. New York: ACM, pp. 9–16. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mapping Notes And Nodes: Building A Multi-Layered Network For A History Of The Cultural Industry
                
                    
                        Heuvel
                        Charles van den
                    
                    Huygens Institute, Netherlands
                    charles.van.den.heuvel@huygens.knaw.nl
                
                
                    
                        van Bree
                        Pim
                    
                    LAB1100, Netherlands
                    pim@lab1100.com
                
                
                    
                        Kessels
                        Geert
                    
                    LAB1100, Netherlands
                    geert@lab1100.com
                
                
                    
                        Álvarez Francés
                        Leonor
                    
                    Leiden University, Netherlands
                    l.alvarez@hum.leidenuniv.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    historical networks research; data-integration; visualization; creative industry;
                
                
                    art history
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    cultural infrastructure
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In August 2014, for the first time in its history, 
                Science included an article of an art historical nature. Art historian Maximilian Schich (2014), together with a team of experts on network theory, modeling, simulation, and visual analytics, mapped cultural migration on a global level by aggregating data of Freebase.com, the General Artist Lexicon, and the Getty Union List of Artists’ Names. Mauro Martino (2014) made an animated visualization in which the dynamics in the birth and death locations of more than 150,000 artists and scientists on a global level can be followed over a period of 2,000 years in a five-minute movie. We agree with some of the critique that the predominantly American–North European nature of the dataset, its focus on artists, and its scope on birth and death dates are too limited to map cultural migration on a global level. It should be complemented with data about the roles and interactions of various actors such as painters, comissioners, cultural agents, scholars, academies, etc., and about the artefacts they produced. However, the article in 
                Science describes an interesting experiment in which a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods were tested that are needed for any global history. Moreover, as the title explains, the authors did not claim other than to provide ‘a network framework of cultural history’. 
            
            In this paper we discuss the outcomes of another experiment that might be used to complement and enhance this global network framework gradually both with ingests of other cultural data and overlays of manually created networks of micro-histories. In a private-public project known as Mapping Notes and Nodes in Networks (Álvarez Francés and van den Heuvel, 2014), a small interdisciplinary team experimented for nine months for two days per week with the software application Nodegoat to create multilayered networks of actors and documents that are potentially relevant for the history of the creative industry in Amsterdam and Rome in the Early Modern Period.
                1 The project started with the integration of three complementary, but heterogeneous (meta)datasets: the full text searchable Biographical Reference Works of the Huygens Institute for the History of Netherlands; ECARTICO, a comprehensive database that allows analysing and visualising data concerning painters, art consumers, art collectors, art dealers, and others involved in the cultural industry of Amsterdam and the Low Countries in the Early Modern Period; and finally HADRIANUS, a database of Dutch artists and scholars from the Middle Ages up the 20th century who stayed in Rome, developed by the Royal Netherlands Institute in Rome. Researchers who heard of the initiative offered their own sets. Frits Scholten and Arjan de Koomen provided the data about the migration of Dutch sculptors throughout Europe that their students had assembled in the project Sculptors on the Move. Susanna de Beer, with a small group of students, developed in her Mapping Visions of Rome project a typology of descriptions of Rome in humanist poetry. We embraced this rather arbitrary selection of sources to complement our three initial datasets, because it reflects the main research question of the Mapping Notes and Nodes project: ‘How can we assess which information is relevant when integrating reused completed datasets with those in development?’ Despite initiatives such as the Internet Archive or Library Alexandria 2.0 we claim that full data integration of digitized sources and digital-born data on a global level is impossible. Therefore, strategies are needed that can bring together top-down and bottom-up approaches and enable handling hybrid forms of data integration in continuous flux. For that reason in this project the emphasis was not on quantitative analyses but on a qualitative approach to allow scholars to connect and complement these divergent datasets and to create and visualize networks to see and interact with connections that they might not do otherwise. To this end, it was decided to develop a viewer for Nodegoat that visualises the co-presence of historical actors (nodes) and (meta-)data of sources and documents (notes) in Amsterdam and Rome in partially overlapping, multilayered networks (see Figure 1).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Network of persons with both relations in Rome and in Amsterdam and their interrelations.
            The assumption is that the co-presence of artists, artisans, scientists, art agents, ambassadors, patrons, sponsors, and entrepreneurs at a certain location in a given time period allows for recognizing potential networks, while contextual topical information (introduction letters, guest lists, audiences, commissions, contracts, artefacts) enable users to assess whether there were actually contacts between these persons. When new data is added, the overlap of the multilayered networks changes, resulting potentially in new answers and other questions. The building of hybrid networks implies perhaps a less systematic research of the history of the creative industry of Rome and Amsterdam, but at the same time both practical and theoretical arguments support this more explorative approach. First of all, this approach seems to reflect the way (digital) humanists assemble information on the basis of rather pragmatic criteria such as time, money, and availability of data. If complete data integration is impossible, a tool that on the basis of metadata enables assessing the likelihood that one combination might lead to better results than another could at least support prioritizing the digitization program necessary for research. The second, theoretical argument is that the proposed incremental approach with changing perspectives on data in flux stands closer to hermeneutic methods (Capurro, 2010). Such methods appeal to many humanities scholars who try to give sense to data from multiple perspectives in continuous processes of reinterpretation (Akker et al., 2011). For that reason we chose a couple of cases that could demonstrate the multidimensional relationships from data about the cultural industry of Amsterdam and Rome from different perspectives. Since the Ecartico database provides visualizations of the places where artists lived in Amsterdam, we decided to map the geolocations of Dutch artists in Rome as well, using inventories of the parochial archives by Hoogerwerff (Tamminen, 1943).
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Location of the ‘Bentvueghels group’ with pop-up of artists living in the same house.
            This mapping reveals a very high concentration of Dutch artists living three or four together in one house, almost from door to door in just a couple streets (see Figure 2). This tight community of artists, known as the Bentvueghels, worked and partied together in Rome between approximately 1620 and 1720. 
            However, we did not only look at relations between artists. Other cases show networks of actors in the creative industry from the perspectives, respectively, of a Dutch pharmacist and a Dutch engineer in Rome. Pharmacist Hendrik Raef, alias Corvinus (ca. 1554/1567–1639), probably provided pigments to painters and was a member of the Bentvueghels group. The Dutch civil engineer Cornelis Meijer (1629–1701) created on commission of three successive popes constructions against floods and to make the Tiber navigable. These constructions are hard to link to the creative industry, but that is different for the commissions he gave to several Dutch and Flemish artists in Rome to make engravings after his designs (see Figure 3). 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Network of people and academies (nodes) and artefacts (notes) around engineer Cornelis Meijer.
            Given the possibility to indicate the nature of relationships as well, we also mapped his competitors. Another case looks into the Dutch contacts of Italian engineers who on behalf of Cosimo III, grand duke of Florence (1629–1701), were involved in espionage of Dutch industries and fortifications. While these cases demonstrate relationships between different actors (the nodes) in overlapping networks, other reveal links from the perspective of the artefacts or contextual documents (notes). For instance, the above-mentioned typology of descriptions of Rome in poems of humanists is linked to categories in ICONCLASS to compare these associations with the classification of visual depictions of the Eternal City and its monuments (see Figure 4).
            
                
            
            Figure 4. ICONOCLASS numbers connecting depictions and descriptions of monuments in Rome.
            The combination of incomplete, heterogeneous digitized, and manually added data will result in much fuzziness and uncertainties in interpretations of the history of the cultural industry of Amsterdam and Rome. In order to assist the user in assessing the quality of data, the producer hereof can annotate them with levels of uncertainty. Although this experiment for a multilayered network of actors and documents was set up around some cases relevant for the history of the creative industry of Amsterdam and Rome, its features of digital hermeneutics to deal with overlaps, multiple perspectives, fuzziness, and uncertainties in data have a much larger potential to enhance existing network frameworks developed for global history.
            Acknowledgements
            The authors are indebted for the data and expertise of Marten-Jan Bok and Harm Nijboer (University of Amsterdam-Ecartico); Marieke van den Doel and Arthur Westeijn (Royal Netherlands Institute in Rome-Hadrianus); Susanna de Beer and Petrie van der Heijden (Leiden University); Hans Brandhorst and Etienne Postumus (Mnemosyne-Iconclass); Arjan de Koomen (UvA) and Frits Scholten (Rijksmuseum; VU University Amsterdam); Sebastiaan Derks and Ronald Sluijter (Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands) Alette Fleischer (independent researcher—Corvinus and Bentvueghels); and Erin Downey (Temple University Philadelphia: Patronage Guistiniani and Bentveughels). 
            Note
            1. Charles van den Heuvel was main applicant and p.i. of the Mapping Notes and Nodes in Networks project. Leonor Álvarez Francés was embedded researcher in LAB1100, the studio of Pim van Bree and Geert Kessels that developed the described features for this project in Nodegoat. Ingeborg van Vugt and Simone Wegman (Leiden University) worked as interns on this project at the Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Akker, C. v. d., et al. (2011). Agora Digital Hermeneutics: Online Understanding of Cultural Heritage. 
                        Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Web Science (WebSci’11), Koblenz, Germany, 14–17 June 2011, http://www.cs.vu.nl/~guus/papers/Akker11a.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Álvarez Francés, L. and Heuvel, C. v. d. (2014). 
                        Mapping Notes and Nodes in Networks: Exploring Potential Relationships in Biographical Data and Cultural Networks in the Creative Industry in Amsterdam and Rome in the Early Modern Period. Report: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) Public Private Partnership Project:
                    
                    https://www.huygens.knaw.nl/mapping-notes-and-nodes-in-networks/?lang=en, and for the viewer, http://mnn.nodegoat.net/viewer.
                    
                        Capurro, R. (2010). Digital Hermeneutics: An outline. http://www.capurro.de/digitalhermeneutics.html.
                    
                    
                        Martino, M. (2014). http://www.nature.com/news/humanity-s-cultural-history-captured-in-5-minute-film-1.15650; http://youtu.be/4gIhRkCcD4U.
                    
                    
                        Nodegoat. (n.d.). http://nodegoat.net/.
                    
                    
                        Schich, M., et al. (2014). A Network Framework of Cultural History. 
                        Science,
                        345, 558–62,
                    
                    DOI:10.1126/science.1240064.
                    
                        Tamminen, M. (1943). 
                        Nederlandse kunstenaars te Rome 1600–1725. Uittreksels uit de parochiale archieven door G.J. Hoogewerff, The Hague.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mapping the Contours of the New Aesthetic, Opening Considerations for Digital Rhetoric
                
                    
                        Hodgson
                        Justin
                    
                    Indiana University, United States of America
                    hodgson@indiana.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    New Aesthetic
                    Digital Rhetoric
                    Eversion
                    hyperrhetoricity
                    hypermedia
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    other
                    cultural studies
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In May 2011, designer and digital futurist James Bridle introduced the world to the idea of the New Aesthetic, a kind of emerging art and cultural critique that called attention to our acts of mediation, to the underlying systems and protocols that produce particular computational visualizations, and to the human viewpoints that frame those considerations. For Bridle, the New Aesthetic revealed the increasingly blurred distinctions ‘between “the real” and “the digital”, the physical and the virtual, the human and the machine’ (2012, n.p.), and it made us increasingly aware of a kind of ‘network vision’ manifest when the digital spills into the real—what William Gibson has called ‘eversion’ (2007). To this point, the ‘digital spill’ of New Aestheticism has been predominantly marked by the novelty of pixelated representation (Terrett, 2012)—8-bit graphics (and their overt pixelated qualities) manifesting in cultural spaces, screen glitches, down-sampled satellite imagery, and the blurry-squared edges of render ghosts. But for Bridle, the pixelated imagery serves merely as a kind of visual shorthand, a surface orientation. What the New Aesthetic points to, however, is the underlying systems that produce those pixelated representations, the media in which they are being undertaken (and of which they are reflective), and the human-technology assemblages that allow us to make sense of these things. 
            As such, Bridle’s year-long curatorial exercise on the New Aesthetic tumblr was more than just a collection of images and artifacts suggestive of an aesthetic of the network itself. Rather, the New Aesthetic oriented us to a moment of contact between what Lev Manovich has labeled ‘Turing-land’ and ‘Duchamp-land’ (1996). It brought together new media art and contemporary art, offering a series of convergences wrought with the dangling threads of the socio-politico-techno-cultural structures that underlie our ubiquitous human-technology assemblages. In so doing, the New Aesthetic helped us attune to design and making practices that sit between new media and contemporary art, as well as attuning to many rooted outside these frameworks (ranging across a variety of industry practices). 
            With this impact on design and/or our making activities, it should come as no surprise, then, that the field of rhetoric studies would have interest in the practices and purposes (if not emerging paradigm) of the New Aesthetic. For rhetoric has always been concerned with making, with the ways in which we produce discourse and/or artifacts for particular audiences, of particular moments in time, space, culture, etc. And rhetorical scholars, particularly those connected to digital rhetoric, have been increasingly concerned with our acts (and artifacts) of mediation, the systems (computational, cultural, communicative, etc.) that produce or allow for particular types of material and digital utterances and engagement, and, perhaps most importantly, the human-technology assemblages at the center of digital making and what those assemblages mean for rhetorical activities in the 21st century (both within the narrowed lens of digital rhetoric and in the general sense of communication, identification, persuasion, engagement, and the like). As such, if the New Aesthetic can be marshaled toward providing structures or explanatory models that could easily map (into) emerging rhetorical/humanistic practices, then it would have much to offer a range of critical and creative inquiry practices, from those practices featured in targeted subfields like digital rhetoric studies to larger umbrella structures like the digital humanities. 
            The problem here is that New Aestheticism actually resists the very kind of codification needed for it to be ‘marshalled’ anywhere. This is in keeping with aesthetic turns in general (cf. Rogoff, 2012), but for Bridle, the ‘resistance’ to application is less a matter of avoiding New Aesthetic tropes, and instead is due to the fact that the New Aesthetic is an ongoing process of critical engagement, born of a networked culture, taking place in/on/of networked worlds, and mirroring certain conditionalities of the network itself—which, in Bridle’s view (2013), renders it resistant to codification. Bruce Sterling performatively makes this point in his ‘An Essay on the New Aesthetic’, where he offers over 30 ‘is’ statements trying to grasp and situate New Aestheticism—ranging from ‘The New Aesthetic is a native product of a modern network culture’ to ‘It is rhizomic’ to ‘the New Aesthetic is really a design fiction’ (n.p.). Aside from offering glimpses of the potential qualities of the New Aesthetic and, perhaps more importantly, helping mainstream the New Aesthetic by publishing his essay in 
                Wired, Sterling’s articulation comes up short in providing a kind of conceptual whole to what the New Aesthetic is or may become. And it most certainly does not provide a set of tropes for employing the New Aesthetic (as hermeneutic or heuristic). 
            
            This is perhaps what has made the New Aesthetic so valuable. It generated a lot of interest and critique not because it offered any prescriptive tropes, but rather because it was more significantly concerned with attunement, digital attunement—i.e., with attuning us to the circulating intensities of representation, mediation, and enactment central to our hybrid cybernetic/human cultures (what Manovich would call ‘computer culture’, Beth Coleman ‘x-reality’, and N. Katherine Hayles ‘mixed reality’). In this view, the New Aesthetic isn’t meant to be a revolutionary aesthetic like the aesthetic movements of yore (Dadaism, Futurism, Cubism, etc.), but rather an awareness-aesthetic—one oriented towards opening us to what McLuhan has referred to as ‘the numbed stance of the technological idiot’ (1994/1964, 18). 
            But for all of its promise as an awareness-aesthetic, no one has been able to articulate what the attunements of New Aestheticism are or how they might inform larger conversations and practices in the digital arts, digital humanities, digital rhetorics, or digital literacies. Part of this tension stems from Bridle’s own hesitation to codify the New Aesthetic, preferring that it reflect the unstabilized and unfixable tenets of the network paradigm from which it emerges—an emergent aesthetic stemming from ‘a new natural order’ (i.e., the network) (Bridle, 2011). While I agree with Bridle’s not wanting to arrest what is, by all indications, an ongoing performance, a process of critical engagement and critique, the many works on the subject (his own as well as the many other commenters: ranging from Bruce Sterling and Catherine David to Joanne McNeil and Ian Bogost) provide enough for us to begin to map temporary contours of the New Aesthetic—a snapshot (perhaps snapchat) of our fleeting, yet-ever-present New Aesthetic moment. 
            This presentation, then, will attempt to articulate these contours without arresting them. It will work to situate these gestural shapes in relation to rhetorical and mediating practices (from hyperrhetoricity to hypermediacy), and attempt to leverage them in order to foster a frame of engagement that may help us make sense of the increasingly blurred lines between screen-mediated and non-screen-mediated experiences. It will do this in three parts: one, it will identify the conceptual purview of the New Aesthetic (history and trajectory); two, it will introduce and respond (in brief) to key criticisms lobbied at New Aestheticism; and three, it will articulate four contours of the New Aesthetic and explore those contours in relation to current digital rhetoric / digital making practices, with particular attention on issues of design (functional and experiential), representation (particularly the leveraging of metaphors from our engineered devices), and mediation (small-screens practices and mediated being). As the limitations of the talk prevent full development of these concepts and applications, the talk will be designed to showcase the key frames, contextualize their impact, and demonstrate their possibilities as a way to invite further questions, criticisms, and creative responses. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bridle, J. (2011). Waving at the Machines. 
                        Web Directions South 2011 (Keynote), Sydney, 5 December, http://www.webdirections.org/resources/james-bridle-waving-at-the-machines/. 
                    
                    
                        Bridle, J. (2012). #sxaesthetic. Booktwo.org, 15 March, http://booktwo.org/notebook/sxaesthetic/.
                    
                    
                        Bridle, J. (2013). The New Aesthetic and Its Politics. Booktwo.org, 12 June, http://booktwo.org/notebook/new-aesthetic-politics/.
                    
                    
                        Coleman, B. (2011). 
                        Hello Avatar: Rise of the Networked Generation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
                    
                    
                        Gibson, W. (2007). 
                        Spook Country. Putnam’s, New York.
                    
                    
                        Hayles, N. K. (2010). Cybernetics. In Mitchell, W. J. T. and Hansenk, M. B. N. (eds),
                         Critical Terms for Media Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 144–56. 
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (1996). The Death of Computer Art. Rhizome, 23 October, http://www.rhizome.org/discuss/view/28877.
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (2001). 
                        The Language of New Media. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        McLuhan, M. (1994/1964). 
                        Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
                    
                    
                        Rogoff, I. (2008). Turning. 
                        e-flux journal, http://www.e-flux.com/journal/turning/.
                    
                    
                        Sterling, B. (2012). An Essay on the New Aesthetic. 
                        Wired, 2 April, http://www.wired.com/2012/04/an-essay-on-the-new-aesthetic/. 
                    
                    
                        Terrett, B. (2012). SXSW, the New Aesthetic and Commercial Visual Culture. 
                        Noisy Decent Graphics, 14 March, http://noisydecentgraphics.typepad.com/design/2012/03/sxsw-the-new-aesthetic-and-commercial-visual-culture.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mapping the Emotions of London in Fiction, 1700-1900: A Crowdsourcing Experiment
                
                    
                        Heuser
                        Ryan
                    
                    Stanford University
                    heuser@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark
                    
                    Stanford University
                    malgeehe@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Tran
                        Van
                    
                    Stanford University
                    vant@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Lockhart
                        Annalise
                    
                    Stanford University
                    ajlock@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Steiner
                        Erik
                    
                    Stanford University
                    ebs110@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    geography
                    affect
                    London
                    fiction
                    space
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    english studies
                    visualisation
                    crowdsourcing
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital literary geography (DLG) has already made possible important discoveries into the geographic patterns of large-scale corpora of fiction. For instance, Matthew Wilkens has shown that the rise of literary regionalism, argued to have taken place in response to the Civil War, does not actually manifest in a large corpus of American fiction published in the surrounding decades. For Wilkens, this methodology—counting how often place-names appear in texts—can effectively operationalize a text’s ‘geographic investment’ with particular places (Wilkens, 2013, 804).
            We find the concept of geographic investment as foundational to DLG as patterns, according to Barbara Piatti, were to the emergence of literary geography. Early maps, such as William Sharp’s 1904 map of the chief localities of Walter Scott’s novels, ‘succeeded to visualise a couple of important aspects’ of the emerging field, namely ‘the distribution of fictional settings (“gravity centers” vs. “unwritten regions”)’ (Piatti et al., 2009, 181). At the same time, we believe that a key challenge for DLG will be to demonstrate its ability to further qualify and differentiate what is meant by ‘investment’. It seems important to understand, for instance, that the rise of mentions of India in 19th-century British novels is predominantly due to their frequent appearances in off-hand explanations of the origin of someone’s wealth or some imported good (Jockers et al., 2012). Similarly, it seems essential for DLG to develop methods by which it can articulate a range of ways in which place-names operate in fiction, visualizing distinct modes of attention both historically and geographically.
            This paper presents a visualization and interpretation of the geographic investment with real London places in 18th- and 19th-century English-language fiction.
                1 It also attempts to visualize two distinct qualifications of this investment. We have applied emerging techniques in crowdsourcing to derive from a consensus of readers two pieces of information regarding the way in which a place-name was invoked in a fictional passage. Was it the setting of the passage, or simply mentioned? Was the emotion of fear, or happiness, associated with the place in the passage?
            
            In addition to narrative setting, we take emotion to play an important role in a project such as this, balanced between questions of literary form and social geography. In the affect-theoretical work of Sianne Ngai, emotions act ‘as a mediation between the aesthetic and the political in a nontrivial way’ (Ngai, 2004, 3). In their polarity between positive engagement and negative withdrawal, happiness and fear can be felt in the tone in which places are invoked in fiction. Mapping these tonal associations reveals one emotional spectrum along which fiction affectively mediated its relationship to London throughout two centuries of urbanization, industrialization and the rise of urban poverty, literacy, the bourgeoisie, and the novel.
            Experiment 1: Geographic Investment
            Method
            We developed a list of locations in London to search for in a corpus of texts, through a combination of computational toponym discovery (using the Named Entity Recognizer of the Stanford NLP toolkit) and research into historical gazetteers and maps of London. From this list, 161 places were chosen for all experiments presented in this paper.
                2 We read random passages mentioning each of the place-names, identifying ten passages per half-century in which the place-name actually referred to the London place we assumed it to. These passage annotations also supplied a statistic on the likelihood of a particular name to refer to a place. For instance, in fiction from 1750 to 1800, ‘Bond Street’ seems to refer to the street about 100% of the time, while the ‘Tower’ to the Tower of London about 90% of the time. These likelihoods are multiplied against the total count of each place-name across all fiction from a given half-century, and visualized in the following map.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Map 1. Fiction’s geographic investment with London, 1700–1900. The four tiles, read left to right, represent a fictional geography of the works published in the four half-centuries of 1700–1900, respectively. Circles represent discrete places in our corpus—streets, buildings, squares—while polygons represent wider spaces such as districts or neighborhoods. The depth of color, and the size of circle, reflect the same data: the overall likelihood for fiction of the period to mention that place.
            
                
            
            Interpretation
            We find a ‘gravity center’ of fictional attention to London spaces, located in the City and West End, that is surprisingly stable across two centuries of dramatic urban expansion. Comparing the distribution of fictional attention to population by London borough across the 19th century, we find that the most frequently mentioned boroughs—the City, Westminster, and Camden—are those that least correlate with population change.
                3 All three decline in relative population while remaining stable in their dominance of relative fictional attention. The responsiveness of literary representation to social change has always remained a contentious question for literary theory: here, we find not responsiveness, but a kind of ‘stuckness’, a tendency to continually reinvest London places already imbued with centuries of public meaning.
            
            Experiment 2: Crowdsourcing Emotional Investment
            Method
            We used the Amazon crowdsourcing platform, Mechanical Turk, to derive a consensus of readers’ annotations to overlay onto the foregoing map. For each place in each half-century, we gave ten passages to twenty readers each. All twenty annotated whether the highlighted place-name acted as the setting of the passage. Ten annotated whether the emotion of fear was associated or experienced in the place; ten for happiness.
                4 Averaging these annotations per place per period produced the following two maps.
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Map 2. Likelihood of narrative setting. The four tiles, read left to right, represent a fictional geography of the works published in the four half-centuries of 1700–1900, respectively. Circles represent discrete places in our corpus—streets, buildings, squares—while polygons represent wider spaces such as districts or neighborhoods. The depth of color, and the size of circle, reflect the same data: the overall likelihood for fiction of the period to act as the setting of a passage. 
                
            
            
                
            
            Map 3. Emotional polarity in fiction. The four tiles, read left to right, represent a fictional geography of the works published in the four half-centuries of 1700–1900, respectively. All places are now represented as geographic polygons. The color scale, from green to red, represents the likelihood of a place to be associated with happiness, subtracted by its likelihood to be associated with fear, in the fiction of that period. Gray areas are not likely to be associated with either (neutral).
            
                
            
            Interpretation
            We observe a spatial bifurcation in fiction’s emotional representations of London places: locations in the City, South, and East are more likely to be associated with fear than locations in the West and North. We test this observation by modeling the spatial patterns in the likelihoods of narrative setting, fear, and happiness, with the spatial patterns of four social-geographic data: the location of the place, whether in the City, or South, East, North, or West of it; the function of the place, whether Prison, Church, Square, etc.; the age of the place, whether deriving from the Roman and medieval eras or from the Tudor era onward; and finally, the social class of the place, as measured using remote sensing techniques applied to its immediate vicinity on Booth’s 1889 map of income classes in London. These four independent data are treated as factors in an odds ratio in order to measure the extent to which they statistically affect the likelihood for setting, fear, and happiness. The significant odds ratios (&gt;1.4) are visualized in the following network.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Factors influencing setting, fear, and happiness.
            Emotional representations of fear and happiness articulate two distinct geographies of London. Prisons, hills (which have prisons associated with them), pre-modern buildings, and places in the City are more likely be associated with fear. Parks, churches, squares, theatres, modern buildings, places in the West, and places around which Booth had indicated upper-class residents lived are more likely to be associated with happiness. Interestingly, the only factor making both emotions more likely is a factor of narrative form: whether the passage was embodied in the place through its narrative setting. We interpret these results further and argue for the relevance of DLG in articulating nuanced geographies of literary history.
            Notes
            1. Our corpus derives from the Literary Lab’s fictional corpus, and includes 5,000 works of English-language fiction published between 1700 and 1900. 
            2. Places were chosen if appearing with a minimum frequency of 0.2% of the total occurrences of London places in any half-century of fiction from 1700 to 1900. In addition, the name of each London district identified on Booth’s 1889 map of London was included to ensure sufficient spatial representation of parts of the South and East of London.
            3. Population data was retrieved from UK census data on historical population in London by borough: data.london.gov.uk/datastore/package/historic-census-population. The ‘West End’ is spatially represented in the data by the contemporary borough of Westminster.
            4. Our process of quality control was as follows. We applied statistical techniques to determine whether readers behaved, on average, more like other readers than would random chance. In borderline cases, manual inspection was made to determine whether the data was unlikely to have been entered sincerely, in which case we excluded it from our analysis.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Jockers, M. L., with Allen, B., Blevins, C. and Heuser, R. (2012). A Geography 
                    
                    of Nineteenth-Century English and American Literature. 
                        Social Science History Association, 37th Annual Meeting, Vancouver, British Columbia, 2 November 2012.
                    
                    
                        Ngai, S. (2004). 
                        Ugly Feelings. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Piatti, B., Bär, H. R., Reuschel, A.-K., Hurni, L. and Cartwright, W. (2009). Mapping Literature: Towards a Geography of Fiction. In Cartwright, W., Gartner, G. F., and Lehn, A. (eds),
                         Cartography and Art. Berlin: Springer, pp. 179–94.
                    
                    
                        Wilkens, M. (2013). The Geographic Imagination of Civil War–Era American Fiction. 
                        American Literary History,
                        25(4): 803–40.
                    
                    
                        Williams, R. (1977). 
                        Marxism and Literature. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mapping the Futures of Higher Education: Teaching, Learning and Research in the Age of Google
                
                    
                        Tagliaferri
                        Lisa
                    
                    The Graduate Center (CUNY), The Futures Initiative, United States of America
                    ltagliaferri@gc.cuny.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    higher education
                    pedagogy
                    digital humanities
                    gis
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster will present an analysis of relationships and knowledge-sharing in the first Futures Initiative course, Mapping the Futures of Higher Education: Teaching, Learning, and Research in the Age of Google, offered at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York (CUNY) in spring 2015. Graduate students enrolled in this course are from widely different backgrounds and teach courses throughout New York City across levels and disciplines. In order to facilitate a collaborative, peer-driven learning environment among this diverse group, the Futures Initiative has deployed a sophisticated web-based technology. 
            The Mapping the Futures website (http://futures.gc.cuny.edu) utilizes a specialized version of Commons In A Box (CBOX), a software project based on WordPress and developed by CUNY and the Graduate Center. As an open-source platform, CBOX offers community and collaboration tools in a single installation package, with low barriers to entry for students, who have various levels of technical proficiency. The site is equipped with multi-site functionality in addition to groups and forums to allow each student to engage online with his or her own course, as well as the larger network of collaborators across campuses. Within the first few weeks, the site’s network includes over 200 users, 20 sites, and 15 groups, many of which are highly active. 
            This poster will be exploring and evaluating this online cross-campus community through data visualizations and analysis. As a Futures Initiative fellow with a background in both the humanities and the computer sciences, as well as an educational background both at CUNY and abroad, I will be exploring the efficacy of the course through its online community network and suggest ways in which aspects of its collaborative and digital pedagogy model may be expanded upon by the global higher education community. I will also consider how the Mapping the Futures site may be a scalable and adaptable digital model, working without geospatial limitations, to facilitate peer-driven and collaborative learning.
            The classroom sessions, led by Futures Initiative director and pioneering digital humanist Cathy N. Davidson and former Graduate Center president William Kelly, are designed to support graduate student-instructors to innovate in their own classrooms. As an interdisciplinary course, with students from humanities as well as STEM fields, it employs a number of digital and collaborative pedagogic approaches to re-envision the methodologies and structure of higher education in the 21st century, many of which are being housed on the Mapping the Futures site. In an effort to harness CUNY’s unique networked structure, in which graduate students teach at a wide array of colleges throughout the city, the course and its site leverage a multiplier effect through an intrinsic embedded flow that can disperse throughout the system. Two professors working with a dozen graduate students and 368 undergraduate students can create profound effects toward refactoring pedagogical assumptions and innovating both in the classroom and online. This first course will proliferate by fivefold through subsequent iterations in the coming semester, thus expanding the student outreach and prompting profound reverberations throughout the system. 
            The physical network of CUNY, the largest urban university in the United States, is echoed in the course’s site, with its linked network of course websites, discussions, documents, and reflections. Students are developing geographic information systems as part of their coursework, approaching it from various skill levels and through diverse methods. This visualization work, which joins identity with a map, is an important means of cultivating the community across campuses. This provides several instantiations of the students’ interconnectedness across disciplines and campuses, through virtual, physical, networked, and temporal mapping. The virtual map is symbolic of the online site that hosts this GIS work, providing a platform to connect students across geospatial realities.
            As a public-facing course intending to encourage iterations and cross-institutional collaboration, all meeting sessions are also posted on the Mapping the Futures website as blogs, videos, and publicly editable online documents. This transparency encourages evaluation, research, and community engagement. The inaugural Futures Initiative course will be completed along with its final public presentation in May 2015. CUNY and the Futures Initiative will be creating additional instances of this course over time, beginning with five more courses in 2015–2016, to foster a wider spread of innovative pedagogies within higher education that develops from the bottom up and offers support from the top down.
        
    



    
        
            
                MARKUS：a Fundamental Semi-automatic Markup Platform for Classical Chinese
                
                    
                        Ho
                        Hou Ieong
                    
                    Leiden University, The Netherlands
                    brent.ho@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Classical Chinese
                    tagging
                    markup
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    asian studies
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The approach of digital humanities has widely interested many humanists from all disciplines. We can see it in the new methodologies introduced at DH2014 in Lausanne, where more than 700 registered participants gathered from around the world. However, digital humanities are still new practices and, in many cases, unachievable practices for many humanists. In the international workshop ‘New Perspective on Comparative Medieval History: China and Europe, 800–1600’, which took place in Oxford in January 2014, one discussion about ‘Isn’t the Siku Quanshu (Database) Enough?’
                1 reflected a common but critical debate between two groups of humanists. Scholars are satisfied with large commercial text databases, and they question why their colleagues invest their research time in data preparation (for example, encoding research texts in TEI) for computational analysis rather than read through the entire search results returned by databases. In the specific case of encoding texts in TEI, scholars often find themselves spending years doing manual encoding before computational analysis can be applied, despite the fact that the TEI standard has already saved a lot of work in schema design. We propose that in addition to defining a standard schema for encoders, efforts must be made to develop semi-automatic markup tools to speed up the tagging process.
            
             In this paper we will introduce MARKUS, a semi-automatic markup platform that is designed to automate the markup process of different kinds of named entities in the domain of classical Chinese (historical) texts. In particular, we focus on the possibility of providing an infrastructural but low-cost and thus sustainable markup service that is solely built upon JavaScript and HTML5, both extremely basic and well-supported technologies.
             MARKUS was developed as a tool to speed up the tagging process for the Communication and Empires project (http://chinese-empires.eu), which applied the TEI-markup approach to a corpus of 112 notebooks of the Song dynasty of historical China. We manually tagged quotes, interlocutors, authors, titles, and topics for each entry of five notebooks following the TEI standard. However, based on the above tagging experience, we realized that if we wanted to analyze all the people mentioned in the texts, it would be simply impossible to manually tag them within the limited time of the project; every hour we could only finish approximately six to seven tags manually. This labor-intensive tagging process is a common barrier for humanists researchers interested in putting the digital humanities approach into practice. Therefore, MARKUS aims to be an infrastructural, user-friendly, openly available, and sustainable markup service for Sinologists to overcome this barrier of encoding texts. 
            MARKUS currently provides three markup functions to help its users to tag classical Chinese texts: automated markup, keyword markup, and manual markup. Instead of providing a centralized and powerful (often complicated) web application, we try to make the service easy to operate by separating each markup function into different single web pages as a single task (Figure 1). In the meantime, all the web pages still share consistent interface design (Figure 2). Users can focus on a single task at a time while still following our step-by-step workflow to accomplish the entire tagging process.
            
                
                Figure 1. The step-by-step workflow interface.
            
            
                
                Figure 2. All markup functions follow a consistent interface design.
            
            The workflow starts with uploading a text file to MARKUS (step 1). After the text is loaded, the user can use the automated markup function (step 2.a) to scan all named entities known to the system. Then the user can choose to apply keyword markup (step 2.b) to scan and tag texts against a list of terms or a regular expression given by the user. At the last step (step 2.c), the user can verify and refine all the markups manually. 
            The automated markup function of MARKUS is currently capable of identifying commonly needed types of named entities in Chinese historical research. MARKUS is built in with 355,000 personal names, place names, temporal references, and official titles based on the results of other digital projects, namely the China Biographical Database (CBDB; http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword=k16229) and the China Historical GIS (CHGIS; http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~chgis/). Named entities for more specific research interests—for example, terms collected in the Buddhist Studies Authority Database Project (http://authority.ddbc.edu.tw/)—will be incorporated. 
            MARKUS uses a color-coding scheme to display markups according to their tags. MARKUS also associates tagged texts with their sources by an identifier defined in the sources in order to provide better interoperability between projects. For example, MARKUS associates a personal name with its CBDB person ID, so that users can link to CBDB to get more information about the person. 
            The built-in lists of named entities only covers the basic needs of Sinologists. Alternatively, MARKUS allows users to upload their own lists of terms and to write regular expressions to tag texts with observable patterns. After the automated and/or the keyword markup, users can validate, add, or remove markups manually while reading through the text. A range of online reference tools and dictionaries (CBDB, CHGIS, ZDICT,
                2 and Wikipedia) have been integrated into the interface to assist the reading and validating process. We also provide a batch edit function to speed up the process of removing or adding a tag throughout the text in a batch. The markup result can be saved as a MARKUS file or exported as a HTML or a TEI file. Users can also further choose to export all the tags along with the passage identifiers to a tabular file (CSV, HTML table, or Excel file) to conduct further statistical, temporal, spatial, and social network analyses. 
            
             MARKUS is still in its early development stage. More functionality, such as visualizing the markups in charts, maps, or a timeline, will be added to provide an infrastructural markup service for Sinologists. MARKUS is freely accessible via http://dh.chinese-empires.eu/beta, and the source code will be released at the end of the project. 
            In order to make MARKUS as sustainable as possible, we chose to develop MARKUS as a non-centralized web application with the most basic technologies. It is solely written in JavaScript and HTML5 without any server side scripts,
                3 meaning it can be hosted in any free web hosting service, even those with the most basic facilities. It is then quite possible to provide the MARKUS service for a long term without any funding. However, this also limits the computing power that MARKUS can provide. During the upcoming development phase, while MARKUS is still funded, we plan to extend MARKUS to include more advanced markup functionalities such as applying machine learning and text mining techniques for automatic markup. It will require a dedicated server to provide higher computing power and online storage for uploaded texts, which will lead MARKUS toward a server-side implementation.
            
            Funding
            This work was supported by the Arts &amp; Humanities Research Council and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
            Notes
            1. Siku quanshu is a one of the largest digital corpora of classical Chinese texts for Chinese cultural studies. It has been digitized as a commercial database. The discussion has been depicted in a blog post by Hilde De Weerdt with her view on this common debate (De Weerdt, 2014).
            2. ZDIC (http://www.zdic.net/) is an online Chinese dictionary.
            3. MARKUS requires HTML5 web worker (http://www.w3.org/TR/workers/) and File (http://www.w3.org/TR/FileAPI/) API to provide a better user experience in heavy computation process and file loading/saving functions. JQuery (http://jquery.com) and Bootstrap (http://getbootstrap.com) are the major JavaScript libraries used in MARKUS.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        De Weerdt, H. (2014). Isn’t the Siku Quanshu Enough? Reflections on the Impact of New Digital Tools for Classical Chinese. http://chinese-empires.eu/blog/isnt-the-siku-quanshu-enough-reflections-on-the-impact-of-new-digital-tools-for-classical-chinese/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Mbira: A Platform to Build, Serve, and Sustain Mobile Heritage Experiences
                
                    
                        Watrall
                        Ethan
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    watrall@msu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    mobile
                    heritage
                    archaeology
                    digital heritage
                
                
                    archaeology
                    historical studies
                    anthropology
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    cultural infrastructure
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The spaces and places we inhabit and interact with on a daily basis are composed of layers of cultural activity that are, quite literally, built up over time. While museum exhibits, historical and archaeological narratives, and public archaeology programs can communicate this heritage, they do not generally allow for rich, place-based, and individually driven exploration by the public. In addition, public heritage programs rarely explore the binary nature of material culture, the preserved record of human activity, and heritage: the presented information about the heritage in question and the process by which scholarly research has reached those conclusions. In short, the scholarly narrative of material culture, heritage, and archaeology is often hidden from public understanding. Further, traditional public heritage programs often ﬁnd it difﬁcult to support rich and vibrant multivocality. 
            In recent years, mobile devices as well as the development and maturation of augmented reality (broadly construed) have offered both platforms and models for mobile heritage applications to at least partially address these issues (Casella and Coelho, 2013; Haugstvedt and Krogstie, 2012; Davies et al., 2013). Mobile applications such as the Museum of London’s Streetmuseum Londinium (http://www.museumoﬂondon.org.uk/Resources/app/StreetmuseumLondinium/home.html), Florida Public Archaeology Network’s Destination: Civil War (http://www.ﬂpublicarchaeology.org/civilwar/), Histories of the National Mall (http://mallhistory.org/), and the CHESS Acropolis Museum mobile application (http://www.chessexperience.eu) successfully facilitate public interaction with heritage and archaeology in a place-based context. Unfortunately, most mobile heritage applications do not support multivocality, nor do they expose and explore the scholarly narrative of the process by which cultural, heritage, and archaeological information was uncovered and information was generated. 
            It is within this context that this paper will introduce and explore mbira (http://mbira.matrix.msu.edu). Developed at Michigan State University’s MATRIX: The Center for Digital Humanities &amp; Social Sciences (http://matrix.msu.edu) in collaboration with the Cultural Heritage Informatics Initiative (http://chi.anthropology.msu.edu), mbira is an open-source platform that is purpose built to address critical shortcomings in many mobile heritage applications. 
            
                ‘Space and Landscape as Museum’
            
            Based on the metaphor of ‘space and landscape as museum’, mbira lets users create mobile experiences in which locations and areas are organized into curated exhibits displayed within a rich, interactive map interface. Each exhibit location contains information and rich media (video, audio, and imagery) about that location as well as the narrative about the associated scholarly work (excavation, survey, historical and heritage research, etc.). 
            
                Cloud-Based Content Management 
            
            mbira projects are created and managed using a cloud-based digital repository platform (discussed below). All content (exhibits, locations, and location content) are added, edited, and updated from within an open-source digital repository platform. When app creators or editors add new project content or edit existing project content, changes dynamically appear in the project’s public native mobile app or mobile website. 
            
                A Constellation of Open-Source Tools 
            
            mbira leverages a series of open-source software and tools, both existing and purpose built, with which individuals, projects, organizations, and institutions can use to author, deploy, and sustain mobile heritage experiences: 
            
                KORA. Developed by MATRIX: The Center for Digital Humanities and Social Sciences, KORA (http://kora.matrix.msu.edu) is a self-installed, open-source digital repository platform. KORA serves as the backbone for the mbira platform—managing all underlying content and data management and delivery. KORA, originally developed with funding from the National Science Foundation Digital Library Initiative, IMLS, and NEH, has several strengths in relation to other digital repository platforms. Designed for small and medium-sized cultural heritage institutions with limited technological resources, KORA facilitates data ingestion, data export, data preservation, and data management. KORA also facilitates easy delivery of complex digital objects (i.e., groups of objects of different media displayed together for a speciﬁc use) through a robust RESTful API. 
            
            
                mbira plugin. The mbira plugin (which is installed on top of the KORA digital repository platform) is the core authoring environment in the platform’s constellation of open-source tools. The mbira plugin facilitates the creation of mobile projects and their associated exhibits, as well as all locations and areas (and their associated content). The mbira plugin allows creators and editors to manage all social aspects of their mobile applications. In addition, the plugin lets users manage all of the device-speciﬁc deployments of their mobile heritage experience (iOS, Android, mobile web). 
            
            
                Mobile templates. mbira includes elegantly designed (and well-documented) native mobile (iOS and Android) and mobile-web stock templates that individuals, projects, or institutions can use as is or modify as they see ﬁt. While the templates are designed primarily for those with minimal programming experience, they can also serve as a project jump-start for more seasoned developers. The templates are built speciﬁcally to dynamically display content (exhibits, places, spaces, explorations) authored in the mbira plugin. As with all of the other components of the mbira platform, the mobile templates are available to users for free under an open-source license. 
            
            Data Portability 
            Project administrators can easily export data from their mbira installation (KORA + mbira plugin) as structured data (XML and JSON) for the purposes of backup, preservation, and migration. Data can also be imported from other CMSs and digital repository platforms into an mbira installation. 
            
                Strongly Social and Multivocal
            
            The mbira platform allows heritage professionals, projects, and institutions to create mobile experiences in which users can interact with one another and domain experts around heritage places and spaces. The mbira platform also includes tools to recognize the expertise and experience of community members, thereby adding a critical dimension of multivocality to mobile heritage experiences. 
            Building Sustainable Mobile Heritage Experiences 
            Beyond addressing the aforementioned issues with current models of mobile heritage experience design, one of the core goals of the mbira platform is to empower individuals, projects, organizations, and institutions to build more sustainable mobile projects. All of the tools in the platform (as well as associated technical documentation) are speciﬁcally designed to lower the oftentimes signiﬁcant technical barrier associated with building mobile experiences. The result is that individuals, projects, organizations, and institutions without existing technical expertise are not forced to contract with potentially costly third-party vendors to develop their mobile projects. The fact that all of the tools in the mbira platform are free and designed to run on the open web further reduces the cost associated with deploying and maintaining mobile projects. Because all of the tools in the mbira platform are available under an open-source license, those with existing technical experience are able to copy, modify, adapt, and redistribute the source code without any ﬁnancial or signiﬁcant copyright barriers. Finally, mbira’s cloud-based content management model means that individuals, projects, organizations, and institutions can easily add new content, thereby extending the effective life of their mobile heritage projects. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Casella, G. and Coelho, M. (2013). Augmented Heritage: Situating Augmented Reality Mobile Apps in Cultural Heritage Communication. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Information Systems and Design of Communication (ISDOC ’13). New York: ACM, pp. 138–40, DOI=10.1145/2503859.2503883, http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2503859.2503883.
                    
                    
                        Davies, C. J., Miller, A. H. D. and Allison, C. (2013). Mobile Cross Reality for Cultural Heritage. In 
                        Digital Heritage International Congress (Digital Heritage), 2013, Marseilles, 28 October–1 November. Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. 331–38. 
                    
                    
                        Haugstvedt, A.-C. and Krogstie, J. (2012). Mobile Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage: A Technology Acceptance Study. In Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2012 IEEE International Symposium, 5–8 November 2012, pp. 247–55, doi:10.1109/ISMAR.2012.6402563.
                    
                    
                        Lombardo, V. and Damiano, R. (2012). Storytelling on Mobile Devices for Cultural Heritage. 
                        New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia,
                        18(1–2): 11–35. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Measuring Virality: Quantifying Formal and Paratextual Features Associated with “Viral” Books
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark Andrew
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    malgeehe@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Frank
                        Morgan
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    emdfrank@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Fredner
                        Erik
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    fredner@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Porter
                        J.D.
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    jdporter@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Walser
                        Hannah
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    walser@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    virality
                    popular fiction
                    contemporary
                    viral
                    corpus
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    english studies
                    cultural studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this poster, we outline a working methodology and present preliminary results from a new project in Stanford’s Literary Lab. The goal of this project is to measure a contemporary novel’s potential ‘virality’. This project is the result of a research partnership the Literary Lab made with a publishing company to analyze a corpus of more than 43,000 ebooks from across the 20th and 21st centuries.
                
            
            
                Why ‘Virality’?
            
            From a literary critical perspective, we have chosen to study the phenomenon of virality in order to approach broader questions of genre, reader reception, and the spread of popular fiction (Latour, 2005). We believe that a study of virality will also identify some formal characteristics associated with popular contemporary fiction, as well as a subset of formal characteristics that do 
                not correlate with popularity. Answering these questions will provide some key information for making historically situated claims about the nature of pop fiction in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, especially as it relates to the rise of the Internet and the changing nature of novel reading.
            
            As an object of quantitative analysis, virality poses an interesting challenge. Going into this project, we had no assurances that there exist formal features that correlate with viral texts. Virality may simply be a phenomenon that exists at the level of social networks or, even more broadly, ‘culture’. Moreover, it is undeniable that when a text goes viral it does so at least in part outside of the bounds set by its covers and spine. After all, a copy of a book is usually sold before it is read. The ambitious goal of our study is to identify formal markers at the level of the text that correlate with the larger social enactment of virality.
            
                Definition
            
            As it is usually used in reference to digital media, ‘virality’ refers to the tendency of a piece of content to be ‘shared rapidly and widely among Internet users’.
                1 Unfortunately, this definition cannot be mapped directly onto novels. There are a number of technical and cultural factors that preclude the possibility of using the standard definition of virality for our project. First and foremost, viral Internet content is generally shared as a hyperlink. Readers access the link through any number of digital communication tools, including email, social media, and so on. There are also qualitative and quantitative differences between clicking on a link and choosing to read a book, such as time commitment (most viral Internet content is short; most novels require hours to read) and monetary investment (most viral content is free; most novels aren’t). Most importantly, this born-digital notion of virality suggests a direct person-to-person spread of information—clicking on a link someone tweeted or posted on your wall, for example. The closest analogue to this notion of virality would be lending a friend a book that you recommend. But the limits of this analogy are immediately apparent: A link can be viewed by as many people as the server can handle at once, while an ink-and-paper novel only serves one reader at a time.
            
            Moreover, we argue that viral novels do not always have a one-to-one relationship between recommender and new readers, though that certainly can be the case. Like extremely viral Internet content, viral novels become visible at multiple levels of mainstream culture: social media, television, radio, references in conversation, reading in public, and so forth. While the mechanism is difficult to describe with precision, there’s a platitude that expresses the feeling associated with viral novels: ‘Everyone’s reading it’.
            For the purposes of our project, we have defined viral texts as those works that achieve rapidly accelerating high sales without viral content antecedents. 
                Harry Potter and the Sorceror’s Stone would be a prime example. However, by our definition, the second 
                Harry Potter book in the series would 
                not be considered viral, since its popularity stemmed in part from the first book’s virality. The same goes for sequels in other viral series, such as 
                The Hunger Games. The restriction we have imposed on content antecedents also applies to character series, such as Dan Brown’s Robert Langdon books, including 
                Angels and Demons (which was not initially viral) and 
                The Da Vinci Code (a highly viral sequel to 
                Angels and Demons that bolstered its sales long after 
                Angels and Demons was released).
            
            
                Research Questions
            
            Our overarching questions in this project include the following:
             • What does it look like when a book ‘goes viral’? How does sales performance change relative to the book’s earlier sales? How does sales performance change relative to the book’s projected in-genre sales?
             • Are there formal features shared across viral texts? Are these features constrained by genre?
             • How does a single text operating within an established genre go viral? For example, why did 
                Twilight significantly outperform other romances with vampires in 2005?
            
             • Is there a set of lexical or syntactic similarities between viral texts that transcends genre or audience?
            Building on methods formalized during the course of the Literary Lab’s previous projects—most recently in ‘Between Canon and Archive’ and previously in projects like ‘Quantitative Formalism’—this study will operationalize and quantify multiple aspects of virality suggested in the above research questions.
            
                Data
            
            To assess sales performance, we use Nielsen BookScan, which provides in-depth point-of-sale data at major book retailers going back to 2001. For books sold from 1994 to 2001, we use the 
                New York Times’ best seller list, which provides relativistic sales performance (i.e., the number-one book on the 
                NYT best seller list outsold number two, but the 
                NYT does not quantify that differential).
            
            For BISAC codes and other means of categorizing novels in our corpus, we use data provided by the publishing company as well as Library of Congress data for novels not provided by the publisher.
            Our corpus was constructed using novels from the publisher’s corpus, as well as ebook versions of viral novels not published by our partner organization.
            
                Corpus Characteristics
            
            The texts under consideration in this study were originally published between 1994 and 2014. We decided to limit the study to this time period because it includes the transition from traditional brick-and-mortar bookselling to the rise of Amazon (which opened in 1994) as the dominant bookseller. This time period also encompasses the rise of the ebook, another market dominated by Amazon.
             We have created several corpora for testing hypotheses related to specific genres, including viral and nonviral comparison versions of each genre corpus. Our nonviral corpora include works that showed average sales performance relative to other works within the same BISAC designation. The ‘one-off’ nature of many viral novels precludes the possibility of constructing a sufficiently large viral corpora to accurately represent certain subgenres.
            
                Research Methodology
            
            To begin this project, we created a corpus of what we have termed ‘ultraviral’ novels. These works achieved extraordinary success—often but not always from first-time authors—and were sufficiently popular to have movie adaptations made. (In the case of some of the more recent novels, movie adaptations have been optioned and are still in progress.)
            The table below shows the novels in our ultraviral corpus, each of which meets the definitional requirements we outlined above:
            
                
                    Title
                    Author
                    
                        Release Date (US)
                    
                
                
                    The Horse Whisperer
                    Nicholas Evans
                    6/15/1995
                
                
                    
                        Left Behind: A Novel of the Earth’s Last Days
                    
                    Tim LaHaye, Jerry Jenkins
                    12/31/1995
                
                
                    Cold Mountain
                    Charles Frazier
                    6/15/1997
                
                
                    
                        Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone
                    
                    J. K. Rowling
                    9/1/1998
                
                
                    Life of Pi
                    Yann Martel
                    9/1/2001
                
                
                    The Lovely Bones
                    Alice Sebold
                    6/15/2002
                
                
                    The Da Vinci Code
                    Dan Brown
                    4/1/2003
                
                
                    The Kite Runner
                    Khaled Hosseini
                    5/29/2003
                
                
                    
                        The Time Traveler’s Wife
                    
                    Audrey Niffenegger
                    6/15/2003
                
                
                    Eragon
                    Christopher Paolini
                    8/26/2003
                
                
                    Twilight
                    Stephenie Meyer
                    10/5/2005
                
                
                    Water for Elephants
                    Sara Gruen
                    5/26/2006
                
                
                    Diary of a Wimpy Kid
                    Jeff Kinney
                    4/1/2007
                
                
                    The Shack
                    William Young
                    5/1/2007
                
                
                    The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
                    Stieg Larsson
                    6/15/2008
                
                
                    The Hunger Games
                    Suzanne Collins
                    9/14/2008
                
                
                    Divergent
                    Veronica Roth
                    4/25/2011
                
                
                    Fifty Shades of Grey
                    E. L. James
                    6/20/2011
                
                
                    Gone Girl
                    Gillian Flynn
                    6/1/2012
                
                
                    The Goldfinch
                    Donna Tartt
                    9/23/2013
                
            
            Our research team read these novels to develop hypotheses about their shared features. Initial hypotheses identified worldbuilding, accessible vocabulary, a proliferation of questions, and the fusion of multiple distinct genres in a single work (e.g., a novel that is both a coming-of-age and fantasy story) as potential sites of virality at a formal level.
            We are currently testing our ultraviral corpus against comparison corpora with average sales performance. Acknowledging that we cannot be sure we know what to look for across such a heterogeneous sample united by an external factor, we are running a bevy of tests on the ultraviral corpus to identify any extant similarities or patterns. These tests include assessments of age of acquisition for vocabulary; average lengths of sentences, paragraphs, chapters, and books; part-of-speech tagging; and type-token ratio analysis. Later phases of research will include topic modelling and an assessment of narration-to-dialogue ratio. Past research on popular fiction at Stanford has also suggested that virality correlates with a relatively high level of information density when compared with other texts in the same genre (Archer, 2014). We will test this information density hypothesis with our various corpora.
            Note
            1. ‘Virality’, Oxford Dictionaries, http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/virality.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Archer, J. (2014). Reading the Bestseller: An Analysis of 20,000 Novels
                        . PhD dissertation, Stanford University
                        .
                    
                    
                        Latour, B. (2005). 
                        Reassembling the Social. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Medium data method for cultural studies: the case of gender studies in Russian National Corpus.
                
                    
                        Bonch-Osmolovskaya
                        Anastasia
                    
                    National Research Unversity Higher School of Economics Moscow, Russian Federation
                    abonch@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    dataset corpus cultural studies culturomics
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    lexicography
                    cultural studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The main aim of the paper is to show how the data of the Russian National Corpus can be used to explore nonlinguistic objects. The National Corpus is created as a well-balanced, marked-up text collection оf almost 300 million documents of different ages (18th–21st centuries), followed with rich metadata. Being one of the best national linguistics corpora it can also be regarded as a store of cultural memory and social reflection. Then the quantitative analysis of the change of frequency of some conceptually important lexeme or qualitative analysis of its various contexts in different periods can lead us to some new analysis of cultural trends and social processes, focusing primarily on their reflection in social consciousness.
            It should be emphasized that though some lexical change can be explained by extralinguistic reasons, the study is based on texts that are not thematically connected with this reason. For example, we observe an abrupt increase of the use of lexeme ‘woman’ in the second half of the 19th century, which surely should be associated with the first wave of emancipation in Russian society. But these are not manifestos, but mostly novels that are being analysed. The frequency increase for ‘woman’ in the 1850s signals a change in readers’ interest. This change and its connection with social processes and events are the objects of investigation with the methods of corpus analysis, distant reading, and culturomics.
            The paper doesn’t claim to make some profound sociocultural research, but the main focus will be on methodology. I will introduce the medium data approach and will argue that it can be used for cultural research, and that it allows solving some of the well-known problems of big-data analyses in textual data. First I will observe the culturomics approach and the benefits of National Corpus use instead of Google Books. Second I will concentrate on one case of medium data cultural research: gender naming in the 19th and 20th centuries in Russia and the Soviet Union. I will show how context analyses can shed light on unexpected data emission, and how competition of lexemes reflects changes of social consciousness.
            Culturomics was first declared as a new scientific method in a 2010 paper in 
                Science magazine titled ‘Quantitative Analyses of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books’ by a group of scientists headed by Jan-Baptiste Michelle. Though very influential and inspiring, the method also has been widely criticized. The two main problems of the method mentioned most often are the trivial results and the dirty, nonreliable data. The methodological problems of culturomics research seem to be the other side of its benefits: the big textual data only allows comparing the queries known in advance. We can observe the effect of censorship by the decrease in Mark Chagall mentions, but we have no instrument to compare the change of semantic context of Chagall’s mentions that accompanied the beginning of content restrictions. That means that we can notice how the political changes are reflected in culture, but we still lack the instrument to explore these processes thoroughly.
            
            In contrast to the influential trend of Big Data, I propose a concept of nedium data. Medium data is the amount of data that allows for quantitative and qualitative studies. The main characteristics of the medium data are
             • The reliability of sources, which metadata can be filtered manually.
             • The sufficiency of the data amount for reliable statistical measures.
             • The possibility of additional semantic mark-up.
            The medium data concept serves to oppose the current practices where computational methods tend to ignore the complexity of the humanitarian sphere. I argue that the quality of the research can benefit much from the contamination of statistical and computational methods, with expert manual analyses possible only with very pure, precise data of not a tremendous amount. Although the primary data filtration will in this case be a matter of the researcher’s responsibility, this situation really doesn’t differ much from any natural science case, when the researcher has to provide the specific conditions of the experiment.
            Though the Russian Natural Corpus is much smaller than the Google Books corpus, its dataset surely has some advantages. First, every document has rich metadata. This allows counting not only the edition date but also the creation date, which can be quite important for studying the Soviet period, as its published texts can demonstrate a significant lexical bias due to censorship. Second, the mistakes of object recognition are very rare in RNC. The morphological mark-up, which plays an important role in a morphologically rich language such as Russian, is diverse and multivariate in RNC, while it is limited to POS-tagging in Google n-grams. The complex morphological mark-up gives an opportunity to make distant queries, which are targeted to represent syntactic relations. For example, the query that consists of the verb ‘to steal’ plus the noun in the accusative extracts the change of consumption needs for different periods (what people steal in different times is what they actually need). Their comparison can inspire some new level of social and cultural research. The textual collection and the markup of the Russian National Corpus thus give us an example of the medium dataset that can be used not only for language investigation but also for social research. 
            How can we benefit from a medium dataset? The research can focus not only on frequency change but also on qualitative context variation. It is not the words themselves but the semantic concepts (synsets, that are different in every period) that are being studied. Medium data allow disambiguation of semantic polysemy, which is usually impossible with big datasets and sometimes can cause damaged results. The semantically close contexts can be merged into classes that enable more transparent and still reliable analyses. The most significant difference between culturomics and medium data can be formulated as follows. Culturomics research results in an overall graphic that often demonstrates quite trivial dependencies. The medium data method allows for treating the graphics not as a diagnosis but as symptom, which serves as an impulse for further research.
            Finally I will focus on one model case of the medium data method. I will compare the frequency of the words ‘man’ and ‘woman’ in the 19th and 20th centuries. The comparison of two frequency graphs shows that the word ‘woman’ is much more frequent than the word ‘man’ in the both centuries. Is it that women are more often written about? Or are men referred to with some other lexical means? If we compare the two words ‘muzhik’ and ‘baba’, which in the 19th century are used as gender terms of low class, we get the opposite picture: males are more frequent than the females. The answer can be drawn out of the context analyses. The reference of males in general is rarely direct in the 19th century, but mostly implicit together with some specific lexical means, characterizing age, social, or professional status. This contrasts much with female references, for which the gender idea is much more important than the social occupation. I will also follow the changes in male and female word usage that take place in Soviet and post-Soviet epochs. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Mining and Discovering Biographical Information in Difangzhi with a Language-Model-based Approach
                
                    
                        Bol
                        Peter
                    
                    Harvard University, USA
                    pkbol@fas.harvard.edu
                
                
                    
                        Liu
                        Chao-Lin
                    
                    National Chengchi University, Taiwan
                    chaolinliu@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Wang
                        Hongsu
                    
                    Harvard University, USA
                    hongsuwang@fas.harvard.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    China Biographical Data
                    Chinese Language Processing
                    Grammar Induction
                    Information Extraction
                
                
                    historical studies
                    text analysis
                    asian studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We present results of expanding the contents of the China Biographical Database [1] by text mining historical local gazetteers, 
                difangzhi地方志.[2] The goal of the database is to see how people are connected together, through kinship, social connections, and the places and offices in which they served. The gazetteers are the single most important collection of names and offices covering the Song through Qing periods. Although we begin with local officials, we shall eventually include lists of local examination candidates, people from the locality who served in government, and notable local figures with biographies. The more data we collect, the more connections emerge. The value of doing systematic text mining work is that we can identify relevant connections that are either directly informative or can become useful without deep historical research. Academia Sinica is developing a name database for officials in the central governments of the Ming and Qing dynasties.[3]
            
            
                
            
            Problem Definition and Main Findings
            Figure 1 shows a scanned page from a 
                difangzhi,[4] and Figure 2 shows the text of the shown image. As Figure 1 shows, traditional Chinese texts do not have spaces between words or employ punctuation. This feature makes the processing of literary Chinese texts much more difficult than handling alphabetical languages and modern Chinese. The circles in Figure 2 serve as a general delimiter, representing the end of a line, the end of a page, a space, or a transition in text formatting—for example, placing two lines of text in a single column in column 2 of Figure 2.
            
            We would like to algorithmically extract the information about local officials, such as Li Chang 李常in Figure 2. We are interested in the alternative names, such as the style name (
                zi 字) and pen name (
                hao號), birthplace, entry method, serving office, service time, and so forth. In this abstract, we focus on how we identify a person’s name, style name, and the dynasty. For example, we wish to extract the record Song宋as dynasty, Li Chang李常 as person name, and Gongze公擇 as style name after handling the text in Figure 2. 
            
            Local gazetteers record various types of information about local areas; we selected those that are related to local government officials. Not counting the circles in the texts, the current study employed 83 text files containing 901,302 Chinese characters. 
            We extracted 1,260 records from the files and compared them with the biographical data in CBDB. Table 1 gives an analysis of the results, where a circle indicates a match; a cross indicates a mismatch. Among the 1,260 records, 562 match the dynasty, personal name, and style name of some CBDB records, and 544 (43.2%) match only dynasty and name.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                
            
            Methods
            Figure 3 shows the main procedure for extracting the records. In addition to the gazetteers, we used files of previously known names, addresses, entries, offices, and reign period titles from CBDB to annotate the texts.[5] In this study, we also consider the dynasties for names, offices, and reign periods. 
            We need to consider the ambiguities of a word when annotating the texts. For instance, ‘Li Chang’ 李常 was a person name in the Song, Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties, and the four-character office title ‘Guan-cha tui-guan’ 觀察推官 was an office in the Tang and Song dynasties. In addition the second and third characters ‘cha tui’ 察推also represent an office in the Song and Yuan dynasties. Hence, as illustrated in Figure 4, we could generate at least 16 possible label sequences for the following string T1 in Figure 2.
            T1: 李常字公擇南康建昌人自宣州觀察推官發運使
            We sift the label sequences by adopting the principle of favoring longer words[6] and by disambiguating with contextual constraints. In T1, we do not consider ‘cha tui’ 察推 an office for the Song dynasty because the four-character sequence is a longer match for the same dynasty. In addition, it is reasonable to require that all labels in a sequence must be 
                consistent with the same dynasty. Hence, among the 16 sequences, only ‘李常-觀察推官’ for Song and ‘李常-察推’ for Yuan could survive. 
            
            Since there are no known tools for parsing literary Chinese, we employ the concept of language models (Manning and Schütze, 1999) to analyze the texts. We computed, collected, and counted the frequencies of 
                consistent sequences of six labels.[7]
            
            Aiming at extracting personal names and style names for government officials, we focused on the consistent sequences that have at least one &lt;NAME&gt; label. We then identified and preferred subsequences that include more different labels. We show four such 
                filter patterns below.
            
            P1: &lt;NAME&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;REIGN PERIOD&gt;&lt;ENTRY&gt;
            P2: &lt;NAME&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ENTRY&gt;&lt;REIGN PERIOD&gt;
            P3: &lt;NAME&gt;&lt;NAME&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;
            P4: &lt;NAME&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;
            Finally, we selected the consistent sequences that contained the filter patterns and extracted original text segments that corresponded to the consistent sequences. The string T1 was extracted from the text in Figure 2 because it could be annotated with the sequence &lt;NAME&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;&lt;OFFICE&gt;&lt;OFFICE&gt;, which contained P4. The &lt;NAME&gt; label is for ‘李常.’ At the annotation stage, our programs did not recognize ‘Gongze’ 公擇as a Style Name for ‘Li Chang’ 李常 because ‘Gongze’ 公擇was not included in the CBDB name list. One of the two annotated results is listed below.
            
                &lt;NAME Song&gt;李常&lt;/NAME&gt;字公擇&lt;ADDRESS&gt;南康&lt;/ADDRESS&gt;&lt;ADDRESS&gt;建昌&lt;/ADDRESS&gt;人自&lt;ADDRESS&gt;宣州&lt;/ADDRESS&gt;&lt;OFFICE Song&gt;觀察推官&lt;/OFFICE&gt;&lt;OFFICE Song&gt;發運使&lt;/OFFICE&gt;
            
            To extract ‘Gongze’ 公擇as a Style Name from T1, we parsed the text segment with a low-level grammar pattern for the task. Specifically, a two-character string that appears after the sequence of a &lt;NAME&gt; label and the character ‘字’ (Style Name) and before an &lt;ADDRESS&gt; label was extracted as the Style Name for the &lt;NAME&gt;. With such syntactic rules, we discovered that ‘公擇’ is a Style Name for ‘李常,’ and obtained two records (Song,李常,公擇) and (Yuan, 李常,公擇).
            
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                
                
            
            Results, Evaluation, and Applications
            We compared the extracted records with the combinations of dynasty, name, and Style Name in CBDB, and Table 1 shows the results. The two records that we just obtained would belong to type 2, because ‘Gongze’ 公擇 is not known to CBDB. All extracted records of type 2 provide opportunities of finding Style Names that were new to CBDB. However, they should be confirmed by asking a domain expert to check the original text segments, which is an operation facilitated by our software platform.
            Extracted records of type 1 do not provide new information if we are just interested in names and Style Names. Certainly, we are more ambitious than this, and type-1 records are instrumental. They help us find the beginnings of the paragraphs that contain extra information about the owners of the type-1 records. T1 is the beginning of the second paragraph in Figure 1. This paragraph contains extra information about ‘李常’ that we can explore to enhance the contents of CBDB. The third paragraph in Figure 1 and many following paragraphs start with statements that we could identify with the filter patterns. 
            Records of types 3 through 7 make up only about 12.2% of the 1,260 extracted records. Similar to type-2 records, these records do not match any records in CBDB perfectly. After inspecting the original text segments, we will be able to tell whether these mismatches are new discoveries or incorrect extractions. 
            Discussion
            The reported work represents an extension of our work for CBDB that was reported in Bol et al. (2012). In the previous work, experts manually designed regular expressions for specific text patterns. Now, based on prior information about named entities, we are able to compute and analyze the label sequences for the local gazetteer texts to learn useful filter patterns for automatically extracting desired information. We can apply the reported mechanism to extract birthplaces, service periods, offices, and other basic information, as we just did for extracting names and Style Names. In addition, by identifying key opening statements for paragraphs that contain biographical data, the reported procedure opens a new door for algorithmically extracting information about personal career and social networks. We are working toward learning the document structures of local gazetteers.
            Our work is related to automatic grammar induction in computational linguistics. Hwa (1999) learns grammars with data that were manually annotated with syntactic information, and we automatically annotated data with named entities. Klein and Manning (2005) employed advanced techniques to learn hierarchical grammars for Penn treebank sentences, which may be quite challenging in the case of literary Chinese. 
            Additional responses to reviewers’ comments are available at http://www.cs.nccu.edu.tw/~chaolin/papers/dh2015blw.online.pdf.
            Notes
            1. The China Biographical Database (CBDB; http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword=k16229) is a collaborative project of Harvard University, Peking University, and Academia Sinica. CBDB is an online relational database with biographical information about approximately 328,000 individuals as of October 2013, primarily from the 7th through the 19th centuries. The data is meant to be useful for statistical, social network, and spatial analysis as well as serving as a kind of biographical reference.
            2. 
                Difangzhi—see http://www.chinaknowledge.de/Literature/Terms/difangzhi.html.
            
            3. http://archive.ihp.sinica.edu.tw/ttsweb/html_name/search.php.
            4. When written in the vertical style, Chinese paragraphs begin from the right side of a page.
            5. Here, ‘names’ include either official names or any alternative names. ‘Addresses’ refer to location names. ‘Entries’ (入仕方式), e.g., ‘進士’ and ‘舉人’, include different ranks and ways of becoming a government official via the Civil Service Examinations (‘科舉’). ‘Offices’ (官職, government positions) include posts in the government. ‘Reign period names’ (年號), e.g., Kangxi 康熙, are names of time periods under a particular emperor. 
            6. This so-called favoring the longer term 長詞優先principle is commonly adopted when segmenting (or tokenizing) Chinese text strings (cf. Gao et al., 2005).
            7. Technically speaking, we are analyzing a 6-gram language model.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bol, P. K., Hsiang, J. and Fong, G. (2012). Prosopographical Databases, Text-Mining, GIS and System Interoperability for Chinese History and Literature. 
                        2012 International Conference on Digital Humanities, Hamburg, Germany, 19 July 2012.
                    
                    
                        Gao, J., Li, M., Wu, A. and Huang C.-N. (2005). Chinese Word Segmentation and Named Entity Recognition: A Pragmatic Approach. 
                        Computational Linguistics,
                        31(4): 531‒74.
                    
                    
                        Hwa, R. (1999). Supervised Grammar Induction Using Training Data with Limited Constituent Information. In 
                        Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 73‒79.
                    
                    
                        Klein, D. and Manning, C. D. (2005). Natural Language Grammar Induction with a Generative Constituent-Context Model. 
                        Pattern Recognition,
                        38: 1407‒19.
                    
                    
                        Manning, C. D. and Schütze, H. (1999). 
                        Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, chap. 6.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Modeling Approaches to Library-led DH Pedagogy
                
                    
                        Padilla
                        Thomas George
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    tpadilla@msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Smiley
                        Bobby
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    bsmiley@msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Miller
                        Sara
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    smiller@msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Mooney
                        Hailey
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    mooneyh@msu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    pedagogy
                    libraries
                    data literacy
                    humanities data
                    information literacy
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Academic libraries have long supported, collaborated on, and led digital humanities (DH) research. Evidence of engagement can be found in acquisition and preparation of objects of inquiry amenable to computational analysis, tool development, and data and platform management and preservation. While investment in these activities varies, recent entrants and long established institutional participants share in common a commitment to delivery of library-led DH instruction. Library-led DH instruction expands the breadth and depth of DH research capacity on campus and provides a space in which to spread awareness of data and services that can drive DH research forward. Despite widespread provision by librarians, there exists little critical engagement with the pedagogical challenges librarians face in designing and delivering DH instruction. 
            As librarians do not typically lead credit-bearing courses, the modes of instruction typically employed by librarians occur via one-shot instruction (e.g., disciplinary faculty requests workshop for class) or a workshop series wherein attempts to sequence content (e.g., data gathering workshop, data cleaning workshop, data visualization workshop) are necessarily loosely joined, given an audience that is not fixed by course enrollment and/or an institutional predilection for enabling target audiences to drop in and drop out of a sequence. Given format and audience constraints it becomes tempting to focus on tools at the cost of disciplinary relevance, let alone missing out on the pedagogical possibilities latent in tools rendered as vectors for enacting theories, methods, and ways of thinking about the world (Lincoln, 2014; Padilla, 2014; Vinopal, 2014). 
            Basic word frequency analysis of the 
                Journal of Library Administration issue on digital humanities and the 
                dh+lib response reveals that out of a corpus of more than 43,000 words, pedagogical terms are minimally represented: pedagogy (7), education (12), teaching (15), learn (20). While this might appear to indicate low commitment to pedagogy, the terms work (208), service (207), and support (135) all fall within the top 15 word frequencies (
                Journal of Library Administration, 2013; Coble, 2013).
                1 It is likely that pedagogical activities are contained within these more general terms, yet painting with such broad strokes does little to assist the librarian aiming to plan, implement, and deliver effective DH instruction. In order to take steps toward remedying this need, two digital humanities librarians, an information literacy librarian, and a data services librarian from Michigan State University applied for and received a DH Pedagogies Microgrant from the Association for Computers and the Humanities to explore development of a model for guiding design of a library-led DH pedagogy. 
            
            On 17 October 2014 the 
                Library-Led DH Pedagogy: Modeling Paths Toward Information and Data Literacy symposium brought together disciplinary faculty and librarians from across the state of Michigan to discuss and test an approach to designing library-led DH pedagogy that draws on the draft Association of College and Research Libraries 
                Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education, the Data Information Literacy (DIL) program competencies, and disciplinary learning expectations (ACRL, 2014; Data Information Literacy, 2014; History Discipline Core, 2012). This approach encourages a move toward library-led DH instruction supported by updated information literacy concepts (interacting with the information ecosystem), leverages advances in data information literacy research (how to work with research data, e.g., metadata, data management, and data curation competencies), and increases relevancy through orientation to disciplinary learning expectations (how to interpret, analyze, and make sense in a manner befitting practice by a disciplinary community). The process of alignment was supported by presentations and discussions that brought the 
                Framework and DIL Competencies into contact with disciplinary practice. This process was further supported by engaging disciplinary faculty and librarians in group-based activities. Each group designed learning outcomes and created model lesson plans predicated on a single or multidisciplinary audience. Mixed disciplinary faculty and librarian participation in project activities was by design, given a framing that assumes DH pedagogy is best understood as an interdisciplinary as well as interprofessional community of practice (Nowiskie, 2014). 
            
            This paper frames and describes the variety of attempts made to implement a pedagogical model for library-based DH instruction that aligns the draft 
                Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education, the Data Information Literacy program competencies, and disciplinary learning expectations. The model lesson plans produced over the course of the symposium are intended to help guide library development of DH instruction that optimally cultivates information and data literacies and, where appropriate, maintains disciplinary relevance (Carlson et al., 2011; Calzada Prado and Marzal, 2013). The paper concludes by discussing additional findings that surfaced during the course of the 
                Library-Led DH symposium, such as the challenge of teaching to single vs. multidisciplinary audiences; advances an approach for designing DH pedagogy in a library context; and reflects upon the use of the library-led DH pedagogy model at Michigan State University during the spring 2015 semester. 
            
            Note
            1. Hirsch (2012) took a similar approach to indicate the paucity of DH pedagogy engagement in general.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ACRL Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education Task Force. (2014). Draft Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education, Part 1, 1 February, http://acrl.ala.org/ilstandards/wpcontent/ uploads/2014/02/Framework-for-IL-for-HE-Draft-1-Part-1.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Calzada Prado, J. and Marzal, M. A. (2013). Incorporating Data Literacy into Information Literacy Programs: Core Competencies and Contents. 
                        Libri,
                        63(2) (January), doi:10.1515/libri-2013-0010.
                    
                    
                        Carlson, J., Fosmire, M., Miller, C. and Nelson, M. S. (2011). Determining Data Information Literacy Needs: A Study of Students and Research Faculty. Purdue Libraries Faculty and Staff Scholarship and Research, 1 January, http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/lib
                        _fsdocs/23. 
                    
                    
                        Coble, Zach. (2013). Make It New? A Dh Lib Mini-Series—The Ebook. 
                        Dh Lib, 28 June, http://acrl.ala.org/dh/2013/06/28/make-it-new-a-dhlib-mini-series-the-ebook/. 
                    
                    
                        Data Information Literacy. (n.d.). http://wiki.lib.purdue.edu/display/ste/Home (accessed 28 May 2014).
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, B. (ed.). (2012). 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles, and Politics. Open Book Publishers, United Kingdom.
                    
                    
                        History Discipline Core. (2012). A Statement from the AHA’s Tuning Project. October, http://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/october-2012/history-discipline-core.
                    
                    
                        Journal of Library Administration. (2013). 
                        53(1), doi:10.1080/01930826.2013.756676. 
                    
                    
                        Lincoln, M. D. (2014). Tool Trouble: Thoughts Differences, 25 April, http://matthewlincoln.net/2014/04/25/tool-trouble.html. 
                    
                    
                        Nowiskie, B. (2014). Asking for It. 8 February, http://nowviskie.org/2014/asking-for-it/. 
                    
                    
                        Padilla, T. (2014). Tooling: Paths toward Sparking Interest and Curiosity in DH, 27 April, http://www.thomaspadilla.org/2014/04/27/tooling/. 
                    
                    
                        Vinopal, J. (2014). Biases and Errors in Our Tools: How Do You Cope? Reflections of a Newcomer to Textual Analysis. 2 March, http://vinopal.org/2014/03/02/biases-and-errors-in-our-tools-how-doyou- cope-reflections-of-a-newcomer-to-textual-analysis/. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Modelling Concepts to Improve the Search Capabilities on Ancient Corpora
                
                    
                        Cheema
                        Muhammad Faisal
                    
                    Leipzig University, Germany
                    faisal@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Blumenstein
                        Judith
                    
                    Leipzig University, Germany
                    blumenst@rz.uni-leipzig.de
                
                
                    
                        Scheuermann
                        Gerik
                    
                    Leipzig University, Germany
                    scheuermann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    concept editor
                    concept search
                    concept modelling
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    knowledge representation
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Motivation
            A common task nowadays is the retrieval of information using search engines such as Google. Often, the results of a usual keyword search are not satisfying, and the user is forced to reformulate the query in order to improve the quality and to increase or reduce the number of search results.
            When searching ancient texts for passages related to a specific topic, humanities scholars encounter similar problems. Considering 
                epilepsy as an example, the traditional keyword search for the corresponding Latin term 
                morbus comitialis (‘disease of the assembly’) yields incomplete results. Operating a truncated search for 
                morb* comiti* extracts more but less accurate results. It also yields false positives like a passage from Titus Livius (
                Ab urbe condita libri 41,18,16) containing both the words 
                morbus and 
                comitia but in a political context only. A further issue regarding the mentioned example is the existence of texts that relate to 
                epilepsy but don’t use the corresponding terms explicitly (e.g., Lucretius, 
                De rerum natura 3,487ff). Here, the disease is paraphrased via occurring symptoms such as 
                spuma (‘foam’) and 
                concidere (‘collapse’). Furthermore, searching for 
                epilepsy only by the term 
                morbus comitialis is incomplete because there are many different terms denoting the disease. Therefore, a simple keyword search is inadequate in finding appropriate results.
            
            The prior goal of the eXChange
                1 project is to extract more and more accurate results by extending the traditional keyword search with a so-called concept search. For this purpose, we develop a concept editor that supports the scholars in modeling their ideas of concepts. Using these concept models, we operate a concept search on ancient corpora and adequately rank the results, such that texts supporting the modeled concept are ranked higher. The significance of our concept modeling methodology is to empower the humanities scholar to construct concepts using her expert knowledge, and iteratively refine the model after analyzing the search results. 
            
            
                Related Work
            
            Besides the aforementioned traditional keyword search, more sophisticated approaches have evolved over time. A 
                semantic search (Guha et al., 2003) takes the contextual meaning of a term into account by automatically considering synonyms, word variation, and so on, whereas a 
                concept search (Giunchiglia et al., 2009) automatically retrieves data that is conceptually similar to the formulated query. These search strategies can be supported with 
                topic maps (Park et al., 2002) or 
                concept maps (Novak et al., 2006), where certain topics and relationships can be modeled in a graph structure. Based upon reference texts such as glossaries, thesauri, and classification systems, these models can be automatically generated for modern languages. Appleford introduced human-generated 
                topic profiles that consist of various allowed and disallowed terms forming a Boolean query (Appleford et al., 2013).
                2 The major difference of our suggested concept modeling compared to existing techniques is that concepts in information retrieval are formulated primarily using existing semantic knowledge from thesauri, topic maps, semantic networks, and so forth. Our suggested concept modeling allows the scholar to express her understanding of the concept model without the need of any semantic knowledge. 
            
            Teevan argues that even with a perfect search engine, a poorly constructed search question may not lead to the right answer, so the user needs to be provided with a directed search system (Teevan et al., 2004). This becomes quite relevant in case of ancient corpora that comprise a particular complexity and uncertainty, which leads to a potential evolution of concepts in ancient times. Also, the sparse presence of reference texts for ancient languages requires a semiautomated generation of concepts. For this task, we present a new methodology to assist humanities scholars in searching ancient texts by empowering them with a directed search environment in the form of a concept editor (discussed in the next section), where a scholar can model a concept using simple graph building tools. This was also a requirement of the collaborating humanities scholars as they wanted full control over the search process, which an automated search system fails to provide. 
            
                The Concept Editor 
            
            Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the concept editor
                3 containing the concept 
                fever. Various shapes are provided for concept modeling. Initially, the scholar defines the main concept 
                fever, drawn in blue. Other shapes representing subconcepts or terms can be drawn via drag&amp;drop to support structuring the concept in a meaningful way. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Concept editor.
            The 
                fever concept consists of the subconcept 
                fever symptoms, which is connected to related Latin terms, and the subconcept 
                fever labels, listing all known Latin terms used to describe fever. The editor provides four ways of connecting a shape to its predecessor discriminated by color. Green shapes support the given concept while red shapes are contradictory. Saturated colors represent definite knowledge of the scholars, whereas light shades represent assumptions. According to the model, texts containing the terms 
                febris or 
                febrire (‘to have fever’) were most likely used to address the concept 
                fever. Terms like quartana may denote fever (‘quartan’) but also serve to name other things. Thus, they are colored in lighter shade.
            
            Each term shape is connected to all possible spellings and word-forms contained in the database. A popup on demand provides a list and tagcloud that allow one to observe and select terms related to the corresponding concept. Figure 2 shows the selected word-forms for the term 
                quartana. As 
                fever in Latin is female, other gender forms of the adjective 
                quartanus can be excluded. By taking advantage of language-specific grammar rules, it will help the scholar to avoid irrelevant results. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Selecting word-forms.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Concept 
                epilepsy
            
            The current model for the concept 
                epilepsy is shown in Figure 3. It also contains subconcepts for labels and symptoms. Most of the Latin terms denoting epilepsy are represented by two single words (e.g., 
                morbus comitialis or 
                morbus maior). The subconcept 
                symptoms is further subdivided, showing, e.g., 
                the affected parts of the body. The unlikely symptom 
                fever is imported as a contradictory subconcept, so all 
                fever-related terms represent a contradictory relation to the concept 
                epilepsy. Additionally, potential causes of epilepsy (e.g., 
                vinum [‘vine’]) are given, and a list of contradicting political terms reduces the relevance of political texts for which the term 
                comitialis is common.
            
            After the concept is built, it is stored for persistence and forwarded to a concept search module. The selected word-forms and spellings of all terms are the basis for the search. For each text of the corpus, we compute a relevancy rank according to the proximity to the given concept. Each occurring ‘green term’ increases the rank of a text, and each occurring ‘red term’ decreases it. Finally, the result list contains all texts ordered by decreasing relevance.
                4
            
            
                Preliminary Results
            
            The results of the search for the concept 
                epilepsy are partially consistent with the humanities scholar’s expectations. So, texts of authors popular for their medical works are highly ranked, e.g., 
                De medicina by Aulus Cornelius Celsus and 
                Naturalis historia by Pliny the Elder. Furthermore, a very low rank is calculated for the unrelated political text 
                Ab urbe condita libri, written by the Augustan chronicler Titus Livius—one of the top results of the traditional keyword search.
            
            The appearance of two texts with a high rank is surprising for the scholars: 
                De re coquinaria by Apicius on cuisine and 
                De re rustica by Columella on agriculture. That these texts appear among the results may be due to the term 
                vinum. First, it can be assumed that it refers to epilepsy, but a detailed examination of the respective passages is required to find out if it occurs in remarks on epilepsy or, say, outline the relationship between nutrition and health (dietetics).
            
            Conclusion
            The benefit and potential of the presented concept search system compared to the traditional keyword search are not only in their multifacetedness but also the enabled persistence of the modeled concepts. Depending on the accuracy of search results, the scholar can iteratively improve results, either by adding or excluding terms from concepts. Retaining the control on the search and the ability to steer the search into a desired direction, now supported by the concept editor, was a major concern of the scholars.
            Often, digitized ancient fragments are neither associated with an author nor with a certain title. This complicates their automated classification as authors are often related to specific genres. Based upon the modeling of generic concepts (e.g., the concept 
                political terms), the potential genres of unclassified texts could be hypothesized.
            
            As a side benefit of the concept modeling, we automatically collect and store the modeled hierarchies and relationships between (sub)concepts. Slightly enhancing the scholar’s modeling capabilities, we might be able to assemble thesauri for ancient languages in the future.
            Notes
            1. Digital Humanities project, eXChange: Exploring Concept Change and Transfer in Antiquity, http://exchange-projekt.de/.
            2. Operating on social web sources, one is able to discover occurrences that match the given profile while dropping text passages that contain any of the disallowed terms. We consider that excluding text passages due to a disallowed term may result in the loss of important text passages.
            3. The web-based concept editor is written in JavaScript and uses the libraries mxGraph (https://jgraph.github.io/mxgraph/) and jQuery (http://jquery.com).
            4. In the current status, the search algorithm works on whole texts only. In the future, we will provide a list of text passages with a high density of related terms to further facilitate the scholar’s workflow. Furthermore, we will provide a transparent view of the results in the form of visual statistics illustrating the reasons for the ranking of a single text passage and the distribution of a concept’s related terms in general.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Appleford, S. and Thatcher, J. (2013). Using the Social Web to Explore the Online Discourse and Memory of the Civil War. In
                         Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2013, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, 16–19 July 2013.
                    
                    
                        Giunchiglia, F., Kharkevich, U. and Zaihrayeu, I. (2009). Concept Search. In 
                        The Semantic Web: Research and Applications. Berlin: Springer, pp. 429–44.
                    
                    
                        Guha, R., McCool, R. and Miller, E. (2003). Semantic Search. In 
                        Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on World Wide Web, Budapest, 20–24 May 2003, pp. 700–709.
                    
                    
                        Novak, J. D. and Cañas, A. J. (2006). The Theory Underlying Concept Maps and How to Construct and Use Them. Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.
                    
                    
                        Park, J. and Hunting, S., with Foreword by Engelbart, D. C. (2002). 
                        XML Topic Maps: Creating and Using Topic Maps for the Web. Addison Wesley Longman, Boston.
                    
                    
                        Teevan, J., Alvarado, C., Ackerman, M. S. and Karger, D. R. (2004). The Perfect Search Engine Is Not Enough: A Study of Orienteering Behavior in Directed Search. In 
                        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vienna, Austria, 24–29 April 2004, pp. 415–422.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Modelling Genre Using Character Networks: The National Tales and Domestic Novels of Maria Edgeworth
                
                    
                        Falk
                        Michael Gregory
                    
                    University of Kent, UK, United Kingdom
                    michaelgfalk@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Maria Edgeworth
                    network analysis
                    genre
                    novel
                    romanticism
                
                
                    literary studies
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Maria Edgeworth (1768–1849), a once-neglected Anglo-Irish novelist of the Romantic period, is becoming increasingly popular in academic circles. She was an innovative novelist, especially in her use of Irish dialect, witty dialogue, and social analysis.
            Today, scholars tend to divide her novels into two main categories: (1) her ‘national tales’, which take place predominately in Ireland, and explore the Irish national character and the social structure of the Irish countryside; and (2) her ‘domestic novels’, which take place predominately in England, and explore issues of gender, race, and history in the daily lives of English aristocrats (Butler, 1972; Ferris, 2002; Hollingworth, 1997; Kelly, 1989; Voss-Clesly, 1979).
            At first glance, this distinction is compelling, but it also underemphasises similarities between these groups of novels. Her books share common themes, such as an interest in education and historical progress, and a sound approach to her fiction would study both the similarities and differences between her ‘English’ and ‘Irish’ novels.
            Methods
            We can use a new technique—character network analysis—to model the dramatic structure of Edgeworth’s novels, and consider similarities and differences across this common generic distinction. Character network analysis was first introduced to literary scholars by Franco Moretti (2011; 2013), though sociologists had earlier experimented with literary applications of the technique (Stiller et al., 2003).
            Here I apply this technique to three of Edgeworth’s ‘national tales’ and three of her ‘domestic novels’. The raw data was collected by hand, in the form of adjacency matrices for each chapter. Each character constituted a ‘node’ in the network. If they addressed another character in the novel, then an ‘edge’ was drawn between them. Each edge was given a ‘weight’ equal to the number of chapters in which the two characters speak to one another. This data was processed in R using the iGraph package (R Team, 2013; Csardi, 2013). Network diagrams were produced using Gephi (Bastian et al., 2009).
            Results
            Statistical analysis reveals important similarities between the two genres in this small corpus. First, three different measures of ‘centrality’ were calculated: 
                degree centrality (which measures how many edges are connected to each node), 
                betweenness centrality (which how many nodes are connected to one another through a given node) and 
                strength (which is identical to betweenness centrality, but takes account of the ‘edge weights’) (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). Every novel had one character who topped every centrality measure, except for 
                Helen (Table 1). All six novels are 
                Figurenromane, with a single central protagonist. Second, a community detection algorithm was run, which tended to sort the characters in all the novels into different households (Figures 1–6, displayed on poster) (Blondel et al., 2008). All the novels, whether ‘domestic’ or ‘Irish’, depict the world as a network of noble households.
            
            
                
            
            But character network analysis also reveals significant differences between the ‘national tales’ and ‘domestic novels’. Four measurements were taken of the overall structure of the six novel networks: the 
                density (the proportion of possible edges that are present in the network), the 
                transitivity (the probability that A and B will be connected if they are both already linked to C), the 
                betweenness centralisation (which measures how much greater the ‘betweenness’ of the most central node is compared to all other nodes), and the 
                degree centralisation (which performs the same calculation, but on the basis of degree centrality) (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). On these four measurements, significant differences between the two categories of novel emerged (Table 2).
            
            
                
            
            The novels that were set in England or had female protagonists had higher average 
                density and 
                transitivity, suggesting that the ‘domestic novels’ depict smaller, more tightly knit communities, with more interactions between the different minor characters. The novels that were set in Ireland or had male protagonists had higher 
                betweenness and 
                degree centralisation, suggesting that in these novels, which feature more travel, the protagonist is more important for connecting the different regions in the network. 
                Harrington is an interesting case, being the only novel set in England with a male protagonist. An individual value plot suggests there is a complex interaction of setting and gender in this small corpus (Figure 7, displayed on poster).
            
            Conclusion
            Character network analysis is a promising technique, because it produces intuitive results that are easy to reconcile with traditional methods. When we visualise the novels as network diagrams, we can immediately grasp an important similarity between Edgeworth’s ‘national tales’ and ‘domestic novels’: the presence of a dominating protagonist and the network of noble households. When we quantify the novels using statistical analysis, we can start to unpick different factors that are difficult to perceive on a close reading: particularly the hidden structural differences between male and female protagonists, which would bear further scrutiny.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bastian, M., Heymann, S. and Jacomy, M. (2009). Gephi: An Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. Paper presented at the 
                        International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, San Jose, CA, 17–20 May 2009.
                    
                    
                        Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R. and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks. 
                        Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 
                        10.
                    
                    
                        Butler, M. (1972). 
                        Maria Edgeworth: A Literary Biography. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Csardi, G. (2013). iGraph Package: Network Analysis and Visualization (Version 0.6.6). Vienna: CRAN, http://igraph.sourceforge.net.
                    
                    
                        Ferris, I. (2002). 
                        The Romantic National Tale and the Question of Ireland. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Hollingworth, B. (1997). 
                        Maria Edgeworth’s Irish Writing: Language, History, Politics. Macmillan, Basingstoke.
                    
                    
                        Kelly, G. (1989). 
                        English Fiction of the Romantic Period, 1789–1830. Longman, London.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        New Left Review, 
                        68: 80–102. 
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). ‘Operationalizing’: or, The Function of Measurement in Modern Literary Theory. 
                        New Left Review, 
                        84: 103–19.
                    
                    
                        R Team. (2013). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing, http://www.R-project.org/
                    
                    
                        Stiller, J., Nettle, D. and Dunbar, R. (2003). The Small World of Shakespeare’s Plays. 
                        Human Nature, 
                        14(4): 397–408.
                    
                    
                        Voss-Clesly, P. (1979). 
                        Tendencies of Character Depiction in the Domestic Novels of Burney, Edgeworth, and Austen: A Consideration of Subjective and Objective World. Institut für Anglistik &amp; Amerikanistik, Universität Salzburg, Salzburg.
                    
                    
                        Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). 
                        Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Modelling the (Inter)National Printmaking Networks of Early Modern Europe
                
                    
                        Lincoln
                        Matthew
                    
                    University of Maryland, United States of America
                    mlincol1@umd.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    R
                    dynamic network analysis
                    engraving
                    digital art history
                
                
                    art history
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Histories of early modern European artistic printmaking have often taken a decidedly nationalistic approach. Giorgio Vasari included an entire chapter contrasting the achievements of Italian, Netherlandish, and German printmakers in the 1568 edition of his 
                Vite (Vasari, 1996, 80; Gregory, 2012). In the north, Haarlem-based art theorist Karel van Mander framed printmaking as a quintessentially Dutch medium, using his 1604 biography of the virtuoso engraver Hendrick Goltzius to rhetorically mirror Vasari’s elevation of Michelangelo in the 
                Vite, thus arguing that engraving could rival the finest masterpieces of painting and sculpture that Italy had to offer (Miedema, 1994, 385–406; Melion, 1991, 22–23). Modern canonical narratives often focus on the emergence of particular regional or national artistic printmaking communities, such as that in the northern Netherlands around the turn of the 17th century, when Haarlem printmakers Claesz Jansz Visscher, Esaias van de Velde I, and Willem Buytewech began to experiment with new graphic styles that diverged from more conventional international trends, and also turned increasingly towards ‘native’ subject matter, such as views of the Dutch countryside and cityscapes. Scholars have connected this turn in style and content to the coalescing of a Dutch national identity during the course of the revolt against Spain between 1568 and 1648 (Freedberg, 1980; Levesque, 1994)
            
            Less well understood is the role that changing production practices, especially international collaboration, may have played in these shifts. Woodcuts and engravings—and, to a lesser extent, etchings—generally required the collaboration of artistic designers, plate cutters, printers, and distributors (Riggs and Silver, 1993). The sheer quantity and variety of prints from this period, and the number of individual printmakers and publishers involved, challenge traditional models of art historical argumentation. Newly available digitized museum databases offer the chance to analyze large-scale changes in the organizational patterns and artistic strategies of reproductive printmakers and publishers in the Netherlands, and of Europe at large, during the 16th and 17th centuries. This paper draws on the British Museum’s large database of European prints between 1550 and 1750 to infer a dynamic network model of European artistic print production in this period. The group-external / group-internal index of the regional/national groups of printmakers constituting this larger network offers a useful metric for describing the shifting balance of regional/national versus international print production in Europe in this period. The results of this study suggest the importance of structural incentives, under-analyzed in the current literature, that guided the development of regional artistic print production.
            Data and Methodology
            This study draws on the digital records of the British Museum’s collections, published as Linked Open Data using the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (Oldman et al., 2014). The database describes 53,462 dated prints (including woodcuts, etchings, and engravings) produced between 1550 and 1750. The British Museum has classified at least one associated creator for each of these prints, and assigned a production role such as ‘published by’, ‘print made by’, and ‘made after’. From these dated objects and associated production data, it is possible to construct a dynamic network structure, where designers, engravers, and publishers are interconnected based on the prints they produced. Date properties on edges (print production dates) and nodes (artist life dates) make it possible to derive subsets of the network at different points in time. Using the 
                igraph package for R, I wrote an analysis script that created 10-year slices of the network using a rolling window (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).
            
            To evaluate the dynamics of domestic vs. international interaction, I implemented an R version of the group-external / group-internal index. The E-I index measures the coefficient of group-external to group-internal ties for 
                
                    
                        N
                    
                classes of nodes (
                
                    
                        
                            
                                N
                            
                            
                                1
                            
                        
                        =
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                    
                                        e
                                    
                                
                                -
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                    
                                        e
                                    
                                
                                +
                                
                                    
                                        n
                                    
                                    
                                        i
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                ) where 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                n
                            
                            
                                e
                            
                        
                    
                 represents all 
                external links from one class of node to another in a different class, and 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                n
                            
                            
                                i
                            
                        
                    
                 represents all 
                internal links between nodes in the same class (Krackhardt and Stern, 1988, 127–29; Hanneman and Riddle, 2005, 128–32; Matos et al., 2014, 15). A positive coefficient thus indicates that members of one nationality made a majority of their connections to artists outside that nationality, while a negative coefficient indicates a majority of domestic connections.
            
            Results
            Figure 2 shows the E-I trend for the six largest regional/national groups of printmakers. The Dutch, French, and English networks all have positive E-I values at 1550, meaning that all these networks were mostly connected to foreign actors. Each of these national networks seems to have experienced their own relatively swift shift towards a majority of domestic connections in the following centuries. While the Netherlands exhibits a sharp inward turn around 1575–1580, the French printmaking network had a more gradual inward turn that was already under way by 1550, but took a particularly sharp negative (i.e., inward) turn between 1600 and 1640. The English network also experienced a sharp turn, but as late as 1650, almost 75 years after the Dutch turn. Conversely, Flemish, German, and Italian printmakers initially connected mostly inwardly, only later shifting towards majority-external connections around the turn of the 17th century.
            Discussion
            The recurring pattern of sudden shifts from majority-external connections to majority-internal connections in the Dutch, Flemish, French, and English printmaking networks is striking, and suggests the pivotal effect of historical incidents on print production. For example, the Dutch inward shift around 1570 may have been partly due to the Spanish capture of Antwerp, which precipitated a massive exodus from the city, particularly of Protestants fleeing religious persecution. This migration infused the Dutch provinces with new wealth and talent, and it was recognized even by contemporaries that this wave powered the consumption side of the paintings market, and introduced innovations on the production side of that market. (On the effect of the Flemish migration into the Northern Netherlands, see Montias, 1982, 73; 1987, 459; Vries, 1991, 265; Sluijter, 2009.) However, it also seems to have had an effect on the organization of printmaking. In addition to an influx of new talent and demand generated by a surge in immigration, printmakers may also have adjusted their behavior as conflict made it more difficult to conduct the international business of printmaking, from the early transmission of contracts and drawn designs to the large shipments of finished impressions required for a successful printmaking business. With avenues to international collaboration cut off, and an increasing amount of domestic demand in centers like Haarlem and Amsterdam, the Dutch printmaking network underwent a rapid reorganization in the working relationships among Dutch printmakers to favor more domestic connections than before.
            However, these shifts did not occur at the same time across Europe. It seems little coincidence that the regional networks that are primarily inward-connecting in the mid-16th century (Flanders, Italy, and Germany) also had some of the longest printmaking traditions, dating back to the late 15th century (Landau and Parshall, 1994). The medium of printing demanded a set of artistic and technical skills, not to mention a set of social connections and financial capital, that presented a barrier to new entrants into the printmaking world. Designers needed to learn what aesthetic effects and compositions would translate well to the printed medium. Printmakers had to learn how to render painted or drawn lighting and color effects with graven lines. Print distribution presented yet another hurdle to new entrants to the market. Publishers needed a large pool of both financial as well as social capital: in addition to purchasing rolling presses and paper, they also had to coordinate with artists as well as with distributors and buyers in domestic markets and at the international book fairs. In the aggregate, these requirements presented a barrier not only to individuals but also to regions and countries. Germany and Italy, the respective origins of woodcut printing in the north and the south in the late 15th century, were able to make mostly internal connections through the 16th century. They would gradually receive an increasing number of foreign connections, as Dutch, French, and English artists sought to connect to expert printmakers. Over time, these externally dependent regions would begin to cultivate more native talent, knowledge, and physical resources, as experienced printmakers trained new students and transitioned from making prints to establishing their own publishing firms. It seems that once a critical mass of designers, printmakers, and publishers had developed within a country, these national networks shifted quickly, rather than gradually, towards increased domestic production. Congruent trends in other countries suggest that it was not the effects of one specific conflict alone that powered the Dutch shift towards more domestic printmaking; it is more accurate to say that war 
                catalyzed the organizational transformation that had already been made possible, and indeed inevitable, by longstanding international collaboration. This more rigorous and specific measurement of organizational changes will allow art historians to enrich our current histories of style and genre in printmaking, and more robustly characterize the relationship of artistic trends to historical ones.
            
            Figures
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Visualization of a small affiliation network inferred from four different print impressions.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Comparative plot of the group-external / group-internal index of French, English, Dutch, German, Italian, and Flemish artists between 1550 and 1750.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Csardi, G., and T. Nepusz. (2006). The Igraph Software Package for Complex Network Research. 
                        InterJournal, Complex Systems, 
                        
                            http://igraph.org
                        , 1695. 
                    
                    
                        Freedberg, D. (1980). 
                        Dutch Landscape Prints of the Seventeenth Century. British Museum Publications, London.
                    
                    
                        Gregory, S. (2012). 
                        Vasari and the Renaissance Print. Ashgate, Burlington.
                    
                    
                        Hanneman, R. A. and Riddle, M. (2005). 
                        Introduction to Social Network Methods. University of California, Riverside, 
                        
                            http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/nettext/
                        .
                    
                    
                        Krackhardt, D. and Stern, R. N. (1988). Informal Networks and Organizational Crises: An Experimental Simulation. 
                        Social Psychology Quarterly,
                        51(2): 123–40, doi:
                        
                            10.2307/2786835
                        .
                    
                    
                        Landau, D. and Parshall, P. W. (1994). 
                        The Renaissance Print, 1470–1550. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    
                    
                        Levesque, C. (1994). 
                        Journey through Landscape in Seventeenth-Century Holland: The Haarlem Print Series and Dutch Identity. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park.
                    
                    
                        Matos, G. d., el al. (2014). 
                        Peer Influence in the Diffusion of the iPhone 3G over a Large Social Network. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2053420. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, 
                        http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2053420.
                    
                    
                        Melion, W. S. (1991). 
                        Shaping the Netherlandish Canon: Karel van Mander’s Schilder-Boeck. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Miedema, H. (ed.). (1994). 
                        Karel van Mander: The Lives of the Illustrious Netherlandish and German Painters (1604). Davaco Publishers, Doornspijk.
                    
                    
                        Montias, J. M. (1982). 
                        Artists and Artisans in Delft: A Socio-Economic Study of the Seventeenth Century. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
                    
                    
                        Montias, J. M. (1987). Cost and Value in Seventeenth-Century Dutch Art. 
                        Art History,
                        10(4): 455.
                    
                    
                        Oldman, D., et al. ( 2014). Realizing Lessons of the Last 20 Years: A Manifesto for Data Provisioning and Aggregation Services for the Digital Humanities (a Position Paper). 
                        D-Lib Magazine,
                        20(7/8), 
                        http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july14/oldman/07oldman.html.
                    
                    
                        Riggs, T. and Silver, L. (1993). 
                        Graven Images: The Rise of Professional Printmakers in Antwerp and Haarlem, 1540–1640. Mary and Leigh Block Gallery, Northwestern University, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Sluijter, E. J. (2009). On Brabant Rubbish, Economic Competition, Artistic Rivalry, and the Growth of the Market for Paintings in the First Decades of the Seventeenth Century. 
                        Journal of Historians of Netherlandish Art,
                        1(2), 
                        http://www.jhna.org/index.php/past-issues/volume-1-issue-2/109-on-brabant-rubbish.
                    
                    
                        Vasari, G. (1996). 
                        Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects. D. Campbell, London.
                    
                    
                        Vries, J. d. (1991). Art history. In Freedberg, D. and Vries, J. d. (eds), 
                        Art in History, History in Art: Studies in Seventeenth-Century Dutch Culture. Santa Monica, CA: Getty Center for the History of Art &amp; the Humanities, pp. 249–71.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Morphological Analysis of Japanese Kyōgen Text
                
                    
                        OGISO
                        Toshinobu
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    togiso@ninjal.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        KONO
                        Tomoaki
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    tkouno@ninjal.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        ICHIMURA
                        Taro
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    tichimura@ninjal.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    historical corpus
                    Late Middle Japanese
                    morphological analysis
                    Kyogen
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    natural language processing
                    philology
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As part of the corpus of historical Japanese, we are constructing a corpus of 
                kyōgen books. 
                Kyōgen is a comic Japanese theatrical form that developed alongside 
                noh in the Muromachi period (1337–1573). 
                Ōkura-ryū (Ōkura school) is one major school of 
                kyōgen, and the 
                Ōkura Toraakira bon books are their oldest script books, written by Okura Toraakira in 1642; however, these 
                kyōgen preserve an older form of the Japanese language than those of the other schools, reflecting the language of the Muromachi period, and as a result they constitute important documents for research into the colloquial language of the time. Therefore, we have begun to construct a corpus of 
                kyōgen based on the text of the 
                Ōkura Toraakira bon books, which consist of 237 plays (approximately 270,000 words).
            
            This corpus requires textual annotation for morphological information, such as part-of-speech, lexeme, and pronunciation information. Initially, we used an existing morphological analysis system to automatically annotate morphological information for all words in the text. However, this system could not analyze the 
                kyōgen texts with sufficient precision because of difference of the linguistic characteristics.
            
            Therefore, we decided to develop a new electronic dictionary for 
                kyōgen text based on UniDic, an existing electronic dictionary for morphological analysis of Japanese (http://sourceforge.jp/projects/unidic/). We used two approaches: expansion of the entries in the existing UniDic, and annotation of a new 
                kyōgen corpus as training data for morphological analysis.
            
            UniDic for Kyōgen
            Starting from the existing UniDic, we extended word entries to address the problems of lexical, morphological, and orthographic differences. UniDic is structured with layered entries in order to treat words flexibly depending on the purposes of researchers. Figure 1 exemplifies the structured word indexes of UniDic. The Lemma layer treats words at abstract lemmatized level, like the entries in a general dictionary. The Form layer distinguishes allomorphs and different conjugations. Specification of conjugations is held in this layer. Finally, the Orthography layer is prepared to distinguish orthographic variants.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Hierarchical structure of UniDic.
            We added new entries to each level in this structure, approximately 6,000 in all, to reflect these lexical, morphological, and orthographic differences.
            To remedy the issues of morphological and syntactic differences between contemporary Japanese texts and 
                kyōgen texts, we manually annotated a corpus of 
                kyōgen containing 100,000 words in order to produce training and test corpora.
            
            MeCab is a morphological analyzer based on the conditional random field (CRF) analytical method that achieves state-of-the-art performance in contemporary Japanese morphological analysis. MeCab can automatically learn feature weights for UniDic from an annotated corpus of 
                kyōgen to build a morphological analyzer.
            
            Evaluation
            Using a dedicated dictionary (UniDic for 
                Kyōgen), 
                kyōgen texts can now be analyzed with a high degree of accuracy. We evaluated the performance of UniDic for 
                Kyōgen using test data consisting of 10,000 words of randomly sampled sentences (10% of the annotated corpus). The evaluations were carried out on four levels. Level 1 covered the accuracy of word segmentation. Level 2 covered the accuracy of part-of-speech tagging for items correct at Level 1. Level 3 covered the accuracy of lemmatization for items correct at Levels 1 and 2. Finally, Level 4 covered the accuracy of distinction between allomorphs for items correct at all other levels. Table 1 shows the performance of UniDic for 
                Kyōgen at each of the four levels.
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        Level 1
                        Segmentation
                    
                    
                        Level 2
                        POS-tagging
                    
                    
                        Level 3
                        Lemmatization
                    
                    
                        Level 4
                        Allomorphs
                    
                
                
                    F-measure
                    0.9881
                    0.9629
                    0.9567
                    0.9536
                
            
            Table 1. Accuracy of UniDic for 
                Kyōgen.
            
            Conclusion
            The accuracy for lemmatization, which is the one most often used by linguists, is approximately 96%. This number is only slightly inferior in comparison with the accuracy of the morphological analysis dictionary for contemporary Japanese (approximately 98%). Using UniDic for 
                Kyōgen, 
                kyōgen texts can now be analyzed with a high degree of accuracy.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Den, Y., Nakamura, J., Ogiso, T., and Ogura, H. (2008). A Proper Approach to Japanese Morphological Analysis: Dictionary, Model, and Evaluation. 
                        Proceedings of the 6th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 1019–24.
                    
                    
                        Den, Y., Ogiso, T., Ogura, H., Yamada, A., Minematsu, N., Uchimoto, K. and Koiso, H. (2007). The Development of an Electronic Dictionary for Morphological Analysis and Its Application to Japanese Corpus Linguistics (in Japanese). 
                        Japanese Linguistics, 
                        22: 101–23.
                    
                    
                        Kudo, T. (2012). MeCab: Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological Analyzer. https://code.google.com/p/mecab/.
                    
                    
                        Kudo, T., Yamamoto, K. and Matsumoto, Y. (2004). Applying Conditional Random Fields to Japanese Morphological Analysis. 
                        Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 230–37.
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Ichimura, T. and Kono, T. (2013). Preliminary Study of Morphological Analysis of Early Modern Japanese (in Japanese). 
                        Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Japanese Corpus Linguistics, pp. 145–50.
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Komachi, M., Den, Y. and Matsumoto, Y. (2008). UniDic for Early Middle Japanese: A Dictionary for Morphological Analysis of Classical Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the 8th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pp. 911–15.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Multiple Views and Modes of Engagement with a Repository of Digital Texts
                
                    
                        Wittern
                        Christian
                    
                    Kyoto University, Japan
                    cwittern@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Digital repository
                    collaboration
                    user interaction
                    research infrastructure
                
                
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    user studies / user needs
                    asian studies
                    philology
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digital representations of texts depend on a specific interface that exposes them to the reader. These interfaces are what enables the reader to interact with the text, but at the same time they do limit these interactions to the specific functions that the designers implemented. 
            While working on a digital repository of premodern Chinese texts (described most recently in Wittern, 2014), some of our most pressing questions were, ‘To what requirements of the readers do we want to cater?’ and ‘How can we design the interaction with the repository in a way that allows all users to feel comfortable and do what they want?’, or ‘How can the repository enable and support the research questions of its users?’ and ‘How can we enable the researchers to collaborate and cooperate?’
            It was quite clear that no one interface would be able to accommodate all these needs. We therefore designed the system from the beginning as a house with many windows, all of which allow peeks into different, sometimes overlapping parts of its interior, that is, our repository of texts. At the moment, three windows to different rooms have been realized and will be discussed below. 
             1. The stack room, the place where the collection is held; the material held here is open access.
             2. The reading room, a place where items from the collection can be requested and read; this room is open to the general public.
             3. The researchers’ office (of which every researcher has its own separate one)—items here include those checked out from the stacks and additional items acquired privately by the researcher; access is limited to the owner (and administrative staff).
            The poster will show how the functionality of these rooms is mapped to different interfaces/applications to access the digital repository.
            The Researchers’ Office 
            The office of a researcher is where interaction with the texts happens in long, uninterrupted stretches of time (ideally); this is the place for close reading, annotating the texts, or writing a commentary to the text and possibly translating it. 
            To support this mode of work, a specialized mode of the versatile editor 
                Emacs has been developed. It offers not only access to the digital repository but includes a wide range of additional tools for working with the text, including reference works, note-taking, publication, and analysis, as well as support for reproducible research and research notebooks.
            
            A researcher can also bring his own texts and tools into interaction with the digital archive, and this in fact blurs the line between working with texts in the archive and texts available locally to the researcher: a digital copy of the text is available to the researcher with all of the same possible interactions that are available to the researcher with his own texts. Furthermore, access to the archive being merely one of the many functions of the interface to be called upon when necessary, it allows a much tighter integration with the workflow of the researcher than a separate dedicated desktop application or even a web application. 
            The Reading Room
            The reading room is open for visitors and used for quick lookup in material that might not be central to the task at hand; it is also used for the discovery of new material. 
            For the digital repository, this is realized as a web application that provides basic search and discovery functionality and allows the browsing of catalogs and texts. Over time, more tools will be added, and a transition path (or a dual-use scenario) to the desktop-based 
                Emacs environment will be developed. However, the exact development path has not yet been determined and will depend on the experience of the users interacting with the current system. The reading room is accessible at http://www.kanripo.org. 
            
            The reading room also serves as a reception room for visitors who might advance to the researchers’ office. It allows them to see what kind of material and tools are available, and thus to gauge if the necessary investment of time is likely to pay off. 
            The Stack Rooms 
            This is where the material available in the reading room and researchers’ office is held. The stack room is the repository of the texts held in https://github.com/kanripo.
            Researchers may also donate texts curated by themselves to the repository, or fork and branch existing texts to gain write access to them. Interaction with the stack room is possible through 
                Emacs or through a dedicated web front-end. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Domnik, C., et al. (2014). Org Mode for Emacs—Your Life in Plain Text. http://orgmode.org.
                    
                    
                        Rawal, V. (n.d.). Reproducible Research Papers Using Org-mode and R: A Guide. https://github.com/vikasrawal/orgpaper.
                    
                    
                        Wittern, C. (2013). Towards an Architecture for Active Reading. In 
                        Scholarly and Research Communication, 
                        3(4): 1–11, http://www.src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/59.
                    
                    
                        Wittern, C. (2014). Kanripo and Mandoku: Tools for Git-Based Distributed Repositories for Premodern Chinese Texts. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2014 Book of Abstracts, pp. 408–9. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Music Score Representation of Poetry Reading: Can Prosody Be Studied by Analyzing the Author’s Voice?
                
                    
                        Yamamoto
                        Takeo
                    
                    Graduate School of Literature and Sociology, The University of Tokyo, Japan
                    ty@tylab.org
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    poetical prosody
                    analysis of recorded voice
                    music score generation
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    literary studies
                    prosodic studies
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            I propose to study prosody of modern poems by analyzing recordings of their authors’ voice reciting their poems and producing forms similar to a music score. An example is shown in Figure 1. In the following, such a notation will simply be called the music score of a poetry reading. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1.
            First I will review developments in three partly overlapping areas related to this study: relationship of poetry recitation to prosody, studies of recorded voice, and prosody of free verse. Then I will describe the computer-assisted method for producing the music score by analyzing recorded voice. Some influential papers have asserted that prosody can’t be studied by analyzing the voice. I will discuss their arguments and show some results indicating that, for many modern poets, analyzing their voice can be an effective way of studying their prosody. 
            Until about half a century ago, linguists, prosodists, psychologists, and sometimes poets actively participated in prosodic studies using human reading of poems. In the mid-1910s, Patterson developed a device called a ‘voice recorder’ that seems to have been a voice amplitude recorder, and poet Amy Lowell used this equipment to measure, in effect, time between stressed syllables in readings of her own and others’ poems. In 1956, Seymour Chatman analyzed recordings of eight people, including the poet himself, reading Frost’s ‘Mowing’. However, those studies were severely attacked by critics W. K. Wimsatt Jr. and Monroe C. Beardsley (1959). They believed that there is an ‘abstract metrical pattern’ in a poem that cannot be studied by analyzing a performance or a set of performances: ‘There are many performances of the same poem—differing among themselves in many ways. A performance is an event, but the poem itself, if there is any poem, must be some kind of enduring object’ (587). Shortly afterwards, linguist Roman Jakobson (1960) concurred, stating that ‘meter, or in more explicit terms, verse design, underlies any single line or, in logical terminology, any single verse instance’ and ‘A variation of verse instances within a given poem must be strictly distinguished from the variable delivery instances’ (365–66). After this, according to Paul Kiparsky (2010), ‘Generative metrics has turned Jakobson’s distinction into an exclusion: Delivery (recitation and text-setting) is not considered to be in the province of metrics’ (slide 6). Among literary prosodists, too, not many have ventured into serious analysis of poets’ recorded voice. 
            In the 1970s, however, Reuven Tsur started to radically change the notion of ‘prosody’. He has formulated an extensive ‘Cognitive Poetics’, encompassing phonology, prosody, and philosophy. More recently, Paul Kiparsky has proposed to expand metrics into ‘broad metrics’, which includes ‘delivery’ (2010). Among literary prosodists, Harvey Gross (1964) has used T. S. Eliot’s recordings for the analysis of his prosody. Poet and scholar Charles Bernstein edited the important book 
                Close Listening (1998a), wherein Bernstein stressed the importance of performance (vocal and print) in prosody. More recently, Marjorie Perloff and Craig Dworkin edited another important book, 
                The Sound of Poetry / The Poetry of Sound (2009).
            
            In the related area of sound study, Jason Camlot (2003), Derek Furr (2010), and Matthew Rubery (2011) have been studying audiobooks and other collections of recordings. Recently, an inter-disciplinary area of ‘voice studies’ seems to be forming.
            Although Wimsatt and Beardsley expressed hope that traditional metrical analysis would be applicable to modernist and later poems, it turned out to be difficult. Several prosodists, including Derek Attridge (1995) and Alan Holder (1995), have been developing prosody for non-metrical verse. Literary critics Helen Vendler (2007) and Marjorie Perloff (2009) have also analyzed prosody in several modernist and, in the case of Perloff, postmodernist poems with non-metrical rhythms, sometimes listening to the poet’s recorded voice. 
            I hope the method described in the following will be usable in the above fields of study. First, the recorded voice is analyzed by using a combination of Wavesurfer and PRAAT speech-analysis software packages. The reason for using two rather similar packages is to take advantage of the user-friendly human interface of Wavesurfer and also the superior pitch analysis and scripting capabilities of PRAAT. The human operator first segments the recorded voice data into syllables and silent/breathing segments, and inputs them into Wavesurfer. The data is imported to PRAAT, and the human operator inputs stress pattern (whether the syllable is heard as stressed or not) and also the line number, in the poem, to which the syllable belongs. After this the analysis is almost automatic, and the following data are obtained from PRAAT: the starting time and duration of each syllable or silence, and the vocal power (loudness) for a short time segment. A perl program was written to convert this into an input program for LilyPond, a software for producing scores. The average over the syllable duration of fundamental formant f0 is taken as the pitch, which determines the position of the note. The duration is converted to the note length (assuming MM=120). The longtime average of power is converted into dynamics. A stressed syllable can be represented by an accent mark next to the note, by a colored note, or both. The resultant music score of poetry recitation will be shown, synchronized with the voice, at the conference.
            The music score obtained as above is, of course, only an approximation of the original recorded voice. It is known that ‘pitch’ is a psychological quantity and does not always correspond to f0. Also, f0 of talking/reciting voice usually changes continually, and its average over a time segment is not an accurate representation. The perception of a stress on a particular syllable is also known to be a psychological (physically difficult to measure) phenomenon, and its presence or absence is sometimes quite difficult to judge, and can be controversial. However, by using music score notation for representing the human voice reciting poetry, much relevant information (not only the stress pattern) is conveniently concentrated in a small space, facilitating discussion.
            The above-mentioned arguments by Wimsatt and Beardsley (1959) and by Jakobson (1960) rely on two assumptions. First, they assume that poetry reading is a performance, and a performance can change arbitrarily and cannot be trusted, even if the performer is the author. Second, they assume that for a poem there is one correct ‘absolute meter’ or ‘verse instance’, which is, in Wimsatt and Beardsley’s terms, ‘something that can be read and studied with the help of grammars and dictionaries and other linguistic guides . . . The meter is something which for the most part inheres in language precisely at that level of linguistic organization which grammars and dictionaries and elementary rhetoric can successfully cope with’ (588). So it can and should be elucidated easily, without going so far as to study any ‘performance’. 
            To see if the first assumption holds, I have studied stress patterns in multiple recordings of the same poem by poets such as W. B. Yeats, Robert Frost, William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, Kenneth Rexroth, W. H. Auden, Allen Ginsberg, and Galway Kinnell. I also analyzed stress patterns of non-authors reading works of those poets and compared them with the author’s reading. The result indicates that the author’s stress pattern is quite stable over years (though there are exceptions), while non-author readers (including poets) tend to read the poem in quite different stress patterns (especially in modern poems that do not have classical metric patterns) from the author’s and from each other’s. That stands to reason, as the stress pattern perhaps is one of the important characteristics in composing a poem, even when (or perhaps the more when) the poem does not have classical meter. In other words, for many authors, the stress pattern may be too important to change arbitrarily (though sometimes change may occur due to the change of heart of the author). On the other hand, the reader often fails to guess the author’s intended rhythm (or find another rhythm) in a modern poem. In short, the first assumption does not seem to hold, at least for many poets reading their own poems. 
            The second point, the assumption of the presence of one ‘absolute meter’ per poem, is difficult to apply to modern poems such as free verse and syllabic verse. For them, modern prosody and sound/voice studies will be able to contribute much, although as Bernstein notes, quoting Peter Quartermain, ‘The poet’s voicing of a poem should not be allowed to eliminate ambiguous voicings in the text; nor should the author’s performance of a poem be absolutely privileged over that of other readers and performers’ (11). 
            The method of analyzing the voice of the poet and the other readers given in this paper will, I hope, contribute to those studies. Relevant software developed in this study (perl programs and PRAAT scripts) will be made available to researchers in the near future.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Attridge, D. (1995). 
                        Poetic Rhythm: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, New York..
                    
                    
                        Bernstein, C. (ed.). (1998a). 
                        Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Bernstein, C. (1998b). Introduction. In Bernstein, C. (ed.), 
                        Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 3–26.
                    
                    
                        Bernstein, C. (1999). 
                        My Way: Speeches and Poems. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Boersma, P. and Weenink, D. (n.d.). PRAAT: Doing Phonetics by Computer, http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/.
                    
                    
                        Camlot, J. (2003). Early Talking Books: Spoken Recordings and Recitation Anthologies, 1880–1920. 
                        Book History,
                        6: 147–73.
                    
                    
                        Camlot, J. (2012). The Sound of Canadian Modernisms: The Sir George Williams University Poetry Series, 1966–74. 
                        Journal of Canadian Studies / Revue d’études canadiennes,
                        46(3): 28–59. 
                    
                    
                        Chatman, S. (1956). Robert Frost’s ‘Mowing’: An Inquiry into Prosodic Structure. 
                        Kenyon Review,
                        18(3): 421–38.
                    
                    
                        Clement, T. E. (2008). ‘A Thing Not Beginning and Not Ending’: Using Digital Tools to Distant-Read Gertrude Stein’s 
                        The Making of Americans. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23(3): 361–81. 
                    
                    
                        Clement, T., et al. (2013). Sounding for Meaning: Using Theories of Knowledge Representation to Analyze Aural Patterns in Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        7(1), http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000146/000146.html.
                    
                    
                        Furr, D. (2010). 
                        Recorded Poetry and Poetic Reception from Edna Millay to the Circle of Robert Lowell. Palgrave, New York.
                    
                    
                        Gross, H. (1964). 
                        Sound and Form in Modern Poetry: A Study of Prosody from Thomas Hardy to Robert Lowell. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
                    
                    
                        Holder, A. (1995). 
                        Rethinking Meter: A New Approach to the Verse Line. Yale University Press, Cranbury, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Jakobson, R. (1960). Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics. In Sebeok, T. A. (ed.), 
                        Style in Language. New York: Wiley, pp. 350–77.
                    
                    
                        Kiparsky, P. (2010). Meter and Performance. 
                        Proc. LSA Metrics Symposium, 8 January, http://web.stanford.edu/~kiparsky/Papers/beamer.lsa2010.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Lowell, A. (1920). Some Musical Analogies in Modern Poetry. 
                        Musical Quarterly,
                        6(1): 127–57.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on World Literature.
                         New Left Review,
                        1 (January–February): 54–68.
                    
                    
                        Nienhyus, H.-W. and Nieuwenhuizen, J. (n.d.). LilyPond: Music Notation for Everyone, http://www.lilypond.org/index.html.
                    
                    
                        Perloff, M. (2009). Introduction: The Sound of Poetry. In Perloff, M. and Dworkin, C. (eds), 
                        The Sound of Poetry / The Poetry of Sound. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1–9.
                    
                    
                        Perloff, M. and Dworkin, C. (eds). (2009). 
                        The Sound of Poetry / The Poetry of Sound. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Quartermain, P. (1998). Sound Reading. In Bernstein, C. (ed.), 
                        Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 217–30.
                    
                    
                        Rubery, M. (ed. and intro.). (2011). 
                        Audiobooks, Literature, and Sound Studies. Routledge, New York.
                    
                    
                        Sjölander, K. and Beskow, J. (2000). Wavesurfer—An Open Source Speech Tool. 
                        Proceedings of ICSLP 2000, 6th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Beijing.
                    
                    
                        Tsur, L. (1977). 
                        A Perception-Oriented Theory of Metre. Porter Israeli Institute for Poetics and Semiotics, Tel Aviv. 
                    
                    
                        Tsur, L. (1992a). 
                        Toward a Theory of Cognitive Poetics. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        Tsur, L. (1992b). 
                        What Makes Sound Patterns Expressive? The Poetic Mode of Speech Perception. Duke University Press, Durham, NC.
                    
                    
                        Tsur, L. (2012a). 
                        Playing by Ear and the Tip of the Tongue: Precategorial Information in Poetry. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        Tsur, L. (2012b). 
                        Poetic Rhythm: Structure and Performance, an Empirical Study in Cognirive Poetics. Sussex Academic Press, Brighton.
                    
                    
                        Vendler, H. (2007). 
                        Our Secret Discipline: Yeats and Lyric Form. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Wimsatt, W. K., Jr., and Beardsley, M. C. (1959). The Concept of Meter: An Excercise in Abstraction. 
                        PMLA,
                        74(5): 585–98.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Myths on Maps
                
                    
                        Newton
                        Greg
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    gregster@uvic.ca
                
                
                    
                        Bowman
                        Laurel
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    lbowman@uvic.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    XML
                    maps
                    myth
                
                
                    classical studies
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    knowledge representation
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            What we commonly refer to as ‘Greek myth’ was initially the product of local oral traditions that celebrated regional heroes and their adventures. The amalgamated texts passed on to us retain much of the sources’ geographical information, allowing us to geo-locate events and characters mentioned by the texts. The Myths on Maps project (http://myths.uvic.ca/) was started in 2009 by Dr. Laurel Bowman as an experimental geographical information system (GIS) with the expressed goal of presenting to a modern audience the geographical connections between people, places, and events that the original tellers and audiences found self-evident. 
            While projects exist to provide information on ancient places (e.g., Pleiades gazetteer of ancient places; 
                http://pleiades.stoa.org/), and others make available repositories of searchable texts (e.g., Perseus Digital Library, 
                http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/), our aim is to bring text and geography together to produce a GIS tightly integrated with our growing collection of texts and standoff data.
            
            Technology
            Given the initial intent of describing relationships, Myths on Maps was originally conceived as a traditional SQL database, using PHP to query the database and render the online portion of the application. After nearly two years of frequent, iterative adjustments to the database schema, it became evident that the project needed to look at other, more flexible methods of storage and retrieval. At that point we settled on an XML/XQuery-based architecture, relying on the eXist XML database (
                http://exist-db.org/) to replace the cumbersome SQL system. 
            
            
                The Application 
            
            By creating three separate views of our texts and data, Myths on Maps provides users with the flexibility to scope inquiries rather than rely on proscribed discovery methods. The Reader view offers an unencumbered view of the text itself, but includes an interactive discovery layer that allows readers to explore characters, groups, places, and events as they progress through the text. The Data viewer allows users to quickly drill down to the character, place, or event they are looking for. Functionally speaking, the Map view is text-agnostic, focusing more on the standoff data. Searches of the map display the myths pertaining to a site, a character, the character’s relationships with other characters, journeys, the texts recording the myths, and relationships between the texts themselves. 
            XML Collections 
            The English texts used by the project were taken initially from the Perseus project and subjected to further XML encoding, connecting mentioned places, people, and events to our standoff data collection. At the time of writing, we have completed Apollodorus’ Library and Epitome, and are currently completing Homer’s 
                Iliad (expected publication date, summer 2015). The project’s growing collection of standoff data consists of over 2,200 characters, nearly 600 places, more than 300 groups, and approximately 2,800 events. All textual data produced by the project is published under a Creative Commons license and is freely available to scholars for their own use. 
            
            
                The Future 
            
            So far, we have chosen particularly geographically dense texts, beginning with Apollodorus’ Library and continuing with Homer’s 
                Iliad. Our next targets include Pausanias’ 
                Description of Greece, followed by Pindar’s 
                Odes, and 
                The Metamorphoses of Ovid. The ultimate aim of the project is to map all major Greek and Roman myths, insofar as their geographic locations and that of their authors are known or noted. 
            
            Given the broad scope of the project, we also hope to be able to develop academic partnerships that will help expand the range of available texts through the contribution of texts encoded using project guidelines.
            Planned features include more sophisticated search and filter functionality, the ability to visualize journeys, and greater user control over the creation and export of custom maps. We are also developing a responsive, mobile version of the site.
        
    



    
        
            
                Negotiating The Issues Of Encoding And Producing Traditional Scripts On Computers – Working With Unicode
                
                    
                        Anderson
                        Deborah
                    
                    UC Berkeley, United States of America
                    dwanders@sonic.net
                
                
                    
                        Morey
                        Stephen
                    
                    Centre for Research on Language Diversity, La Trobe University, Australia
                    s.morey@latrobe.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Unicode
                    character encoding
                    South and Southeast Asia
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Over the past 30 years, developments in computing mean that almost every script and writing system ever created can be coded on a computer and used on Facebook, mobile phones, and in emails, and large numbers of documents can be encoded, searched, and archived in a range of different scripts.
            In South and Southeast Asia, there are a large number of different scripts, some used by quite small communities. In India, for example, there are around 11 official scripts, with states like Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Gujarat, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu having their own unique scripts. Speakers of Tai languages, in particular, have long had a range of different scripts in use among languages that are quite similar, so, for example, the script used by Shan people in eastern Myanmar is quite distinct from that of the Khün in the eastern part of Shan state, and also different from but intelligible with the Khamti script in western Myanmar, and the various scripts used by Tai people in Northeast India.
            Since the earlier part of this century, a great effort has been made to encode all of these scripts in Unicode, a standard that allows for the encoding of symbols used in writing that can be demonstrated to be in use, or to have been in use in the past. However, negotiating a script into Unicode is a complex issue, involving considerable technical expertise and knowledge of script encoding principles, things that are difficult enough for an academic linguist but virtually impenetrable for members of the speech communities.
            Combining our expertise in both script encoding and in linguistics, we will raise issues of community involvement in the process by means of several case studies.
            1. The decisions to encode different forms of letters used in different scripts, such as Burmese on one hand and Tai varieties in Northeast India on the other, on the same encoding point so that they cannot both appear in platforms like Facebook (Hosken, 2014b). 
            Below is an example, from an 1821 Tai Phake manuscript called Mahosatha, telling one of the former lives of the Buddha (Jataka). This shows the stark differences in glyph shapes of the characters. The top line is in the Burmese script (Pali language), then shifts to Tai in the second line. 
            
                
            
            Background: In Unicode, the glyphs for the letters in the Burmese (‘Myanmar’ in Unicode) script were based on their use in the Burmese language, whose 32 million speakers dwarfs the Tai language communities of India (such as Phake with 2,000 speakers). The Myanmar script was published in Unicode in 1998, and the minority users were not consulted in the encoding then, so the default glyphs represent those of the Burmese language, not the Tai languages. 
            Update: The request (Hosken, 2014b) to Unicode to disunify the characters for Tai (Aiton and Phake) from Burmese was discussed in August 2014, with experts calling in to the Unicode Technical Committee meeting. However, no consensus was reached, so the topic was dropped for the time being. As a result, users on Facebook can’t show a mixture of Burmese and Tai-based languages on the same FB page with the expected glyph shapes. 
            2. The difficulties that the Assamese community find with the naming of letters used only in Assamese, such as ‘Bengali letter Ra with middle diagonal U+09F0’, a letter not used at all in Bengali but found in Assamese with the pronunciation [wɔ] (Hosken, 2012).
            Background: The name of the script ‘Bengali’ was already the name of the script in Unicode 1.1 (1993). Due to stability policies, script names cannot be changed. 
            Update: The controversy reached the point of being discussed in the newspapers in 2012. In response to users, the Unicode Consortium made a few changes to incorporate ‘Assamese’ in the chapter on Bengali and the names list in 2012, but clearly there remains some confusion for Assamese users. 
            3. Problems for users posed by the Unicode New Tai Lue encoding model, which does not allow users to type the characters in visual order (Hosken, 2014a), the model adopted by the scripts used in neighboring countries of Thailand and Laos.
            Update: As the result of the request to change the encoding model by Hosken (2014a) and feedback from a public review issue posted on this issue (Unicode Consortium, 2014a), Unicode decided to change its encoding model in the next version of Unicode, Unicode 8.0, which will be released in the summer of 2015.
            The talk will conclude with suggestions on ways to improve the interaction between linguists, speech communities, and the Unicode standards committee. For example, conveying technical details over email and the phone can become problematic both for the user community and the Unicode Technical Committee (such as how to represent Tai languages on Facebook, above, 1). One strategy that has been successful is to bring a Unicode expert to the users (or to a linguist who works with the users) or to bring an expert to the Unicode committee. However, this involves hurdles, such as finding funding for travel.
            The urgency for supporting the requirements of small language communities is based on the increasingly widespread use of mobile devices and social media. Why should minority language users in South and Southeast Asia be limited in their electronic communication, so that they have to rely on script-style of the larger language community, instead of having their own preferred style displayed?
            
                Funding
                This work was supported by the National Endowment for the Humanities [grant 
                PR-50205 to Deborah Anderson] and the Australian Research Council [Future Fellowship grant FT 1001006614 to Stephen Morey].
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hosken, M. (2012). Proposal for Minor, Non-Character, Additions to UCS Addressing Concerns from Assamese. Working Group Document, UTC L2/12-350, 
                    
                    http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2012/12350-assamese.pdf.
                    
                        Hosken, M. (2014a). Proposal to Change the Encoding Model of New Tai Lue. Working Group Document, UTC L2/14-090, http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2014/14090-new-tai-lue.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Hosken, M. (2014b). Proposal to Disunify Khamti Letters from Myanmar (Revision 2). Working Group Document, UTC L2/14-108R2, http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2014/14108r2-khamti_disunify.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Unicode Consortium. (2014a). Proposed Encoding Model Change for New Tai Lue. Public Review Issue #281, http://www.unicode.org/review/pri281/pri281-background.html.
                    
                    
                        Unicode Consortium. (2014b). 
                        The Unicode Standard 7.0.0. Mountain View, CA: Unicode Consortium, http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode7.0.0/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                New Developments in Quantitative Metrics
                
                    
                        Birnbaum
                        David J
                    
                    University of Pittsburgh, United States of America
                    djbpitt@pitt.edu
                
                
                    
                        Thorsen
                        Elise
                    
                    University of Pittsburgh, United States of America
                    enthorsen@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        del Rio Riande
                        Gimena
                    
                    SECRIT-CONICET
                    gdelrio.riande@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Martínez Cantón
                        Clara
                    
                    UNED
                    cimartinez@flog.uned.es
                
                
                    
                        González Blanco-García
                        Elena
                    
                    UNED
                    elenagbg@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Pue
                        A. Sean
                    
                    Michigan State University
                    pue@msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Teal
                        Tracy K
                    
                    Michigan State University
                    tkteal@msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Brown
                        C. Titus
                    
                    University of California, Davis
                    ctb@msu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    meter poetics rhyme verse poetry
                
                
                    literary studies
                    prosodic studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Papers
            Enabling the Automated Identification and Analysis of Meter and Rhyme in Russian Verse
            David J. Birnbaum, University of Pittsburgh, and Elise Thorsen, University of Pittsburgh
            Making Visible the Invisible: Metrical Patterns, Contrafacture and Compilation in a Medieval Castilian Songbook
            Gimena del Rio Riande, SECRIT-CONICET; Clara Martínez Cantón, UNED; and Elena González Blanco-García, UNED
            Using Bioinformatic Algorithms to Analyze the Politics of Form in Modernist Urdu Poetry
            A. Sean Pue, Michigan State University; Tracy K. Teal, Michigan State University; and C. Titus Brown, University of California, Davis
            
                Panel Organizer
            
            David J. Birnbaum, University of Pittsburgh, djbpitt@gmail.com
            
                Panel Synopsis
            
            This panel presents new primary research results in the formal study of poetry and poetics that have been made possible by the development and use of innovative digital technologies. The research questions underlying the presentations are varied, as are the linguistic and cultural traditions (early modern and modern Russian, medieval Spanish, and Urdu [in comparison with Hindi/Sanskrit and Persian/Arabic]). What unites the three presentations is (1) a focus on using digital technologies to create humanities knowledge that would not otherwise be possible; (2) the development of innovative methodologies that are able to address those research questions; and (3) the building of new digital tools that make it possible to address new research needs.
            Our panel responds to the following specific areas of emphasis noted in the original call for paper:
             • 
                Humanities research enabled through digital media, data mining, software studies, or information design and modeling. The focus of our panel is on new types of research results that are made possible by the development of original digital tools and methods. In this sense, the research results are foremost, but the projects that produce that research are methodologically innovative, and the research results would not have been attainable without that innovation.
            
             • 
                Creation and curation of humanities digital resources. The creation of plain-text poetry archives is relatively straightforward: the text can be generated through OCR or by repurposing digital files originally created to produce print editions. The creation of structured poetry archives is also relatively straightforward: the general hierarchical structure of poetry is represented by pseudo-markup layout in plain-text editions, and is amenable to autotagging with the aid of regular-expression parsing. The creation of poetry archives with metrical and rhyme annotation, however, is difficult because it requires linguistic knowledge, and the presentations on this panel describe new technologies that were developed in order to (1) facilitate the machine-assisted creation of these types of metrically annotated poetic corpora, and (2) undertake original research about formal metrical practice on the basis of large digital corpora.
            
             • 
                Social, institutional, global, multilingual, and multicultural aspects of digital humanities . . . For the 2015 conference, we particularly welcome contributions that address ‘global’ aspects of digital humanities including submissions on interdisciplinary work and new developments in the field. Our panel includes three research reports from three diverse poetic traditions: early modern and modern Russian, medieval Spanish, and Urdu (in comparison with Hindi/Sanskrit and Persian/Arabic). The projects that produced these research results have operated independently, but within their highly varied cultural contexts they address similar types of research questions.
            
             • 
                Digital humanities in pedagogy and academic curricula. The projects that contribute to our panel, which were designed to create new research knowledge in the humanities, were developed in many cases with attention to pedagogical and curricular concerns. For example, some portions of the development for these projects was carried out in the context of digital humanities courses, with undergraduate and graduate students making contributions to authentic humanities research as a way of learning to be digital humanists.
            
            
                1. Enabling the Automated Identification and Analysis of Meter and Rhyme in Russian Verse
            
            Birnbaum, D. J. and Thorsen, E. 
            Quantitative metrics, and particularly the statistical study of meter and rhyme, has been a core research methodology in Russian verse theory and scholarship at least since the early 20th century, both among Russian scholars (e.g., Belyj, 1929; Taranovski, 1953; Gasparov, 1984) and abroad (e.g., Shaw, 1993; Scherr, 1986; Friedberg, 2011). Until recently, the methods have had to rely largely on the laborious human identification and tagging or recording of all individual stress and rhyme phenomena, which have then served as input into the (often computer-assisted) statistical analysis of synchronic patterns and diachronic trends in meter and rhyme. Not only is this sort of manual effort at corpus preparation not scalable, but more often than not the raw data underlying published scholarship have not been shared, which means that the results cannot be replicated and the conclusions cannot be verified. Almost the entire corpus of Russian classical verse is now freely accessible on the Internet in authoritative scholarly digital editions, and computational tools could therefore be used to relieve scholars of the human labor previously needed to prepare and collect the data necessary for studies in quantitative versification, and to perform the analysis. To the extent that the data preparation and analysis proceed algorithmically, intermediate results can be saved and examined, and the entire process can be replicated and verified.
            The principal limitation to using available poetic texts for this purpose has been that the place of stress in words, which in Russian is not predictable without linguistic knowledge and which is not part of standard orthographic practice, must be known before the orthographic representation can be converted algorithmically to a useful phonetic representation, which is, in turn, a prerequisite for identifying meter and rhyme automatically. To address this need, the authors have built a network of tools, all freely available as web services, that automate this process as much as possible. The system begins with a full-text dictionary of Russian, consisting of approximately 100,000 headwords with all inflected forms, including information about the place of stress, which can be accessed through an API to add stress information to Russian-language texts in natural, native orthography. The stressed texts can be used for other purposes (such as in readers for language learners), but our principal goal was that they could then serve as input into API-driven web services that are capable of producing descriptive statistics and visualizations of the metrical patterns in individual poetic texts and in corpora. These integrated resources thus serve as a workstation for the formal and quantitative exploration of Russian versification in a way that is consistent with current best practice for research data management. All web services are publicly accessible, and all data and other materials are available under a Creative Commons license.
            There are other tools and services that address some of the same issues as our system, but none that enables users to process their own texts by means of a convenient pipeline of API-enabled web services that can convert corpora of texts in native Russian orthography into tagged output, descriptive statistical reports, and visualizations. Furthermore, our innovative two-pass methodology enables us to use regularities in the poetic structure to compensate for lacunae in the dictionary; the ambient meter that emerges on a first pass in the case of metrically regular poetry can be used, in a second pass, to infer the place of stress for words that either are not in the dictionary or return ambiguous results. The feedback portion of our system that corrects for lacunae and ambiguities does presuppose largely regular metrical and rhyme patterns, which means that this component of the system performs most reliably, effectively, and usefully with the largely regular syllabotonic verse that dominates Russian poetry from the beginning of the 19th well into the 20th century. We also note, in response to early reader comments, that although the Russian National Corpus (RNC) provides a poetry subcorpus that purports to be able to return metrical information, in fact the RNC output merely layers the predetermined dominant metrical scheme of a poem on top of the text without regard to actual linguistic stress phenomena, which means that the output is of no value for determining which potential (metrical) stresses are realized (linguistically) and which were not.
            Our conference presentation will illustrate the use of the system to answer types of research questions that are common in Russian versification studies, involving synchronic and diachronic properties and regularities of poets, periods, and forms and styles of poetry. In particular, metrical analyses have produced the concept of ‘semantic halo’, a term coined by Mikhail Gasparov to describe intertexual meanings conventionally associated with a given meter. This is an observation enabled by a form of close reading performed numerous times, and because these observations of verse have by necessity been made by counting by hand, sample sizes have thus far been limited. The poetic canon is small enough that counting manually is feasible; however, scansion by hand could not begin to account for the large body of amateur and pulp poetry written from the mid-19th century onward, or the extent to which this poetry does or does not reflect conclusions drawn from analyses of major 19th- and 20th-century poets.
            While the obscurity of most of these authors means their works remain undigitized, there is an ever-growing body of poetry published digitally. For example, there are more than 30,000 poems self-published by members of the online journal 
                Poeziia.ru. A corpus of this size offers the opportunity to elucidate the relationship of the larger population of those who consume and produce poetry with the poetic canon and contemporary critically acclaimed poets. With large-scale data about the use of meter, rhythm, and characteristic vocabulary, our research questions address the extent to which metrical semantic halos operate in this corpus and the extent to which they reflect patterns of readership and influence from the canon. What kinds of semantic halos are rarified phenomena, and which are more universally accepted as verse norms?
            
            References
            
                Belyj, A. (1929). Ritm kak dialektika i ‘Mednyj vsadnik’. Federacija, Moscow.
            
            
                Friedberg, N. (2011). 
                English Rhythms in Russian Verse: On the Experiment of Joseph Brodsky. Trends in Linguistics. Studies and Monographs 232. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
            
            
                Gasparov, M. L. (1984). 
                Očerk istorii russkogo stixa. Metrika, ritmika, rifma, strofika. Nauka, Moscow.
            
            
                Scherr, B. P. (1986). 
                Russian Poetry: Meter, Rhythm, and Rhyme. University of California Press, Berkeley.
            
            
                Shaw, J. T. (1993). 
                Pushkin’s Poetics of the Unexpected: The Nonrhymed Lines in the Rhymed Poetry and the Rhymed Lines in the Nonrhymed Poetry. Slavica, Columbus, OH.
            
            
                Taranovski, K. (1953). 
                Ruski dvodelni ritmovi. Srpska akademija nauka, Belgrade.
            
            
                2. Making Visible the Invisible: Metrical Patterns, Contrafacture, and Compilation in a Medieval Castilian Songbook
            
            Del Rio Riande, G., Martínez Cantón, C. and González Blanco-García, E. 
            ReMetCa, Digital Repertoire on the Metrics of the Medieval Castilian Poetry (
                Repertorio Métrico Digital de la Poesía Medieval Castellana) is an online, free-access digital tool designed to undertake simultaneous complex searches on the metrical and rhyming patterns of Medieval Castilian poetry (starting from the late-12th-century epics to the poetry of the 16th-century Castilian 
                Cancioneros). ReMetCa is part of the corpus of online digital resources on Medieval Romance poetry, alongside such others as the ones related to Galician-Portuguese (MedDB, The Oxford Cantigas de Santa Maria Database), French (BedTrouveres, Nouveau Naetebus), and Occitan and Catalonian poetry (BedT, Corpus des Trobadours). The research project that sustains ReMetCa aims to integrate traditional studies of philology (especially those pertaining to metrics) with digital humanities, revising and classifying the Castilian corpus in a hybrid digital framework that embeds TEI-Verse module tags in a relational database that works altogether with a controlled vocabulary on Medieval Castilian poetry.
            
            One interesting case of study that illustrates the topic of the panel is our digital approach to the 
                Cancionero de Baena, a large songbook containing almost 600 poems transcribed and compiled in the first half of the 15th century by Juan Alfonso de Baena, scribe of the court of King Juan II of Castile. The data retrieved from the tagging and classification of the metrical and rhyming patterns of a large section of Baena’s songbook—the one regarding the 
                antiquiores or the eldest poets, and those that composed their texts mainly in the second half of the 14th century—yielded interesting results in the area of the Hispanic studies devoted to metrics. On the one hand, we discovered that the 
                antiquiores composed a large part of their poems using a pattern almost unknown by their predecessors, the Galician-Portuguese troubadours: the octosyllabic 
                octava (eight-lined stanza, lines of eight syllables that may sometimes be isometric or heterometric). This pattern was shaped in a body of four stanzas (
                glosa) with rhymes structured in a singular pattern (
                rimas singulares) and words stressed on the penultimate syllable (
                rima grave or 
                femenina). Furthermore, we were able to identify some groups or cycles of poems composed on the basis of the metrical and rhyming imitation or 
                contrafacture (→ 4x8@8) (Spanke, 1928; Marshall, 1980; Rossell, 2000).
            
            It was the theoretical organization of the XML markup as a discursive system (Jockers and Flanders, 2013), which we used to shape an ontology framework (available at http://www.purl.org/net/remetca and http://datahub.io/dataset/remetca-ontology), that in practice helped us to move from the descriptive to the connotative dimension, thus making visible the invisible. Apart from using the expected TEI-verse attributes such as @met for our schemes based on the number of syllables of each line and on the number of lines (e.g., 8,8,8,8), and @rhyme for the rhyming structure of the stanzas (e.g., abba), there were some new attributes that did not exist in the TEI-Verse module and that we decided to add to our XML schema: @asonancia, an attribute that indicates the two possible values of the rhyming typology: ‘asonante’ (which means that only vowel sounds are repeated) and ‘consonante’ (which means that every sound after the stressed syllable is repeated); @unisonancia, which takes the values of ‘unisonante’ or ‘singular’ and shows whether the same rhyming scheme (e.g., abba) is repeated in different stanzas or not; and @isometrismo, which states whether all the stanzas have the same number of syllables (isométrico) or not (heterométrico). It was the joint work of all these attributes that retrieved the metrical and rhyming patterns and led us to those new results. In addition to this, the whole analysis of the corpus resulted in an unexpected fact: Juan Alfonso de Baena may have organized and compiled the texts of the different poets in his songbook guided not only by chronological order but also following metrical patterns and types of stanza.
            With the help of our digital tool we will illustrate possible contrafactures, common metrical and rhyming patterns, and cycles of poems in the 
                antiquiores’ corpus, and give an account of more complex definitions. The examples will also serve as an opportunity to cast our eyes again on the macro-microanalysis (Jockers, 2013; Jockers and Flanders, 2013; Liu, 2014) and data-text (Marche, 2012) debates in the field of literary studies and the concepts of close-distant reading (Moretti, 2013; Latour, 2014) and relate them to a subject of study that is interested in formal patterns (and not as much in content) and acquires new meaning when compared through large corpora: metrics.
            
            References
            
                Asperti, S., Zinelli, F., et al. (n.d.). 
                BedT, Bibliografia Elettronica dei Trovatori. www.bedt.it.
            
            
                Brea, M., et al. (n.d.). 
                MedDB: Base de datos da Lírica profana Galego-Portuguesa. http://www.cirp.es/bdo/med/meddb.html.
            
            
                González-Blanco, E., et al. (n.d.). 
                ReMetCa: Repertorio Métrico Digital de la Poesía Medieval Castellana. www.remetca.uned.es.
            
            
                Jockers, M. L. (2013). 
                Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press.
            
            
                Jockers, M. L. and Flanders, J. (2013). A Matter of Scale. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1106&amp;context=englishfacpubs.
            
            
                Latour, B. (2014). Opening plenary, 
                Digital Humanities 2014 (DH2014), http://dh2014.org/videos/opening-night-bruno-latour/.
            
            
                Liu, A. (2014). 
                The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
            
            
                Marche, S. (2012). Literature Is Not Data: Against Digital Humanities. 
                Los Angeles Review of Books, http://www.lareviewofbooks.org/article.php?id=1040&amp;fulltext=1.
            
            
                Marshall, J. H. (1980). Pour l’étude des 
                contrafacta dans la poésie des troubadours. 
                Romania CI, pp. 289–335.
            
            
                Moretti, F. (2013). 
                Distant Reading. Verso, London.
            
            
                Parkinson, S., et al. (n.d.). 
                The Oxford Cantigas de Santa Maria Database. http://csm.mml.ox.ac.uk/.
            
            
                Rossell, A. (2000). Intertextualidad e intermelodicidad en la lírica medieval. In Bagola, B. (ed.), 
                La Lingüística española en la época de los descubrimientos: Actas del Coloquio en honor del profesor Hans-Josef Niederehe, Tréveris 16 a 17 de Junio de 1997. Hamburg: Helmut Buske, pp. 149–56.
            
            
                Seláf, L. (n.d.). 
                Le Nouveau Naetebus. Répertoire des poèmes strophiques non-lyriques en langue française d’avant 1400. www.nouveaunaetebus.elte.hu.
            
            
                Spanke, H. (1928). Das öftere Aufreten von Strophenformen und Melodien in der altfranzösichen Lyrik. 
                Zeitschrift für französichen sprache und Literatur, 51, pp. 73–117.
            
            
                3. Using Bioinformatic Algorithms to Analyze the Politics of Form in Modernist Urdu Poetry
            
            Pue, A. S., Teal, T. K. and Brown, C. T.
            This paper has two aims. First, it shows how the authors—a humanist and two computational biologists—adapted graph-based algorithms used in genome assembly and multiple sequence analysis to scan the meter of Urdu poetry. Second, applying these techniques to modernist free-verse poetry of the early 1940s, the paper argues that data-rich analysis of poetic meter offers humanistic insights into the politics of literary form.
            
                3.1 Adapting Bioinformatic Algorithms to Scan Classical Urdu Poetic Meters
            
            
                3.1.1 Metrical Overview
            
            The meter of Urdu poetry is quantitative, based on length rather than qualitative stress. The traditional theory of prosody, called 
                ’urūz, describes these meters following the metrical system devised for Arabic by al-Khalīl Ibn Ah-mad of Basra (b. 718 CE). The meter can be described as moraic, consisting of ‘long’ and ‘short’ metrical ‘syllables’ arranged, in classical poetry, into metrical feet in particular combinations. Pronunciation plays a primary role in determining these metrical syllables, though orthography must also be taken into account in certain situations. The determination of ‘long’ and ‘short’ syllables follows particular rules. There is also considerable flexibility, as certain word-final long vowels can be long or short, metrical syllables can be formed across word boundaries, and additional short syllables can be inserted at particular locations (Pybus, 1924; Pritchett and Khaliq, 1997; Deo and Kiparsky, 2011). 
            
            
                3.1.2 Interdisciplinary Analogy
            
            The authors found a productive analogy, which reached across their respective disciplines, between the workflow of computational scansion and the central dogma of biology. In this sequential transfer of information, DNA 
                replicates and 
                transcribes into messenger RNA (mRNA), which 
                parses into RNA codons, and finally 
                translates into particular proteins.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Interdisciplinary analogy.
            Computational scansion involves a similar process. The first stage is the 
                replication of the Urdu text into its transliterated form, which shows additional information about the source text, most notably short vowels, required for metrical scansion. Next, in 
                transcription the transliteration converts into metrical components, such as consonants, short vowels, and long vowels. Through 
                parsing, the metrical components are grouped into short and long metrical syllables. Finally, 
                translation renders those grouped components as a particular scansion, which can be described as a combination of long (=) and short (-) metrical syllables divided into feet or as a meter (
                bahr) named according to traditional Urdu prosody.
            
            
                3.1.3 Adapted Graph Theory
            
            Urdu meter is combinatorially explosive, leading quickly to hundreds or thousands of possibilities. The authors adapted graph theory, commonly used in ‘next generation’ sequence analysis and genome assembly, in the transcription, parsing, and translation stages of this workflow.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Transcription graph.
            During 
                transcription, the transliteration is tokenized, and each token assigned a class, e.g., ‘consonant’ or ‘short vowel’. A Depth-First Search (DFS) through a directed graph determines metrical components from these tokens. Nodes correspond to tokens to be consumed. Certain edges contain constraints that must be met before reaching a terminal node, corresponding to a classified metrical component.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Parsing graph of a subset of classical meters.
            The 
                parsing and 
                translation stages utilize another graph, traversing which metrical components are consumed. Again, there are constraints on the edges, here to prevent certain invalid metrical combinations. This graph can consist of only acceptable, standard meters based on genre, or it can be adapted to allow for variations, as described below in the specific application to free verse. Multiple acceptable scansions may exist. The common meter can be found by requesting a union of the multiple sets of the lines’ scansions.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. A single classical meter.
            In adapting the algorithms designed for classical Urdu poetry to address free-verse poetry, the authors also took a cue from bioinformatics, employing a score-based progressive algorithm commonly used in multiple sequence alignment, which seeks patterns despite frame shifts, substitutions, and mismatches to determine the 
                parsing graph appropriate for particular free-verse poems.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Sequence alignment and free verse.
            
                3.2 Metrical Analysis and the Politics of Modernist Literary Form
            
            Urdu poetry can usually be understood by speakers of the closely related, and mutually intelligible, South Asian language of Hindi, even while it retains a distinct vocabulary and meter as well as script. As noted above, poetry in Urdu is built primarily on the meters of Persian/Farsi, which took on the prosody of Arabic, thereby participating in a translingual Muslim poetic tradition. Borrowing moraic meters from poetry in the early-modern Braj Bhasha and classical Sanskrit, Hindi poets aligned themselves with the poetry of the Hindu devotional tradition (Dalmia, 1997; King, 1994; Rosenstein, 2002). In the 20th century, many Urdu poets were eager to modernize a literature criticized as foreign or too closely associated with the so-called misrule of the erstwhile Mughal Empire. They chose between retaining the treasured and melodious form of the Urdu and Indo-Persian ghazal, or looking away from that form and toward either English models or the meters embraced by Hindi (Pritchett, 1994). In the effort of anti-colonial nationalist movements to establish India and Pakistan in 1947, the choice of meter took on a political meaning: writers addressed different publics through the sound of their poetry. To some adherents of the ‘Two-Nation Theory’, which argued that Indian Muslims were a separate and distinct nation, the 
                āhang (poetic melody) of Indo-Muslim civilization was external to the Indian soundscape. Other writers, including advocates of secular nationalism, insisted that Urdu poetry fell within a shared and distinct ‘Hindustani’ literary culture that embraced both Hindu and Muslim elements.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Free-verse meter (abstracted from classical meter in Figure 4).
            Among the latter group of authors was Sana Ullah Dar ‘Miraji’ (1912–1949), who is often described as the progenitor of a modernist Hindustani literary culture that moves beyond older Persian forms to embrace South Asian folk culture (Patel, 2002). Hindustani displaced the Persian of the Mughal Court as the official language of colonial north India. It is commonly understood as both the origin language of contemporary Urdu and Hindi and a still-existing language of common address with a primarily indigenous vocabulary (Cohn, 1996; Lelyveld, 1993). To describe Miraji’s poetry as Hindustani is to evade casting his allegiance to either of the nations founded just before the poet’s death. His most prominent critics prize how Miraji’s poetry defies the solidification of language and nation; they base their claim primarily on the poet’s choice of vocabulary common to both languages.
            By applying the computational techniques described above, this paper explores how the poet negotiates these language politics less in terms of word choice than in the sound of his poetry. It argues that Miraji’s innovative uses of meter are both fully transparent to his audiences and lie outside of the ideological construct of Hindustani as a ‘composite’ language. 
            The paper examines the metrical variation in Miraji’s free-verse poetry by pitching its analysis at a formal level independently from the linguistic register. It shows how, in addition to abstracting from classical Urdu poetry, as did his modernist contemporaries, Miraji also attempted to provide an indigenous meter borrowed from poetry written before Hindi and Urdu audiences were separated by religious community. He does so by translating into Urdu prosody poetic forms from Braj Bhasha, which require certain combinations of 
                guru (heavy) and 
                laghu (light) metrical syllables, and by adapting into free verse the so-called Hindi meter associated most strongly with the 18th-century Urdu poet Mir Taqi Mir. This paper argues that meter itself carries meaning, and examines the rhythmic quality of language, which is among the most prized aspects of poetry in the Indian Subcontinent.
            
            
                3.3 Source and Data Dissemination
            
            Along with the data, the source code for metrical parsing and visualizations will be available at http://github.com/seanpue/dh2015.
            3.4 References
            
                Cohn, B. (1996). Command of Language and the Language of Command. In 
                Colonialism and Its Forms of Knowledge: The British in India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 16–57.
            
            
                Dalmia, V. (1997). 
                The Nationalization of Hindu Traditions: Bhāratendu Hariśchandra and Nineteenth-Century Banaras. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
            
            
                Deo, A. and Kiparsky, P. (2011). Poetries in Contact: Arabic, Persian, and Urdu. In Lotman, M. and Lotman, M.-K. (eds), 
                Frontiers in Comparative Prosody. Bern: Peter Lang, pp. 147–72.
            
            
                King, C. R. (1994). 
                One Language, Two Scripts: The Hindi Movement in Nineteenth-Century North India. Oxford University Press, New York.
            
            
                Lelyveld, D. (1993). Colonial Knowledge and the Fate of Hindu-stani. 
                Comparative Studies in Society and History,
                35(4) (October): 665–82.
            
            
                Patel, G. (2002). 
                Lyrical Movements, Historical Hauntings: On Gender, Colonialism, and Desire in Miraji’s Urdu Poetry. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, CA.
            
            
                Pritchett, F. W. (1994). 
                Nets of Awareness: Urdu Poetry and Its Critics. University of California Press, Berkeley.
            
            
                Pritchett, F. and Khaliq, K. A. (1997). 
                Urdu Meter: A Practical Handbook. South Asian Studies. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison. 
            
            
                Pybus, G. D. (1924). 
                Urdu Prosody and Rhetoric. Rama Krishna and Sons, Lahore.
            
            
                Rosenstein, L. (2002). 
                New Poetry in Hindi. Permanent Black, New Delhi.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Nichesourcing The Uralic Languages For The Benefit Of Linguistic Research And Lingual Societies
                
                    
                        Hakkarainen
                        Jussi-Pekka
                    
                    National Library of Finland, Finland
                    jussi-pekka.hakkarainen@helsinki.fi
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    crowdsourcing
                    libraries
                    Uralic languages
                    citizen science
                    research collaboration
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    lexicography
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    software design and development
                    text generation
                    xml
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    morphology
                    crowdsourcing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The emerging technologies have recently challenged the libraries to reconsider their role as a mere mediator between the collections, researchers, and wider audiences (Sula, 2013), and libraries, especially the nationwide institutions like national libraries, haven’t always managed to face the challenge (Nygren et al., 2014). In the Digitization Project of Kindred Languages, the National Library of Finland has become a node that connects the partners to interplay and work for shared goals and objectives. In this paper, I will be drawing a picture of the crowdsourcing methods that have been established during the project to support both linguistic research and lingual diversity. 
            The National Library of Finland has been executing the Digitization Project of Kindred Languages since 2012. The project seeks to digitize and publish approximately 1,200 monograph titles and more than 100 newspapers titles in various, and in some cases endangered Uralic languages. Once the digitization has been completed in 2015, the Fenno-Ugrica online collection will consist of 110,000 monograph pages and around 90,000 newspaper pages to which all users will have open access regardless of their place of residence. 
            The majority of the digitized literature was originally published in the 1920s and 1930s in the Soviet Union, and it was the genesis and consolidation period of literary languages. This was the era when many Uralic languages were converted into media of popular education, enlightenment, and dissemination of information pertinent to the developing political agenda of the Soviet state. The ‘deluge’ of popular literature in the 1920s to 1930s suddenly challenged the lexical orthographic norms of the limited ecclesiastical publications from the 1880s onward. Newspapers were now written in orthographies and in word forms that the locals would understand. Textbooks were written to address the separate needs of both adults and children. New concepts were introduced in the language. This was the beginning of a renaissance and period of enlightenment (Rueter, 2013). The linguistically oriented population can also find writings to their delight, especially lexical items specific to a given publication, and orthographically documented specifics of phonetics. 
            The project is financially supported by the Kone Foundation in Helsinki and is part of the Foundation’s Language Programme. One of the key objectives of the Kone Foundation Language Programme is to support a culture of openness and interaction in linguistic research, but also to promote citizen science as a tool for the participation of the language community in research. In addition to sharing this aspiration, our objective within the Language Programme is to make sure that old and new corpora in Uralic languages are made available for the open and interactive use of the academic community as well as the language societies. Wordlists are available in 17 languages, but without tokenization, lemmatization, and so on. This approach was verified with the scholars, and we consider the wordlists as raw data for linguists. Our data is used for creating the morphological analyzers and online dictionaries at the Helsinki and Tromsø Universities, for instance.
            In order to reach the targets, we will produce not only the digitized materials but also their development tools for supporting linguistic research and citizen science. The Digitization Project of Kindred Languages is thus linked with the research of language technology. The mission is to improve the usage and usability of digitized content. During the project, we have advanced methods that will refine the raw data for further use, especially in the linguistic research. How does the library meet the objectives, which appears to be beyond its traditional playground? 
            The written materials from this period are a gold mine, so how could we retrieve these hidden treasures of languages out of the stack that contains more than 200,000 pages of literature in various Uralic languages? The problem is that the machined-encoded text (OCR) contains often too many mistakes to be used as such in research. The mistakes in OCRed texts must be corrected. For enhancing the OCRed texts, the National Library of Finland developed an open-source code OCR editor that enabled the editing of machine-encoded text for the benefit of linguistic research. This tool was necessary to implement, since these rare and peripheral prints did often include already perished characters, which are sadly neglected by the modern OCR software developers, but belong to the historical context of kindred languages and thus are an essential part of the linguistic heritage (van Hemel, 2014). 
            Our crowdsourcing tool application is essentially an editor of Alto XML format. It consists of a back-end for managing users, permissions, and files, communicating through a REST API with a front-end interface—that is, the actual editor for correcting the OCRed text. The enhanced XML files can be retrieved from the Fenno-Ugrica collection for further purposes.
            Could the crowd do this work to support the academic research? The challenge in crowdsourcing lies in its nature. The targets in the traditional crowdsourcing have often been split into several microtasks that do not require any special skills from the anonymous people, a faceless crowd. This way of crowdsourcing may produce quantitative results, but from the research’s point of view, there is a danger that the needs of linguists are not necessarily met. Also, the remarkable downside is the lack of shared goal or the social affinity. There is no reward in the traditional methods of crowdsourcing (de Boer et al., 2012). Also, there has been criticism that digital humanities makes the humanities too data-driven and oriented towards quantitative methods, losing the values of critical qualitative methods (Fish, 2012). 
            And on top of that, the downsides of the traditional crowdsourcing become more imminent when you leave the Anglophone world. Our potential crowd is geographically scattered in Russia. This crowd is linguistically heterogeneous, speaking 17 different languages. In many cases languages are close to extinction or longing for language revitalization, and the native speakers do not always have Internet access, so an open call for crowdsourcing would not have produced appeasing results for linguists. Thus, one has to identify carefully the potential niches to complete the needed tasks. 
            When using the help of a crowd in a project that is aiming to support both linguistic research and survival of endangered languages, the approach has to be a different one. In nichesourcing, the tasks are distributed amongst a small crowd of citizen scientists (communities). Although communities provide smaller pools to draw resources, their specific richness in skill is suited for complex tasks with high-quality product expectations found in nichesourcing. Communities have a purpose and identity, and their regular interaction engenders social trust and reputation. These communities can correspond to research more precisely (de Boer et al., 2012). Instead of repetitive and rather trivial tasks, we are trying to utilize the knowledge and skills of citizen scientists to provide qualitative results.
            In nichesourcing, we hand in such assignments that would precisely fill the gaps in linguistic research. A typical task would be editing and collecting the words in such fields of vocabularies where the researchers do require more information. For instance, there is lack of Hill Mari words and terminology in anatomy. We have digitized the books in medicine, and we could try to track the words related to human organs by assigning the citizen scientists to edit and collect words with the OCR editor. 
            From the nichesourcing’s perspective, it is essential that altruism play a central role when the language communities are involved. In nichesourcing, our goal is to reach a certain level of interplay, where the language communities would benefit from the results. For instance, the corrected words in Ingrian will be added to an online dictionary, which is made freely available for the public, so the society can benefit, too. This objective of interplay can be understood as an aspiration to support the endangered languages and the maintenance of lingual diversity, but also as a servant of ‘two masters’: research and society. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        De Boer, V., et al. (2012). Nichesourcing: Harnessing the Power of Crowds of Experts. In 
                        Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management. Lecture Notes in Computing Science 7603. Berlin: Springer, pp. 16–20. 
                    
                    
                        Fish, S. (2012)
                        . Mind Your P’s and B’s. The Digital Humanities and Interpretation. 
                        New York Times, 23 January 2012, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/23/mind-your-ps-and-bs-the-digital-humanities-and-interpretation/?_r=0.
                    
                    
                        Nygren, T., Foka, A. and Buckland, P. I. (2014). The Status Quo of Digital Humanities in Sweden: Past, Present and Future of Digital History
                        . H-Soz-Kult, 23 October 2014, http://hsozkult.geschichte.hu-berlin.de/forum/id=2402&amp;type=diskussionen.
                    
                    
                        Rueter, J. (2013). Open-Source Morphological Parsers for Uralic Minority Languages. Presentation at 
                        Finnic Languages, Culture, and Genius Loci, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 7 March 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Sula, C. A. (2013). Digital Humanities and Libraries: A Conceptual Model. 
                        Journal of Library Administration, 
                        53(1): 10–26, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756680.
                    
                    
                        van Hemel, W. (2014). OCRUI: Interface for the Correction of OCR Text Material. Presentation at 
                        OCR Webinar, National Library of Finland, Helsinki, 5 March 2014, http://blogs.helsinki.fi/fennougrica/2014/03/06/webinar-recap/. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Nocht: An Open Source Tool for Text Analysis
                
                    
                        O'Sullivan
                        James Christopher
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University
                    josullivan@psu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Hswe
                        Patricia
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University
                    phswe@psu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Long
                        Christopher P.
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University
                    cplong@psu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Tools
                    Text Analysis
                    Python
                    Digital Literary Studies
                
                
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Computational approaches to text analysis have revolutionised the ways in which scholarly research is being conducted. A number of tools exist that help scholars, from a variety of disciplines, analyse textual data, whether literary, historical, or otherwise, using scientific methodologies. However, many of these tools are either proprietary, present a steep learning curve, or are constructed without much transparency, often leaving users with results whose means of production they do not understand. This poster will outline the development of a tool that is intuitive and completely free and open-source, so that scholars in literary studies, and indeed the broader humanities, can leverage computational methods and big data analytics in their research.
            Nocht
            Nocht (trans.: to reveal, uncover), is developed, primarily, in Python, so that it is flexible, scalable, and cross-platform. It has been developed in accordance with the following principles:
             • It offers users a low-barrier means of using computational approaches to text analysis.
             • It is designed and developed in a humanities / arts / social sciences context.
             • It is completely open-source, removing the ‘black-box’, closed-code issues.
             • It brings together existing libraries and code-sets, acting as a ‘script portal’ of sorts.
            At present, Nocht supports the following methodologies, though with some limitations:
             • Wordcount and most frequent wordlists.
             • Word / wordlist frequency plotting.
             • Syntax and sentence analysis.
             • Sentiment analysis.
             • Topic modeling.
             • Zeta analysis.
            It is hoped that Nocht will further contribute to our field’s ongoing commitment to open and sustainable research tools, complementing highly regarded projects like Voyant
                1 and Stylo (Eder et al., 2013). Its name is an obvious tribute to the former, which has for so long been one of our field’s fundamental tools. It is hoped that Nocht will add further to the DH toolkit, as well as complement the ongoing work of Voyant’s creators in leveraging the iPython architecture. 
            
            From a technical perspective, Nocht is scalable and robust, and satisfies the needs of a wide range of scholars, many of whom wish to conduct this form of research but lack the expertise or resources to do so. In this respect, it enables scholars, both emerging and established, to engage with cutting-edge analyses across a variety of disciplines. In many cases, it draws on a series of existing libraries and proven methodologies, such as NLTK
                2 and matplotlib,
                3 and so acts as a set of original scripts as well as a portal to existing tools. A complete technical overview of the project’s features, as well as the components utilised in its modular development, will be provided at the session. 
            
            Discussion
            This poster proposes to introduce Nocht to the field, discussing possible future development directions, as well as issues to date. Some of the disciplinary particularities identified by Gibbs and Owens (2012), such as our need to enhance the usability of our tools, will be addressed. The tension between having an intuitive interface and the need for scholarly tools to produce verifiable results is particularly clear in this project. While there is a long-established requirement that such tools be user-friendly (Krug 2005), one might argue that this must be balanced with a commitment to avoiding ‘black-box’ projects; usability does not necessarily equate to understanding. 
            Measuring the value and success of development projects also remains problematic for scholars and practitioners working across the digital humanities. Schreibman and Hanlon’s survey (2010) finds that the majority of respondents were satisfied that their tools had been ‘successful’, enabling themselves and others to further their research. However, respondents also outlined that they had measured this success from a ‘controlled list’. As our methods continue to gain prominence beyond the core digital humanities community, we must find new metrics through which we can reliably measure the impact of our tools, not just in terms of user volumes, but in relation to the quality of research output. As a project that has sacrificed some aspects of usability and marketability in favour of broad functionality and a commitment to open principles, perhaps to its detriment, Nocht is an ideal catalyst for this debate. It is a small development with limited financial support, so it will be interesting to see if projects of this scale have a future in our discipline.
            Notes
            1. See Stéfan Sinclair and Geoffrey Rockwell, http://voyant-tools.org/.
            2. Natural Language Toolkit, http://www.nltk.org/.
            3. matplotlib, http://matplotlib.org/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: A Suite of Tools. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, pp. 487–89.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. and Owens, T. Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward Broader Audiences and User-Centered Designs. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        6(2).
                    
                    
                        Krug, S. (2005). 
                        Don’t Make Me Think! A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. 2nd ed. New Riders Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Schreibman, S. and Hanlon, A. M. (2010). Determining Value for Digital Humanities Tools: Report on a Survey of Tool Developers. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        4(2).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Non-hegemonic Interoperability: Towards a Global Conversation in Digital Performance Research
                
                    
                        Escobar Varela
                        Miguel
                    
                    National University of Singapore, Singapore
                    m.escobar@nus.edu.sg
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Semantic Web
                    Interoperability
                    Interculturalism
                    Performance Studies
                    Global perspectives
                
                
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    knowledge representation
                    semantic web
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Current models of interoperability discussed in the digital humanities are premised on standardization (Grassi et al., 2013; Doerr, 2003). Working toward this level of interoperability is a praiseworthy objective that requires enormous amounts of effort. However, the problem of standardization is that it does not reflect the multiplicity of perspectives that characterize humanistic practice throughout the world. In other words, standardization often supports a hegemonic view of the humanities. Addressing this limitation is a pressing challenge for the digital humanities, which have been criticized for their lack of linguistic diversity (Galina, 2014) and for not representing oppositional, non-hegemonic views of culture (Koh and Risam, 2013; McPherson, 2012). 
            This paper suggests that the existing technology stack of semantic web applications (such as OWL ontologies and SPARQL endpoints) can be used to develop a non-hegemonic approach to interoperability in digital humanities projects. The paper focuses on theatre and performance studies but presents conclusions that are applicable to other areas of humanistic inquiry. 
            Shared Conceptualizations?
            An ontology is often defined as a ‘formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization’ (Gruber, 1993). The ideal of a shared conceptualization is well suited to areas of science where collective efforts are aimed at constructing universal knowledge models. This explains the rapid adoption of ontologies such as the Gene Ontology Consortium (GOC), since ‘much of biology works by applying prior knowledge (“what is known”) to an unknown entity’ (Stevens et al., 2000). 
            This teleological epistemology might be ill-fitted to describe the work of scholars in the humanities. The humanities are historical and interpretive, and newer conceptual models do not disprove previous ones. Previous knowledge is not aggregated and falsified. Rather, knowledge production is the result of interpretation and disagreement. Coordinated efforts to find shared vocabularies in the humanities are laudable efforts. However, they do not take into account the atmosphere of ‘sophisticated disagreement’ (Strine et al., 1991) that is intrinsic to many aspects of humanistic practice. In the humanities, concepts are often ‘essentially contested’, as argued by W. B. Gallie (1964). 
            The essentially contested nature of concepts in the humanities is not just a methodological fine point. A multi-vocal debate in the humanities is a necessary recognition of non-normative subject positions. The progressive recognition of alternative views has been one of the main developments in the study of the humanities. As argued by Edward Said (2004), this is probably one of the main contributions from the humanities to the current world. 
            Failed Inclusivity in Theatre and Performance Studies
            This paper aims to suggest ways in which semantic web technologies can be used in the development of a global, inclusive dialogue in the field of theatre and performance studies. In order to trace the contours of a truly inclusive digital scholarship in these areas, it is important to consider the criticism launched against previous attempts to create an international dialogue in theatre and performance. 
            In the 1960s and 1970s intercultural theatre was presented as a creative methodology that had the potential to include and represent multiple perspectives on theatre. However, critics such as Rustom Bharucha (1993) have identified a contradiction in intercultural discourse. Although it aims to represent a set of varied perspectives, it is still premised on an essentially Western view of the world. Likewise, Paul Rae (2011) shows that most academic discourse on intercultural theatre is conducted in English and that few Western interculturalists are multilingual. 
            Another example comes from performance studies and the idea of a ‘broad-spectrum approach’ (Schechner, 1988). The broad-spectrum approach aims to consider a multiplicity of practices (such as theatre, rituals, political protests, and performance art) as part of a continuum rather than as distinct categories. However, this approach betrays an Anglophone perspective. When translated into other languages, the term “performance” does not cover the same semantic space and cannot be applied to the same range of practices considered in the spectrum (Taylor, 2003). 
            The previous examples demonstrate how interculturalism and the broad-spectrum approach can be criticized for their lack of cultural and linguistic diversity. However, this argument can also be can be extended to other non-hegemonic perspectives not always represented in official histories and conceptualizations of theatre and performance. How to work towards this goal and avoid the pitfalls of these previous attempts? 
            
                An ‘Essentially Contested’ Ontology?
            
            This paper suggests that semantic web technologies can offer a possible way of ensuring a multi-vocal dialogue in theatre and performance studies. Instead of setting up standards and controlled vocabularies, the semantic web stack can be used to make data available from a multiplicity of sources (for example, with SPARQL endpoints). 
            The Web Ontology Language (OWL) can be used to specify different (even contrasting) models of intercultural theatre and different versions of a broad-spectrum classification. Perhaps different scholars and institutions can make their data and schema available by setting up independent SPARQL endpoints. Rather than trying to collapse or merge these ontologies, federated data models can be used to show a multiplicity of perspectives (cultural or otherwise). 
            Creating ontologies and linked data is becoming increasingly easy with the use of free software such as Stanford University’s Protegé and the Open Link Virtuoso Universal Server. Nevertheless, this solution has its problems. Scholars would require technical knowhow and server space. However, the entry bar for this public, global debate is perhaps much lower than the one set by the publishers regulating the previous exchanges on interculturalism and on broad-spectrum approaches to the study of performance. 
            Following Lins Ribeiro’s notion of 
                non-hegemonic globalization (2009), I would like to propose the concept of a non-hegemonic interoperability that would still use the semantic web stack. As Lins Ribeiro notes, non-hegemonic globalization movements also make use of established networks—for example, environmental NGOs that benefit from the same global communications network as the official institutions that support a capitalist globalization. Likewise, free or open-source tools developed for the semantic web applications can be used to foster an global, inclusive dialogue on theatre and performance research. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bharucha, R. (1993). 
                        Theatre and the World: Performance and the Politics of Culture. Routledge, New York. 
                    
                    
                        Doerr, M. (2003). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Module: An Ontological Approach to Semantic Interoperability of Metadata. 
                        AI Magazine,
                        24(3): 75.
                    
                    
                        Galina, I. (2014). Geographical and Linguistic Diversity in the Digital Humanities. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        29(3): 307–16.
                    
                    
                        Koh, A. and Risam, A. (eds). (2013). Open Thread: The Digital Humanities as a Historical ‘Refuge’ From Race/Class/Gender/Sexuality/Disability? Postcolonial Digital Humanities: DHPoco, http://dhpoco.org/blog/2013/05/10/open-thread-the-digitalhumanities-as-a-historicalrefuge-from-raceclassgendersexualitydisability/. 
                    
                    
                        Gallie, W. B. (1964). 
                        Philosophy and the Historical Understanding. Schocken, New York.
                    
                    
                        Grassi, M., et al. (2013). Pundit: Augmenting Web Contents with Semantics. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(4): 640–59. 
                    
                    
                        Gruber, T. R. (1993). A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications. 
                        Knowledge Acquisition,
                        5(2): 199–220. 
                    
                    
                        Lins Ribeiro, G. (2009). Non-Hegemonic Globalizations: Alter-Native Transnational Processes and Agents. 
                        Anthropological Theory,
                        9(3): 297–329. 
                    
                    
                        McPherson, T. (2012). Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? Or Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation. In Gold, M. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 139–60. 
                    
                    
                        Rae, Paul. (2011). In Tongues: Translation, Embodiment, Performance. In Van Der Putten, J. and Ricci, R. (eds). 
                        Translation in Asia: Theories, Practices, Histories. Manchester: St Jerome Publishing, pp. 153–66. 
                    
                    
                        Said, E. (2004). 
                        Humanism and Democratic Criticism. Columbia University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Schechner, R. (1988). Performance Studies: The Broad Spectrum Approach. 
                        Drama Review,
                        32(3).
                    
                    
                        Stevens, R., et al. (2000). Ontology-Based Knowledge Representation for Bioinformatics. 
                        Briefings in Bioinformatics, 
                        1(4): 398–414.
                    
                    
                        Strine, M. S., Long, B. W. and Hopkins, M. F. (1991). Research in Interpretation and Performance Studies: Trends, Issues and Priorities. In Phillips, G. and Wood, J. (eds), 
                        Speech Communication: Essays to Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the Speech Communication Association. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP. 
                    
                    
                        Taylor, D. (2003). 
                        The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the Americas. Duke University Press, Durham, NC. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Novels in Context: A TEI Database of Primary Resources for Teachers, Students, and Scholars
                
                    
                        Howe
                        Tonya
                    
                    Marymount University, United States of America
                    thowe@marymount.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    TEI
                    eXist-db
                    student-faculty research
                    open access
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    xml
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                In this poster presentation, I hope to share the (evolving) product of a recent grant to create a free and open-source database of curated, excerpted, and annotated primary source materials useful for the study and teaching of the 18th-century novel in English. The Novels in Context (NiC) project combines my interests in DH with my scholarship in 18th-century studies while creating a pedagogical opportunity for student-faculty research and publication. The goal of the NiC project is, most immediately, to provide an agile and accessible alternative to (1) the costly and proprietary Eighteenth-Century Collections Online, (2) the single print anthology on the subject, and (3) the free but scattered and often unreliable resources available on the Internet. 
            
            
                NiC is built on TEI-formatted XML in an eXist database, an open-source native XML platform. To ensure that the project remains free and ethically unencumbered by proprietary concerns, all the texts are transcribed and marked up individually and page images secured through library collections holding first editions. The XML is both structural and critical, including key themes and topics—this is primarily in anticipation of the time when NiC can incorporate MALLET topic modeling and other modes of visualization. The project will incorporate an editorial board to publish user contributions more broadly, including student-faculty collaborations. In the long term, I hope to create a portable platform that instructors can use to generate coursepacks of quality, reliable material (headnotes, reading questions, and so on) that could potentially stand in for the ubiquitous, proprietary, and costly textbook, engaging students in a broader conversation about intellectual property and the public good. 
            
            
                NiC is currently in the working prototype phase, and a copy of the current build is available for technical collaboration on GitHub (https://github.com/tonyahowe/NiC
                ); I am also eager to find collaborators among the world of coders, scholars, and teachers of literature.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Old Traces, New Links: Representation of Taiwan Baotu in OpenStreetMap
                
                    
                        Huang
                        Jheng-Peng
                    
                    Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; National Taiwan University of Technology and Science, Taipei, Taiwan, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    marchuang41@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Liu
                        Hao-Syong
                    
                    Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
                    kumahl@gate.sinica.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Liao
                        Hsiung-Ming
                    
                    Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
                    veevee@gate.sinica.edu.tw
                
                
                    
                        Chuang
                        Tyng-Ruey
                    
                    Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
                    trc@iis.sinica.edu.tw
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital reproduction
                    digital representation
                    interactive historical map
                    digital archive
                    OpenStreetMap
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    historical studies
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    software design and development
                    knowledge representation
                    programming
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                What Is Old Is New Again
                There are various approaches to digital reproductions of old artifacts. One typical approach, for example, is to make a careful scan of a rare book to preserve the book’s look and feel in high-resolution images. Other approaches, however, aim to extract as much as information from the artifacts in order to be processed by machines. Such an approach will instead convert (manually, automatically, or by a mix of manual and semi-automatic procedures) the content of a book into pure text so that it can be indexed and text-mined by computers. The digital representation of an old book is its computer text. Such a representation opens up opportunities for further reuse (e.g., audio books, hyperlinked pages, machine-translated scripts, etc.). 
                When working on old maps, researchers can take the latter approach: One can strike to retrace the contours and elements depicted in the maps and convert them into interlinked digital objects. Old routes in ancient atlases become road networks in online maps supported by GIS (Geographic Information Systems). We can then make travel plans as if we were living in the past by using information extracted from the old maps. The routes, however, can be calculated with the help of computer algorithms. A well-known autography can be taken apart and its essentials re-created by repurposing modern-day social network services. Researchers and students can now indulge in an interactive chronology of the people, social circles, and events described in the book.
                This short paper is a preliminary report of our experience in using OpenStreetMap to digitize and put online a small portion of Taiwan Baotu. OpenStreetMap is both a grassroots, collaborative effort in global map-making, and a reliable web map service that is free for all to use (Ramm et al., 2011; Haklay and Weber, 2008). We modify and reuse the software behind the OpenStreetMap’s web map service and apply it to geospatial data digitized from old maps. We hope that what we do will come to exemplify a new approach to represent and repurpose old maps; we aim to create online resources from ancient maps where old traces become new links. Further, the links can be collaboratively added and forged when such online resources are shared and reused.
                Note that OpenStreetMap has also been adapted for other purposes. In many of these cases, datasets from elsewhere are overlaid over OpenStreetMap, and it becomes convenient to browse them as themed annotations attached to a certain geographic area of interest. Often the online OpenStreetMap service is used as the source of the background map; this necessarily generates a modern map of the area (Amat et al., 2014). Such an overlaying method is frequently applied to other web mapping services as well, so that online maps enriched with collections of cultural objects (in the forms of digital images, web links, etc.) can be viewed and shared by many (Presner et al., 2014). In this work, instead, we give new lives to old maps so that they can be the background maps, be interacted with, and be enriched with other datasets. However, as OpenStreetMap depends on the use of precise geospatial coordinates, our approach is accordingly limited in its applicability to ancient maps that cannot be recoded using modern coordinate systems.
            
            
                Why Taiwan Baotu?
                The Taiwan Baotu is a set of 457 topographic maps covering a major part of Taiwan. Each map is 1:20000 scaled. It was produced in 1904 when Taiwan was under Japanese rule. The collection was first published in 1906; another edition with redacted place names was released in 1920. Taiwan Baotu was derived from the output of an island-wide land survey, but had also incorporated other types of geographic information. The maps illustrate administration areas with their detailed boundaries. They contain place names, as well as land-use, transportation, landmark, and other information about Taiwan in the early 1900s.
                At Academia Sinica, Taiwan Baotu was previously scanned as high-quality images. These images are available as online services from which they can be used together with other map images. Like most web-based map collections, they are delivered as map tiles to user browsers to be examined. Intrinsic details in Taiwan Baotu, such as administrative boundaries and place names, are not available as machine-processable datasets. Parts of the Taiwan Baotu had also been digitized using GIS software package. The traced contours of the maps are stored as layers of vector data (in the Shapefile format, to be exact). As such, they can be visualized and analyzed by various GIS software, but such activities cannot be easily performed and coordinated over the Web.
                As we have been participating in a multidisciplinary project relating to the Taijiang Inner Sea Area (Tainan, Taiwan), we aim to represent Taiwan Baotu as a web of interlinked resources upon which researchers can further enrich and collaborate with one another. 
            
            
                OpenStreetMap as Infrastructure
                OpenStreetMap is a mass collaboration on mapping the world as it is now. We aim to learn from its success and use its technical infrastructure to represent the Taijiang Inner Sea Area as it was in the past. OpenStreetMap probably is best known for its practices and tools for collaborative map-making. In our work, we have not used much of the collaborative part of OpenStreetMap but rely on its underlying sub-system for map rendering, tile serving, and overlapping. To represent Taiwan Baotu in OpenStreetMap, we first took as input an existing collection of Shapefile layers. We renewed, merged, and converted these layers into new datasets following the OpenStreetMap data format. 
                An OpenStreetMap system is built upon a collection of open-source software packages: a database for storing map data, a rendering system for converting data into map tiles, and a tile server. The tile server responds dynamically to a user’s request for the map of a certain area and of a particular scale. OpenStreetMap software is released under free/open-source software (FOSS) licenses; everyone can freely use and modify the software to serve one’s needs (as long as the software license is respected). This means that the experiments we have done with Taiwan Baotu with OpenStreetMap can be reproduced and validated by others; the experience can be shared in the research community (which is not true if proprietary software or a proprietary service is used). 
            
            
                Taiwan Baotu in OpenStreetMap
                Our current work focuses on Redrawing Taiwan Baotu, converting map data for use in OpenStreetMap, and providing an interactive layer on top of Taiwan Baotu in OpenStreetMap. These can be applied to any historical maps with definite geospatial coordinates.
                
                    
                
                Figure 1. Redrawing maps in QGIS.
                First, QGIS is chosen as the tool to redraw the historical maps (see figure 1). The redrawing is actually an iterative process: Feedback from the OpenStreetMap end will trigger editing at the QGIS end, and the data modified with QGIS is again fed to OpenStreetMap for visualization and verification. The result is saved in the ESRI Shapefile format.
                Second, we convert datasets from the Shapefile format to the OpenStreetMap format. We developed a program to do the conversion automatically; we also provided a web form for people to upload and convert Shapefile datasets so as to try to bridge the various gaps between the researchers and the programmers. There are several existing conversion programs, which are unable to perform this job because our datasets contain Chinese characters. Our program supports Unicode and is able to import the result directly into the OpenStreetMap database after a map dataset is converted. Once the dataset is converted, it becomes readable and editable by simple text editors. Then the OpenStreetMap service will convert map datasets into map tiles that are then sent to display in user browsers.
                
                    
                
                Figure 2. A comparison of a paper map and its digital representation in OpenStreetMap.
                Finally, we built an interactive map of Taiwan Baotu on which users can contribute data on top of the visualized map. Figure 2 shows paper and digital maps of Taiwan Baotu in the same screen. We use this platform to review the quality of the redrawn map: one can compare the difference between the paper map and the digital map. We also provide a platform for users to connect external data to the historical map on display.
                
                    
                
                Figure 3. Attaching external information to a historical map.
                The external data is usually a URL to an article, an image, or a video accessible over the Internet. We provide a form for users to fill in the URL of an external resource that is related to a location on map (see Figure 3).
            
            
                Openness in Research and Scholarship
                Our method represents a workable and reproducible approach for the digital representation of historical maps where intrinsic map details are kept and opened up for reuse. As we keep much information in the maps in digital and interactive forms, these historical maps become more helpful for the historians, researchers, teachers, students, and others who are interested in the maps and wish to contribute to the development of digital humanities. Recent research and observation about research data sharing and reuse (of which maps are but one category) shows that open scholarship is the norm. Formal and informal scholarly communication (sharing and reusing map data offer one example) is converging, and open access to data is a paradigm shift (Amat et al., 2014). Our methods are small but concrete steps to open up historical maps for better sharing and reuse.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Amat, G., Fernandez, J., Arranz, Á. and Ramos, A. (2014). Using OpenStreetMaps Data and Tools for Indoor Mapping in a Smart City Scenario. In 
                        17th AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information Science, Castellón, June.
                    
                    
                        Borgman, C. L. (2013). 
                        Scholarship in the Networked World: Big Data, Little Data, No Data. Oliver Smithies Lecture, Balliol College, Oxford, June. 
                    
                    
                        Haklay, M. and Weber, P. (2008). OpenStreetMap: User-Generated Street Maps. 
                        IEEE Pervasive Computing,
                        7(4) (October–December): 12–18. 
                    
                    
                        Presner, T. S., Shepard, D. and Kawano, Y. (2014). 
                        HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Ramm, F., Topf, J. and Chilton, S. (2011). 
                        OpenStreetMap: Using and Enhancing the Free Map of the World. UIT Cambridge. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                "On the Clock": Grading the NFL Draft Pundits
                
                    
                        Quamen
                        Harvey
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    hquamen@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Bouchard
                        Matt
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada; University of Toronto, Canada
                    matt.bouchard@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Keenan
                        Andrew
                    
                    University of Toronto, Canada
                    andrewtkeenan@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    popular culture
                    sports
                    sabermetrics
                    data visualization
                    football
                
                
                    other
                    games and meaningful play
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Every spring, fans of the National Football League gather around televisions and websites to watch their favourite teams draft the most promising young players from the college and university ranks. A few decades ago, the NFL Draft was a closed-door affair held in a nondescript hotel conference room, but today the annual draft fills New York City’s Radio City Music Hall to capacity and the spectacle attracts as many television viewers as baseball’s World Series (Kaboly, 2013). It has even prompted a recent Hollywood movie: 
                Draft Day, starring Kevin Costner. What sabermetrics and the movie 
                Moneyball did for baseball is now clearly happening to football as well (Lewis, 2004). The NFL draft is a pop culture extravaganza that gives DH specialists the ability to take their data analytics and data visualizations outside academia. 
            
            The weeks and months leading up to the draft are filled with a flurry of mock drafts and finely-tiered player rankings from professionals and amateurs alike. Regardless of the format, however, fans hang on every new post as pundits like Mel Kiper, Mike Mayock, Gil Brandt, Rob Rang, and Nolan Nawrocki update their respective lists on a weekly—and sometimes even daily—basis. But how do the pundits fare? How accurately do these experts predict the top-ranked players whom teams will covet most highly? 
            
                Methodology
            
            This project uses correlation analysis and data visualization to measure the accuracy of NFL draft pundits. Given that NFL teams’ individual ‘draft boards’ are top-secret affairs, the only accessible data are from the pundits themselves. But because the draft itself functions like a marketplace—the more highly valued players will be selected first—we can use a simple tool like Pearson’s correlation coefficient (colloquially known as ‘Pearson’s 
                r’) to calculate how accurately a pundit’s ranking of top players matches the draft’s actual progression. Calculating and graphing Pearson’s
                 r at every draft pick yields not only a clear visualization of the best and worst pundits, but also how their accuracy increases or decreases as the draft progresses. 
            
            This poster evaluates the performances of 32 different pundits in last year’s 2014 NFL draft. Although the draft itself consists of 256 selections distributed across seven rounds, not all pundits rank enough players to cover all seven rounds. A few pundits predict only the top 32 players—the elite players to be chosen in the first round—while a few sources grade 500 or even 1,000 players. As our visualizations progress from round to round, then, many pundits drop off the charts, but the results are telling. 
            
                Results
            
            Although our goal was merely to measure pundits’ accuracy, these visualizations allow us to learn much more about the culture surrounding the NFL draft and about how top-secret data move through invisible channels. Visualizing multiple rounds of the draft clearly shows which pundits work independently and which have some access to one of the two official NFL scouting consortia, called BLESTO and National (Business Arena Sports, 2013; 
                Finding Giants, 2014). Because official scouting information from those two consortia is private and secret, we can only infer the circuits of communication through which these lists move, but the fact that information is ‘leaked’ every year is irrefutable because we can see exactly where it surfaces. By Round 7, our visualizations even allow us to deduce which specific pundits have allegiances to which consortium. 
            
            In short, the results are these: 
             • The most high-profile television pundits—ESPN’s Mel Kiper and NFL Network’s Mike Mayock—are independents who, despite their enormous popularity, have only middle-of-the-pack accuracy. Like most independent pundits, their accuracy severely plummets about 80 or 85 picks into the draft. Still, they are the most accurate of the independents. 
             • It’s in Round 3 (about pick 100) that the independents are clearly separated from the pundits who have closer access to organizations of professional NFL scouts. Lists generated by those organizations surface in otherwise relatively quiet and low-profile venues such as news organizations like CBS Sports and data aggregators like Drafttek. 
             • By Round 7, few independent or amateur scouts remain. The remaining pundits’ scores converge here into two very distinct groups, and our conclusion is that these pundits have access to either of the two private lists used by the NFL teams themselves. Given that pundit Rob Rang was sued in 2011 by National Scouting for violating copyright on their draft data (Business Insider, 2013), we can deduce that the pundits that cluster near Rang have access to the player rankings provided by National Scouting whereas the other group most likely represent BLESTO. 
            References
            
                Brandt, G. (2014). Hot 100 + 25: Johnny Manziel, Jadeveon Clowney Lead Draft Class. Nfl.com, 24 April, http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap2000000343420/article/hot-100-25-johnny-manziel-jadeveon-clowney-lead-draft-class.
            
            
                Business Arena Sports. (2012). NFL Scouting Foundation—Blesto &amp; National, 2 November, http:// www.businessarenasports.com/ba-blog/nfl-scouting-foundation-blesto-national. 
            
            
                Business Insider. (2013). Football Blogger Might Get Away with Publishing ‘Secret’ Player Grades, 16 January, http://www.businessinsider.com/copyright-claim-against-rob-rang-dropped-2013-1. 
            
            
                Draft Day
                . (2014). Dir. Ivan Reitman. Starring Kevin Costner. Summit Entertainment. 
            
            
                Finding Giants. (2014). Television series. NFL Network. 30 September, http:// nflcommunications.com/2014/09/22/nfl-networks-original-series-finding-giants-provides-insidelook- into-scouting-building-the-new-york-giants/. 
            
            
                Kaboly, M. (2013). NFL Draft Has Become Must-See Television, 7 April, http://triblive.com/sports/steelers/3763292-74/draft-nfl-espnfiaxzz3H91nu3zA. 
            
            
                Kiper, M. (2014). Big Board: Top 100 Prospects. http://insider.espn.go.com/nfl/draft2014/story/_/id/ 10890085/2014-nfl-draft-jadeveon-clowney-tops-mel-kiper-final-big-board-top-100- prospects. 
            
            
                Lewis, M. (2004). 
                Moneyball. W.W. Norton, New York. 
            
            
                Mayock, M. 2014 NFL Draft: Mike Mayock’s Top 100 Prospects. http://www.nfl.com/news/ story/0ap2000000346744/article/2014-nfl-draft-mike-mayocks-top-100-prospects. 
            
            
                Moneyball. (2011). Dir. Bennett Miller. Starring Brad Pitt. Columbia Pictures. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
            
                
            
             Figure 2.
            
                
            
            Figure 3.
        
    



    
        
            
                On the Use of Visualization for the Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Verbert
                        Katrien
                    
                    KU Leuven, Belgium
                    katrien.verbert@cs.kuleuven.be
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    visualization
                    interaction
                    survey
                
                
                    visualisation
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Recent computing developments have created several visualization techniques and tools for building interactive visualizations that can be used to explore data in new ways. These techniques and tools play a central role in many novel digital humanities applications, ranging from social network visualizations to 3D models of historic buildings. 
            In this paper, a wide range of visualizations that have been presented at the digital humanities conference 2014 (DH2014) is analyzed. The research contribution of this paper is twofold. First, an analysis of prominent research in this domain is presented, focusing on the following research questions: 
             • RQ1: Which visualization techniques are used by current prototypes and systems? 
             • RQ2: Which interaction techniques are supported by current prototypes and systems? 
             • RQ3: How are visual approaches to digital humanities research evaluated?
             Second, based on an analysis of existing applications that were presented at DH2014, opportunities for future research in this area are outlined. 
            
                Analysis of Visual Approaches in the Digital Humanities 
            
            
                RQ1: Which visualization techniques are used by current prototypes and systems? Out of all DH14 contributions, 58 presentations report on significant work on the use of visualizations. Fifteen techniques for different data types are deployed 74 times (see Figure 1): 
            
             • 
                1-dimensional: Word clouds (four occurrences) and histograms (three occurrences) are used to represent 1-dimensional data. Word clouds and histograms are, for instance, used to understand the main themes. 
            
             • 
                2-dimensional: Scatterplots (one occurrence) and timelines (four occurrences) are typical examples of data that are represented on two dimensions. 
            
             • 
                Multi-dimensional: 3D models are used by 12 out of 58 applications. In most cases, these 3D models render historic buildings to support virtual exploration. Geographic maps are also commonly used (13 occurrences). In all cases, a third variable is represented in addition to longitude and latitude data to support data analysis. The size of a dot on a map and different colors are, for instance, used to represent the number of occurrences of entity types in their geographic context. Parallel coordinates and infographics have the potential to represent more than three dimensions—but are not used often. An example of the use of parallel coordinates is represented in Figure 3 and enables exploration of correlations or trade-offs between more than two variables. 
            
             • 
                Relations: Most common are uni- or bi-directional relations represented by graphs. Graphs are present in 23 out of 58 prototypes. Other relations are less common and include hierarchical relations represented by trees, relations between sets represented by a cluster map, Sankey diagrams, matrices, and heatmaps. 
            
             • 
                Animations: Three out of 58 applications employ animation techniques to enhance understanding of complex data. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1. Visualization techniques used by work presented at DH14.
            
            RQ2: Which interaction types are supported by current prototypes and systems? 
            For analyzing the level of interactivity, Yi et al.’s classification (2007) of interaction types was used. Out of the 58 presentations, 35 visualizations are interactive. Twenty-three presentations represent a static visualization, or a visualization at a conceptual level without specifying the level of interactivity. Of interest for this analysis are the 35 visualization prototypes that implement interaction. Figure 2 presents the interaction types that are supported: 
             • The most common interaction type is 
                abstract/elaborate that enables users to show more or less detail in a visualization. An example is a drill-down operation in a tree representation that allows the user to examine a particular sub-tree. A zooming operation to see part of a geographic map in more detail is another interaction technique that is supported by many prototypes. Another common example is a tool-tip interaction technique that provides detailed information when a mouse cursor hovers over a data item. These interactions have been defined as 
                details-on-demand operations. Abstract/elaborate interactions are supported by 35 out of 58 prototypes that implement visualizations. 
            
             • A second common interaction type is an 
                explore operation. Such operations enable the user to see a different subset of the data in the visual representation. A typical explore operation is a panning action that enables the users to see a different part of a graph representation or a different part of a geographic map. Thirty-four out of the 35 interactive prototypes support this type of interaction. 
            
             • 
                Filter interaction techniques enable the user to change the set of data items that is presented based on specific conditions. Data items not satisfying the condition are hidden or shown differently. Sliders to specify a range of dates and check boxes to filter categorical data are typical examples. Some visualizations use input boxes to filter data elements such as names through keyboard interaction. Fifteen out of 35 interactive prototypes provide filter operations. Such interactions are key when working with large datasets and enable users to refine research questions on the fly. 
            
             • One prototype uses an 
                encode interaction technique to enable users to show a different representation. Figure 3 presents an example of a visualization that enables users to select a different representation technique (table, graph, etc.) to analyze data. 
            
             • To the best of our knowledge, 
                reconfigure interactions that enable users to see a different arrangement, such as different variables on the X- and Y-axis of a scatterplot, 
                connect interactions, and 
                select/focus interactions to mark information are not supported. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Interactions supported by DH14 applications. 
            RQ3: How are visual approaches to digital humanities research evaluated? 
            Most contributions presented at DH14 present proof-of-concept prototypes that implement research ideas in prototypes or full systems. These prototypes or systems are then used by the authors to answer specific research questions. Only four out of 58 applications have been evaluated in case studies to assess their value for other researchers. In these case studies, applications have been made available to target users who have used the applications to conduct a research task. Such case studies provide valuable insight into the usefulness and usability of different visualization and interaction techniques. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Visualization to interpret biographies (Booth and Martin, 2014)
            Conclusion 
            In this paper, visualization and interaction techniques in visual applications presented at DH14 have been analyzed. From this analysis, a few take-away messages and opportunities for future research can be highlighted: 
             1. 
                Visualization techniques (RQ1). DH applications employ a wide variety of visualization techniques. An earlier study by Montague et al. (2014) identified 
                trees, histograms, graphs, word clouds, and 
                scatter plots as key visualization techniques to support text mining analysis. Results of our study identify a broader range of visualization techniques that have been applied successfully in digital humanities prototypes, beyond the scope of text analysis. Our analysis indicates that 
                graphs, 
                geographic maps, and 
                3D models are the most prominent techniques. Trees, histograms, word clouds, and scatter plots are also employed, although less often. In general, our analysis identifies a wide variety of techniques that have been used successfully, including advanced multidimensional techniques such as parallel coordinates. 
            
             2. 
                Interaction techniques (RQ2). A subset of 35 out of 58 applications employs interaction techniques to enable users to drive the analysis. Most common are 
                abstract/elaborate techniques that enable users to retrieve details on demand. 
                Explore interactions are also common in interactive prototypes. 
                Filter operations are key when dealing with large data collections and enable retrieval of a subset of the data that is relevant. Such interactions are supported by 15 prototypes. Other interactions that enable users to choose different data types (
                reconfigure) or different representation methods (
                encode) are not used often: such techniques are more advanced, and can play a role in interactive interfaces that support data analysis from different perspectives. The use of such techniques to steer visual data analysis processes constitutes a further line of research. 
            
             3 
                Evaluation (RQ3). Our analysis indicates that case studies that evaluate the usefulness and usability of visualization techniques to support digital humanities are still rare. Four out of 58 prototypes have been evaluated in significant case studies. Whereas such case studies have been identified as key to gain insight into actual use of visualization techniques, only a limited number of research contributions report on insights derived from such studies. Results of our own work indicate that case studies are key to identifying suitable visualization and interaction techniques: a cluster map technique to represent relations turned out to be complex for novice users, whereas a traditional Venn diagram was more successful in a case study that we conducted with researchers. Similar experiments are needed to gain insight into the merits and drawbacks of representation and interaction techniques, and how they can be successfully deployed in useful applications. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Booth, A. and Martin, W. (2014). An XML Schema to Interpret Networked Biographies: Reading Mid-Range. In 
                        Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-823.xml.
                    
                    
                        DH2014. (2014). 
                        Digital Humanities 2014 Conference. http://dh2014.org/. 
                    
                    
                        Montague, J. J., Rockwell, G., Ruecker, S., Sinclair, S., Brown, S., Chartier, R., Frizzera, L. and Simpson, J. (2014). Seeing the Trees and Understanding the Forest. In 
                        Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2014. 
                    
                    
                        Yi, J. S., ah Kang, Y., Stasko, J. T. and Jacko, J. A. (2007). Toward a Deeper Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualization. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 
                        13(6): 1224–31. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Organizational Practices in Digital Humanities Centers
                
                    
                        Antonijevic
                        Smiljana
                    
                    Illinois Institute of Technology, United States of America
                    smiljana@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digtial humanities centers
                    organizational practices
                    ethnographic study
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    interface and user experience design
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    knowledge representation
                    internet / world wide web
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    cultural studies
                    social media
                    crowdsourcing
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    anthropology
                    media studies
                    English
                    rhetorical studies
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper addresses organizational practices and activities of digital humanities centers (DHC). The paper draws on an ethnographic study conducted from 2010 to 2013. Through case studies, surveys, interviews, and observations, the study explored how scholars engage with and think about digital research tools and methods, analyzed teams developing digital research tools, and observed organizational practices related to DHCs. The fieldwork was carried out at twenty-three educational, research, and funding institutions in the United States and Europe, and it involved 258 participants including researchers, faculty, students, administrators, librarians, software developers, policymakers, and funders. 
            DHCs emerged as an academic organizational unit in the 1980s (Fraistat, 2012), representing ‘key sites for bridging the daunting gap between new technology and humanities scholars’ (Terras, 2012, 281). Over the past three decades, the number of DHCs grew, yet not as intensely and widely as humanists’ engagement with digital technologies (Zorich, 2008).
            DHCs analyzed in this study were founded from the early 1990s up to the present time. All centers are affiliated with research-intensive universities, have a dedicated space, and employ between five and fifteen staff members, mostly traditionally trained humanists with advanced computational skills. 
            A significant difference among the analyzed DHCs distinguished the bottom-up versus top-down initiatives. In the top-down initiatives, university administrators sought to establish hubs of scholarly innovation, yet often without a clear sense of what that innovation entailed. For instance, one DHC featured new glass walls as a visually transparent boundary between the print and the electronic materials, while flexible workspaces with high-end technologies were designed to adjust to user needs. But while design, ergonomic, and technical features were meticulously considered, the goals for the center were given less attention: 
            That’s really a big question for us, what kind of services we want to offer. Are people going to know what to do? Are they going to come in, sit down, and check e-mail? [director of a DHC]
            Another campus of the same university launched its DHC simultaneously, but the initiators were humanities scholars rather than the administrators. They began with a university-wide dialogue, which included humanities faculty and students, information technologists, librarians, and other stakeholders. These early conversations and comprehensive planning helped identify organizational strategies and design possibilities consistent with their goals, resulting in a well-defined mission for the new unit. 
            A number of the analyzed DHCs aspire to support humanists’ general research and to gradually introduce scholars to digital tools and methods. These centers target the widest spectrum of humanists rather than those already versed in or inclined to using digital tools, thus bridging the critical gap between more and less technologically advanced scholars. Yet, with such a diverse user community, they sometimes struggle to profile their activities. Humanists’ interest in digital tools and methods varies as much as their skills, and addressing such a spectrum of proficiencies and needs is anything but straightforward. Some DHCs thus adopt a more precisely defined approach when establishing goals and characterizing their potential user base. However, parallel functioning of DHCs within the same institution, differentiated according to the funding sources and the target user-base, often increases fragmentation of work and user confusion.
            Considering the hesitation toward digital scholarship that traditionally trained humanists sometimes hold, DHCs’ outreach often involves two preparatory steps: (1) making humanists aware that they already rely on digital technologies and (2) explaining that DHCs are offering digital tools and methods rather than imposing them. The perception of digital tools and methods as ‘data crunching’ and incompatible with humanistic hermeneutics contributes to lower uptake of these technologies among humanists. DHCs play a considerable role in breaking down the complexities of those shifting epistemic practices and values. One part of the task is familiarizing humanists with the epistemological and methodological elements of the transition towards digital scholarship. Another component depends on making the transition manageable to grasp and adopt:
            And I think we’ve been able to break that down into smaller steps that people can make without dumbing it down, without making it seem trivial, but really emphasizing the real shift in thinking that’s happening in the humanities, and supporting that with the technical side. [codirector of a DHC]
            This study showed that humanists favor and best learn in practice, when instruction is closely related to their area of study and when it unfolds organically, through collaboration with peers or graduate students. Instead of skill-based training, humanities education in digital scholarship needs a comprehensive framework encompassing epistemological, methodological, technical, and sociocultural aspects of digital knowledge production. Furthermore, in their outreach activities, DHCs frequently stumble upon the scholars’ lack of time: 
            These are very busy people, and they are ultimately making choices between do they go and pay attention to our offer of a demonstration about digital tools, or do they spend that hour focusing on their own research questions. We’re competing with natural priorities in a scholar’s life. [director of a DHC]
            It is therefore vital that education in digital scholarship becomes administratively recognized as part of scholars’ professional development included in their paid time and activity, as well as in their promotion dossiers.
            DHCs often employ hybrids—traditionally trained humanists who also have good computational skills. They are seen as a necessary link between ‘the two cultures’, who can adeptly translate epistemological and methodological concepts and approaches. ‘Smart organizations will have more of me’, remarked the head of the research and development team at one of the centers, a historian with good programming skills. The advantage of speaking both ‘programese’ and ‘scholarese’, as this interviewee put it, is the capacity to help humanists grasp digital tools and methods while helping programmers understand humanities work. 
            DHCs have found an efficient way of employing hybrids through engaging humanities graduate students, usually early adopters of technology. Graduate students who participated in the study liked working at DHCs. It allowed them to advance their research skills and to build expertise through participation in important research and decision-making activities. The reversal of instructional roles, in which students were teaching teachers, facilitated students’ understanding of some of the didactic principles motivating them to develop their own pedagogic strategies.
            Hybrids as a type of scholarly workforce are linked to the concept of alternative academic careers. Participants in this study described alternative academic paths as intentional career choices scholars make. Although this choice allows scholars to continue working in their preferred field, the transition is nonetheless perceived as difficult and consequential: ‘You can’t just yank somebody out of the faculty and out of years or decades of training without some accounting for how they conceive of themselves as a scholar,’ said an associate professor of English. From the administrative point of view, thinking about people’s time and labor is an important issue DHCs need to engage with, because the inherited systems of classifying employees are not well suited to digital scholarship.
            Traditional organizational systems are not only inefficient for addressing contemporary issues of academic labor and knowledge production; they are also potentially detrimental to the future of scholarly work: 
            If we can’t get this generation of graduate students comfortable with alternate modes of work, not feeling like they are failures if they don’t get a tenure-track position, and seeing good career paths for themselves within the DH, we’re going to lose that generation of scholars. [professor of history]
            Among the respondents, two related but disparate theories of the future of DHCs emerged. One suggests that digital tools and methods will progressively become a standard part of humanities research; DH should thus be seen as a transitional moment in the humanities disciplines rather than as a distinct field. Another approach held that the need for innovative work and thinking with technology in the humanities would never cease. Although the use of digital tools and methods will become increasingly mainstream, there will always be a need for research groups on the frontier of innovation. Scholars and administrators both mused about whether DHCs will be needed in the future, or whether digital scholarship will blend into existing disciplinary and departmental structures. Overall, the respondents agreed that we will see a wave of interest in DHCs, some of which will persist, while others will peak quickly, only to fade away. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Fraistat, N. (2012). The Function of Digital Humanities Centers at the Present Time. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 181–91. 
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2012). 
                        Quantifying Digital Humanities. http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/dh/2012/01/20/infographic-quantifying-digital-humanities/.
                    
                    
                        Zorich, D. M. (2008). Digital Humanities Centers: Loci for Digital Scholarship. In CLIR, 
                        Working Together or Apart: Promoting the Next Generation of Digital Scholarship. Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information Resources, pp. 70–78, http://www.clir.org/pubs/resources/promoting-digital-scholarship-ii-clir-neh/zorich.pdf. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Palimpsest: Improving Assisted Curation of Loco-specific Literature
                
                    
                        Alex
                        Beatrice
                    
                    University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
                    balex@inf.ed.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Grover
                        Claire
                    
                    University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
                    grover@inf.ed.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Zhou
                        Ke
                    
                    Yahoo Labs, London
                    zhouke.nlp@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Hinrichs
                        Uta
                    
                    University of St. Andrews, United Kingdom
                    uh3@st-andrews.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    assisted curation
                    document retrieval
                    annotation
                    user feedback
                    geo-parsing
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper reports on interdisciplinary work carried out for the Palimpsest project, focusing on mining literary works set in Edinburgh, a UNESCO City of Literature.
                1 The project’s aim is to use text mining to scour accessible literary works and find those mentioning Edinburgh or places within it. We ground ‘loco-specific’ passages of text by identifying their latitudes and longitudes, so that scholars and the public can both geographically explore their fictional city. Palimpsest is a collaboration between literary scholars studying the use of place in literature and computer scientists working on text mining and information visualisation. Through a range of maps and accessible visualisations, users are able to explore the spatial relations of the literary city at particular times in its history, in the works of specific authors, or across eras and writers.
            
            We present an overview of the project workflow and describe the assisted curation process adopted. It involves automatic retrieval and ranking of accessible literature according to its loco-specificity followed by manual selection of ranked documents, resulting in a set of literary works identified as set in Edinburgh. We report on the fine-tuning of the retrieval and ranking prototype based on literary scholar annotators’ feedback.
            Palimpsest
            Figure 1 shows the Palimpsest workflow. The input data is made of five literary document collections amounting to approximately 380,000 works, most of which are out of copyright, as well as a small set of modern books from authors who are well known for their literature being set in Edinburgh (incl. Irvine Welsh, Alexander McCall Smith, and Muriel Spark). The out-of-copyright collections are varied in content and contain literary fiction and nonfiction genres. The data is first indexed using Indri 5.6
                2 and ranked using a set of 1,633 Edinburgh place name queries.
                3 We use the Indri inference network language model-based ranking approach (Strohman et al., 2005). The ranking score of a document is increased given certain metadata information (including a set of favoured Library of Congress codes and subject terms) or down-weighted for ambiguous Edinburgh place names. We combine the score for genre in the metadata with the location query retrieved from the content of the book. The output of the document retrieval component is a set of ranked Edinburgh-specific candidate documents per collection.
            
            
                
            
            This data was loaded into a web-based annotation tool for manual curation. All Edinburgh place names occurring in the document and snippets surrounding them were displayed to aid in the annotators’—three literary scholars from the School of Literature at the University of Edinburgh—decision making. The subset of works which were manually curated as Edinburgh-specific are further processed by text mining, which geo-references place names by grounding them to their latitude/longitude coordinates using the Edinburgh Geoparser (Grover et al., 2010)
                4 and in particular the Edinburgh gazetteer that is being developed in Palimpsest. The output (geo-referenced location mentions and snippets) is stored in the Palimpsest database, which is accessible via web-based visualisations.
            
            Assisted Curation
            By assisted curation we refer to the process of semiautomatically curating a set of Edinburgh-specific literature from all accessible literature. Related endeavours have relied on the collection of titles, or passages, by a few individuals or via crowdsourcing (e.g., Edinburgh Reads
                5 run by Edinburgh Libraries or Global Bookmap
                6). The idea for Palimpsest arose out of an initial prototype that visualises a small set of extracts manually collected by literary scholars at the University of Edinburgh.
                7 Such an approach results in high-quality data with the disadvantage of missing less well-known but potentially interesting works. In Palimpsest we consider the entire pool of accessible literature accessible to determine a subset of highly ranked Edinburgh-specific candidates automatically using location-based document retrieval. The aim is to uncover a large range of Edinburgh-specific literature, not only famous and well-read titles. Assisted curation by means of text mining alone has shown encouraging results in other domains (e.g., Kristjansson et al., 2004; Alex et al., 2008). We combine text mining and information retrieval for assisted curation and show how user feedback can improve the technical stages to this process.
            
            The manual annotation of the ranked candidates to select actual Edinburgh-specific literature was done using the annotation tool displayed in Figure 2. All ranked documents are displayed on the left-hand panel, listing the title of each work, the author and publication date if available, a link to the original source document, and a list of location mentions identified within the book. When clicking on a title, additional information appears in the right-hand panel, including a graph showing occurrences of place names within a document and snippets containing Edinburgh place names. Based on this information and by following the link to the original source, the annotators can determine a work as being Edinburgh-specific or not, enter further comments, and identify the start and end content pages of a document. When clicking the submit button, a document annotation is saved to the database and disappears from the panel on the left.
            
                
            
            An item can be annotated using the annotation scheme shown in Figure 3. We consider documents annotated as 
                yes or 
                yes (except) as Edinburgh-specific within Palimpsest.
                8 The scheme was developed by the annotators while working on an initial ranking of HathiTrust documents.
                9
            
            
                
            
            We used the HathiTrust collection (253,350 documents) to develop the retrieval and ranking component. This resulted in 20,542 ranked candidate documents containing one or more Edinburgh place names. Over a period of two weeks, the annotators curated the ranked documents in order. This resulted in 1,710 annotated documents, of which 200 were considered Edinburgh-specific literature.
            Initially, the annotators reacted enthusiastically to the annotation and discovered several works set in Edinburgh of which they were unaware (e.g., 
                John and Betty’s Scotch History Visit or 
                Noctes Ambrosianae). As they worked through the documents, however, they lost trust in the ranking. They noticed relevant documents appearing far down the list and sometimes had to go through many documents to find a positive example. They also recorded a list of ambiguous place names (
                High Street or
                 Trinity) mostly referring to other locations as well as a list of words in titles suggesting nonliterary content (
                catalogue or 
                dictionary). Finally, they observed that most Edinburgh-specific documents contain a reference to 
                Edinburgh or a variant.
            
            Improving the Ranking
            Based on this feedback, we then fine-tuned the retrieval component. We used the set of 1,710 annotated works as an evaluation set to determine the effect of a modification. There is a body of research on using relevance judgments for improving information retrieval, a good summary of which appears in Manning et al. (2008). We tested the initial ranking (baseline), the following three measures and their combination:
             (a) Down-weighting ambiguous place names identified by the annotators.
             (b) Removing documents containing nonliterary title words (
                catalogue, 
                dictionary, etc).
            
             (c) Ensuring that 
                Edinburgh or one of its variants (
                Embra, 
                Edinburrie, etc.) occurs in the work.
            
            Figure 4 shows that down-weighting of ambiguous place names (a) resulted in a small improvement in average precision (MAP) (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999). Filtering documents with nonliterary title words (b) had the highest increase in MAP. The condition of Edinburgh or a variant to appear in the document (c) decreased MAP slightly. However, it resulted in a large decrease in the number of ranked documents, reducing the workload of the annotators significantly. We therefore consider measure (c) to be beneficial as well. When combining all three measures, the retrieval component yielded an improved MAP score of 0.1684 (compared to the baseline MAP of 0.1307), and the workload of documents to be curated was reduced by 60%.
            
                
            
            Conclusion
            The assisted curation process undertaken in Palimpsest attempts to keep the user in the loop during iterative technical development. We received useful feedback from the literary scholars on issues that appeared as they curated documents and considered their suggestions in changing the underlying methods for ranking Edinburgh-specific literature. Our results show that document retrieval performance improved and curation workload was reduced as a result. The improved method was subsequently applied to all document collections, which resulted in very positive feedback from the curators, reporting that the ranking improved considerably.
            Acknowledgements
            Palimpsest is funded by the AHRC (Digital Transformations in the Arts and Humanities—Big Data, PI: Prof. Loxley). We would like to thank Dr Anderson, Dr Otty, and Dr Thomson, who were in charge of the curation, and Dr Harris-Birtill, who helped with the data processing for the annotation tool.
            Notes
            1. 
                http://palimpsest.blogs.edina.ac.uk/.
            
            2. 
                http://sourceforge.net/projects/lemur/files/lemur/indri-5.6/.
            
            3. This includes entries appearing in at least three of five resources used to construct the Edinburgh gazetteer (OpenStreetMap, OSLocator, Royal Commission for Ancient Historic Monuments of Scotland, Historic Scotland, QuatroShapes of Edinburgh areas).
            4. 
                https://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/software/geoparser.
            
            5. 
                http://yourlibrary.edinburgh.gov.uk/fictionmap.
            
            6. 
                http://www.mappit.net/bookmap/.
            
            7. 
                http://palimpsest-eng.appspot.com/.
            
            8. We excluded poetry, but we annotated it (
                prob. not) to be able to work on it in future.
            
            9. HathiTrust: 
                http://www.hathitrust.org.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        
                        
                        Alex, B., Grover, C., Haddow, B., Kabadjov, M., Klein, E., Matthews, M., Roebuck, S., Tobin, R. and Wang, X. (2008). Assisted Curation: Does Text Mining Really Help? In 
                        Biocomputing 2008: Proceedings of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, pp. 556–67.
                    
                    
                        Baeza-Yates, R. and Ribeiro-Neto, B. (1999). 
                        Modern Information Retrieval. Addison Wesley Longman, London.
                    
                    
                        Grover, C., Tobin, R., Byrne, K., Woollard, M., Reid, J., Dunn, S. and Ball, J. (2010). Use of the Edinburgh Geoparser for Georeferencing Digitised Historical Collections. 
                        Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
                        368
                        (1925): 3875–89.
                    
                    
                        
                        Kristjansson, T. T., Culotta, A., Viola, P. and McCallum, A. (2004). Interactive Information Extraction with Constrained Conditional Random Fields. In 
                        Proceedings of the 19th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
                        , San Jose, CA. AAAI Press, pp. 412–18.
                    
                    
                        Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P. and Schütze, H. (2008). 
                        Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Strohman, T., Metzler, D., Turtle, H. and Croft, W. B. (2005). Indri: A Language-Model Based Search Engine for Complex Queries, CIIR Technical Report, ext. version.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Patterns of Novelty in Literary Data
                
                    
                        Higgins
                        Devin Cook
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    higgi135@mail.lib.msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Padilla
                        Thomas George
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    tpadilla@mail.lib.msu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Hintze
                        Arend
                    
                    Michigan State University, United States of America
                    ahintze@me.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Information Theory
                    Novelty
                    Literary Studies
                
                
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In addition to forming a piece of the lasting and living embodiment of the cultural heritage of humanity, literature also constitutes a form of data. The features of this data are precisely what define the ‘literary’ as such. In order to ‘understand the structural continuity of the step from information to literature and back again . . . [and] to grasp the 
                nonuniqueness of literature in an absolute structural sense’, that is, to specify a difference of 
                degree rather than 
                kind between literature and other forms of data, it is necessary to isolate and define the features of the literary band of the data spectrum with nuance at a granular level.
                1
            
            To isolate and define features of literary data, the authors have employed several information-theoretical techniques to analyze literary text and find distinguishing patterns. An algorithm developed to study the information novelty in DNA sequences has been applied to strings of arbitrary text. Previously used to quantify information generated by Twitter users on a daily basis, the algorithm has been adapted here to measure information novelty patterns across fictional texts.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Novelty pattern expressed in 375 texts.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Novelty pattern in 
                Moby-Dick.
            
            The graphs above (Figures 1 and 2) measure the proportion of novelty (
                y-axis) over intervals of 10,000 characters (
                x-axis) within each text, moving from beginning to end. Novelty is determined by the percentage of 
                n-length character segments that have not previously appeared in a given text. This measurement stands distinct from a measure of lexical diversity wherein a count is given for unique words that occur in a text. The novelty measure accounts for the totality of combinations of characters in a given text rather than counting unique words. In the case of the graphs above, where 
                n=5, novelty declines over the duration of texts according to a pattern of exponential decay. Fitting curves to novelty patterns allows us to make quantitative and comparative claims about patterns of information. The r-squared value in Figure 2 indicates that nearly 80% of the novelty data is explained by the exponential function used to describe the curve (in red).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Novelty in 
                A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.
            
            Yet other texts resist curve-fitting, displaying information patterns that are highly variable and erratic. Figure 3 represents the novelty pattern for Joyce’s 
                A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, in which the exponential function can only account for approximately 38% of the recorded variation—wild swings in the data that are unexpected, perhaps, in one of Joyce’s less experimental works. (The r-squared value for 
                Ulysses was 52%.)
            
            The novelty measure is not only useful when looking at patterns over individual works but as a way of assessing linguistic ingenuity, or fluctuating historical trends in literary authorship, by studying the works over time of a single author, or of many authors across historical epochs. Figure 4 depicts novelty across three novels by Virginia Woolf (in chronological order), in which spikes of novelty are visible at the start of each new work (at approximately the 75 and 175 points along the 
                x-axis).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Novelty across three novels by Virginia Woolf.
            The significance or not of ‘novelty’ in regard to literary studies is a question for debate that our poster will address. Recent work on patterns of information has shown that the concept of novelty (describing a formation that is new only from a particular perspective) is strongly linked to the concept of innovation (describing one that is new to all perspectives) (Tria et al., 2014). Tying novelty to innovation allows us to go further in building arguments about the role that novelty measurement could play in building an image of the particular form of data known as literature.
            Our poster will present visualizations of key findings as we continue to investigate literary data, via an algorithm designed to detect patterns of novelty. The poster would also work well as a live demonstration, during which texts could be fed to the algorithm ‘live’ as the audience circulates and poses questions.
            Note
            1. Terence Turner, quoted in Hayot (2014).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hayot, E. (2014). What Is Data in Literary Studies?
                    
                    http://erichayot.org/ephemera/mla-what-is-data-in-literary-studies/.
                    
                        Tria, F., et al. (2014). The Dynamics of Correlated Novelties. 
                        Nature, http://www.nature.com/srep/2014/140731/srep05890/full/srep05890.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Perseids And Arethusa: Building Tools That Build Digital Humanists
                
                    
                        Almas
                        Bridget
                    
                    Tufts University, United States of America
                    bridget.almas@tufts.edu
                
                
                    
                        Beaulieu
                        Marie-Claire
                    
                    Tufts University, United States of America
                    Marie-Claire.Beaulieu@tufts.edu
                
                
                    
                        Höflechner
                        Gernot
                    
                    Leipzig University, Germany
                    1986gh@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    collaboration
                    pedagogy
                    annotation
                    software methodology
                    close reading
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    software design and development
                    philology
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Can a methodology that allows students, scholars, and teachers to use tools as we build them contribute to the development of those individuals as ‘digital’ humanists? Over the last year as we have been developing the Perseids Platform and the Arethusa Annotation Framework, we have been actively engaging the users at every step of the process and releasing features for them to work with well before the tools are fully finished. Despite the challenges this introduces for the developers as well the users, we have found that using tools mid-development opens a window into exactly how the tools let users manipulate and shape the data. The process also allows both students and researchers to understand their role in the creation, curation, and annotation of texts through the scientific process of creating and using the data. This process has also exposed the critical role the humanist plays as product designer and tester of the tools we develop to support the research and publication process—or, as Stephen Ramsay says, as ‘builders and makers’ (2011).
             The Perseids platform is a collaborative editing environment built from a loose coupling of open-source tools and services.
                1 Two core values in the development of the platform have been (1) to reuse existing tools wherever possible and not reinvent the wheel and (2) to put the data first, creating data that are reusable and that can be preserved through the use of stable identifiers and serialized according to standard formats. (Data in this case mean all of our texts, annotations, and related objects.) While we aim to produce prototype disseminations of the data created on the platform as web-servable digital editions, this focus on the data, and the reuse of existing tools, has put production of a seamless user interface and polished presentation of output as a lower priority. We also have adopted an Agile
                2-inspired development methodology, which requires us to release new features for use early and often. Although up until now we have been following this methodology more in spirit than to the letter, as the number of people involved in the project continues to grow, we will begin to incorporate some of the official practices, particularly the use of user stories to drive our development.
            
             The result is that the end users see much of the ‘inner wiring’ of the tools. For example, in IMGSPECT,
                3 our image-to-text mapping tool, students identify regions of interest on an image and map them to the text of the transcription. This tool creates stable identifiers (in the form of CITE URNs
                4) for the region of interest and creates a template TEI transcription for the word or characters represented in the image that references the URN of the region of interest in the @facs attribute of the TEI markup element. Although ultimately we plan for automatic population of the underlying TEI XML file for the entire transcription from the image annotations, currently users have to copy the template markup into their file manually. While the value of such extra work is not always obvious, the process affords an opportunity for the students to experience all the steps involved in building a dataset. In particular, the process emphasizes the need to both justify editorial choices in transcribing a text and to create data that conforms to the current best practices and can therefore be reused by others. In doing so, students are using new technology while following the most traditional scholarly principles. Indeed, producing good data that are sharable, interoperable, and can form the basis for sound interpretation is the goal of all scholarship. In this way, working with Perseids allows students to put the highest standards of scholarship into practice and to enter the worldwide conversation about the production of knowledge. By exposing the URNs that link the text to the image, we allow them to see that what they are doing is producing data that not only justify their choices in their own edition but also allows others to reuse this data.
            
             Arethusa
                5 is a framework for linguistic annotation and curation that provides a highly configurable, language-independent, extensible infrastructure for close reading, annotation, curation, and exploration of open-access digitized texts. Arethusa is back-end independent, but it has been developed in collaboration with the Perseids project and integrated with Perseids to provide an annotation interface for morpho-syntactic analyses. Going forward, Arethusa will also act as a broker between the Perseids back-end and various other front-end annotating and editing activities, including translation alignments, entity identification, and text editing. Many of the design requirements for the Arethusa morpho-syntactic annotation environment were directly informed by unanticipated scholarly and pedagogical uses of its precursor tool, the Alpheios Treebank Editor.
                6 Alpheios exposed the XML of both the treebank annotations it worked with and the configuration files that defined the tag sets available for use. The ability to work with these XML structures allowed the users to see the direct interplay between the data and the tools used for editing them, pushing the limits of the Alpheios interface. As design on the new Arethusa interface started, we actively engaged these users in testing and designing the new features they had asked for. This is not necessarily a novel approach; in Thomas and Solomon (2014), the RoSe project team noted that engaging students in this way greatly improved the usability of their system. However, in addition to the benefits afforded by the tool, we also found that this process developed the humanist users’ analytical skills and experiences, forcing them to evaluate questions such as whether the features they were requesting merited changes in existing standard linguistic representations of morpho-syntactic annotations, and implications on interoperability. It also required them to consider the division of responsibility between user interface functionality and representation of the data manipulated by the interface. The ability to edit the underlying data directly provoked questions about data integrity, as the morpho-syntactic annotations are just one component of a larger publication that includes TEI XML transcriptions, translation alignments, and other annotations. 
            
             From a pedagogical standpoint, integrating students into the development efforts has meant that professors and pupils both had to be comfortable with using a technology that is in constant evolution. For this reason, we favor a hands-on approach that focuses on the tasks to be accomplished by the students rather than general instruction about the tools or about digital humanities. In this we agree with Mahoney and Pierazzo, who write, ‘What we should be teaching under the umbrella of the “digital humanities” are not skills—although they too play their part—but new methodologies and new ways of thinking’ (2012, 245). For example, students in an intermediate Greek class were given step-by-step instructions about how to transcribe a Greek inscription as an XML document rather than a lecture about XML, even though they had never been introduced to it. The instructions gave basic XML markup indications, such as &lt;w&gt;, &lt;l&gt;, and &lt;lb&gt;. The professor and students accomplished each task simultaneously so that the students could refer to the on-screen demonstration as they transcribed their own text. After each step, students saved their work and visualized the concrete result of their edits in the preview screen. They were thus able to measure their progress and to gain an immediate understanding of the effect of their work. This approach has been put into practice when using Perseids in classes such as classical mythology, intermediate Greek, medieval Latin, and many others. We have found it to be productive, as it empowers the students to work with the software from the very beginning and to start to feel comfortable with it quickly. The approach has also offered great opportunities to gather feedback from the students and to keep developing the tools in order to make them more intuitive and user-friendly. We will use a study currently under way at Tufts University during the spring 2015 semester to further evaluate the outcomes on and for the students using and participating in the platform.
                7
            
             Finally, the ability to work directly with the data has led the Perseids and Arethusa users to think differently about the process of publication. Giuseppe Celano, a scholar who was an integral member of the Arethusa development process, has been exploring the possibilities for sharing treebanking analyses in the form of open micro-publications, realizing that ‘through Perseids, every scholar is provided a free platform allowing a micro-publication which is fully shareable, and so anyone is given the chance to be not only the user but also the contributor of a publication’.
                8
            
            Notes
            1. http://sites.tufts.edu/perseids/.
            2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development.
            3. https://github.com/PerseusDL/imgspect.
            4. http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-doc/cite/.
            5. http://sosol.perseids.org/tools/arethusa/app/#/.
            6. https://github.com/alpheios-project/treebank-editor.
            7. This is a continuation of the work described in Krohn and Crane (2014).
            8. Email correspondence, September 27, 2014.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Krohn, A. and Crane, G. (2014). Technology and Greek in the Translation Course,. Presentation at the 
                        Classical Association Annual Conference, University of Nottingham, 
                        http://dl.tufts.edu/catalog/tufts:sd.0000170.
                    
                    
                        Mahony, S. and Pierazzo, E. (2012). Teaching Skills or Teaching Methodology? In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics, Open Book Publishers, pp. 216–25
                        
                            ,
                        
                        http://openbookpublishers.com/htmlreader/DHP/chap08.html.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2011). On Building.
                        
                             
                        
                        http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/.
                    
                    
                        Thomas, L. and Solomon, D. (2014). Active Users: Project Development and Digital Humanities Pedagogy. 
                        CEA Critic, 
                        76(2) (July): 211–20, DOI:10.1353/cea.2014.0014.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                PhiloLogic4 And The Android PhiloReader Apps: Toward Building A Full-Featured PhiloLogic API
                
                    
                        Cooney
                        Charles M.
                    
                    ARTFL, United States of America
                    chu.cooney@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Gladstone
                        Clovis
                    
                    ARTFL, United States of America
                    clovisgladstone@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Shandruk
                        Walter
                    
                    ARTFL, United States of America
                    waltms@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Morrissey
                        Robert
                    
                    ARTFL, United States of America
                    rmorriss@uchicago.edu
                
                
                    
                        Roe
                        Glenn
                    
                    The Australian National University
                    glenn.roe@anu.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    PhiloLogic4
                    API
                    Android
                    text databases
                    search and retrieval interface
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    interface and user experience design
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    programming
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The ARTFL Project would like to submit a proposal for a short paper on the development of an API for PhiloLogic4, our next-generation corpus query and text retrieval platform for digital humanities databases, and to demonstrate Android PhiloReader Apps that we are building to interact with that API.
                1
            
            A primary goal of the PhiloLogic4 project has been to allow ARTFL or any digital humanities group using this software to develop a variety of results display and user interfaces with ease.
                2 For example, the databases ARTFL has already released in beta form under PhiloLogic4 for traditional browser access have features such as frequency sidebars for query results, links within those sidebars for faceted browsing, and dynamic Time Series reports.
                3 ARTFL’s PhiloReader Apps extend and exemplify this fundamental design goal. They take advantage of PhiloLogic4’s simple set of query parameters and flexible results object formatting to enable text search and retrieval on handheld devices. 
            
            ARTFL intends these apps to serve as a lighter-weight alternative to web browser apps for interacting with the PhiloLogic4 installations of text databases on our main production servers. The interface has been designed with a focus on the reading functionality that PhiloLogic4 already offers in its web incarnation. Users can conduct word and/or metadata search from a toggling drawer with the aim of finding and reading text sections.
                4 Word search results can be returned in concordance and frequency reports. Any metadata value can serve as a frequency report option, though the most common are word use by title, by date, by author, and even by speaker in collections of plays. More intensive text analysis would require the search form accessible through a web browser. 
            
            Functionally, the Android code interacts with PhiloLogic4 databases simply by sending search queries and then displaying the results that PhiloLogic4 sends back over the network. Those results, like all the data the PhiloLogic4 API passes both internally and externally, are formatted as JSON objects. From the search terms the user enters, the app builds a query URI compliant with the PhiloLogic4 API, which includes parameters such as number of results per page and metadata values, as well as a parameter that calls specifically for a JSON object (‘&amp;format=json’). For basic concordance and bibliographic searches, the URI currently points at the main script PhiloLogic4 uses to handle all interaction from web browsers (‘dispatcher.py’).
                5 For example, a basic concordance query for ‘sun’ from the Shakespeare app has this URI: 
            
            http://artflsrv02.uchicago.edu/philologic4/shakespeare_demo/dispatcher.py?report=concordance&amp;q=sun&amp;method=proxy&amp;title=&amp;start=1&amp;end=25&amp;pagenum=25&amp;format=json 
            For the web version of PhiloLogic4, the dispatcher directs calls for secondary queries, like frequency searches and table of contents requests, to scripts that run behind the scenes. In order to minimize extra coding on the server side, the app calls those CGI scripts directly for these same queries. A frequency by title search for ‘sun’ from the app points to the frequency generation code to get PhiloLogic4’s internal JSON object: 
            http://artflsrv02.uchicago.edu/philologic4/shakespeare_demo/scripts/get_frequency.py?report=concordance &amp;q=sun&amp;method=proxy&amp;title=&amp;frequency_field=title&amp;format=json 
            The JSON object of a concordance result, for example, can contain chunks of the search result, bibliographic metadata, and a PhiloLogic id used for linking into larger sections of the text. The Android code renders the JSON into a string array and displays search results in a listview.
                6 The user can then select individual list items to get larger text sections. The Android code submits a second query to the PhiloLogic4 database for that specific text object which is, again, returned as JSON and also contains navigational links to the previous and next sections of the text. This full-text JSON is rendered for the user to read inside a webview.
                7 We use a webview to display text objects in order to apply the same CSS formatting rules that we use for web versions. The PhiloReader also allows users to bookmark text objects for easy access in later sessions by retaining its PhiloLogic object pointer. 
            
            At the time of writing this proposal, we have succeeded in developing a functional API and Android code to work with it as proof of concept. Going forward, we will continue to work to make the API as generic and simple to use as possible, and fully RESTful compliant. 
            Our ultimate goal is to allow other development teams to pick and choose any subset of PhiloLogic4 functionality through the API to build their own interfaces. For instance, developers could integrate concordance search functionality into a traditional desktop app under Windows or MacOS, or into a web environment like Drupal or Django. Developers could also use the API to plug frequency or collocation reports into modern visualization tools like d3.js. And since the API always returns pointers to original text objects, any new interface will be able to have links from results display into fuller document context. 
            ARTFL chose Android Java as the initial development language for the apps because of existing in-house capability. At the time of the conference, we will make available a skeleton version of our Android code for other groups to adapt or simply examine to see how we interact with the API. In the coming months we intend to have parallel apps developed for iPads, though we are not certain they will be ready in time to present at DH. Nevertheless, ARTFL believes these Android apps demonstrate the ease and flexibility of using the PhiloLogic4 API to develop new ways of interacting with text databases. 
            Screenshots
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Search for term ‘sun’ in 
                Romeo and Juliet in the Shakespeare database. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Full-text view from 
                Romeo and Juliet with search term ‘sun’ highlighted.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Frequency by title search results for ‘flay’ in ECCOTCP.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. JSON object of frequency by title search results for ‘flay’ in ECCOTCP, http://artflsrv02.uchicago.edu/philologic4/ecco_tcp_demo/scripts/get_frequency.py?report=concor dance&amp;q=flay&amp;method=proxy&amp;title=&amp;author=&amp;frequency_field=title&amp;format=json.
            Notes
            1. At the time of writing, we have built demonstration apps around the ECCOTCP text collection and the MONK project’s Shakespeare’s Plays data. Versions of these apps can be downloaded from http://artflsrv02.uchicago.edu/downloads/app_download/.
            2. For general background on PhiloLogic4, see Allen, T., Gladstone, C. and Whaling, R., PhiloLogic4: An Abstract Query TEI System, 
                Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 5 (June 2013). Development is ongoing; code resides at https://github.com/ARTFLProject/ PhiloLogic4.
            
            3. See http://artflproject.uchicago.edu/.
            4. See the ‘Screenshots’ section for images of the interface and an example of a PhiloLogic4 JSON object.
            5. These calls that the app makes to the dispatcher script are subject to change as we continue to refine the API. Eventually, we might choose to bypass the dispatcher, as we do for frequency and table of contents calls from the app, and instead communicate with CGI scripts exclusively.
            6. ListView is Android terminology for a layout that displays a vertically scrollable list. See http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/layout/listview.html.
            7. Again, Android terminology for a view that displays web pages. See http://developer.android.com/reference/android/webkit/WebView.html.
        
    



    
        
            
                Predicting the International Appeal of novels
                
                    
                        Martinez-Ortiz
                        Carlos
                    
                    Netherlands eScience Center
                    c.martinez@esciencecenter.nl
                
                
                    
                        Buschenhenke
                        Floor
                    
                    Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands
                    floor@woordheks.nl
                
                
                    
                        van Dalen-Oskam
                        Karina
                    
                    Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands; University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, The
                    karina.van.dalen@huygens.knaw.nl
                
                
                    
                        Koolen
                        Marijn
                    
                    University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, The
                    marijn.koolen@uva.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    literary studies
                    globalization
                    named entity linking
                    measuring interest
                
                
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    translation studies
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Globalization is a current theme in literary studies. Are authors writing increasingly for a global audience, with novels that appeal to readers in many countries, through shared ‘global’ cultural knowledge—e.g., references to concepts with which people around the globe are familiar? The Beyond the Book project aims to investigate whether we can measure how ‘international’ a novel is in its references to cultural knowledge. This could be useful in predicting the international appeal of novels and help publishers choose titles for translation that may appeal to readers in different markets. 
            Although many potential factors contribute to a publisher’s or editor’s decision to translate a novel, we wish to know if textual aspects are a factor, and if so, to what extent. As a first step, we focus on the named entities in a set of Dutch novels, including novels that have been translated from Dutch to English. 
            We link the named entities to English Wikipedia articles and use the Wikipedia edit history to measure the relative contribution of Dutch Wikipedians to each entity as a proxy for how specific the cultural references are to Dutch readers. 
            The main research questions addressed are
             • How can we use named entities in novels as representations of cultural references? 
             • How can we measure the relation between cultural references and international appeal? 
            
                The Translation Market 
            
            
                The World Book Market 
            
            From UNESCO’s Index Translationum database, which charts worldwide book translations, Heilbron (2010) finds a four-level structure: around 55 to 60% of all translations are from English, around 10% from German and French, 13% for each of seven or eight other languages, and the rest are translations from ‘peripheral’ languages (including Dutch). For peripheral languages, translations from other languages are common, whereas in English-speaking countries, translations make up only a small fraction (around 3%) of the book market. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
            
                The Dutch Book Market 
            
            Import 
            Across all genres, in the Netherlands only about 34% of translated books come from languages other than English (UNESCO Index, up to 2006). This percentage fluctuates over time: the report ‘Publishing Translations in Europe: Trends 1990–2005’ by the Mercator Institute, which provides data for the Dutch market for translated fiction, states that 72.6% of all translations are from English.
                1
            
            Export 
            The Dutch export market is very different from the import market. For spreading Dutch novels, Germany is the ‘gate market’ that opens up the possibility of translation into other peripheral markets in Europe (Heilbron, 2010). From the roughly 200 translations receiving funding from the Letterenfonds per year, 60 are adult fiction, and German takes up about 30% of those; English, only 17%. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2.
            The Decision Makers 
            Franssen and Kuipers (2011) asked 23 Dutch editors how they decide which foreign titles to purchase for the domestic market. When editors assessed the text, they were purely focussed on ‘universal’ manuscript quality, not international appeal. We found in our interviews with 12 Dutch decision makers that, when looking to sell international translation rights for Dutch novels, a translation into English is deemed the most desirable of all. Hence, we focus on translations to English. 
            Methodology 
            
                Technical Pipeline 
            
            This section describes the necessary steps to go from the full text of a novel to a meaningful measure of relative interest from a country in that novel. 
            Identify Words of Interest 
            The full text of a novel is split into arbitrarily sized units (e.g., a paragraph), which are processed using Semanticizer (Meij et al., 2012), to produce a list of Named Entities (NEs). These NEs represent the terms (
                w
                i) that have a high probability of being used as links to other Wikipedia pages, if the given text was an article in Wikipedia. Each of these link-terms has a probability of being a link associated with it 
                P
                link(
                w
                i); link-terms are filtered by their probability, and terms with probability below a certain threshold are discarded. The frequency of an NE in a given text 
                F(
                w
                i) represents the relative importance of that NE. 
            
            Country Interest 
            Next, the relative interest from a country in each link-term is determined. This is estimated on the basis of the number of edits from a given country to the Wikipedia page corresponding to the NE. The English version of Wikipedia is used for this study, since it contains edits from many countries, including the Netherlands. Each Wikipedia article is built from contributions of several users over time. The interest in a particular topic is gauged by the number of contributors from a specific country. It is possible to determine the country of origin of the contributor, either by IP address (recorded for anonymous contributors) or by analysing the geographical categories the contributor belongs to (e.g., Wikipedians in the Netherlands). 
            This proposed methodology has limitations. Contributions from ‘bots’ (i.e., contributions made automatically by programs) need to be ignored. Registered users can state their nationality on their user profile, but not all users provide such information. The fraction of unknown contributions is treated as an uncertainty 
                C(
                w
                i). For instance, if 70% of the contributions to a given page are from known sources, then the interest from a given country can be assessed with a 0.7 confidence. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3.
            Each country provides a different volume of contributions to Wikipedia. Thus, country contributions on a specific topic must be normalized by that country’s contributions to the whole English Wikipedia. The interest of a given country on a particular NE 
                I
                Q
                 (w
                i
                ) is then the normalized percentage of contributions from that country to the Wikipedia article for the NE in question.
            
            To illustrate these steps, the following graphs show the percentages of contributions from various countries to the English Wikipedia,
                2 the expected and observed contribution percentages to the English Wikipedia article on ‘ice hockey’, and the relative country contributions to the ‘ice hockey’ article.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. 
            
                
            
            Figure 5.
            
                
            
            Figure 6.
            Integrate over Complete Novel 
            The relative importance 
                R of a given NE 
                w
                i for country 
                Q is calculated as follows: 
            
            
                
            
            where 
                J
                Q(
                w
                i) is the weighted interest of country 
                Q on the word: 
            
            
                
            
            And the interest from that country for a whole novel can be calculated as the average interest of the identified NEs in the novel: 
            
                
            
            Where 
                N is the total number of NEs in the novel. 
            
            Experiments 
            For the experiments, 492 Dutch (mostly literary) novels are used, all published between 1933 and 2008. Of these, 318 have been translated into other languages, but only 27 have been translated into English (based on data from WorldCat).
            The following features are determined:
             • The 
                number of translations to English.
            
             • The 
                number of entities in four categories: person, location, organization, and miscellaneous.
            
             • The relative 
                Dutch contribution
                to Wikipedia articles on entities in each category.
            
            The correlations between the number of English translations and the two features per entity category are shown in the figure below:
            
                
            
            Figure 7.
            There is a weak correlation (0.38) between a Dutch novel getting translated into English and its number of miscellaneous entities (events, buildings, etc.). These can be interpreted as cultural references that readers from different countries may be familiar with. The number of locations has a positive but very weak correlation with getting translated, while the number of person, location, and organisation names has a very small negative correlation. 
            The number of translations to English is weakly correlated with the relative contribution from Dutch Wikipedians to the entities in the miscellaneous category. These results suggest that novels that get translated from Dutch to English contain many references to Dutch culture. The locations in translated novels have a relatively low Dutch contribution, which suggests that their settings are perhaps more international. I
                t is intriguing that the international appeal of these novels may lay just as much in their ‘Dutchness’ as in their ‘global’ references. 
            
            Conclusions 
            The aim of this paper is to investigate the role the text of a novel plays in determining whether it gets translated. 
            Cultural references seem to contribute to a novel’s chances of getting translated. The classic writers’ adagium, ‘Show, don’t tell’, may actually work; cultural references provide concrete, familiar details that anchor the story to the ‘real world’. Their realism could lead to a greater appeal for readers. 
            These are preliminary findings. The current set of books is very small, and the methods are crude. The next steps will be to refine our methods by incorporating more textual features, look in more detail at how they relate to translation decisions, and apply our methods to a larger set of novels, in different genres and languages. 
            Notes
            1. There are gaps in the available data of 1993–1999, so the picture is not entirely accurate.
            2. See http://stats.wikimedia.org/wikimedia/squids/SquidReportPageEditsPerLanguageBreakdown.htm.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Franssen, T. and Kuipers, G. (2011). Overvloed en onbehagen in de mondiale markt voor vertalingen. 
                        Sociologie,
                        7(1) (2011): 67–93.
                    
                    
                        Heilbron, J. Structure and Dynamics of the World System of Translation. 
                        UNESCO International Symposium on Translation and Cultural Mediation, Paris, 22–23 February 2010. 
                    
                    
                        Meij, E., Weerkamp, W. and Rijke, M. de. (2012). Adding Semantics to Microblog Posts. 
                        WSDM 2012: Fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, Seattle, WA, 8–12 February 2012, pp, 563–72, http://ilps.science.uva.nl/biblio/adding-semantics-microblog-posts.
                    
                    
                        Publishing Translations in Europe: Trends 1990–2005. (2010). Making Literature Travel Series, Literature across Frontiers. Mercator Institute for Media, Languages, and Culture, Aberystwyth University, Wales. 
                    
                    
                        Van Dalen-Oskam, K. Does, J. de., Marx, M., Sijaranamual, I., Depuydt, K., Verheij, B. and Geirnaert, V. (2014). Named Entity Recognition and Resolution for Literary Studies. 
                        Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal,
                        24: 473–80. 
                    
                    
                        Vertalingendatabase, Letterenfonds [Dutch Institute for the Promotion of Dutch Literature Abroad]. (2014). https://letterenfonds.secure.force.com/vertalingendatabase/zoeken.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Press F6 to Reload: Games Studies and the future of the Digital Humanities in India
                
                    
                        Ray Murray
                        Padmini
                    
                    University of Stirling, United Kingdom
                    p.raymurray@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Mukherjee
                        Souvik
                    
                    Presidency University, Kolkata
                    prosperoscell@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    South Asia
                    India
                    videogames
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    interface and user experience design
                    other
                    games and meaningful play
                    cultural studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As the digital humanities gathers global impetus, with recent initiatives such as Global Outlook: DH and Around DH in 80 Days, seeking to extend the reach of the discipline beyond Anglo-American institutional portals (both virtual and architectural), it might be an appropriate moment to reflect upon what indigenous digital humanities forged in an Indian context might look like. What might it mean to have an Indian homegrown digital humanities? Why is it even a necessity? One obvious answer would include the assumed digital divide between the Western world and the developing world, but also we would argue, in response to the need for a ‘poor theory’—a term Ngugi wa Thiong’o coined in a 2012 essay—a theoretical framework that endeavours to ‘accord dignity to the poor as they fight poverty’. He elaborates: ‘Poor theory and its practice imply maximising the possibilities inherent in the minimum’.
            To those of us working in an Indian context, this is all too familiar, being borne out in practice by the Indian practice of 
                jugaad, the endeavour of creating ingenious solutions by yoking disparate technologies or parts together. In recent years, this form of informal iterative working has been gaining recognition in the West, often drawing parallels to hacking. The semantic differences of the two words, however, deserves close attention, alerting us to philosophical differences that are consequences of that digital divide. To ‘hack’ contains within it both the meaning of subverting the authority of proprietary systems through some sort of destructive action as well as to come up with a quick solution, whereas the aim of 
                jugaad is almost always constructive, often unaware of the capitalist systems it undermines, and truly born out of necessity. The practice and theoretical shape of the digital humanities thus far, almost exclusively determined by wealthy institutions in the global North, has failed to make space for such circumstantial necessity, and it is only with the Maker/DIY movement in the West that an alternative paradigm has been forged. The concept of minimal computing, for example, dwells on the dichotomy of choice versus necessity built on the understanding that computing resources in the developing world are not necessarily high performance, and that much can be done by streamlining low-cost single-board computers such as the Raspberry Pi for use in these contexts.
            
             The inevitable lacunae formed by the absence of this awareness in the Western academy has meant that the discipline has been remarkably tone-deaf to the noise made by cultural criticism in the mainstream humanities post ’68—as Tara McPherson writes in a 2013 essay: 
            Much of the work in the digital humanities also proceeded as if technologies from XML to databases were neutral tools. Many who had worked hard to instill race as a central mode of analysis in film, literary, and media studies throughout the late twentieth century were disheartened and outraged (if not that surprised) to find both new media theory and emerging digital tools seem indifferent to those hard-won gains. 
            However, as the discipline matures, Alan Liu advocates that digital humanists should become sharper critics of ‘how the digital humanities advances, channels, or resists today’s great postindustrial, neoliberal, corporate, and global flows of information-cum-capital’. We believe that the local flavours of such analyses, as well as the particularities of our relationship with technology in India as exemplified by the philosophy of 
                jugaad mentioned earlier, necessitates a particularly Indian approach to this area of critical thinking and doing. 
            
            If, as digital humanists, our aims are to create resources that help us perform the act of cultural criticism and to study the objects of such criticism, we must accept that our vision is necessarily circumscribed by cultural specificity and particularity. These concerns operate both at the level of content and interface: for example, much humanities work in Indic languages has been, until relatively recently, impeded by the lack of optimised character recognition software. Katharina Reinecke’s seminal work on how national culture influences our perception of good design has shown how, for instance, Google struggled to get a foothold in the Korean market, as Korean users preferred much more colourful and graphically populated interfaces. This demonstrates how international technology players can be disadvantaged by their failure to tailor their offerings to local tastes and visual habits. 
            Our research into gaming in India endeavours to demonstrate how these local tastes, habits, and practices are shaped by global forces, but how local context still uniquely shapes digital culture—however homogeneous that culture itself might be—and how questions of access, infrastructure, economic and government policy, technological obsolescence, relevance, and lag might all contribute to more nuanced understandings of what it might mean to practice games studies and the digital humanities in the global South. 
            The Indian market is growing exponentially, especially with the undeniable popularity of mobile gaming. While India has long been considered a destination for outsourcing animation and visual effects work for games made abroad, the local industry is beginning to take shape. Indeed, the nascent, emergent Indian videogame industry with its growing player base is a marker of how digital technologies are shaping contemporary culture in this developing nation. However, videogames based on original intellectual properties created in India are still few and far between. Commentators have assumed that industry expertise combined with visual vibrancy, narratives rooted in myth and legend, and the multimodal richness of a certain sort of India, embedded in ethnic otherness, could result in a watershed moment for the industry. Indeed, in 2009, eminent game designer and commentator Ernest Adams felt that India’s lack of progress in the field could be rapidly compensated for by relying on adaptations of grand epic narratives such as the 
                Mahabharata or the 
                Ramayana. 
            
            While this promise is yet to be fulfilled, predictions have been heady and optimistic—with KPMG forecasting a growth of 17 billion INR by 2017, and NASSCOM (India’s flagship computing association) anticipating an eight-fold surge in casual gamers over the 2010–2015 period, with the vast majority (approximately 60%) playing on mobile, approximately 38% on PC, but a paltry 0.3% on console. However, there has been almost no academic research on the business of selling games, game design and how it might be shaped by its Indian origins, nor any rigorous analysis regarding the kind of games that are being enjoyed and played in the country. 
            To this end, we undertook an online (via surveymonkey.com) and offline survey of game developers and gamers, across sociocultural and linguistic communities in India (covering platform reach, importance of storytelling, gaming practices, problems of accessibility). SPSS, MAXQDA 10, and Wordle were the tools used to yield quantitative and qualitative data analyses of the total of 185 responses, which mostly came from major Indian urban centres. The paper will showcase our findings, which include a range of anecdotal responses to open-ended questions as well as empirical data. The scope can certainly be enlarged, and the final paper will reveal how the data sample is indicative.
            Our research on videogames very usefully addresses the conference’s theme of ‘global’ digital humanities as it is possibly the most international of contemporary media forms, and as our data demonstrates, individual engagement with such a phenomenon is always mediated through its local context but inextricable from its global condition—and we feel these are significant revelations for the future of storytelling, narrative, and digital cultures.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Adams, E. W. (2009). The Promise of India: Ancient Culture, Modern Game Design. Keynote Address, 
                        NASSCOM Animation and Gaming Summit 2009, Hyderabad, India, 7 November 2009, http://www.designersnotebook.com/Lectures/India/india.htm.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2012). Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities? In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 490–510.
                    
                    
                        McPherson, T. (2012). Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 139–60.
                    
                    
                        Reinecke, K. and 
                        Bernstein, A. (2013). Knowing What a User Likes: A Design Science Approach to Interfaces That Automatically Adapt to Culture. 
                        MIS Quarterly,
                        37(2): 427–53.
                    
                    
                        Thiong’o, N. w. (2012). 
                        Globalectics: Theory and the Politics of Knowing. Reprint ed. Columbia University Press, New York.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Progressive philology with TXM: from 'raw text' to 'TEI encoded text' analysis and mining
                
                    
                        Heiden
                        Serge
                    
                    ENS de Lyon, France
                    slh@ens-lyon.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    xml
                    tei
                    txm
                    open-source
                    text analysis
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    natural language processing
                    scholarly editing
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    xml
                    standards and interoperability
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            A typical text analysis workflow combines the following two stages:
             • Preparing data. Philological methodology establishes the base text, critical apparatus, and some analytical information like text metadata (author, date, domain, etc.) to be able to compare domains, authors, etc. with respect to the text’s content (word forms or word lemma frequency, n-gram frequency, etc.).
             • Processing. Analytic methodology provides the framework to analyze a corpus or sub-corpus of texts with the help of word patterns search and display (concordances) or count (frequency lists) and comparison tools (factorial analysis, clustering).
            It is convenient to characterize the relation between the data and the processing stages as contractual. That contract is based on the encoding conventions of the digital representation of texts interpreted by the software to manipulate and display them through interfaces.
            Simple conventions (like Unicode character encoding of raw text) can correspond to file formats directly interpreted by the software; more elaborate ones (like XML-TEI encoded text) correspond to guidelines that need tuning to be processable by software. This article presents a text analysis workflow implemented in the TXM analysis software in which the data/processing philological contract complexity can be progressively adapted to the needs of the user, balancing costs of encoding with interests in processing and analysis. It will also introduce the delegation model to call external tools (like ‘natural language processing’ [NLP] software as lemmatizers) to automatically enrich encoded texts on the fly while importing them into the platform for analysis.
            The TXM Analysis Software
            The open-source GPL-licensed TXM software implements an analytic methodology articulating those stages. It provides an import framework that allows reading of corpus sources at various levels of encoding and a classic toolbox for text analysis and mining, composed of a versatile and efficient full text search engine, text reading and browsing, sub-corpus and partition building, co-occurrence analysis, factorial analysis, and clustering. It is available as a desktop application for Windows, Mac, or Linux, as well as a web portal software for a server accessed through a web browser (Heiden, 2010). The TXM platform can be downloaded for free at http://sf.net/projects/txm.
            Importing Corpora into TXM at Progressive Levels of Encoding
            Starting from raw text corpora, the first level of contract is simple and has a low encoding cost barrier: texts may have properties (called metadata) that can be used to compare them or their properties, and words are defined by their character constituents. The text format provides all information needed explicitly to the software.
            To analyze a corpus at such a level of encoding, TXM provides the Unicode ‘TXT+CSV’ import module. The CSV in the name expresses the possibility to associate metadata to each text through an external CSV table file. That table encodes the metadata of each text on a separate line, as in the following excerpt of the Brown corpus metadata table defining the ‘type’ and ‘reference’ metadata (Francis and Kucera, 1964):
                1
            
            
                
                    id
                    type
                    reference
                
                
                    a01
                    PRESS: REPORTAGE
                    Sample A01 from The Atlanta Constitution
                
                
                    a02
                    PRESS: REPORTAGE
                    Sample A02 from The Dallas Morning News, February 17, 1961, sec. 1
                
                
                    a03
                    PRESS: REPORTAGE
                    Sample A03 from Chicago Daily Tribune
                
                
                    a04
                    PRESS: REPORTAGE
                    Sample A04 from The Christian Science Monitor, May 11, 1961, p. 1
                
                
                    a05
                    PRESS: REPORTAGE
                    Sample A05 from The Providence Journal
                
            
            
                Table 1. Brown corpus metadata (the ‘id’ column encodes text identifiers, ‘type’ the genre, and ‘reference’ the source).
            
            When it comes to TEI encoded texts, the contract is more complex and fuzzy, especially because the TEI provides guidelines for encoding but not as prescriptive as a format can do. One can typically use several different ways to encode a particular text component. This is needed for scholars to adopt the technology: it provides ways to encode texts we haven’t read yet, for which we haven’t established the base text or the critical apparatus yet. For a given project, the TEI encoding practice should be much more specific and documented because scholars need to share the same conventions to cross-validate their philological work. In such a context, it is possible to tune the software based on the conventions documentation to import the specific TEI sources and build the necessary corpus model to process it.
            To analyze a corpus at such a level of encoding, TXM provides pre-tuned TEI import modules for each documented TEI practice—for example, the ‘XML-TEI BFM’ import module for texts encoded according to the BFM corpus TEI encoding practice (Heiden et al., 2010).
            To analyze a corpus encoded with an unknown TEI practice, TXM provides the generic ‘XML/w+CSV’ import module. That module provides a simple way to adapt any XML or TEI encoding through an XSLT transformation stylesheet into the ‘XML-TEI TXM’ format designed for the TXM corpus model.
            TXM is available with a library of several XML and TEI adaptation stylesheets: https://sourceforge.net/projects/txm/files/library/xsl.
            The ‘XML/w+CSV’ import module is part of the progressive TXM import framework, which is built on a concentric format model (every format is based on the format of lower-outer level): Unicode TXT &lt; XML &lt; TEI &lt; XML-TEI TXM:
            Figure 1. TXM progressive import framework workflow. 
            In that framework, import modules can take a corpus at any level of encoding passing through the final TXM pivot ‘XML-TEI TXM’ format before compilation by the software (search engine indexes, text edition, etc.).
            The corpus model of TXM is composed of the following:
            • Each corpus consists of a set of 
                texts with properties called ‘metadata’ (author, title, date, genre . . .).
            
            • Each text is composed of nested optional internal 
                structures that have properties.
            
             • Each text is composed of a sequence of 
                words that can have properties. Words can be embedded in any textual structure.
            
            Each text has an HTML edition built during the import process. Some 
                textual planes can be built on demand, such as separating comments or notes from content body, etc.
            
            For each import encoding level, some corpus model elements can be built, or not:
            
                
                    
                    TXT
                    XML
                    TEI
                
                
                    Text units
                    files
                    files
                    files
                
                
                    Metadata
                    CSV
                    CSV
                    teiHeader
                
                
                    Structures
                    n/a
                    all
                    TEI specific
                
                
                    Words
                    raw
                    &lt;w&gt;?
                    &lt;w&gt;?
                
                
                    Textual planes
                    n/a
                    front XSL
                    TEI specific
                
            
            For each import level, a file corresponds to a text unit. TXT level cannot provide either internal structures encoding for texts or planes and tokenizes words from their ‘raw’ character constituents. XML level provides TXT level processing and can optionally encode some or all words with a &lt;w&gt; tag; all other tags are interpreted as text structures, and a front XSL can filter out some elements on the fly. TEI level provides XML level processing, text metadata are taken from the TEI header, and every tag has specific semantics related to structures or planes.
            Within such an import framework, the scholar can adapt the encoding effort to the level best suited for the elements she wants to be able to manipulate in the analysis software. A typical progression is to start with raw text (TXT) and progressively encode more information (sometimes based on findings made with the analysis tools). When entering the XML level, the first elements encoded are very often some specific structures (e.g., sentence, paragraph, or section) or words (e.g., compounds or entities) and page breaks to control text edition pagination with respect to the sources and concordance references (e.g., page number).
            NLP Annotation at Word Level
            As any level of encoding supposes the processing of words (implicitly or explicitly encoded), TXM integrates the possibility to call external NLP tools working on words to automatically enrich the sources through a delegation model. In that model, tools and their parameters are first declared once. Then, for each import module, they can be automatically called as many times as needed on a representation of the texts compatible with their processing (texts are converted to the format needed by each tool), and the result of their processing is reinjected back into the sources. As an example, TXM automatically annotates words with their lemma and morphosyntactic category with the TreeTagger software. In that model, the quality of the automatic encoding is delegated to external tools.
            In the case of XML type sources, if a word is already encoded with some properties (typically by using a &lt;w&gt; element), the NLP annotation is just added to the initial encoding.
            Adding systematic word level annotation can be difficult to keep compatible with original XML encoding. This is why TXM provides stand-off and inline ways to store word annotations into a TXM-specific TEI extension scheme called ‘XML-TEI TXM’. That representation can be exported to other tools or re-imported in any TXM.
            Conclusion
            We presented the TXM progressive import framework allowing the scholar to choose the right level—and effort—of encoding needed for the analysis of its sources. TEI level encoding is not mandatory to use the tool, simple raw text can be analyzed, and XML encoded sources provide a lot of useful services for analysis, but TEI provides the best reference target level of encoding as a language to establish a contract between philological and analytic work.
            Note
            1. The sample BROWN corpus can be downloaded from the TXM software website, http://sourceforge.net/projects/txm/files/corpora/brown.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Francis, W. N. and Kucera, H. (1964). A Standard Corpus of Present-Day Edited American English, for Use with Digital Computers. Department of Linguistics, Brown University, Providence, RI. Revised, 1971; revised and amplified, 1979. See also https://sourceforge.net/projects/txm/files/corpora/brown.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In Otoguro, R., Ishikawa, K., Umemoto, H., Yoshimoto, K. and Harada, Y. (eds), 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, November 2010, Sendai, Japan, Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, pp. 389–98.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S., Guillot, C., Lavrentiev, A. and Bertrand, L. (2010). Manuel d’encodage BFM / XML-TEI, Version 4.0, BFM–Base de Français Médiéval [En ligne]. Lyon: ENS de Lyon, Laboratoire ICAR, http://bfm.ens-lyon.fr/IMG/pdf/Manuel_Encodage_TEI.pdf.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Proposal for Creation of "Research Profile" of Photo Archives Using Digital Book Format
                
                    
                        Togiya
                        Norio
                    
                    Kansai University, Japan
                    ntogiya@kansai-u.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    historical photograph
                    archive
                    digital book
                    epub
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In recent years, digital/analog archives for photographs have been created in various places, and photos from different time periods and regions have been exhibited.
                1 However, one faces several challenges when trying to use the original photo materials as data.
            
            The first challenge is that it is very difficult to precisely determine the specifics of the subject of the photographs, such as people, buildings, time period, etc., due to there not being enough descriptions in writing, as the photographs are iconographic materials. 
            The second challenge is that it is rare for the inherited photographs to remain intact, and they are often damaged after natural disasters, wars, disagreements, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to grasp the information about their history and state of preservation. In addition, as a third point, in the analysis of photo materials it is rare that the frequency with which a particular subject is expressed has been quantified before the analysis, so in many cases the target analysis is performed from a subjective impression. However, in an objective analysis, it is desirable that the analysis is based on main quantitative data, such as frequency of the subject (Togiya and Kawashima, 2013). For this reason, in photo materials, it is necessary to provide basic data, such as frequency with which the particular subject is expressed.
            Outline of the Research Project
            In this study, we propose basic elements and an implementation plan for a ‘Research Profile’ of the photo documentation in order to objectively use photographic materials as academic materials. First, the ‘Research Profile’ of the photo archive proposed in this study includes the following three elements:
             1. Documentation on provenance and original condition (related documents, footage of interviews with old warehouse owners, visual material of the old warehouse space, distribution of the material, and a graph showing inheritance status).
             2. Materials that became a rationale for the content of the material for cataloging purposes, such as video interviews, official records and discussions by experts (video and online discussion data), personal information of the subjects, genealogical data, information on the buildings, etc.
             3. Frequency with which names that can be recognized are expressed in the subject, frequency with which multiple subjects are expressed together in the photo documentation group.
            Figure 1 is a diagram showing the actual configuration of the screen shown in the previous section ‘Research Profile’. Video and audio materials that contain detailed information about the corresponding material are stored in the profile after publishing the photo material of interest. These are stored in EPUB format, and text, voice, and images are integrated and stored in one set of files, enabling access with various e-book viewers.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The sample of research profile consisted of photo, movie, and graph.
            Summary
            The main point in this presentation is that since the number of photo archives is expected to increase in the future, it is important to collect data that can be browsed and analyzed from a more objective viewpoint and open it to the public as a ‘Research Profile’. In addition, another feature is that data, such as provenance information, interviews with witnesses, and discussions with experts—which became a reference at time of cataloging and until now was out of focus—can be systematically collected as objective data on quantitative analysis of the subject, and can be aggregated and published as material for scientific use. Additionally, these texts, pictures, audio, still images, and other media are aggregated in e-book format, and by using tablets, etc., they can be viewed in one set of files, browsed, and viewed in parallel in PC photo archive format or paper book format. Furthermore, persistent management is possible by storing them in an e-book format into e-book deposit systems, which are becoming popular these days.
            By making public ‘Research Profiles’ of photo archives, like the one in this study, it will be possible to use photo materials more objectively as scientific materials. An awareness that the testimony of the people involved in the photo is ‘documentation’ will develop, which will provide a base for developing the budding ‘Photograph Material Science’ in the future. 
            Note
            1. Library of Congress: Prints &amp; Photographs Online Catalog, http://www.loc.gov/pictures/;
            Smithsonian American Art Museum Photograph Archive, http://americanart.si.edu/research/programs/archive/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Togiya, N. and Kawashima, T. (2013). Research to Clarify the Interrelationships between Family Members through the Analysis of Family Photograph. 
                        Digital Humanities Monthly, no. 27 (October), http://www.dhii.jp/DHM/dhm27-1.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Prototyping A Workset Builder Using Semantic Technologies
                
                    
                        Jett
                        Jacob
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    jjett2@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Senseney
                        Megan
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    mfsense2@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Maden
                        Chris
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    crism@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Fallaw
                        Colleen
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    mfall3@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Downie
                        J. Stephen
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    jdownie@illinois.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    data modeling
                    HathiTrust corpus
                    RDF
                    semantic technologies
                    triple store
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    semantic analysis
                    information architecture
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The HathiTrust Digital Library comprises more than 4.7 billion pages (12.6 million volumes) of digitized content. The HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC) is a collaborative research initiative led by the University of Illinois and Indiana University engaged in developing an array of tools to connect digital humanities researchers with materials of interest within the HathiTrust corpus. This poster discusses the activities of the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis (WCSA) project, an initiative of the HTRC. Part of the primary mission of the WCSA initiative is the development and evolution of worksets that include selected subsets of the HathiTrust corpus for use in computational analysis. To test how well semantic technologies fit the workset concept we have implemented a prototype RDF-based triple-store that allows scholars to directly engage with the metadata describing their worksets and the bibliographic entities. 
            A key component to this work is the development of an underlying formal conceptual model that effectively represents descriptive information about worksets, including provenance, curatorial intent, and other useful metadata, in a manner that facilitates the scholarly process of selecting, grouping, and citing research data collections. The prototype has been designed to (1) comply with standards established by the Linked Open Data and semantic web communities and (2) allow scholars the maximum amount of flexibility when gathering their research data collections together, permitting them to intermingle resources from external corpora with those contained within the HathiTrust Digital Library.
            Discussion
            As a majority (~66%) of the HathiTrust corpus remains under copyright, HTRC web services are being built primarily to provide “nonconsumptive” research. Under the nonconsumptive paradigm, the full contents of the copyright-restricted digitized books are never exposed to users, so scholars rely upon descriptive metadata about volumes within the corpora to assemble worksets. As depicted in the simplified workflow visualization in Figure 1 (below), scholars will then be able to submit their worksets to a number of analytics tools, both provided by the HTRC and developed by themselves. These processes will result in a number of data products that can be leveraged by the scholar in a number of ways, including as research materials that can be included in new worksets.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. HTRC scholarly workflow.
            Scholars require infrastructure that allows them to gather together masses of heterogeneous research materials (Varvel and Thomer, 2011), facilitates interoperability across datasets (Henry and Smith, 2010), and supports working with materials at arbitrary levels of granularity (Fenlon et al., 2014). These requirements have been a driving force in the development of our prototype and its underlying conceptual and data models. We built our prototype RDF-based workset builder (a graph visualization is depicted in Figure 2) using the open-source version of OpenLink’s Virtuoso Triple Store.
                1 Development of the prototype triple store has been continually informed by our ongoing partnerships with four project teams engaged in separate but related prototyping projects
                2 to enrich the metadata in the HathiTrust corpus. Through these interactions, the project team encountered the need to accommodate several additional use cases surrounding the selection of materials for worksets and methods for directly enriching bibliographic metadata describing the entities that constitute worksets. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Graph representation of the WCSA Workset model.
            In collaboration with the Oxford 
                ElEPHãT project, we have explored extensions and adaptations to the bibliographic metadata that describes volumes within the HathiTrust corpus that will facilitate the deduplication process for scholars as they gather research materials, enabling them to remove redundant resources from their worksets more efficiently. We are also working with a team at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities to explore the best way to leverage annotations of bibliographic metadata. This latter case exploits the RDF-based Open Annotation standard
                3 as a means for enriching bibliographic metadata without making direct changes to values already recorded within the original MARC metadata records. 
            
            Future Work
            We are currently engaged in exploring additional extensions to the prototype’s underlying data model in order to more fully address the need for more fine-grained units of analysis, as identified by Fenlon et al. (2014). The need to consider page-level rather than volume-level content has already informed the use of new metadata description entities that better characterize pages of digitized content as bibliographic artifacts. Utilizing previous work on arbitrary segmentation of web-based resources (Sanderson, Ciccarese, and Van de Sompel, 2013), we are currently formalizing methods by which finer grained sub-page features—paragraphs, sentences, and other page fragments—can reliably be identified and exploited as workset members in their own right. Complementary methods for identifying and leveraging literary forms such as music and poems, among others, are also under development.
            Notes
            1. http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com.
            2. http://worksets.htrc.illinois.edu/worksets/?p=101.
            3. http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Fenlon, K., Senseney, M., Green, H., Battacharyya, S., Willis, C. and Downie, J. S. (2014). Scholar-Built Collections: A Study of User Requirements for Research in Large-Scale Digital Libraries. Paper for presentation at the 
                        77th ASIS&amp;T Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA, 31 October–5 November 2014.
                    
                    
                        Henry, C. and Smith, K. (2010). Ghostlier Demarcations: Large-Scale Text Digitization Projects and Their Utility for Contemporary Humanities Scholarship. In 
                        The Idea of Order: Transforming Research Collections for 21st-Century Scholarship. Council on Library and Information Resources, pp. 106–15.
                    
                    
                        Sanderson, R., Ciccarese, P. and Van de Sompel, H. (2013). Designing the W3C Open Annotation Data Model. 
                        Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Web Science Conference, Paris, 2–4 May 2013.
                    
                    
                        Varvel, V. E. J. and Thomer, A. (2011). Google Digital Humanities Awards Recipient Interviews Report (CIRSS Report No. HTRC1101). Center for Informatics Research in Science and Scholarship, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Psst! An informal approach to expanding the linguistic range of the Digital Humanities.
                
                    
                        Ortega
                        Elika
                    
                    CulturePlex Lab, University of Western Ontario
                    elikaortega@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Gil
                        Alex
                    
                    Columbia University
                    colibri.alex@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        O'Donnell
                        Daniel Paul
                    
                    University of Lethbridge
                    daniel.odonnell@uleth.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    go::dh
                    multilingualism
                    whispering
                    translation
                    best practices
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    translation studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH) is a Special Interest Group (SIG) of the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations (ADHO). Its purpose is to help break down barriers that hinder communication and collaboration among researchers and students of the digital arts, humanities, and cultural heritage sectors across political, economic, and regional boundaries (Global Outlook::Digital Humanities, 2013).
            The origins of GO::DH lie in Melissa Terras’ infographic ‘Quantifying Digital Humanities’ (Terras, 2012). This posting contained a map showing the distribution of physical centres in the digital humanities (as defined by members of ADHO communities) across the globe. Its most striking feature, however, were the absences: apart from a thin band of centres across the Northern Hemisphere and in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, the majority of the world appeared as ‘empty space’. While digital work in the humanities was being conducted by researchers, teachers, and scholars in these areas, it remained for the most part invisible to researchers in the ‘Global North’ associated with the largest international digital humanities societies and organisations. There was a literal disconnect between researchers in these (largely mid- and low-income economic) ‘unknown’ regions and those appearing on the map (for the most part found in high-income regions): the researchers were simply not part of the same digital, academic, and social networks. Although the digital humanities as we define it is, relative to the humanities more broadly, a highly international and collaborative endeavour, it remains the case that our internationalisation and collaborative activity are primarily conducted on an East-West basis among a relatively small number of generally contiguous, high-income economies (O’Donnell, 2012; see also Fiormonte, 2012; Galina, 2013).
            The GO::DH approach to breaking down these barriers is extremely practical: the organization develops complementary strengths, interests, abilities, and experiences of its membership through special projects, events, activities, and publicity (Priego and O’Donnell, 2013; Priego and Gil, 2013). Its core activities are discovery, community-building, research, and advocacy. It helps its members learn more about digital work in the arts, humanities, and cultural heritage sectors; it acts to foster collaboration and cooperation across regions and economies; it coordinates research on and in support of the use of technology in these areas across the globe; and it advocates for a global perspective on work in this sector.
            This paper discusses in particular approaches that the SIG has taken in the last two years towards promoting multilingualism within the digital humanities, primarily through the ‘whisper campaign’ (first rolled out at DH2014). It concludes with information on the translation toolkit currently under development by authors.
            The Whisper Campaign
            The whisper campaign from DH2014 in Lausanne is one of the more prominent GO::DH initiatives. This project, which came together very quickly in the weeks leading up to the conference, involved the distribution of buttons to conference attendees on which they could write languages they were able to interpret for others.
            The model for this project came from the 2012 INKE conference in Havana, Cuba (INKE, 2012). Although the language of the conference was English, and although most participants at the conference could work in English to a greater or lesser degree, the conference organisers also decided to promote an informal system through which those with stronger English skills could help those with weaker ones. When speakers who preferred to speak in Spanish presented, the same system was used, with Spanish speakers in this case translating for Anglophone attendees.
            Two members of the GO::DH executive in attendance at that conference, Alex Gil and Daniel Paul O’Donnell, were quite taken with this model and began to wonder whether this could be used in other DH contexts. The need for such an approach was further confirmed at DH 2013, when several members of GO::DH saw examples of presenters or conference attendees struggling with questions or answers in English.
            The final push for the whisper campaign came in the form of an unconference session on multilingualism led by Élika Ortega at DHSI2014 in which participants were asked to come up with ideas on how to ‘knit an exchange network of DH scholarship in various languages’ (Ortega, 2014). In his concluding keynote, Gil argued that the initiatives proposed at this workshop would help ‘open language to the community, where a translation of the website or any forum post depends on the community itself’ (Gil, 2014). In a subsequent discussion on the GO::DH mailing list, O’Donnell suggested that ‘most people find it easier to receive information in weaker languages than produce it’, while Isabel Galina proposed using the (then) upcoming DH2014 meeting as an opportunity to put together a concrete plan of action: ‘Maybe somewhere where you can sign up and say, “I am willing to help out with the following languages” or “I need help in this language”? A volunteer system for helping out in sessions that require it?’ (Global Outlook::Digital Humanities, 2014).
            With some buttons ordered by Ortega and some felt-tipped markers, the project was implemented for less than $200. While there were relatively few examples of ad hoc translation at DH2014 (though there were a large number of volunteers), the greater impact is seen in its influence on subsequent meetings: organisers at the Society for the History of Authorship, Reading, and Publishing (SHARP) meeting and OurMarathon project, for example, have sought to either incorporate the same model or use it to inspire efforts to make sure their practice is open to languages other than English. We will also be offering the service again at DH2015.
            
                The Translation Toolkit
            
            The success of the whisper campaign—both in practical terms at DH2014 and in its wider effect at bringing multilingual issues to the fore—has inspired members of the executive to develop a ‘translators toolkit’. This is a collection of tips for best practices and tools that have been compiled with help from the broader DH community. Examples of these practices include promoting the use of multilingual slides during presentations, allowing presenters and attendees to request live translation (via the whisperers themselves), creating multilingual posters, matching multilingual chairs to multilingual sessions, and compiling a multilingual glossary of DH terms. Ultimately, the initiative could lead to the creation of a directory of whisperers and multilingual reviewers.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clavert, F. (2013). The Digital Humanities Multicultural Revolution Did Not Happen Yet, 26 April, http://www.clavert.net/the-digital-humanities-multicultural-revolution-did-not-happen-yet/.
                    
                    
                        Dacos, M. (2013). [globaloutlookDH-L] Presentation and Concrete Propositions, 27 January, http://listserv.uleth.ca/pipermail/globaloutlookdh-l/2013-January/000188.html.
                    
                    
                        Fiormonte, D. (2012). Towards a Cultural Critique of the Digital Humanities. In Thaller, M. (ed.), 
                        Controversies around the Digital Humanities. Köln: Published jointly by QUANTUM and Zentrum für Historische Sozialforschung, pp. 59–76. 
                    
                    
                        Galina, I. (2013). Is There Anybody Out There? Building a Global Digital Humanities Community. Humanidades Digitales, http://humanidadesdigitales.net/blog/2013/07/19/is-there-anybody-out-there-building-a-global-digital-humanities-community/.
                    
                    
                        Gil, A. (2014). The (Digital) Library of Babel. 
                        @elotroalex, http://elotroalex.webfactional.com/digital-library-babel/. 
                    
                    
                        Global Outlook::Digital Humanities. (2013). About page. http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/about/.
                    
                    
                        Global Outlook::Digital Humanities. (2014). DHSI Unconference Session on Multilingualism in DH. Email correspondence of participants in the ADHO DH Global Outlook Community, 18–20 June 2014.
                    
                    
                        INKE (Implementing New Knowledge Environments). (2012). Havana Gathering 2012, http://inke.ca/projects/inke-conference-2012-havana/.
                    
                    
                        O’Donnell, D. P. (2012). In a Rich Man’s World: Global DH? Dpod Blog, 2 November, http://dpod.kakelbont.ca/2012/11/02/in-a-rich-mans-world-global-dh/.
                    
                    
                        O’Donnell, D. P. (2013). [globaloutlookDH-L] A Revolution Yet to Happen, 30 April, http://listserv.uleth.ca/pipermail/globaloutlookdh-l/2013-April/000319.html.
                    
                    
                        Ortega, É. Whispering/Translating during DH2014: Five Things We Learned | Readers of Fiction. 
                        Readers of Fiction, 21 July, http://lectoresdeficcion.blogs.cultureplex.ca/2014/07/21/dhwhisperer/. 
                    
                    
                        Priego, E. and Gil, A. (2013). Global Perspectives: Interview with Alex Gil. 4Humanities, http://4humanities.org/2013/01/interview-with-alex-gil/.
                    
                    
                        Priego, E. and O’Donnell, D. P. (2013). Bringing Diversity of Experience Together: An Interview with Daniel O’Donnell. 
                        4Humanities, May, http://4humanities.org/2013/05/interview-daniel-o-donnell/.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2012). Quantifying Digital Humanities. http://melissaterras.blogspot.ca/2012/01/infographic-quanitifying-digital.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Publish: Whatever The Price? A French Study On Structuration Of Costs During Publishing Process In Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Corne
                        Emmanuelle
                    
                    CNRS, member of BSN7 group, France
                    emmanuelle.corne@cnrs-dir.fr
                
                
                    
                        Gremillet
                        Anne-Solweig
                    
                    CNRS, member of BSN7 group, France
                    anne-solweig.gremillet@univ-paris3.fr
                
                
                    
                        Contat
                        Odile
                    
                    CNRS, member of BSN7 group, France
                    odile.contat@cnrs-dir.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    cost
                    public academic edition
                    non-profit publishing
                    DH infrastructures
                    journals
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    French
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2009 the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research created a facility, the Digital Scientific Library (Bibliothèque Scientifique Numérique [BSN]), to provide national-level support for the scientific and technical information sector and to inform on a variety of issues. A part of the work of BSN is focused on the various aspects of the publishing process, considering good practice policies and direct and indirect costs related to the activity. 
            This article presents the BSN as an emerging facility and, more specifically, describes the protocol and results from a survey implemented by the ‘publishing’ group focused on the costs associated with publishing in human and social sciences from the perspective of actors actively involved in developing editorial added-value. 
            
                The Digital Scientific Library, a Facility for French Public Digital Sciences Research Institutions
            
            Publishing articles in scientific journals is expensive for French public institutions for a number of reasons, from financing the editorial process and production, to purchasing libraries and providing access to researchers. The issue of making publicly funded scientific publications available in Open Access form has increasingly become the subject of heated debates.
                1
            
            In addition, since 2012 and with the long-term perspective of Horizon 2020, national and European financial institutions have both included in their recommendations the use of Open Access publication (recommendations by the European Commission in July 2012 and the Horizon 2020 December 2013 release), and the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research clearly positioned itself on the subject with its declaration in 2013, ‘Scientific information is a common asset that must be available to all’ (Fioraso, 2013). Among the priority actions outlined by the Ministry of Research to achieve this goal are the following three proposals: to develop 
                Green Open Access, to provide support for 
                Gold Open Access, and to promote the development of a third road emphasizing innovation and sustainability. 
            
            The BSN publishing group is tasked with implementing scalable recommendations, adaptable to changes in the state of the art within the sector, editorial practices, usage, and market demands. The long-term objective of the group is to produce a sustainable scientific digital guide outlining:
             • Best practices promoting innovative content use, dissemination, and preservation.
             • Conditions for access to make the greatest number of research results available, ideally in Open Access form.
            
                The Survey of Editorial Costs for Humanities and Social Science Journals
            
            This survey, conducted by the BSN publishing group, is designed to collect the most recent information available representing a diverse range of situations related to editorial costs for research journals, for all disciplines, for a comprehensive and up-to-date assessment. The objective is to identify common parameters of different journals related to their operations and editorial financing and to provide a set of realistic and adaptable guideline recommendations for journals targeting Open Access publication. To achieve this, it is necessary to identify all manufacturing costs for scientific journals and differentiate shares of the public and private sectors in terms of financial support, contributing to increasing editorial value or providing support for production, dissemination, and distribution, for both printed and digital works. The main question is: What is the cost of producing a scientific article, and what is the cost to transition to Open Access?
            The survey began with 10 qualitative interviews with journal managers or managing editors to produce detailed descriptions of the scientific and financial operations of their journals and to discuss how they viewed Open Access publishing (or issues related to the process of transitioning to Open Access). These first interviews allowed us to understand the stages of the editorial chain and provided information on the time and cost required for each necessary task within that chain for more than 15 journals. To complement and support these first results, a quantitative survey with 66 questions was then sent out, between July 2014 and November 2014, to 300 people working for university publishers or French research centres for which a part of their activity is dedicated to publishing double-blind peer-reviewed scientific journals. In the end, both cumulative surveys helped to collate results for 50 French humanities and social science academic journals.
            Conclusion and Discussion
            This work was commissioned by the publishing group at the Digital Scientific Library (BSN) joined in the process of observation and revaluation of balances by clarifying the French publishing landscape for sustainable academic publishing committed to the goal of making all scientific productions available through Open Access by the year 2020. However, up to now, very little has been known about the economics of scientific journals, and consequently, public policy makers lacked the necessary information needed to develop informed policies for publishing.
            We want to emphasize that, despite what we see in some of the calculations and graphics presented, switching to Open Access with APC could not be calculated by substituting the cost per article, as the APC for an article is covered by public support. This would have made our analysis of scientific editorial production purely financial when the issues are much more complex.
            This survey on publishing costs of HSS journals shows the following:
             • Cost analysis is an unfamiliar prism of perspective for most public actors involved in producing journals. It was urgently needed, particularly in the context of reports with commercial publishers.
             • Academic journal producers and research units develop all scientific content up to the stage of page layout within their public institutions before delivering it to a private publisher who handles distribution and commercial sales, with the revenues rarely returned to the public institution.
             • Paying salaries for editorial work represents the most important cost involved in publishing articles in HSS journals.
             • Costs paid for by the private publisher (printing, distribution) represent less than costs supported by public sector funds (salaries for editorial work).
             • The role of the private publisher is often limited to managing distribution, particularly in the context of emerging digital production and distribution. This is not to reduce the usefulness or effectiveness of this function. To the contrary, we now know that the highest costs are spent in the earlier stages of the publishing process, and this cost—which is often hidden or ignored—shows that the state invests heavily in the process of publishing journals, which has a direct consequence: this investment must be recognized, and the state as an investor should be given rights to the production it finances.
             • Cost distribution between public and private funding is essential to the relationship between the public sector and private operators.
             • The need exists for a French or even European infrastructure to better coordinate public and private contributions.
             • The issue of empowering researchers with technical skills in digital humanities elicited very different responses and merits further investigation in a follow-up study.
            This survey did not examine purely scientific costs, such as issues of authors’ remuneration and work done by reviewers and editors overseen by researchers, but this issue was central to our discussions with journal managers. The first results of this survey will, hopefully, be a source of ideas and reflection for practical ways to approach Horizon 2020 in France and for prospects of further enlargement in Europe.
            Our discussions with professionals in the industry showed us that issues surrounding scientific editorial production in humanities and social sciences in France are approximately on par with those in Spain and Portugal (Medici, 2014). It would appear that the necessary conditions have been met for building common foundations for good practice guidelines in Europe, and perhaps the future possibility of developing editorial costs within the Dariah infrastructure (Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities).
            Authors’ Note
            This article compiles the main conclusions of a collective work conducted by the publishing group of the Digital Scientific Library handled by the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research. We want to thank all stakeholders in this group and the institutions they represent for their involvement, their careful proofreading, and their support: Marin Dacos (Openedition), Domique Roux (University Presses of Caen), Emmanuelle Corne (Foundation for the Sciences of Man), Céline Vautrin (College of France Publications), Jacques Lafait (Nanosciences Institute of Paris), Sylvie Steffann (CNRS-Inist), Jean-François Lutz (University of Lorraine), Annie Leblanc (French Atomic Energy Commission), and Sébastien Respingue-Perrin (University Library of Evry Val d’Essonne, Couperin).
            Note
            1. ‘We have seen the Open Access culture developing for several years; we now need to consider how this affects the economics of scientific publication’ (Chartron, 2006).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Chartron, G. (2006). Une économie renouvelée de la publication scientifique. 
                        Perspectives documentaires en éducation, no. 62.
                    
                    
                        Fioraso, G. (2013). L’information scientifique est un bien commun qui doit être disponible pour tous. Discours lors des 5e journées Open Access, le 24 janvier 2013, http://www.enseignementsup-recherche.gouv.fr/cid66992/discours-de-genevieve-fioraso-lors-des-5e-journees-open-access.html.
                    
                    
                        Médici. (2014). 
                        Actes des 5e journées du réseau métier de l'édition scientifique publique (Médici), Strasbourg, Parlement européen, 7–9 avril 2014, http://www.cnrs.fr/dist/z-outils/documents/Medici.pdf.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Punched-Card Humanities: Roberto Busa and IBM in Historical Context
                
                    
                        Jones
                        Steven Edward
                    
                    Loyola University Chicago, CUNY Grad Center ARC (2014-2015), United States of America
                    sjones1@luc.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    history of humanities computing
                    platform studies
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    information retrieval
                    natural language processing
                    concording and indexing
                    cultural studies
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            It’s the canonical founding story of the digital humanities: In November 1949, the Italian Jesuit scholar Father Roberto Busa came to IBM headquarters at 590 Madison Avenue in New York to meet with the founder and head of the company, Thomas J. Watson Sr. He was seeking technical and financial support for the project of mechanizing the building of a massive lemmatized concordance to the works of St. Thomas Aquinas. Drawing on Father Busa’s own papers, recently accessioned in Milan, as well as IBM archives and other sources, I aim to uncover the historical complexities behind the founding story, the history behind the myth. In this paper, based on a book in progress, I’ll look at a few details of that 1949 meeting between Father Busa and Watson using the metaphor of the exploded-view diagram—like those used by engineers, descended from examples in the notebooks of Leonardo, for example—suspending and zooming in on constituent details of the meeting and the meanings each detail invokes, in order to understand the story as part of a larger history of computing in the 1940s and 1950s, and as part of the prehistory of the digital humanities. 
            In a paper delivered at DH 2014, Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair briefly consider Father Busa’s work with IBM, along with other examples of ‘the period of technology development around mainframe and personal computer text analysis tools, that has largely been forgotten with the advent of the web’ (2014). They advocate a media-archaeology approach (they cite Zieliniski, 2008; I’d add Parikka, 2012) as a way to begin to ‘understand how differently data entry, output and interaction were thought through’ in the mainframe era (2014). I share those goals. In my case, I’ll also draw on the related approach known as platform studies, examining specific calculating and computing platforms available to Father Busa and his collaborator at IBM, Paul Tasman—including the ‘bootstrapped’ systems they configured for punched-card processing, which soon included early tape-drive stored-program computers. The affordances of these platforms led to the inclusion in Father Busa’s research agenda on the 
                Index Thomisticus of similar work on the newly discovered Dead Sea Scrolls in the later 1950s. I’ll look at relationships between the layers in each platform: hardware, software, human agents, history, and culture. My central question is how specific technologies afford and constrain cultural practices, including the academic research agendas of humanities computing and, later, digital humanities.
            
            My point of departure is a seemingly insignificant detail: a poster Father Busa says he carried into the CEO’s office that read, ‘The difficult we do right away; the impossible takes a little longer’. In his telling, the poster becomes a rhetorical device for persuading IBM to collaborate. I show that in the 1940s, at least for Watson, it would also have been closely associated with the SeaBees, the U.S. Navy Construction Brigade, and its famous ‘can-do’ philosophy, and, thus, with the wide context of the postwar period of reconstruction and of the role of technology in the new era, including IBM’s own complicated history in Europe. Just months before the meeting with Father Busa, IBM had created its World Trade Corporation, and, significantly, it was to this international subsidiary and the technical head of it, Paul Tasman, that Father Busa’s project was assigned. The collaboration belongs in that wider historical context, as well as the more specific context of the particular punched-card machines Busa and Tasman went on to use for the initial experiments in machine-generated indexes and general ‘language engineering’, the results of which were first published in Busa (1951). I’ll look at how the punched cards continued to be used for years, even in hybrid (and transatlantic) workflow systems that, at one point, included punching, sorting, and collating the cards in Italy, then bringing them to New York for transfer to and sequential processing on the magnetic tapes of the room-sized IBM 705. (Publicity photos from the era show Father Busa sitting at the control console of the 705, its tall tape drives in the background.) 
            I’ll also consider one example of an ‘adjacent possible’ platform (Johnson, 2014, 156), a road not taken, as it were: the SSEC, the first publicly recognized large-scale calculator (and about the status of which as a stored-program 
                computer there has been a history of debate). Father Busa would have had to walk past this big machine on his way to the fateful meeting, a kind of pre-mainframe, operating out in public, on display in the custom-designed showroom on the street level of 590 Madison Avenue, on the corner of 57th Street, and he would perhaps have seen the plaque mounted there with Watson’s words, dedicating it to science, education, and government, and the exploration of ‘the consequences of man’s thought to the outermost reaches of time, space, and physical conditions’. The machine was in newsreels, a 
                Vogue magazine spread, newspapers (one cross-marketing ad with Shell Oil included a cartoon depicting it as a colossal female ‘Oracle on 57th Street’), and was even used in an early cold-war Hollywood film noir, which cast IBM engineers and operators as extras, all during the years Father Busa was demonstrating his system for linguistic analysis using the available punched-card machines. The example of the SSEC likely led to Busa’s interest within a few years in using the 705 (in a line that replaced the SSEC in IBM’s public showroom starting in 1952, just when Busa and Tasman were demonstrating their techniques at IBM). Despite the movies and other representations of the popular imagination, fueled by publicity campaigns, the ‘questions’ posed to the ‘oracles’ that were early 1950s computers were, of course, in the form of mathematical calculations, and the data to be processed was for the most part numbers, not natural language. But according to Tasman, the development of Information Retrieval at IBM, including the standard KWIC (Key Word In Context) protocol, grew out of Father Busa’s early experiments (1968).
            
            The whole campaign around the SSEC, in terms of its mode of publicity and its computing aims, bears a striking resemblance to the most recent IBM campaign this past season (Fall 2014), at a different showroom, down at Astor Place in New York, with another personified machine, but this time one that 
                does answer natural language questions by recourse to very deep data to which it applies artificial intelligence in the form of cognitive computing. Watson, named for the founder and first CEO, is in part descended from Father Busa’s project, started in that CEO’s office, and on the kind of research it represented, its processing of language instead of numbers, and eventually (and perhaps at first accidentally), its focus on viewing a text-base in the way a database would later be viewed—as a store of information to be mined, analyzed, retrieved effectively, and even rearranged algorithmically in order to reveal patterns or answer new questions. At mid-century, the SSEC may have been (literally) the poster-child for these aspirations for computing, but it was the ‘humanistic’ work with punched-card machinery, like the experiments of Father Busa and Paul Tasman, trying at first just to sort words more efficiently, only later learning they could engage in more sophisticated text analytics, that marked a significant swerve that would eventually lead into these larger aspirations—not to mention to what came to be known as the digital humanities. It’s in that more complicated sense that the prehistory of the digital humanities, at least one prehistory, is punched-card humanities.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bogost, I. and Montfort, N. (n.d.). Platform Studies. http://platformstudies.com.
                    
                    
                        Busa, R. (1951). 
                        Varia Specimina Concordiatarum: A First Example of Word Index Automatically Compiled and Printed by IBM Punched Card Machines. Fratelli Bocca, Milan.
                    
                    
                        Busa, R. (1980). The Annals of Humanities Computing: The 
                        Index Thomisticus. Computers and the Humanities,
                        14(2): 83–90.
                    
                    
                        Johnson, S. (2014). 
                        How We Got to Now: Six Innovations That Made the Modern World. Riverhead Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Parikka, J. (2012). 
                        What Is Media Archaeology? Polity, Cambridge, UK.
                    
                    
                        Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (2014). Past Analytical: Towards an Archaeology of Text Analysis Tools. Paper delivered at 
                        DH 2014, Lausanne, http://dharchive.org/ paper/DH2014/Paper-778.xml.
                    
                    
                        Tasman, P. (1957). Literary Data Processing. 
                        IBM Journal of Research and Development, (
                        1)3: 249–56.
                    
                    
                        Tasman, P. (1958). 
                        Indexing the Dead Sea Scrolls, by Electronic Literary Data Processing Methods. IBM World Trade Corporation, New York.
                    
                    
                        Tasman, P. (1968). Oral History. IBM Archives, Somers, NY, accessed 2014.
                    
                    
                        Zieliniski, S. (2008). 
                        Deep Time of the Media: Toward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Quantifying Ambiguity by Gamifying the Writing Process: A Case Study on William Blake’s “The Sick Rose”
                
                    
                        Milstein
                        Dana
                    
                    Yale University, United States of America
                    dana.milstein@yale.edu
                
                
                    
                        Cochrane
                        Euan
                    
                    Yale University, United States of America
                    euan.cochrane@yale.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    ambiguity
                    poetry
                    word processor
                    heat map
                    lexicon
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    information retrieval
                    lexicography
                    natural language processing
                    software design and development
                    knowledge representation
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Both the challenge and the pleasure of poetry analysis originate in nocuous and polysemous ambiguity: Different readers interpret linguistic expressions in a poem based on different contexts. The layers of ambiguity grow exponentially when a reader applies semiotic analysis to a poem to examine linguistic expressions for modalities, paradigms, syntagmatic structures, rhetorical tropes, intertexual elements, and semiotic codes. Poetry scholars might argue, in fact, that to eliminate nocuous and polysemous ambiguity would diminish the poem and defeat the purpose of poetic interpretation.
            To date, ambiguity analysis generally manifests itself in domains like requirements gathering documents, where ambiguity can lead to misinterpretation, lost money and time, and poor or stunted project outcomes. Approaches that attempt a probabilistic prediction of ambiguity in such documents can be useful for indicating ambiguity when writing these texts, so that authors can be reminded to clarify their writing where it 
                might be necessary. In poetry analysis, however, it may be less useful for interpretation purposes to probabilistically predict which expressions are ambiguous or not. Orthography petrifies meaning in poetry, some argue; nevertheless, a poem may be infused with multiple meanings by virtue of ambiguities created through wordplay and rhetorical devices that can be discerned only through close reading and puzzle solving to decode the linguistic expressions and structures.
            
            We are curious to discover if reducing ambiguity will limit poetic analysis and what new types of questions may emerge as a result of disambiguation. To that effect, in this presentation we aim to present three facets of what we hope will become a large project on quantifying ambiguity:
             a. 
                Method as Applied to Research in the Humanities: This algorithmic tool will be further refined to provide a mechanism to quantify the ambiguity of a given text by analyzing its lexical and syntactic ambiguity to produce a number that represents the overall ambiguity of the text. As well as gamifying the process of communicating unambiguously (by enabling the dynamic scoring of the author’s progress as she writes), the tool enables the ambiguity of diverse texts to be objectively compared and opens new avenues for text comparison and analysis. Furthermore, the tool should identify ambiguity 
                within a text by quantifying the ambiguity of individual words and phrases inside the text. An immediate application of this will be to produce an extension that will highlight terms or phrases in a text in colors representing their ambiguity, providing an ‘ambiguity map,’ the equivalent of a ‘heat map’ (see Chen and Wang, 2012) for ambiguity within texts:
            
            Figure 1. Sample output of the tool in current prototype.
            
                
            
             b. 
                Critical Assessment of the Application: Application of the tool to William Blake’s ‘The Sick Rose’. Initially, we set our ambitions too high—to apply the tool to what many consider the most difficult poem in the world due to its high level of ambiguity, Mallarmé’s ‘Coup de dés’ (CDD). Obstacles arose because of the structure and variants in the Littré Dictionary (which Mallarmé used to write the poem), which made it difficult to apply the algorithm in its current form. CDD’s length and visual formatting also render it too difficult to parse manually in order to compare it to the algorithm’s output. Therefore, we decided to work with William Blake’s ‘The Sick Rose’, for its brevity, morphological simplicity, and its ambiguity (scholars refer to it as one of Blake’s ‘gnomic triumphs’ [Bloom, 1987]). We anticipate that this 34-word poem will be more manageable both for the algorithm to analyze, so that we can manually code the poem and compare our effort to the algorithmic output, and to build a proof-of-concept multimodal dictionary with word processor. 
            
             c. 
                Impact in Formulating and Addressing Research Questions: An outcome of our analysis is the realization that dictionaries (whether those used by the poet or current dictionaries used by readers of poetry) provide definitions that may themselves be ambiguous, primarily due to circularity (for example, the definition of a word in a dictionary may contain a word, the definition for which contains the original word), but also due to the general effect of nocuous or polysemic ambiguity in the dictionaries themselves. Additionally, by hand coding one poem we will show that a computer-aided coder (e.g., a special word processor) would greatly speed up the task of specifying the semantics of a text. Therefore, we intend to build and showcase a multimodal dictionary for the poem, which we will discuss in conjunction with a proposed, longer-term project to build a type of word processor that enables authors to specify the meanings of words in-line while writing a poem or to mark up a poem post-hoc. 
            
            As dictionaries often provide multiple meanings for a single word, the proposed new dictionary will provide identifiers for concepts as well as linking terms to those concepts (in much the same way that WordNet does [see Miller, 1995]), enabling authors to use the word processor to specify the concept they are referring to when they use a term or phrase (rather than simply including a multi-meaning term in their text), and minimizing the ambiguity of their writing. The dictionary will require all concepts to be defined using data (images, audio, video, other sensor data), semantic primitives / semantic primes, or some combination of these, thus ensuring that the definitions in the dictionary are minimally ambiguous (Wierzbicka, 1972). In order to eventually enable 
                semantic ambiguity to be quantified, the dictionary will also not limit the referrers that may refer to concepts to only terms or phrases but will allow any text to link to a concept. This effort aligns with current ambiguity analysis theory, where authors state that ambiguity can be avoided by using controlled languages (Fuchs and Schwitter, 1996; Gause and Weinberg, 2011), style guides (Kovitz, 1998; Ryser and Glinz, 2000), and lexicons (Chantree et al., 2006) In this section, we also address concerns that creating a lexicon of domain-specific terminology, even for a 34-word poem, will be a sizeable task. If time permits, we hope to solicit feedback from the audience on the proposed word processor, which would enable authors to create texts with minimal ambiguity by enabling them to specify the meanings of words and phrases as they type (in much the same way as predictive text software works). The word processor would also enable deterministic semantic analysis (in contrast to the mainstream approaches to semantic analysis, which are, for the most part, probabilistic [see Hoffman, 2001]) by capturing a machine-readable version of the meaning of the text being written. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blake, W. (1789). The Sick Rose. In 
                        Songs of Innocence and Experience. 
                    
                    
                        Bloom, H. (ed.). 1987. 
                        Introduction to William Blake’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience. New York: Chelsea House, pp. 1–28. 
                    
                    
                        Chantree, F., Kilgarriff, A., de Roeck, A. and Willis, A. (2005). Disambiguating Coordinations Using Word Distribution Information. In 
                        Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP), Borovets, Bulgaria. 
                    
                    
                        Chantree, F., Nuseibeh, B., de Roeck, A. and Willis, A. (2006). Identifying Nocuous Ambiguities in Natural Language Requirements. In 
                        Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
                    
                    
                        Chen, L. and Wang, Y. (2012). Heat Map Displays for Data from Human Abuse Potential Crossover Studies. 
                        Therapeutic Innovation and Regulatory Science,
                        46(6) (November): 701–7.
                    
                    
                        Empsom. W. (2004). 
                        Seven Types of Ambiguity. Random House. 
                    
                    
                        Fuchs, N. and Schwitter, R. (1996). Attempto Controlled English (ACE). In 
                        Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Controlled Language Applications. Leuven, Belgium.
                    
                    
                        Gause, D. and Weinberg, G. (2011). 
                        Exploring Requirements: Quality before Design. Dorset House, New York. 
                    
                    
                        Harrison, A. (1963). Poetic Ambiguity. 
                        Analysis,
                        23(3) (January). 
                    
                    
                        Hoffman, T. (2001). Unsupervised Learning by Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis. 
                        Machine Learning, 
                        42: 177–96. 
                    
                    
                        Kovitz, B. L. (1998). 
                        Practical Software Requirements: A Manual of Content and Style. Manning, Greenwich, CT. 
                    
                    
                        Miller, G. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database for English. 
                        Communications of the ACM,
                        38(11): 39–41. 
                    
                    
                        Norvig, P. (1998). Interpretation under Ambiguity. In 
                        Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. 
                    
                    
                        Poesio, M. (1996). Semantic Ambiguity and Perceived Ambiguity. In Van Deemter, K. and Peters, S. (eds), 
                        Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and Information. CSLI Lecture Notes 55. 
                    
                    
                        Resnik, P. (1999). Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy: An Information-Based Measure and Its Application to Problems of Ambiguity in Natural Language. 
                        Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
                        11: 95–130. 
                    
                    
                        Rogers, R. (1973). On the Metapsychology of Poetic Language: Modal Ambiguity. 
                        International Journal of Psychoanalysis,
                        54(1): 61–74.
                    
                    
                        Ryser, J. and Glinz, M. (2000). Scent—A Method Employing Scenarios to Systematically Derive Test Cases for System Test. Technical Report 2000.03, University of Zurich, Switzerland. 
                    
                    
                        Schull, F., Rus, I. and Basili, V. (2000). How Perspective-Based Reading Can Improve Requirements Inspections. 
                        IEEE Computer,
                        33(7) (July): 73–79.
                    
                    
                        Wasow, T., Perfors, A. and Beaver, D. (2003). The Puzzle of Ambiguity. In Orgun, O. and Sells, P. (eds). 
                        Morphology and the Web of Grammar: Essays in Memory of Steven G. Lapointe. CSLI Publications. 
                    
                    
                        Wierzbicka, A. (1972). 
                        Semantic Primitives. Athenäum, Frankfurt.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Queen Luise of Prussia, a Digital Hagiography
                
                    
                        Askey
                        Jennifer D
                    
                    McMaster University, Canada
                    askeyj@mcmaster.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    German history
                    digitization
                    nineteenth century
                    fraktur
                
                
                    literary studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    text analysis
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    german studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Popular biographies of Queen Luise of Prussia (1776–1810, r. 1797–1810) written in the second half of the nineteenth century uniformly adhere to what Wulf Wülfing has called a ‘stations of the cross’ structure (Wülfing, 1984). Independent of whether the biography focuses on her domestic life, her personal character and temperament, or her influence at court, it relates and pays homage to canonical moments in Luise’s life story: her childhood encounter with Goethe’s mother, her presence at the coronation of the last Holy Roman Emperor, her meeting with her future husband, and several instances of informal, uncourtly conduct upon becoming princess. Biographies written for a variety of intended audiences (the German people, young Germans, young ladies, etc.) all adhere to the same narrative thread. While biographies on the same subject might be expected to follow a similar time line, popular treatments of Luise’s life and times tend to treat the same set of life anecdotes using the same language (Askey, 2013). While Luise’s function as a secular Prussian saint is one reason for the similarity of these biographies, another is their grounding in the same foundational texts. After Luise’s death in 1810, two biographies written by members of the Prussian court reached the public. King Friedrich Wilhelm III’s court pastor, Ruleman Friedrich Eylert, published 
                Charakter-Züge und historische Fragmente aus dem Leben des Königs von Preussen Friedrich Wilhelm III (Characteristics and Historical Fragments form the Life of King Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia), a multivolume court history that contained over one volume of information on Queen Luise. And Luise’s lady in waiting, Countess Sophie Marie von Voss, published 
                Neunundsechzig Jahre am preussischen Hofe; aus den Erinnerungen der Oberhofmeisterin Sophie Marie Gräfin von Voss (Sixty-Nine Years at the Prussian Court: The Memories of the Senior Lady in Waiting Countess Sophie Marie von Voss)
                . This poster will introduce a digitization and textual analysis project that brings court and popular biographies into conversation with one another. 
            
             While the court biographies are available digitally, most of the popular biographies, especially those for children, are not. Libraries in the nineteenth century did not generally collect children’s literature, and so my personal collection of around a dozen Luise biographies for young readers will be digitized. Our team at the Sherman Centre for Digital Scholarship will OCR the biographies, experimenting with ABBYY, OmniPage, and Tesseract to achieve optimal results with the notoriously difficult German 
                Fraktur typescript. Once the corpus of official court and popular biographies has been created, we will perform standard text mining on the body of texts for young people to confirm or refute personal close readings. Our text mining queries will focus on the frequency of selected key terms relating to Luise’s life story, as well as the frequency of certain gendered textual markers (such as the word 
                Gemüt—temperament, or words associated with clothing or fashion). The information gleaned from text mining will contribute to a scholarly discussion not only on the queen but on exemplarity, female childhood, and the gender discourse of the public sphere in the long nineteenth century. 
            
             The final step involves running subsets of the popular biographies (for the general public, for young people) and the court biographies through a comparison engine such as Juxta to determine adherence or deviation from a supposed ur-text. In the context of my previous work on Queen Luise and her literary function as exemplar for young German women, my hopes for the comparison step of the process are quite high. I use Voyant and Juxta to focus on specific language tokens that provide insight into gender norms and expectations, references to Luise’s physicality, and the development of nationalist discourse (apparent where the queen’s use of French at the court is set against her domestic use of German). 
             The poster will illustrate the resource creation process (digitization and OCR of Fraktur texts, accessibility of that corpus for other scholars) as well as the first stages of textual analysis using the corpus. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Askey, J. (2013). Good Girls, Good Germans: Girls’ Education and Emotional Nationalism in Wilhelminan Germany. Camden House, Rochester, NY. 
                    
                    
                        Eylert, R. (1844). Charakter-Züge und historische Fragmente aus dem Leben des Königs von Preußen Friedrich Wilhelm III: Gesammelt nach eigenen Beobachtungen und selbstgemachten Erfarhungen; wohlfeile Ausgabe für das Volk. Heinrichshofenschen Buchhandlung, Magdeburg.
                    
                    
                        Voß, S. (1876). Neunundsechsig Jahre am Preußischem Hofe: Aus den Erinnerungen der Oberhofmeisterin Sophie Marie Gräfin von Voß. Dunker und Humbolt, Leipzig.
                    
                    
                        Wülfing, W. (1984). ‘Die Heilige Luise von Preußen: Zur Mythisierung einer figure der Geschichte in der deutschen Literatur des 19. Jahrhunderts’: Bewegung und Stillstand in Metaphern und Mythen: Fallstudien zum Verhältnis von elementarem Wissen und Literatur im 19. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Rare N-Grams, Victorian Drama, and Authorship Attribution
                
                    
                        Hoover
                        David L.
                    
                    New York University, United States of America
                    david.hoover@nyu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    n-grams
                    authorship attribution
                    Victorian drama
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    text analysis
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The use of rare n-grams in authorship attribution has generated considerable recent commentary and polemic. Vickers argues for the expansion of Thomas Kyd’s canon on the basis of 3- to 6-grams not found elsewhere in plays produced during his lifetime but shared by Kyd’s and some anonymous plays (2008). Although Jackson (2008) challenged his method, Vickers has repeated and expanded his claims (2009), arguing that Middleton did not adapt 
                Macbeth (2010) and that Shakespeare added about 2,600 words to Kyd’s 
                The Spanish Tragedy (2012). He has also produced a wide-ranging polemical dismissal of computational stylistics in general and the most frequent words in particular (2011). For responses to Vickers’ flawed critique, see Burrows (2012) and Antonia et al. (2014). Here I test his method on Victorian drama.
            
            I have shown that the method is not reliable for similar-sized corpora of late-19th-century novels and modern American poetry (Hoover, 2011; 2012). Vickers has been insufficiently systematic and has not checked his method adequately on texts of known authorship. The huge number of individually rare n-grams ensures that many otherwise unattested n-grams show matches between any authorial corpus and many individual texts, whether those texts are by the same author or not. However, given that authorship attribution methods vary in accuracy with texts of various genres and lengths, it seems important to test Vickers’ method on drama, using a corpus that mimics the shape and size of his corpus of early modern plays. (Plays seem to present special difficulties for authorship attribution because they typically consist almost entirely of the spoken dialogue of multiple characters.)
            Vickers emphasizes the unusual nature of the London drama scene in the late 1500s—where plays were being produced very rapidly and often collaboratively by a relatively small number of authors—as a reason to expect repeated n-grams to be especially appropriate as authorship markers (2008). He also usually limits his search for repeated n-grams to a restricted corpus of 55 to 75 plays produced during the productive lifetimes of his candidate authors. This initially seems reasonable, but it also inflates his chances of success and underestimates the likelihood of random matches not resulting from common authorship. Consider that ‘We know the titles of 1,500 plays performed between 1590 and 1642, of which only a few hundred survive . . .’ and that ‘the names of barely a dozen dramatists survive’ (Vickers, 2008, 13). Given these facts, rare n-grams found in one author’s often small and/or problematic corpus and an anonymous play but not in a restricted and incomplete reference corpus seem a dangerous indicator of authorship. We cannot know how many of these n-grams occurred in lost plays. Rare n-gram matches can support attributions or suggest the common authorship of anonymous plays, but they cannot provide the conclusive proof that Vickers seeks, claims, and uses to assert the unreliability of probabilistic methods based on frequent words or n-grams.
            The small corpus and the uncertainty of dates, authorship, and collaboration, combined with substantial spelling variation, suggest that many early modern authorship questions are beyond confident solution. As noted above, rare n-grams have not proven effective for 19th-century fiction or modern American poetry, but extending the test to drama will provide a better comparison with Vickers’ method. I created a corpus of Victorian drama that mirrors his 55-play corpus (Vickers, personal communication) but without its drawbacks. I selected authors with enough plays available to match the authorial corpora of the nine known authors in Vickers’ corpus, and tried to match the lengths of the plays as closely as possible. For example, below are the seven plays by Henry Byron I use to match Vickers’ seven plays by Marlowe (sizes approximate):
            
                
            
            I also selected nine plays by nine additional authors to match Vickers’ nine anonymous plays. (None of my plays is a collaboration or is of uncertain authorship, as some of Vickers’ unfortunately are, but about half my authors were involved in collaborations.) To overcome the limitations of Vickers’ corpus, I collected 20 more plays by 10 authors (one to three plays each), for testing. I used WordSmith Tools (Scott, 2012) to collect the 3- to 6-grams appearing at least twice in the 75 plays (about 173,000; n-grams appearing only once obviously cannot show matches). For my first test, I removed Buckstone’s six plays from the 55-play corpus, leaving 49 as the reference corpus. I tested a four-play Buckstone corpus against his two other plays and the 20 remaining plays by others by deleting all 3- to 6-grams present in the reference corpus (leaving 37,000), and then deleting all those absent from the Buckstone corpus. I calculated the number of matches between the remaining 6,500 Buckstone n-grams and the 22 test plays. The two remaining Buckstone plays have 363 and 241 n-gram matches with his corpus that are not found in the reference corpus (Vickers’ test). The 20 other plays have 59 to 254 such matches, and two have 241 or more, showing that plays by other authors can equal or outscore those by a candidate author. The results for Taylor (also with a six-play corpus, testing a four-play corpus against the remaining two Taylor plays and the 20 test plays) are worse: nine plays have more matches with Taylor than one of his own plays does. Although Vickers reports raw numbers of matches, as I have just done, the variation in length among his plays and mine makes this seem unwise, so Figures 1 and 2 graph the numbers of matches divided by text length for the Buckstone and Taylor tests above. Two other plays outscore both of Buckstone’s test plays, and three outscore the other (Figure 1). For Taylor, the results are a bit better, with only one play outscoring one of Taylor’s (Figure 2). These results do not, however, suggest a conclusive method.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. N-grams absent from the reference corpus with matches between the Buckstone corpus and 22 plays.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. N-grams absent from the reference corpus with matches between the Taylor corpus and 22 plays.
            I created a larger reference corpus for further testing by collecting 45 more plays, for a total of 100—86 in 14 authorial corpora of two to 17 plays each, and 14 by 14 authors not otherwise represented in the corpus. To mirror the case of the 2,600 words added to 
                The Spanish Tragedy, I also collected two more full plays and 15 sections of 2,600 words by the 14 authors of the 86 plays (including at least one for each of the 13 authors with at least three plays), and eight sections of 2,600 words by eight additional authors. The goal was to test what might have happened had the corpus of early modern plays been larger and to see how sections by authors from outside the corpus compare to authors’ sections by authors in the set. 
            
            I again collected all the 3- to 6-grams appearing twice or more in the entire corpus (206,000), removed the Buckstone authorial corpus, and treated the remaining plays in authorial sets as the reference corpus. I deleted the n-grams found in the reference corpus, then retained only those found in a 6-play Buckstone authorial corpus and checked for matches between Buckstone and the remaining texts. I did the same for Taylor. The results can be seen in Figures 3 and 4.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. N-grams absent from the reference corpus with matches between the Buckstone corpus and 39 other texts.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. N-grams absent from the reference corpus with matches between the Taylor corpus and 40 other texts.
            The Buckstone test succeeds, with all three of the 2,600-word sections of his test play as well as the entire play showing more matches with Buckstone than any of the other texts do, though it does not make a strong case for the certainty Vickers claims. The Taylor test fails badly: the whole Taylor play only barely outscores one other text, and the 2,600-word section trails behind 15 other texts. Tests on two of the other five authors with at least a six-play corpus are clearly successful, and tests on two fail badly. Clearly, in a real authorship test, this method will often produce strong erroneous attributions.
                1
            
            Finally, I tested twenty-one 2,600-word sections against all seven authors with at least a six-play corpus and against a composite ‘author’ comprising six plays by six authors (from among the original 20 test plays). Seven sections are by the seven authors and the remaining 14 by other authors; obviously, none is by the composite author. As Figure 5 shows, the tests for Bernard’s and Taylor’s sections fail; Bernard’s corpus is outscored by four other authors, including the composite one, and Taylor’s is outscored by two. The Phillips and Poole tests are very successful, and the correct author has the highest proportion of matches for the remaining three authors, but none of those cases is clearly distinguishable from the results for tests on sections not by any of the seven authors. And it is quite disconcerting that the composite author often scores first or second. Furthermore, these results are artificially successful because I limited each authorial corpus to exactly six plays. When larger authorial corpora are tested, the largest often outscores most or all of the other authors for most sections, showing the importance of the size of each author’s corpus to this method. As welcome as a conclusive method for authorship attribution would be, especially for relatively small amounts of text, the rare n-grams method seems unlikely to provide it.
            
                
            
            Figure 5. N-grams absent from the reference corpus with matches between the eight authors and twenty-one 2,600-word sections of plays by 21 authors. 
            Note
            1. Because of the unusual nature of the rare n-grams test, it is difficult to compare results using other methods. However, in a Delta test on authors in Vickers’s 55-text corpus, including only the seven authors with three or more texts and testing 30 texts as if they were unknown (21 whole plays and nine sections of about 2,600 words by one of the authors in the set), 23 texts are correctly attributed to their authors. Among the seven failures are four of the nine short sections. Curiously, there are three errors for Buckstone in the Delta tests, but none for Taylor, reversing the results of the rare n-grams test.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Antonia, A., Craig, H. and Elliott, J. (2014). Language Chunking, Data Sparseness, and the Value of a Long Marker List: Explorations with Word N-grams and Authorial Attribution. 
                        LLC,
                        29(2): 147–63.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. F. (2012). A Second Opinion on ‘Shakespeare and Authorship Studies in the Twenty-First Century’. 
                        Shakespeare Quarterly, 
                        63(3): 355–92.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2011). Delta, Zeta, and Iota: An Ngrammatical Investigation. 
                        Language Individuation: A Symposium in Honour of John Burrows, University of Newcastle, Australia, 4–8 July 2011.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2012). The Rarer They Are, the More There Are, the Less They Matter. Lecture, University of Hamburg, 19 July 2012.
                    
                    
                        Jackson, M. P. (2008). 
                        Research Opportunities in Medieval and Renaissance, 
                        47: 107–27.
                    
                    
                        Scott, M. (2012). WordSmith Tools version 6. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
                    
                    
                        Vickers, B. (2008). Thomas Kyd, Secret Sharer. 
                        Times Literary Supplement,
                        18: 13–15.
                    
                    
                        Vickers, B. (2009). The Marriage of Philology and Informatics. 
                        British Academy Review,
                        14: 41–44.
                    
                    
                        Vickers, B. (2010). Disintegrated: Did Thomas Middleton Really Adapt Macbeth? 
                        Times Literary Supplement, 28 May, 13–14.
                    
                    
                        Vickers, B. (2011). Shakespeare and Authorship Studies in the Twenty-first Century. 
                        Shakespeare Quarterly,
                        62: 106–42.
                    
                    
                        Vickers, B. (2012). Identifying Shakespeare’s Additions to 
                        The Spanish Tragedy (1602): A New(er) Approach. 
                        Shakespeare,
                        8: 13–43.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Recording Historical Connections In The Dictionary Of Sydney.
                
                    
                        Wallace
                        Stewart McAdam
                    
                    University of Melbourne; University of Sydney
                    stewart.wallace@unimelb.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    relationships
                    semantics
                    data-modelling
                    dictionaries
                    encyclopedias
                    history
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    interface and user experience design
                    metadata
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    ontologies
                    knowledge representation
                    internet / world wide web
                    cultural infrastructure
                    semantic web
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper will outline the approach taken to encoding historical information in the Dictionary of Sydney project and, in particular, will assess five years of use of one of its core data structures—known to the project as ‘Factoids’.
            The Dictionary of Sydney (http://dictionaryofsydney.org/)
            The Dictionary of Sydney project arose from an initiative at the City of Sydney Council in 2004–5. A trust was set up to support and manage the establishment and operation of the Dictionary, and it was subsequently the subject of an Australian Research Council linkage grant from 2005 to 2010 involving the University of Sydney, the City of Sydney, the State Library of NSW, the State Archives of NSW, and the University of Technology Sydney (UTS). The author was project manager of the ARC project from 2006 to 2010 and has worked intermittently with the Dictionary since.
            The Dictionary was ‘born digital’ and aimed to create a flexible repository of information on the history of the area now encompassed by ‘Greater Sydney’. A website, intended to be only the first of various digital products, went live in 2009. The Dictionary continues to operate with the backing primarily of the City of Sydney Council and some other institutional and philanthropic support.
            
                Text and Data Structures
            
            The use of the term ‘Dictionary’ was debated and somewhat at odds with similar initiatives more often titled ‘Encyclopaedias’ (Te Ara [n.d.]; Encyclopedia of Chicago [2005]). The Dictionary was always intended to include narrative entries of varying length and was by no means expected to be confined to a list of defined terms or to be simply a gazetteer of names and labels (as ‘Dictionary’ might have implied). However, the obvious potential for a strong set of terms and labels to link and aggregate digital resources (text, multimedia, and maps) encouraged an approach that integrated narrative text and structured data.
            This gave rise initially to two distinct sets of terms encompassing Entities (‘things’) and more abstract Subjects. The emphasis in all these deliberations was on simplicity and ease of use rather than the final word in academic rigour. So, in assessing useful categories of urban Entities, listings on popular directory websites such as Sensis (2014) and even those at the back of street directories were consulted along with more scholarly efforts at categorisation. Hierarchies were kept shallow, with generally no more than three levels.
            The final list of Entity types was Artefacts, Buildings, Events, Natural Features, Organisations, People, Places, and Structures. Digital resources were identified as Entries, Maps, and Multimedia, and the Dictionary’s set of components was completed with Subjects, Contributors, and Roles.
            By the time of writing, at least 50,000 of these elements have been created (alongside over a million words in Entries), and several years of experience and practice has been built up.
            
                Linking Entities and Defining Roles—The ‘Factoids’
            
            The Entities provided a solid framework to which could be attached various digital resources. This ensured that the Dictionary was not ‘entry-centric’ and could have multiple Entries attached to a single Entity—important in ensuring that the Dictionary was 
                not confined to a single interpretative voice but instead did justice to the many opinions and discourses that a complex urban history demands.
            
            There remained requirements that Entities alone did not satisfy:
             • Linking entities.
             • Consistently recording location spatial and temporal extent.
             • Recognising that the ‘role’ of Entities can change (e.g., a building used for different purposes over time).
             • Handling different names (Mark Foys aka The Downing Centre, Pyrmont Bridge aka Anzac Bridge).
             • Finer-grained categorisation where the eight basic Entity types were not adequate.
            There was reluctance to define different data structures for different Entities, thereby leading to a complex and inflexible relational ‘database of everything’. It was also recognised that the Dictionary could not (and should not) take over the role of every specialist information source; for example, the Dictionary might record the location, designer, builder, and perhaps function of a bridge and key dates, but it could be left to an engineering heritage resource to record—for the true aficionado or expert—the materials used, the number of rivets, the exact dimensions and load-bearing characteristics, etc.
            The recognition of the temporal element and the need to record change also significantly influenced the data structure used to handle these requirements. The key element for encoding change was the Role. Different Entities could take on different Roles over time—a Building might be a gaol, then a cultural centre, and then a residential block; a Place might be a quarry and then a park; a Structure might be a railway viaduct and then an elevated park. Roles could be created flexibly as needed (with due attention to duplication and ambiguity).
            Roles could similarly describe relationships, most obviously between People (spouse, child, mentor) and between People and Organisations (member, CEO). A Person could be assigned a Role to indicate a profession—a doctor—or a position—a doctor 
                at a hospital. In this sense, some relationships were transitive (requiring a source and target on either side of the Role), others intransitive (only requiring a source). Some relations are clearly directional—e.g., child-of—and some are symmetrical—e.g., spouse-of.
            
            A single data structure called a ‘Factoid’ (an unsatisfactory term and only used internally) was fashioned to handle all these requirements. The structure was as follows:
            
                
                    Field
                    Purpose
                    Example
                
                
                    Source
                    An Entity
                    Francis Greenway
                
                
                    Role
                    Describes the relation or adds information
                    Architect
                
                
                    Target
                    A ‘target’ Entity
                    Hyde Park Barracks
                
                
                    Type
                    The type of Entity (see below)
                    Position
                
                
                    Target-text
                    A text substitute for the target Entity where it is not appropriate to create it as a full record
                    
                
                
                    Start date
                    Date on which the Role commenced
                    1819
                
                
                    End date
                    Date on which the Role ended
                    1822
                
                
                    Location
                    A geo-spatial encoding (point, line, or polygon)
                    
                
            
            The Type field was used to distinguish Factoids created for different purposes and to group them meaningfully. The types were as follows:
            
                
                    Type
                    Purpose
                
                
                    Name 
                    for recording different names that Entities had over time
                
                
                    Sub-type 
                    used to subtype the main Entity types, e.g., Hostel as a sub-type of Building
                
                
                    Milestones 
                    key events for an Entity—birth, death, construction, demolition, opening
                
                
                    Occupation 
                    normally held by People, e.g., architect
                
                
                    Position 
                    an occupation applied to a specific Entity, e.g., architect of Hyde Park Barracks
                
                
                    Relationships 
                    most commonly between People—brother, spouse, mentor, etc.
                
                
                    Property 
                    recording occupation or ownership
                
                
                    Time-Space 
                    a special type of Factoid used only to record ‘existence’ and location, commonly used for Natural Features and Places
                
            
            Factoids can be seen on most Entity pages on the Dictionary website:
            Figure 1. 
                The Entity page for Hyde Park Barracks with four groups of Factoids.
            
            Factoids in Use
            The Factoid is one of many attempts to encode this sort of historical information (HEML [n.d.]; Vicodi [2002–4]; CIDOC-CRM), and it is reflected in other initiatives such as the Humanities Networked Infrastructure (Huni, 2014).
            The Factoids have been in use now for over five years. This provides a valuable opportunity to assess their utility in a real-world, growing resource. This paper will report the results of an assessment undertaken with the Dictionary of Sydney staff in the first quarter of 2015, and an analysis of the use of the Factoids in the Dictionary and through a comparison with recent developments in historical encoding.
            Areas to be assessed will include the following:
             • Limits the expressivity of the Factoid structure—At what point does the information being encoded become too complex and need to revert to narrative description?
             • Has the original structure of the Factoid been amended or new types added?
             • Has custom and practice developed around the use of the Factoid that was not originally anticipated?
             • Has the Factoid (as defined in the Dictionary of Sydney) been deployed in any other projects?
             • Has the Factoid had advantages in processes not originally envisaged (e.g., fact/error-checking)?
             • How has the divide between useability and rigour been navigated—Has the Dictionary’s position as a public (rather than academic) history project influenced this process?
             • The Dictionary Factoids are not referenced or attributed—Has this affected their credibility or reliability?
             • Who has been able to contribute Factoids effectively, and how has the process been managed and quality-controlled? Have amateurs contributed or only professional staff? (Reference may be made here to emerging models for managing ‘cyber-infrastructure’ such as that proposed by Lynch [2014]).
             • What challenges and/or opportunities do the Factoids present for sustainability and preservation of the data they contain?
             • Has it been possible to link the Factoids to other data standards?
             • ‘Factoid’ was a term of convenience for the Dictionary but it has been used in other areas, such as prosopography—Has its use in other disciplines influenced its use in the Dictionary?
            While it may not be possible to cover all these questions in depth, an assessment of the Factoids in practice may provide useful insights into the utility of data structures of this sort for digital humanities projects.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Encyclopedia of Chicago. (2005). http://www.encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/.
                    
                    
                        HEML. (n.d.). http://heml.mta.ca/.
                    
                    
                        Huni. (2014). https://huni.net.au.
                    
                    
                        Lynch, T. J. (2014). Social Networks and Archival Context Project: A Case Study of Emerging Cyberinfrastructure. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        8(3).
                    
                    
                        Sensis. (2014). http://www.sensis.com.au/.
                    
                    
                        Te Ara—The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. (n.d.). http://www.teara.govt.nz/en.
                    
                    
                        Vicodi. (2002–4). www.vicodi.org/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Remapping Cultural History? Digital Humanities, Historical Bibliometrics, and the Reception of Print Culture
                
                    
                        Towsey
                        Mark R.M.
                    
                    University of Liverpool, United Kingdom
                    towsey@liverpool.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Bode
                        Katherine
                    
                    Australian National University, Australia
                    katherine.bode@anu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Burrows
                        Simon
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    S.Burrows@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Lamond
                        Julieanne
                    
                    Australian National University, Australia
                    julieanne.lamond@anu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Reid
                        Mark
                    
                    Australian National University, Australia
                    mark.reid@anu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Roe
                        Glenn
                    
                    Australian National University, Australia
                    glenn.roe@anu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Shep
                        Sydney
                    
                    Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
                    Sydney.Shep@vuw.ac.nz
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    Book History
                    Digital Humanities
                    Library History
                    Newspapers
                    History of Reading
                
                
                    historical studies
                    literary studies
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    english studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This panel brings together leading book historians and digital humanists to explore the dynamic and complex interface between the two fields. Book history is increasingly recognised as playing an important role in the development of digital humanities (DH). Alan Liu describes book history as a Levi-Straussian ‘trickster figure’ for the field​​, uniting DH’s commitment to older humanities disciplines, and the value of the old itself, with more recent interest in emergent media and design (2013, 410). Elsewhere he points to the way book historians ‘increasingly compare, and not just contrast, earlier writing/reading practices to their digital successors’ (2012, 16), and the potential of this approach to enhance understandings of DH as well as the digital age to which it responds. As Matthew Kirschenbaum and Sarah Werner (2014) argue more recently, key methodologies of DH—cataloguing, counting, sorting, and mapping—have long been part of the book historian’s toolkit. Mass digitisation has highlighted the need for textual and scholarly editing; book history skills must also be brought to bear in examining the limits and nature of the data (both text corpora and metadata) that is being digitised and analysed as part of DH projects.
            At the same time, the digitisation of the media landscape in which books are produced and read has profound implications for book history as a discipline, both in terms of its methodologies and the nature of its objects of inquiry. Kirschenbaum and Werner position this shift as ‘a series of material interventions in established systems of reading, writing, and publication, interventions that take shape and define themselves in relation to the affordances of other, more familiar media, the printed page not least among them’ (408). The digital turn has refocused our attention on the materiality of the objects with which book historians work, but as digital archives become increasingly important both to digital humanities and the humanities more broadly, it is more important than ever that we think about how best to represent and study material sources in this changed scholarly landscape.
            Despite what would seem to be a natural affinity between these disciplinary formations, Kirschenbaum and Werner suggest, the 
            big data trend in the humanities is not one that has spoken to book historians. It has been the tool of literary and linguistic scholars, something prized by researchers interested in text, rather than textual production. But ignoring what digital tools can offer the study of book history cuts us off from opportunities to further develop our knowledge of how books are made and used. (410) 
            There is, however, an emerging body of scholarship working at the intersection of these two interdisciplinary fields, as evidenced, for example, by the success of projects such as the Australian Common Reader, the French Book Trade in Enlightenment Europe, the Reading Experience Database, Dissenting Academies Online, and What Middletown Read. These projects have been brought together by the AHRC-funded international research network on ‘Community Libraries’, a group of over 80 scholars, librarians, and archivists from across the Americas, Europe, and Australia driven by a shared interdisciplinary interest in the dissemination, circulation, and reception of books in the past.
            The network was founded to share approaches and stimulate conversation about how library historians are harnessing the analytical power of digital methodologies to deepen and complicate our understanding of past reading communities and the social impact of print, both in quantitative and qualitative terms. Historical library records lend themselves particularly well to large-scale digital analysis, providing rich seams of data on book collecting, lending practices, borrowing habits, and membership patterns. Individual projects such as the Dissenting Academies Online’s Virtual Library System or What Middletown Read encourage a more holistic approach to historic library records, shaped not by the researcher’s own specialist and disciplinary interests but by the research demands of the user. However, surviving records are rare and can hardly be considered representative; as Priya Joshi suggests, ‘The conclusions one could draw from a single library’s circulation would need to rest closest to the regional, class and social history of that library only and could probably not be applied too widely before becoming irrelevant’ (2002, 52). There is an urgent need, therefore, for library historians to think about how to connect together digital research on libraries of different types, in different places, and at different times, lending greater statistical meaning to the collection patterns and borrowing figures available for individual institutions. Since libraries are inseparable from other elements of the ‘communications circuit’ influentially outlined by Robert Darnton (1982), digital research into library history must also connect with scholars working on wider aspects of historic print production, distribution, and reception—including those interested in the book trade, reading habits, ephemeral print, and the newspaper press.
            This panel seeks to develop the potential revealed by the Community Libraries network for collaboration across national and disciplinary contexts in creating and making use of DH projects and methods for addressing questions about the circulation and reception of print culture. It brings together leading scholars working at the intersection of DH and book history: Mark Towsey will introduce the work of the Community Libraries network, together with the network’s plans for a digital Atlantic Union Catalogue; Sydney Shep will discuss 19th-century typographical journals and global communication networks, William Colenso and the Victorian Republic of Letters, and the New Zealand Reading Experience Database; Katherine Bode will explore the ‘world’ of serial fiction in 19th and early-20th-century Australian newspapers digitised by Trove; Simon Burrows will outline the aims and ambitions of the French Book Trade in Enlightenment Europe project and how its historical-bibliometric digital tools might be developed for wider use among book history projects; Julieanne Lamond and Mark Reid will show the potential for mapping the circulation of popular fiction in the Australian Common Reader database; and Glenn Roe will discuss reconstructing the 18th-century commonplace book using the Eighteenth Century Collections Online (ECCO) dataset.
            Panel Organisation
            The panel will consist of six papers (five given by one contributor each, one shared between Lamond and Reid), each reflecting on how the speakers’ projects are opening up new perspectives and possible answers to the research questions posed below. This will be followed by a full 30-minute discussion, with the aim of motivating debate about how book history and DH are feeding into each other, and illuminating the key theoretical and methodological challenges they currently face.
            
                Research Questions
            
            The panel will draw on this vibrant body of research to address the following questions:
             • What does book history have to offer DH and vice versa?
             • What challenges does DH pose to existing projects and approaches?
             • How can DH approaches expand the scope of book-historical enquiry, especially across national boundaries and in new transnational and translocal arenas?
             • What is the relationship between the digital, the physical, and the material in both disciplines: as Kirschenbaum and Werner ask, what is ‘the value [of] digital tools and . . . theories of the digital for complicating and reconfiguring our notions of textual “materiality” and dissemination’ (409)?
             • How can DH approaches to large datasets (text mining, data visualization, etc.) inform book history’s understanding of authorship practices by way of large-scale approaches to national and transnational literary cultures?
             • How best can we bring together these two methodological approaches, and how can methodological debates in each expand our understanding of the humanities?
            Speakers
            
                Katherine Bode is senior lecturer in literary and textual studies in the Centre for Digital Humanities Research at the Australian National University.
            
            
                Simon Burrows is professor of history at the University of Western Sydney.
            
            
                Julieanne Lamond is lecturer in English in the School of Literature, Languages and Linguistics at Australian National University.
            
            
                Mark Reid is research fellow in the Research School of Computer Science and Engineering at Australian National University.
            
            
                Glenn Roe is lecturer in digital humanities in the Centre for Digital Humanities Research at the Australian National University. 
            
            
                Sydney Shep is reader in book history and the printer at Wai-te-ata Press, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand.
            
            
                Mark Towsey is senior lecturer in modern British history at the University of Liverpool, and a British Academy Mid-Career Fellow for 2014–2015.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Darnton, R. (1982). What Is the History of Books? 
                        Daedalus,
                        111(3): 65–83.
                    
                    
                        Joshi, P. (2002). 
                        In Another Country: Colonialism, Culture and the English Novel in India. Columbia University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M. and Werner, S. (2014). Digital Scholarship and Digital Studies: The State of the Discipline. 
                        Book History,
                        17(1): 406–58.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2012). The State of the Digital Humanities: A Report and a Critique. 
                        Arts and Humanities in Higher Education,
                        11(1–2): 8–41.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2013). The Meaning of the Digital Humanities. 
                        PMLA,
                        128(2): 409–23. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Remembering books: A within-book topic mapping technique
                
                    
                        Organisciak
                        Peter
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    organis2@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Auvil
                        Loretta
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    lauvil@illinois.edu
                
                
                    
                        Downie
                        J.Stephen
                    
                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
                    jdownie@illinois.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    text analysis
                    topic modeling
                    visualisation
                
                
                    text analysis
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Applying clustering techniques in modeling text collections is effective for surfacing high-level themes at scales that humans cannot match with close reading. Within-book topic modeling is more difficult to perform, due to noise inherent to small frame sizes and the expectation that a single book can simply be read. In this work, we argue that this form of text analysis is effective as a research aid, presenting a method and tools to visualize the progression of topics through the course of a long text. 
            This approach focuses on improving human readability of machine-modeled topics and is notable for (a) a sliding-frame topic inference technique that smooths noise and (b) a visualization approach that uses sorting and filtering to help focus attention on clearer topics and their narrative order. 
            The goal is to use topic modeling as an aid to a reader’s understanding of a work as well as the ability to communicate that understanding. In particular, it appears to have promise as a mnemonic tool, helping past readers recollect plot points and progression. As this work progresses, it will explore better ways of surfacing important topics and measuring the quality of its visualizations. To this end, a tutorial and scripts have been released, enabling researchers and instructors to evaluate this technique for their own uses. 
            Data 
            This study was performed using the extracted features dataset from the HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC). HTRC is the research arm of the HathiTrust, developing tools for research access—and particularly large-scale access—to the holdings in the HathiTrust Digital Library. For our purposes, the HTRC’s feature extraction dataset is used less for its breadth than its features. The extracted features dataset includes page-level feature information, including part-of-speech tagged token counts with headers and footers removed. Our approach will work similarly on any clean text documents with page-level information or comparably sized sections—for example, blocks of TEI marked-up sections or paragraphs. 
            Approach 
            This study’s method for within-book topic modeling is notable for its approach to training and inference: where the training data is composed of individual page texts, the data it is inferred against is a sliding frame of pages. This lends a coherence to the resulting topic models by offering clean input data while assuming that actual occurrences of topics in a book occur in broader spans of text. We take a conservative view of what a theme in the text is when training, and a liberal view when inferring. 
            While pages are succinct for training, most of the time they are a physical artifact, disconnected from the content of the book. Language also deviates from page to page: inferring their topics in groups of pages allows for themes at that point in the book to emerge more clearly. Since we do not know where topics start and end, nor can we reliably assume that any particular part of a book is about any one topic, we use a sliding frame of groups of pages. 
            Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is used in this approach (Blei et al., 2003). LDA is a generative mixture modeling approach used to estimate probability distributions over correlated data. When used with text unigrams as features, these distributions are often interpreted as ‘topics’. One can think of a topic distribution as a word generator, outputting different words with varying frequencies. A topic about ‘Valentine's Day’, for example, is more likely to generate the terms ‘love’ and ‘February’ than one would normally see in the English language; to guess how likely a document is to be about Valentine’s Day, we can look at the likelihood of the Valentine’s Day topic generating the particular words in the document. 
            In training a generative model, it is ideal to have each input document represent a minimal number of concepts. While LDA is robust at differentiating different components of a training document, a clearer input improves the possibility of coherent clusters. For this reason, training a classifier on a large chunk of text such as a book can lose the nuance of the various themes within that text. For this study, we train on individual pages of a work. This page-level information is offered in the HTRC Feature Extraction dataset, and modeled using the LDA functionality of the MALLET toolkit (McCallum, 2002). 
            After a work is modeled against its pages, the resulting topic distributions are then applied to infer the most probable topics of sliding frames of pages in the same work. For example, for a frame size of 5, the work is processed into sections representing pages 1–5, pages 2–6, 3–7, and so on. Figure 1 demonstrates the difference in readability that the sliding frame allows. 
            
                
                
            
            Figure 1. Example of topic for 
                Anne of Green Gables inferred without (top) and with (bottom) sliding page frame. 
            
            
                
            
            In pursuing a technique for aiding an individual’s understanding and recall of a work, inferring coherent within-book themes is only as important as their presentation. For this reason, this study pursued visualization of within-book topic models with sorting and filtering. 
            Figure 2. Topics in 
                Tess of the D’Ubervilles, shown with a sliding frame of 10 pages. Every third of 30 topics shown, to demonstrate topic sorting with brevity. 
            
            For sorting, topics are tagged by their most representative page, and subsequently visualized in chronological order of these pages. This sorting technique has proven to be effective at showing their progression through a work.
            Not all topics are equally insightful. Particularly, there are usually a few topics that serve as catch-alls: attracting probability mass for difficult-to-assign terms. These ‘noise topics’ serve a useful function, but not for an individual’s analysis or understanding. We attempted to identify these topics and filter them through a number of methods, so that they could be ignored in visualization. This included looking at high-variance distributions, distributions with high peakedness, and topics with disproportionately large pieces of the overall probability mass. Unfortunately, each of these techniques would filter out some useful topics, so we thus far have not found a filtering approach that is worth performing. Instead, the sorting performed at visualization leads with the most likely ‘noise topics’, making them easy for a person to visually assess and ignore if necessary. 
            Figure 2 demonstrates topic visualization for topics seen in 
                Tess of the D’Ubervilles by Thomas Hardy. For brevity, only every third topic is shown, showing the sorting progression and the grouping of potential but not necessarily noisy topics at the start. In addition, vertical lines are included to denote the ‘phases’ in the book, allowing a comparison of topics to parts of the book. For example, Phase the Second clearly contains most of the discussion around the protagonist’s birth and subsequent loss of her child, and the language representative of this topic does not recur again in the book. 
            
            Next Steps 
            The code for this project is available online.
                1 As this is a work-in-progress, we hope this tool encourages others to use it and provide feedback. Thus far, this study has pursued qualitative improvements based on the judgments of the authors. As we move forward, we hope to evaluate this approach against the satisfaction of domain experts, compared to previous techniques. 
            
            Additionally, the goal of filtering uninteresting or noisy topics is still interesting, even if our given approach was not tractable. A more deliberate approach might be more effective in the future; specifically, human judges will be asked for their opinions on the most insightful topic distributions. This will allow us to compare their responses to a number of statistical metrics about the distribution, potentially building a classifier for useful topics. 
            Note
            1. 
                HTRC-Book-Models, Github, https://github.com/organisciak/htrc-book-models.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. 
                        Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
                        3 (2003): 993–1022. 
                    
                    
                        McCallum, A. K. (2002). MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Renderings: Translating Literary Works in the Digital Age
                
                    
                        Marecki
                        Piotr
                    
                    Jagiellonian University, Poland
                    piotr.marecki@ha.art.pl
                
                
                    
                        Montfort
                        Nick
                    
                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology, US
                    nickm@nickm.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    translation theory
                    creative computing
                    platform studies
                    expressive processing
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    literary studies
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    natural language processing
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    text generation
                    philology
                    internet / world wide web
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    programming
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    translation studies
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The point of departure for this paper is the Renderings project 
                (http://trope-tank.mit.edu/renderings/) established in 2014 and developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in a lab called the Trope Tank. The project is described as concentrating on translations of highly computational and otherwise unusual digital literature into English. Its members ‘not only employ established literary translation techniques, but also consider how computation and language interact. Literary and computational experts worldwide participate’. The current team includes Nick Montfort (the initiator and leader of the project), Patsy Baudoin, Andrew Campana, Sally Chen, Aleksandra Małecka, Piotr Marecki, and Erik Stayton. During the project’s first year, 13 translations or bilingual works, by 12 authors, have been produced in the following languages: Chinese (1), French (3), German (1), Japanese (4), Polish (2), and Spanish (2). The translated works are 
            
             • Automation (2013) by Andrew Campana.
             • Contemporary Japanese Poetry Generator (2012) by Shinonome Nodoka.
             • Dizains (1985) by Marcel Bénabou.
             • Hallelujah (2012) by ni_ka.
             • MAZ—Mutantist Autonomous Zone (2014) by Mathias Richard.
             • Poem 21 (1988) by Amílcar Romero.
             • Poet (2003) by Michał Rudolf.
             • Sample Automatic Poem (2009) by Féliz Remirez.
             • Seika no Kôshô (2013) by Andrew Campana.
             • Shanshui by Sally Chen.
             • Speeches (1993) by Marek Pampuch.
             • Tötan das Gedich (1997) by Johannes Auer.
             • Triolets by Paul Braffort.
            The programming languages of the original works include Basic, Perl, and Java Script. They were selected to represent the wide variety of genres of electronic literature and creative computing, and the productions of cultures/literatures not currently well known in this dominantly English-language field. Thus, the first Renderings set of works includes genres characteristic of specific cultures, such as Japanese ‘monitor poetry’ (a blog that bursts of flowers, hearts, and other graphics dense enough to obscure the screen), a Polish generator of communist speeches, electronic ‘landscape poetry’ from China, and electronic OULIPO texts (France). The selected works also present different approaches to computation in literature. The project itself thus has the aim of describing the experiences of the margins of digital culture and exploring the hitherto overlooked fringes of the digital heritage.
            The Renderings is not the first project exploring translations of electronic literature. There have already been translations of Michael Joyce’s, Stuart Moulthrop’s, Nick Montfort’s, and Stephanie Strickland’s works from English into other languages. In addition, the Electronic Literature Organization was a co-sponsor of the conference Translating E-Literature in 2012 in Paris. The Renderings project continues these threads, but focusing on the direction from other languages into English, its goal being to give English-speakers access to works from other traditions. The project involves also meetings and brainstorming with literary translators: Robert Pinsky, Marc Lowenthal, John Cayley, and David Ferry.
            Translating digital works written in code requires the translator to face new challenges in addition to those tackled by the regular translator of literature. It is a type of translation akin to the translation of experimental, conceptual or constrained works. It is not rare that the task requires the translator or translators to reinvent the work in a new linguistic and cultural context, and sometimes also another programming language. The history of literature is already familiar with similar cases, like the translations of works of the French OULIPO group; for instance, Georges Perec’s La dispariton, which is written without the most frequently occurring vowel of the French language, has been be rendered in other languages with the omission of the most frequent vowel in the language of the translator, e in English but a in Spanish.
            In the case of highly computational digital works there are additional difficulties and challenges, first and foremost, the formal and material properties of the code of the program. If we assume after Noah Wardrip-Fruin that a digital work has three layers: the input, process and output, the task of translation will be operated mostly on the first two layers: the input and process. It will require establishing a lexicon, determining the input data, which may differ given the discrepancies between grammars (inflection, declension, genre) and translating the process, that is the lines of code responsible for producing a given output. Noah Wardrip-Fruin explains to humanities scholars analyzing digital works that they focus mainly on the output level, which he considers a superficial approach. It seems that the work of the translator of a digital work is the ideal activity for performing what this scholar calls ‘expressive processing’. Translating a highly computational work without the knowledge of its inner workings and operation on all the three levels of analysis should not occur. For instance, the novel World Clock, written by Nick Montfort in Python, has 165 lines of code in its original English version. Its Polish translation has an additional 60 lines of code. Indeed it is not unusual for the output of the translated work to be the result of processes different than in the original code. An important category for the translation of digital works is collaborative work, in a team including a translator and a programmer, where translation and programming competences overlap and complete.
            The translation of a digital work is not only a matter of language, but also requires awareness of the code and the platform for which it was designed. Especially in the case of older works, the translator has to consider porting the work to a platform more accessible to the contemporary reader. The textual generator Poet was written in Perl in 2003 and archived online as a .pl file. It will be thus available to those readers who know how to run the program in the terminal and are willing to download and execute it. Given the goals of the project, it seemed justified to port the program to Java Script in order to publish it online, to provide easier access to readers on the Web. In such a case the translator has to preserve as many aspects of the program’s functioning as possible in the original programming language. Yet another aspect connected to this problem is the change of platform. Platform consciousness and platform description are described according to the methodology developed by Nick Montfort and Ian Bogost in books from the Platform Studies series published by MIT Press. It is a method that ‘investigates the relationships between the hardware and software design of computing systems and the creative works produced on those systems.’ And so when describing the generator of communist speeches translated and published online as part of the Renderings project, an important aspect of its historical, formal and material analysis will be the consideration of the consequences of the fact that it was first written in a popular programming language for the Amiga.
            The presented paper describes a phenomenon belonging to the broadly understood discipline of creative computing and studies the work of the translator as taking place both in code and language, drawing from the methodology developed by the fields of code studies, platform studies and expressive processing. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Research Through Design and Digital Humanities in Practice: What, How and Who in an Archive Research Project.
                
                    
                        Schofield
                        Tom William
                    
                    Culture Lab, Newcastle University, United Kingdom
                    tom.schofield@ncl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Kirk
                        David
                    
                    Culture Lab, Newcastle University, United Kingdom
                    david.kirk@ncl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Whitelaw
                        Mitchell
                    
                    Faculty of Arts &amp; Design, University of Canberra
                    mitchell.whitelaw@canberra.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Design
                    Methodology
                    Practice-Based
                    Artefacts
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    interface and user experience design
                    user studies / user needs
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper highlights shared methods, questions, and challenges between research through design (RTD) and digital humanities (DH) through the discussion of an archival research project. In DH, debates continue (Gold, 2012) regarding the impact of digital technologies on epistemology, methodology, and our professional identities as researchers, scholars, academics, and teachers. Our reading of this debate is that there is a tripartite relationship at work between the kind of work we should call DH (and aspire to produce); the nature of knowledge, research, and scholarship (particularly with reference to the role of artefacts produced); and issues of disciplinary orientation or professional identity. We could phrase these as the what, how, and who of DH and, of course, RTD. The discussion of our project is in no sense intended to provide an exclusive answer to those questions, but to give one snapshot of what DH and RTD look like when they come together. 
            RTD emphasises artefact-led, practice-based research with an emphasis on developing design methods, conceptual frameworks and theories, as well as products (Gaver, 2012). Its speculative orientation and emphasis on making with digital materials aligns it well with some currents of thought in DH (see, e.g., Drucker, 2009). Indeed, Joanna Drucker has pointed to a shared ground with design, generally noting that ‘all forms of design share a propositional orientation that is well-suited to the challenges that come with designing new structures, for design asks, “What if?”’ (Burdick et al., 2012). At the same time she warns that ‘the cultural authority of digital technology is still claimed by the fields that design the platforms and protocols on which we work. These are largely fields in which quantitative, engineering, and computational sensibilities prevail’. We wish to qualify Drucker’s claim by noting a series of more detailed concordances with RTD of a particular propositional, speculative, and explorative orientation. We note that despite Drucker’s valid concerns for the positivist outlook of some design research contexts, within the field of human-computer interaction (despite its background and reputation for some as computing engineering’s heartland), and interaction design, a vibrant dialogue is being sustained concerning the role of designed artefacts in knowledge production (Bowers, 2012), their responsiveness to the values of users (see, e.g., Vines et al., 2013), and the state of critique and criticality (Bardzell and Bardzel, 2013), all of which are directly relevant to DH. In the following paragraphs we will describe aspects of an ongoing project, positioned as DH with roots in RTD methodology. Through it we will position our work in relation to the tripartite relationship we identified between what digital humanities research looks like, what role its artefacts play, and what kind of people do it. 
            Our project is, typically for digital humanities research, based around an archive. Bloodaxe Books is a small but internationally significant publisher of contemporary poetry, whose archive, consisting mostly of edited manuscripts, was purchased by Newcastle University, UK, in 2013. Our role within a research project as artists and Interaction Designers was to create exploratory and provocative interactions with the archive both online and in physical space. This is the ‘what’ of our project. 
            The interfaces we designed for the archive respond to its formal and textual specificities, and this flexible and responsive mode of engagement is typical of RTD processes. We think that this kind of approach is well aligned with a view of the role of DH as one that expands the ground of research processes as well as simply augmenting their methods with new tools and techniques. In our project we began with loose research questions (as described above) that were refined alongside the project. Our treatment of the archival material was to be informed by the experience of 30 project participants, each of whom was conducting personal, creative research in the archive. Inspired by previous research through design work, we conceived of a ‘cultural probes’ (Gaver et al., 2004) activity to gain insight into the way the archive was being used by our project participants and to uncover some of the things they found interesting about the materials themselves, the better to inform our ‘what’. Our activity used a bookmark-like insert completed and left by participants in the archive boxes themselves to act as a conversation ‘backchannel’ for participants. A trial of this activity revealed a number of interesting features of the archive that focused our interests and informed future designs. Particularly our later work with archival Marginalia and our related interest in the temporality of the archive was significantly informed by this process. When Drucker asks, ‘Have the humanities had any impact on the digital environment?’, one answer is in exactly this kind of enquiry, which has at least a 10-year history in design research. The probing activity described above was user-focused, not in the sense of a formal ‘requirements’ analysis but as a kind of critically sensitizing activity. For instance, in the final interface three particular areas of our design responded to questions and issues raised by the participants and our literary research colleagues: ‘Shapes’
                1 allows users of our interface to sketch—with the mouse—the shape of a poem and receive matches from the archive. ‘Data’ mashes our own metadata with British Library and Wikipedia data to explore wider the context of the archive.
                2 ‘Words’
                3 uses text mining techniques and word distancing to produce network graphs of correspondences between documents and relationships to themes (e.g., flowers, death).
            
            In practice-based research processes, an inevitable question arises concerning the status of the artefact as a bearer or disseminator of knowledge, and researchers in (Ramsay and Rockwell, 2012) and out (Ingold, 2013) of DH have noted the problems this causes for the place of such work within academia. In other words, our ‘how’ is about how we treat the things we make, how we evaluate their contribution and ensure that they are productive. Our perspective, as writers of both code and research papers, is that there is knowledge in both objects and commentary but that the relationship between them should be negotiated honestly and delicately. In our project we adopted a fast prototyping cycle in which we made a series of early visualisations and web interfaces to the digitized material publically available and invited criticism and feedback. We also made a feature of both our ongoing design work and the cataloguing and digitization taking place in the library by producing a Twitter feed of computationally extracted archival marginalia connected live to the work of the archivist and digital assistant and a drawing robot, the Marginalia Machine, which publically re-draws these same editorial notes. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Screen grab from the @BloodaxeArchive Twitter bot.
            These artefacts acted as kinds of a ‘boundary object’ (Star and Griesemer, 1989), around which we and our colleagues in the library and the English Department could discuss future iterations of design work. Their production afforded what we might call the ‘unimagined interactions’ characteristic of this kind of speculative prototyping. In our project, as is common in RTD, the artefacts were a part of a methodology for integrating facets of our research, working with our colleagues and participants and of course improving future designs. Despite this pivotal function for the ‘things’ (Brown, 2001) of our research, we recognise the value of reflection, in written or other forms, for future work. John Bowers proposes the ‘annotated portfolio’ (Bowers, 2012) as one approach to communicating the value of our work to ourselves and others. We note that however much artefacts articulate a position, their situatedness in a world of stuff means that they will always be poly-vocal. This is both their strength (when we wish to explore) and their weakness (when we want to be specific). 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Detail of the Marginalia Machine.
            Finally we observe that in the picture of the digital humanities researcher as one who can ‘research, write, shoot, edit, code, model, design, net-work, and dialogue with users’ (Burdick et al., 2012), RTD shares a problem educating, finding, and hiring such people. We further note that the role of a designer, even one with such competencies, in a DH project remains problematic for a number of reasons. If we wish to pursue successful interdisciplinary research, then we must decide to what degree our research questions will be common with our collaborators or distinct. One model for the latter sees a humanities researcher provide a problem for a computer scientist to work with—for instance, the development of a corpus analysis tool. The computer scientist produces technical innovation while the humanist integrates the tool into the research. In our project, however, the designer, coming from a humanities background himself, brought his own questions to bear on the material, which were informed by art history, philosophy, and the cultural history of design. A challenge for such designers is how to meaningfully collaborate with other humanities researchers without, first, denigrating their own research questions and competencies to a second-tier status, and second, ignoring the nuance and depth of good humanities research. Strategies for the successful avoidance of these two pitfalls, we feel, should be the focus of future discussion of this relationship. 
            Notes
            1. http://bloodaxe.ncl.ac.uk/explore/#/shapes.
            2. http://bloodaxe.ncl.ac.uk/explore/#/data.
            3. http://bloodaxe.ncl.ac.uk/explore/#/words.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bardzell, J. and Bardzel, S. (2013). What Is Critical about Critical Design? In 
                        Proceedings of CHI 2013, Paris, 27 April–2 May 2013, ACM Press, pp. 3297–306.
                    
                    
                        Bowers, J. (2012). The Logic of Annotated Portfolios: Communicating the Value of ‘Research Through Design’. In 
                        Designing Interactive Systems. ACM Press, pp .68–77.
                    
                    
                        Brown, B. (2001). Thing Theory. 
                        Critical Inquiry,
                        28(1): 1–22. 
                    
                    
                        Burdick, A., Drucker, J., Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T. and Schnapp, J. (2012). 
                        Digital_Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2009). 
                        SpecLab. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, doi:10.7208/chicago/9780226165097.001.0001.
                    
                    
                        Gaver, W. (2012). What Should We Expect from Research through Design? In 
                        Proceedings of CHI 2012, Austin, TX, 5–10 May 2012. ACM Press, pp. 937–46.
                    
                    
                        Gaver, W., Boucher, A., Pennington, S. and Walker, B. (2004). Cultural Probes and the Value of Uncertainty. 
                        Interactions, 
                        11(5): 53–56. 
                    
                    
                        Gold, K. (2012). 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates.
                    
                    
                        Ingold, T. (2013). 
                        Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture. Routledge: London.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. and Rockwell, G. (2012). 
                        Developing Things: Notes toward an Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities. 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/11.
                    
                    
                        Star, S. L. and Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional Ecology, ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39. 
                        Social Studies of Science,
                        19(3): 387–420, doi:10.1177/030631289019003001.
                    
                    
                        Vines, J
                        ., Clarke, R., Wright, P., McCarthy, J. and Olivier, P. (2013). Configuring Participation: On How We Involve Users in Design. 
                        Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Paris, 27 April–2 May 2013, pp. 429–38.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Ruptured Life Courses: Institutional and Cultural Influences in Transnational Contexts
                
                    
                        van Faassen
                        Marijke
                    
                    Huygens ING, Netherlands, The
                    marijke.van.faassen@huygens.knaw.nl
                
                
                    
                        Hoekstra
                        Rik
                    
                    Huygens ING, Netherlands, The
                    rik.hoekstra@huygens.knaw.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Dutch-Australia
                    Mutual Cultural Heritage
                    Digital Preservation
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    cultural studies
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The focus for this project is the life courses of migrants. It is acknowledged that the life courses of all migrants have a rupture at the point of migration. As a result, the lives of migrants differ structurally from the lives of most other people, as their life courses are divided in a period before and a period after migration. Our central research question is about the questions of continuities and discontinuities in life, habits, and lifestyles. As people migrated from the Netherlands to Australia in the post–World War II period, we consider the influences of both the sending and receiving states, the emigrants’ institutions of both countries, their own communities, and the churches on their enrollment for migration. It is a largely unexplored question whether and up to what extent these influences were continued or taken over by new agents after their migration and contributed to the way their lives were shaped in their new country (Green, 2005, 263–65; Green and Weil, 2007, ix; Schrover and Van Faassen, 2010, 4; see also Elich, 1987). 
            The backbone for the research program is the development of a database that seeks to capture and aggregate data on the life courses of the migrants. The Dutch National Archives hold an archive with some 50,000 emigrant cards, corresponding to ca. 180,000 persons (as the cards register an emigrant unit, usually consisting of a family) or about 90 percent of all emigrants to Australia from 1945 to the mid-1980s (http://www.gahetna.nl). The Australian National Archives also have a collection of files about the same people, who for Australia were immigrants. These cards and files contain the core facts of the migrants’ life courses. Both collections are made accessible by databases. Explorative research has made it clear that it is possible to link the Dutch and the Australian records (http://resources.huygens.knaw.nl/emigratie). The database in development combines records from the Netherlands and Australia and in this way demonstrates a resource with data relating to the life courses of virtually all Dutch-Australian emigrants from 1945 to 1980. This makes it possible to link and understand aspects of migration that could previously only be studied separately. The actual parent project, Migrant, Mobilities and Connection, started in 2014 and is still in an exploratory phase. Results are preliminary. 
            Life courses are not a new field of study, having long drawn the attention of historians and social scientists alike (Maas et al., 2008, 7–8). However, studying lives has tended to either focus on the micro level or on the macro level. The micro historical approach is mostly qualitative as it works out case studies for individuals; the macro historical method is serial in nature and distinguishes patterns in the lives of groups of people. An important example is the Historical Sample of the Netherlands (HSN) that contains a representative sample of all persons born in The Netherlands between 1812 and 1922, corresponding with ca. 77,000 people (http://www.iisg.nl/hsn). However, the HSN only contains information about the facets of life of the people who are contained in its database. The Migrant, Mobilities and Connection database of life courses (the ‘backbone’ of both projects) is suitable for similar research as the HSN, but that is only the starting point. As it has links to the actual Dutch and Australian files, it is possible to study groups of migrants in much more depth than only the records in a database would allow. The organization of the research around a new, comprehensive dataset (that will be enriched by digitized policy and case files in anonymized form) and using the computer-assisted heuristics of the digital humanities make it possible to connect the micro and the macro approaches into what we would call 
                serial qualitative research. This method makes it possible to find patterns while keeping access to the details, to make representative selections for case studies, and to generalize and quickly test representative coverage of the findings from in-depth case studies.
            
            For all conceivable groups and selections it is possible to investigate the life courses of each member in detail. In this way it becomes possible to identify social networks of and around the migrants and follow their evolution as they migrated from a Dutch setting to the environment of their new homes in Australia. As the social networks evolved, it is possible to identify the different influences on their development. In this way we can combine pattern recognition of diverging lives and Dutch community formation and forms of assimilation in Australia with the pressures from the social context (Tilly, 2011; Brettell and Hollifield, 2014, 14–19; White and Houseman, 2002). We can research which institutions were involved and what their influences were on the lives of the emigrants both during their time in the Netherlands and after their emigration to Australia. The institutions include the Dutch and Australian governments, both consular services, but also the church, employers, and trade unions (Van Faassen, 2014, 79–121, 162–68).
            Another question is how did the cultural background of the people, such as the places of provenance and their religion, contribute to the lives they led in their new country? This is complemented by the medical history and group differences that are made possible by medical records archives kept at the Australian National Archives (privacy regulations permitting).
            The emigrant files also contain links to heritage institutions containing cultural heritage. The additional materials enrich the life courses and extend the fields of analysis. For example, the same people who are in life courses are also on the member lists of Dutch immigrant associations. Previously it was only possible to study the cultural lives in the Dutch Australian immigrant societies as a whole, but the life courses backbone links them to the people involved and their contributions.
            It is our objective to complement the research project by a cultural heritage project that uses the same life courses backbone as its structuring device for building a site for the Dutch-Australian community. Its members will be invited to identify their families in the life course and to enrich its contents by contributing all sorts of personal materials like photos, pictures, diaries, letters, and memorabilia. It is the intention that the site contributes to the community formation as its members may exchange experiences and come into contact with one another and with their Dutch past (Official Report, 2012). The community site is an objective per se, but can also contribute to the research project, as the materials of the community members may be used for further research into the Dutch-Australian experience and the memories of and the (changing) image of their former homeland. 
            Last but not least: reconstructing such a backbone dataset of life courses of migrating people and embedding it in both their communities could serve as a template for other countries as well. In order to be able to test this template statement, our research project has a comparative perspective, building on the work already done on German migrants by the Australian digital historian Dr Kristy Kokegei (Kokegei, 2012).
            Theme: ‘Migrating People, Migrating Data’
            This short paper is part of two interlinked short papers that discuss the archival, custodial, and digital challenges that impact the discovery, collection, preservation, and content management of material and immaterial traces from the past that the Netherlands shares with Australia. (The other short paper is ‘Developing a Sustainable Model in Mutual Cultural Digital Heritage’ by Nonja Peters.) In partnership with key institutional and community stakeholders, our pilot study on mobility between these two countries is about developing new understandings of the experience and representation of migration and how this has shaped an evolving sense of Dutch-Australian heritage and, with it, the consequences for the formation of cultural identities. 
            The deliberate play in the short papers linking theme of ‘Migrating People, Migrating Data’ is to signal the thematic content of the parent project, Migrant, Mobilities and Connection—that is, the socio-cultural material traces that append to the historical activity of people moving from one region to settle in another, in which the movement of bodies through space combines with information about their mobility through time. At the same time, it is to also signal the technical and conceptual challenges surrounding the consolidation of different data sources (both hard copy and digital) from a prior generation of technology to successive generations. For example, many Dutch community groups in both countries are actively collecting documents, artefacts, photographs, and maps to pass on to future generations. However, few have developed sustainable workflows to ensure the sustainability of their ‘collections’, and rarely are they familiar with cataloguing and metadata conventions that help describe an item’s provenance, role, and position in the world. Planning for digital preservation therefore is uneven, leading to concerns about a ‘digital gap’ in a community’s history. Mitigating the deleterious effects, then, of information loss and fading human recollection is an issue central to both the continued accessibility of cultural heritage materials and the digital preservation of historical knowledge beyond technology format lifetimes. 
            Project Members
            Dr Nonja Peters, Curtin University and University of Western Sydney
            Professor Paul Arthur, University of Western Sydney
            Dr Marijke van Faassen, Huygens ING
            Dr Rik Hoekstra, Huygens ING
            Dr Jason Ensor, University of Western Sydney
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brettell, C. B. and Hollifield, J. F. (eds). (2014) 
                        Migration Theory: Talking across Disciplines. 3rd ed. Routledge, New York.
                    
                    
                        Elich, J. H. (1987). 
                        Aan de ene kant, aan de andere kant. De emigratie van Nederlanders naar Australië, 1946–1986. Eburon, Delft.
                    
                    
                        Green, N. L. (June 2005). The Politics of Exit: Reversing the Immigration Paradigm. 
                        Journal of Modern History,
                        77: 263–89.
                    
                    
                        Green, N. L. and Weil, F. (2007). 
                        Citizenship and Those Who Leave: The Politics of Emigration and Expatriation. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
                    
                    
                        Kokegei, K. A. (2012). 
                        Australian Immigration and Migrant Assimilation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Adelaide.
                    
                    
                        Maas, I., van Leeuwen, M. H. D. and Mandemakers, K. (eds.). (2008). 
                        Hondervijftig jaar levenslopen. De Historische Steekproef Nederlandse Bevolking. Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam.
                    
                    
                        Official Report by the CIE on the Australian-Dutch Heritage Day 14 June 2012, The Hague. (2012). http://www.heritage-activities.nl/sites/default/files/content/Report%20Australian-Dutch%20Heritage%20Day%20The%20Hague%202012.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Schrover, M. L. J. C. and Van Faassen, M. (2010). Invisibility and Selectivity: Introduction to the Special Issue on Dutch Overseas Migration in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Century. 
                        TSEG,
                        7(2): 3–31.
                    
                    
                        Tilly, Ch. (2011). Transplanted Networks. In Yans-McLaughlin, V., 
                        Immigration Reconsidered: 
                        History, Sociology, and Politics. Oxford Scholarship Online, DOI:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195055108.001.0001.
                    
                    
                        Van Faassen, M. (2014). 
                        Polder en Emigratie. Het Nederlandse emigratiebestel in internationaal perspectief, 1945–1967. Huygens ING, Den Haag.
                    
                    
                        White, D. and Houseman, M. (2002). The Navigability of Strong Ties: Small Worlds, Tie Strength and Network Topology. 
                        Complexity,
                        8(1): 72–81. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Scaling Up Digital Public History: Lessons Learned From The Find &amp; Connect Web Resource Project
                
                    
                        Jones
                        Michael Alastair
                    
                    The University of Melbourne, Australia
                    m.jones@unimelb.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Tropea
                        Rachel
                    
                    The University of Melbourne, Australia
                    rachel.tropea@unimelb.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital history
                    archives
                    public humanities
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    historical studies
                    metadata
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    knowledge representation
                    information architecture
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            16 November 2014 marks the fifth anniversary of the Australian government’s apology to Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants. When then–prime minister Kevin Rudd stood in the Great Hall of Australia’s Parliament House in 2009, he moved a motion of apology to the approximately 500,000 people who were placed in orphanages, children’s homes, and other institutions in Australia in the 20th century. In that speech was a line committing to ‘a national database that will collate and index existing state identified records into a national searchable data base, accessible to state and other care leaver services and also directly to care leavers themselves’ (Prime Minister, 2009).
            The resulting three-year National Find &amp; Connect Web Resource Project (http://www.findandconnect.gov.au/) concluded in November 2014. Though work on the web resource will continue (at a substantially reduced level) for some time, this milestone provides a significant opportunity to examine one of the largest publicly funded digital history projects in Australia. In this paper, senior members of the project team will reflect on what worked and what could have been done differently—on success stories and lessons learned.
            In preparation for funding the proposed ‘national database’ the government undertook a scoping study, looking at activities around the country. Some states did have existing guides to institutions and archival records, but these were static, point-in-time print documents. By contrast, in Victoria researchers from the University of Melbourne and Australian Catholic University were already working digitally, as part of the Australian Research Council–funded project Who Am I? The Archive as Central to Quality Practice for Current and Past Care Leavers (Forgotten Australians). A significant component of the project was the Pathways dataset and web resource, which documented the history of child welfare, collections of records, and key resources (including publications and images) in Victoria from the 1840s to the present (O’Neill et al., 2012; McCarthy and Evans, 2012). As noted by the government in September 2010, ‘It is important that the website design is based on sound principles which will stand the test of time and cater to the complexity of the content and search functions’, and that ‘No other example of a specialised website designed to cater for care leavers, with the search functionality and archival integrity of Pathways, was identified in Australia or overseas during the scoping study’ (Department of Families, 2010).
            Following a tender process, the core Who Am I? project team was entrusted with expanding the Pathways model nationally. In this paper, we will explore how the project team scaled up a local, relatively contained state-based resource produced as part of a research project to produce a national, government-funded resource utilised by Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants and their families, as well as support services, advocacy groups, governments, record holders, past providers, researchers, and the general public.
            The Find &amp; Connect web resource covers the history of out-of-home ‘care’ for children and young people spanning eight states and territories and nationally (each jurisdiction with its own legislation and context) and more than 150 years, with a primary focus on 1920–1989. At the time of writing, the resource consists of nine underlying databases and more than 1.5 million words of scholarly content, presented to the general public through more than 16,000 web pages. The content has been created and curated by 25 core staff (with assistance from many others) including archivists, historians, and technology staff, overseen by three senior academics from the University of Melbourne (Associate Professor Gavan McCarthy and Professor Cathy Humphreys) and the Australian Catholic University (Professor Shurlee Swain).
            With regard to technology, the data collected is structured as a nonhierarchical network of entities and relationships, utilising international standards for the description of entities, archival resources, publications, and digital objects while also extending those standards where required to meet the needs of the project. Over the course of three years, archivists collaborated with technology staff to develop capability in rendering, indexing, and visualising content, including standardised XML (McCarthy et al., forthcoming). Underpinning all this, the technology base of the eScholarship Research Centre was expanded to ensure more robust preservation of data and support high-availability web services.
            Challenges emerged in a number of key areas:
             • 
                Technology: Some of the underlying tools were utilised due to their informatic strength and proven capability; however, legacy issues created problems when working as part of a distributed national team and development of the underlying technology was not as rapid as initially hoped.
            
             • 
                Web design and usability: In attempting to present complex historical narratives and networked information models to nonspecialist audiences, the team uncovered a range of usability and design issues. Some of these have been largely overcome while others require further work (Jones and O’Neill, 2014).
            
             • 
                Resourcing: The balance of archivists to historians to technology staff was planned and budgeted from the outset, based on a projected understanding of the project and its parameters. Some of these early decisions put limits on what was possible later in the project.
            
             • 
                Scalability: Some of the processes and practices around content development, editing, quality assurance, and informatics that produced high-quality results for the Who Am I? project were put under significant strain when working at scale.
            
            Despite these challenges, the project has achieved notable success, including substantial visitor numbers, very positive feedback from stakeholders and the community, markedly improved results in usability testing, and the fostering of communities of practice around the country with an enhanced awareness of the issues facing the sector. In terms of scholarship, the project has researched and documented the history of institutions providing out-of-home ‘care’ across the country, and the records and resources related to those institutions, in more detail than ever before; and this information has been captured and stored in sustainable, extensible ways for the benefit of researchers and the community at large.
            Our experience also has findings relevant to public history and digital scholarship more broadly. The team’s long, iterative approach to content development and interest in sustainability and persistent citability was distinctly different from most other government websites and online content development projects. Conversely, historians working around the country found their practice and priorities were influenced and shaped by an unfamiliar immediacy and regularity of feedback on their work (much of which was first made publicly accessible while still just a work-in-progress) from users and the large, multi-disciplinary project team of which they were a part.
            Historians and archivists also met regularly with users and stakeholders in the project, and this ongoing engagement in a sometimes charged, politically active space meant academic freedom was tempered by the need to negotiate language, representation, and content with individuals, groups, and governments.
            In this long paper, senior members of the Find &amp; Connect web resource team will explore the success of the project, reflect on the challenges encountered, and raise some of the implications for public and digital history more broadly. They will conclude by outlining their hopes for the Find &amp; Connect web resource in the future, and the ways it could be linked more effectively to other digital initiatives within Australia and internationally.
            The Find &amp; Connect Web Resource Project is funded by the Australian government’s Department of Social Services (previously the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs. (2010). Find and Connect Service—Scoping Study, Commonwealth of Australia, September, https://www.dss.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/find_connect_scoping_study.pdf, iv, 32.
                    
                    
                        Jones, M. and O’Neill, C. (2014). Identity, Records and Archival Evidence: Exploring the Needs of Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants, 
                        Archives and Records,
                        35(2), DOI:10.1080/23257962.2014.951032.
                    
                    
                        McCarthy, G. J. and Evans, J. (2012). Principles for Archival Information Services in the Public Domain. 
                        Archives &amp; Manuscripts,
                        40(1): 54–67, DOI:10.1080/01576895.2012.670872.
                    
                    
                        McCarthy, G., Smith A. and Jones, M. (Forthcoming). Looking beyond the Archive: Utilising Encoded Archival Context in a Broader Societal Context. 
                        Journal of Archival Organisation.
                    
                    
                        O’Neill, C., Selakovic, V. and Tropea, R. (2012). Access to Records for People Who Were in Out-of-Home Care: Moving beyond ‘Third Dimension’ Archival Practice. 
                        Archives &amp; Manuscripts,
                        40(1): 29–41, DOI:10.1080/01576895.2012.668841.
                    
                    
                        Prime Minister. (2009). Transcript of Address at the Apology to the Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants—Great Hall, Parliament House—16 November 2009. http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/110625/20091116-1801/www.pm.gov.au/node/6321.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Sea Stacks: Contemporary Atlantic Canadian Books for Children and Youth
                
                    
                        Howard
                        Vivian
                    
                    Dalhousie University, Canada
                    howardv@dal.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    regional literature
                    children's literature
                    pedagogy and curriculum support
                    content analysis
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    interface and user experience design
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    user studies / user needs
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    english studies
                    cultural studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Research over the past two decades has amply demonstrated the importance of literature to the formation of both regional and national cultural identity, particularly in the face of mass-market globalization of children’s book publishing in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, as well as the predominance of non-Canadian content from television, movies, books, magazines, and Internet media (Egoff and Saltman, 1990; Diakiw, 1997; Nodelman, 1997; Pantaleo, 2000; Baird, 2002; Nodelman, 2008; Reimer, 2008; Edwards and Saltman, 2010). John Sorfleet notes, ‘It is this independent local perspective—what one can term a sense of one’s own place or home ground—which is most important to any understanding of the raison d’être of children’s literature in Canada and other relatively young nations’ (Sorfleet, 2003, 220). In 
                Picturing Canada: A History of Canadian Children’s Illustrated Books and Publishing, Gail Edwards and Judith Saltman note that some of the pastoral trends in representations of home spaces found in many Atlantic Canadian picturebooks perpetuate ‘a deeply embedded Romantic view of childhood’ (Edwards and Saltman, 2010, 195) and raise important questions about publishing trends and educational mandates in relation to regional representation for young audiences. 
            
            Despite the richness of literary traditions in Atlantic Canada, local children and youth are not consistently exposed to their own regional literature in classrooms or school libraries. A 2009 survey of public school teachers and school library staff in K–12 classrooms in the Atlantic Provinces conducted by the researcher revealed that while 94.6% of respondents indicated that they felt it was theoretically important to include regional authors and illustrators in their classrooms, only 48.2% reported that they had actually done so in the previous year, and only 19.6% stated that they felt well informed about Atlantic Canadian books for youth. One respondent commented, ‘It is important for children to see that there are many people in their own geographical area that write, illustrate and publish literature. I find this encourages young writers and lets them see that this is a viable profession to pursue’. Another respondent noted that ‘children need to see the connections of where they live to the rest of the world. Sometimes children know more about other places than where they live’. When asked about their knowledge of Atlantic Canadian children’s books, respondents expressed the need for a web-based resource listing regional authors, illustrators, titles, and themes as well as information about curriculum links. One teacher stated, ‘I would love to have a list of local authors on a reference website I could go to to search for books related to what I am teaching at any given time. [At the moment] I don’t know who the authors/illustrators are and what their books are called. I would have to have time to do research to find out, and I don’t have that time’. This study clearly demonstrated that, although information on some well-known regional authors is available on the Internet, this information is scattered, inconsistently organized, and erratic in currency, completeness, quality, and authority. Furthermore, teachers and school library staff do not have the time to search out information on a variety of widely dispersed sites and strongly expressed the need to have it collected and organized in a single, easy-to-use, comprehensive, and authoritative online resource. 
            The Sea Stacks website (www.seastacks.lib.unb.ca), an inter-university collaborative research project, directly addresses the currently under-exposed and under-valued state of contemporary Atlantic Canadian literature for children and young adults by creating an authoritative web-delivered resource devoted to this literature. On the basis of research that emphasizes the significance of regional books in the establishment of cultural identity, this project will ultimately provide a current, complete, and authoritative information resource devoted to regional literature, the framework for which is already in place along with 25 profiles funded by a one-year SSHRC standard research grant. The Sea Stacks site documents the current state of this literature through profiles containing biographical information, bibliographies of primary texts and secondary sources, textual analysis, and video interviews with selected authors and illustrators, specifically exploring ‘regional’ themes in their work. Most importantly, the site encourages researchers to analyze and theorize issues in contemporary English-language Atlantic Canadian literature for children and youth: its searchable database allows users (scholars, teachers, librarians, parents, youth) to gather thematically related books together in ways they may not have done before. The Sea Stacks website has been the catalyst for the upcoming (July 2015) Thomas Raddall Symposium at Acadia University in Wolfville, Nova Scotia, which will be devoted to an analysis of ‘Child, Youth, and Place in Atlantic Canadian Literature’ (http://english.acadiau.ca/tl_files/sites/english/resources/RaddallCFP%20extension-10.pdf). Thus, this proposed poster describes the role of the Sea Stacks site in exploring traditional research questions and in opening up new research questions and avenues of inquiry.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baird, J. (2002).
                         
                        English Language Canadian Literature in High Schools.
                        
                             
                        The Canada Council for the Arts, http://www.canadacouncil.ca/grants/publishing/doc01-e.asp#overview.
                    
                    
                        Diakiw, J. (1997). Children’s Literature and Canadian National Identity: A Revisionist Perspective.
                        
                             
                        
                        Canadian Children's Literature, 
                        87: 36–49. 
                    
                    
                        Edwards, G. and Saltman, J. (2010).
                         
                        Picturing Canada: A History of Canadian Children’s Illustrated Books and Publishing. University of Toronto Press.
                    
                    
                        Egoff, S., and Saltman, J. (1990).
                         
                        The New Republic of Childhood: A Critical Guide to Canadian Children’s Literature in English.
                         Oxford University Press, Toronto.
                    
                    
                        Howard, V. (2012). The Sea Stacks Project: Enhancing the Use of Regional Literature in Atlantic Canadian Schools.
                         
                        Partnership: The Canadian Journal of Library and Information Practice and Research,
                         
                        7(1): n.p.
                    
                    
                        Nodelman, P. (1997). What’s Canadian about Canadian Children’s Literature? A Compendium of Answers to the Question.
                         
                        Canadian Children’s Literature,
                        87(3): 15–35.
                    
                    
                        Nodelman, P. (2008).
                         
                        The Hidden Adult: Defining Children’s Literature.
                         Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
                    
                    
                        Pantaleo, S. (2000). Grade 3 students explore the question: ‘What’s Canadian about Canadian children’s literature?’ 
                         
                        English Quarterly, 
                        32(3/4): 41–50.
                    
                    
                        Reimer, M. (ed.).
                         (2008).
                         
                        Home Words: Discourse on Children’s Literature in Canada. Wilfrid Laurier University Press, Waterloo.
                    
                    
                        Sorfleet, J. (2003). The Nature of Canadian Literature: A Commentary. In
                         Hudson, A. and Cooper, S. A. (eds), 
                        Windows and Words: A Look at Canadian Children’s Literature in English. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, pp. 219–26.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Seeing Is Revealing: A Critical Discussion on Visualisation And The Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Champion
                        Erik Malcolm
                    
                    Curtin University
                    nzerik@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Visualization
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    visualisation
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Images and Written Language
                Yet visualisation is at least as old as written language. The earliest symbols are artistic rather than literary. Historically, the distinction between text and symbol has been blurred, from early European languages to Asian languages and as part of world history in general 
                    Tang201324(Tang, 2013)242412Tang, DidiChina Discovers Some Of The World&apos;s Oldest WritingHuff PostChina Discovers Some Of The World&apos;s Oldest Writing201310 JulyNewspaperhttp://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/10/china-oldest-writing_n_3574624.htmlEnglish?>. Even today, language is geographically influenced 
                    Mark198925(Mark et al., 1989)252510Mark, David MGould, Michael DNunes, JoanSpatial language and geographic information systems: Cross-linguistic issues (El Lenguaje Espacial y Los Sistemas de Información Geograficos: Temas Interlinguisticos)Conferencia Latinoamericana sobre el Technologia de los Sistemas de Información Geográficos (SIG)25-291989Venezuelahttp://downloads2.esri.com/campus/uploads/library/pdfs/5815.pdf1989?>. One can include cave paintings; they reveal the long-term association between image, space, and meaning 
                    Viegas200826(Viegas, 2008)262643Viegas, JenniferMusic and art mixed in the Stone AgeABC Science: News in ScienceABC Science: News in ScienceThursday, 3 July 20082008ABChttp://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2008/07/03/2293114.htm?>
                    
                    Brown, 2012). In some prehistoric caves the paintings are apparently spatial pointers to reverberant spaces (and reverberation apparently indicates spirituality) while some archaeologists believe Lascaux cave paintings are maps of the stars (see 
                    http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/871930.stm). In Australia, traditional Aboriginal paintings are visualisations of mythical knowledge as well as environmental resources; they are cultural schemas and ‘totemic maps’ 
                    Lewis197637(Lewis, 1976, McDonald and Veth, 2013)373717Lewis, DavidRoute Finding by Desert Aborigines in AustraliaJ. NavigationJ. Navigation21-3829119760373-463310.1017/S0373463300043307McDonald201323232317McDonald, JoVeth, PeterThe Archaeology of Memory: The Recursive Relationship of Martu Rock Art and PlaceAnthropological ForumAnthropological Forum367-38623420132013/12/01Routledge0066-4677http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00664677.2013.84344410.1080/00664677.2013.8434442014/02/03?>. 
                
                Textual Literacy
                To improve public access to digitalised material 
                    Warwick201213(Warwick et al., 2012, Kirschenbaum, 2010)131328Warwick, ClaireTerras, Melissa M.Nyhan, JulianneDigital humanities in practiceDigital mediaHumanities -- Technological innovationsLibraries -- Special collections -- Electronic information resourcesInformation technology -- Social aspects2012LondonFacet Pub. : in association with UCL Centre for Digital HumanitiesKirschenbaum201015151556Kirschenbaum, Mathew G.Digital Humanitiesacademic room20142010Onlinehttp://www.academicroom.com/topics/what-is-digital-humanitiesUniversity of Maryland?> we also need to tackle the problem of literacy, digital literacy, and digital fluency 
                    Resnick200216(Resnick, 2002)161613Resnick, MitchelRethinking learning in the digital age2002The Global Information Technology Report: Readiness for the Networked World. Oxford University Press?>. Multimedia, visualisations, and sensory interfaces can communicate across a wider swathe of the world’s population. And although literacy is increasing, technology is further wedging a fundamental divide between those who can read and write and those who cannot 
                    UNESCO201417(UNESCO, 2014)171712UNESCOLiteracy for all remains an elusive goal, new UNESCO data shows | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization20142014/01/29/03:31:29http://www.unesco.org/new/en/media-services/single-view/news/literacy_for_all_remains_an_elusive_goal_new_unesco_data_shows/back/9597/#.Uuh1O3lm5UO?>. Yet developing visual literacy is still nascent, even though more and more people read by viewing graphical interfaces, and text-based interfaces cause serious problems for people with low levels of literacy 
                    Medhi201135(Medhi et al., 2011, Chaudry et al., 2012)353517Indrani MedhiSomani PatnaikEmma BrunskillS.N. Nagasena GautamaWilliam ThiesKentaro ToyamaDesigning mobile interfaces for novice and low-literacy usersACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.1-2818120111073-0516195902410.1145/1959022.1959024Chaudry201236363610Chaudry, Beenish MConnelly, Kay HSiek, Katie AWelch, Janet LMobile interface design for low-literacy populationsProceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT international health informatics symposium91-1002012ACM1450307817?>.
                
            
            
                Non-Text-Based Media Are Part of Digital Humanities
                Archives are not just text, and the digital humanities 
                    are collaborative and interwoven. Even the book itself is a material, embodied experience. Literature itself is linked to both the image 
                    Theibault201220(Theibault, 2012)20205Theibault, JohnDougherty, JackNawrotz, KristenVisualizations and Historical Arguments by John Writing History in the Digital AgeDigital Culture Books(Spring 2012 version)Part 52012OnlineUniversity of Michigan Press?> and to materiality 
                    Rudy201121(Rudy, 2011)212117Rudy, Kathryn M.Kissing Images, Unfurling Rolls, Measuring Wounds, Sewing Badges and Carrying Talismans: Considering Some Harley Manuscripts through the Physical Rituals they RevealElectronic British Library JournalElectronic British Library Journal20112011http://www.bl.uk/eblj/2011articles/article5.htmlp4 Manuscripts made as private devotional prayer books often reveal that their owners handled and kissed them as part of rituals.?>; the materiality of Icelandic sagas and runic inscriptions are considered by various scholars to be essential properties 
                    Jesch201322(Jesch, 2013)222217Jesch, JudithRunes and Words: Runology in a Lexicographical Context (plenary paper)Futhark, International Journal of Runic Studies, Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Runes and Runic Inscriptions, &apos;Runes in Context&apos;Futhark, International Journal of Runic Studies, Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Runes and Runic Inscriptions, &apos;Runes in Context&apos;77-1004James E. Knirk and Henrik Williams2013August 2010Oslo Norwayhttps://www.academia.edu/5644959/Runes_and_words_runic_lexicography_in_contextOnlineMore recenly, younger scholars in paricular have been invesigaing he ways in which he whole runic objec “means” (Sern 2009, Bianchi 2010), showing how he decoraion, design and layou o runesones in paricular conribue o he meaning o he inscripions, making hem muli-modal objecs. I mysel have argued (Jesch 1998) ha he maerialiy o runesones is as much a par o heir meaning as heir exualiy. ?>. Humanities is/are not merely multimodal but also embodied experiences. The objects in and on which the humanities are described, critiqued, and preserved are more than just holders for text; they are essential artefacts that give researchers essential clues in the interpretation of text and author. Material objects are not merely brute objects; they are symbolic as well, inscribed into the lived and symbolic world 
                    McDonald201323(McDonald and Veth, 2013)232317McDonald, JoVeth, PeterThe Archaeology of Memory: The Recursive Relationship of Martu Rock Art and PlaceAnthropological ForumAnthropological Forum367-38623420132013/12/01Routledge0066-4677http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00664677.2013.84344410.1080/00664677.2013.8434442014/02/03?>. 
                
            
            
                Scholarly Arguments
                Research labs that call themselves visualisation labs include Kings College Visualisation Lab (
                    http://www.kvl.cch.kcl.ac.uk/dhi.html), Wired! Lab Digital Art History and Visual Culture (http://www.dukewired.org/), AliVE—Applied Laboratory for Interactive Visualization and Embodiment (
                    http://www.cityu.edu.hk/scm/alive/), and the founder of CAVE VR, EVL—Electronic Visualization Laboratory (https://www.evl.uic.edu/). The name also appears in conferences and in journals—for example, the 
                    Journal of Visualization and Computer Animation
                    
                        . Can they all be wrong?
                    
                
                The above labs and journals suggest that visualisation can also be the development of a simulation rather than the depiction of data or a model. These laboratories may produce high-resolution graphical models to represent archaeological data, but they can also produce simulations to test hypotheses. Beat Schwendimann 
                    Schwendimann201017(2010)171756Schwendimann, BeatWhat is the difference between a simulation and a model? [Updated]Proto-Knowledge-Turning disconnected information into knowledge through visualizations20142010unknownhttp://proto-knowledge.blogspot.com.au/2010/12/what-is-difference-between-simulation.html?> explains the distinction succinctly: 
                
                A model is a product (physical or digital) that represents a system of interest. A model is similar to but simpler than the system it represents, while approximating most of the same salient features of the real system as close as possible . . . [while] . . . a simulation is the process of using a model to study the behavior and performance of an actual or theoretical system. . . . While a model aims to be true to the system it represents, a simulation can use a model to explore states that would not be possible in the original system. 
                By creating a simulation rather than a model, we can test hypotheses. So, yes, I am also arguing that games can be considered to be visualisations, of the designer’s mental model of the game world. Games (with examples like 
                    Papers, Please; September 12; and 
                    Space Refugees) are persuasive 
                    and rhetorical simulations.
                
                Earlier definitions don’t appear to understand the persuasive and rhetorical nature of visualisations, perhaps because they wish to use them as value-neutral tools. For example, McCormick et al. 
                    McCormick1987140(1987)14014017McCormick, B., DeFanti, T. &amp; Brown, MVisualization in Scientific ComputingComputer GraphicsComputer Graphics216November 19871987?> defined visualisation as ‘to form a mental image of something incapable of being viewed or not at that moment visible’ . . . (Collins Dictionary) . . . ‘a tool or method for interpreting image data fed into a computer and for generating images from complex multi-dimensional data sets’. This definition invalidates visualisations that predate the large use of data, does not attempt to explain the mental model and process behind the visualisation, and believes visualization must focused on image generation.
                
                 More interestingly, Kosara 
                    Kosara200728(2007)282810Kosara, RobertVisualization Criticism – The Missing Link Between Information Visualization and ArtProceedings of the 11th International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV)631–6362007http://kosara.net/papers/2007/Kosara_IV_2007.pdf2015?> posited three interesting criteria for visualisation: it must be based on (nonvisual) data, produce an image, and the result must be readable and recognizable. He added this interesting subcriteria: ‘In addition to readability, a visualization has to be made with the intent to communicate data three steps: realizing that data is being visualized by the image, understanding what is being visualized, and how the display is to be read’. Unfortunately he also tried to create a simple spectrum ranging from practical visualisations to sublime/artistic visualisations. I believe he has conflated two quite different concepts, at least according to Kantian aesthetics. But he has come closer to a more useful and generic definition: visualisation should reveal the process behind the output.
                
                But where is visualisation as a research tool in its own right? Can’t visualisation actually 
                    create new research questions or at least prove difficult to answer questions? Examples in my field, virtual heritage, include a photo-realistic model which showed colours not actually visible in the ruins of the remaining temple 
                    Chalmers199634(Chalmers and Stoddar, 1996)34345Chalmers, A.Stoddar, S.Higgins, T.Main, P.Lang, J.Photo-Realistic Graphics for Visualising Archaeological Site ReconstructionsImaging the Past: Electronic Imaging and Computer Graphics in Museums and Archaeology 85-93114 British Museum Occasional Paper 114 1996London British Museum Press?>, computer modelling to deduce the astronomical function of ancient Roman obelisks (http://idialab.org/virtual-meridian-of-augustus-presentation-at-the-vaticans-pontifical-academy-of-archeology/), or digital data-driven maps to create historically derived visual descriptions of ancient Roman journeys (
                    http://orbis.stanford.edu/). There have also been more general humanities-orientated papers arguing that visualisation can be reflective and critical 
                    
                    
                    (Dörk et al., 2013; Jessop, 2008; Robichaud and Blevins, 2011). 
                
            
            
                Summary
                Visualization is an extremely significant aspect of digital humanities, and writers such as Burdick et al. 
                    Burdick201218SG2-3(2012)18185Burdick, AnneDrucker, JohannaLunenfeld, PeterPresner, ToddSchnapp, JeffreyA Short Guide to the Digital HumanitiesDigital Humanities2012Cambridge USAMIT Presshttp://jeffreyschnapp.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/D_H_ShortGuide.pdf?> agree, but we need to improve our understanding and communication of visualisation as being part of the humanities not just now but also historically, before the advent of computer data. 
                    And to recap: historically text has not lived in a hermetically sealed hermeneutic well all by itself. A world with literature but without the arts is intellectually and experientially impoverished. Critical thinking and critical literacy extend beyond the reading and writing of text. Visualization can make scholarly arguments relevant to the humanities. Therefore non-text-based research should figure more prominently in digital humanities readers and monographs.
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Segetes: a Digital Initiative in Discovering and Simplifying Access to Open Source Metadata for Vergil’s Works
                
                    
                        Hollis
                        Luke Robert
                    
                    Archimedes Web Solutions, United States of America
                    lhollis@chs.harvard.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Text analytics
                    Information engineering
                    Augustan-era Latin poetry
                    Open source
                    RESTful web services
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    classical studies
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    metadata
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    programming
                    visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Reading on a screen should be as simple and beautiful of an experience as reading a book. Similarly, interacting with metadata should be as intuitive as interacting with the text itself, no matter what device a user accesses it with. Segetes is a simple, developer-friendly framework for creating and curating networked texts in web applications that can share seamlessly between each other and have the potential to create decentralized networks. The first application built with the Segetes framework includes the poetry of Vergil and is available at 
                
                    segetes.io
                . 
            
            Segetes’ project is twofold: first, to discover and extract metadata for source texts with its open-source modules—including grammatical structures, scansion, textual allusion, entity abstraction, related media, and a concordance of citations for line-specific related criticism—and second, to provide easy access to this data via a web interface, RESTful web service, or document exports as JSON-LD or XML. The Segetes framework is built to be as useful and streamlined as possible for developers at all skill levels and allows researchers to customize the data model and define schemas as necessary. 
            Segetes seeks to simplify user interactions and strives for clarity within intricacy in complex metadata. It accomplishes this by allowing users to toggle quickly between the most minimal view possible—the text only, without distractions—and the view for complex metadata related to each paragraph of prose or line of poetry. The primary endpoint of the API is the paragraph or line—and most facets of metadata reference this unit as a whole; thus, the data model provides ease of search and ordering by this base unit to make developing new views, applications, and components as easy as possible. 
            As networked texts continue to change the way that users read and study, Segetes seeks to make sharing data an integral and creative force that drives the formation of archives. Automated import and export modules remove obstacles between developers and their data and enable researchers to share it easily. These modules attempt to learn and predict features (such as section breaks and line numbers) about imported texts, and other modules for entity recognition, and calculating text reuse may be used to extract and aggregate other relevant metadata. The export data models rely on and extend current Schema.org, TEI, and Dublin Core standards for annotating metadata and utilize CITE architecture URNs where applicable to offer the most useful and sharable data model possible. Segetes recommends that applications built with its framework and modules contribute back to the community by publishing their datasets, whether as JSON-LD, XML, or another data format, on a larger collaborative data-sharing platform such as DataHub. 
            Similarly, each Segetes application offers robust webhooks for networking resources and updates between other Segetes applications that it is linked with. Text search and reuse, disambiguating shared entities, publishing updates, and sharing media are all made easy with in-network texts. In this way, applications developed and curated by individual researchers or teams of researchers and developers may network with each other and create decentralized archives of information, benefiting from sharing resources such as named entities and media, while distributing the burden of editing, data cleaning, hosting, and application development. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Senga: Participatory Curation and the Mathematical Model of Exhibition
                
                    
                        Kitamoto
                        Asanobu
                    
                    National Institute of Informatics, Japan
                    kitamoto@nii.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    museum
                    participatory curation
                    mathematical model
                    exhibition
                    analysis
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    internet / world wide web
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Senga is a Web-based participatory curation system designed for the general public. The Senga interface consists of four steps—search, collect, order, and share—to make an image sequence called a tour. We claim that these steps mimic the basic process of curation, so a tour can be considered as an exhibition. Senga is a type of crowdsourcing system similar to crowd annotation, but the uniqueness of Senga is in context-dependence, meaning that an interpretation of an image depends on the neighborhood of an image sequence. Through the analysis of more than 2,500 tours created on Senga since its release in 2007, we showed that it has potential to be used by curators to draw new ideas for the exhibition. We conclude the paper by proposing the mathematical model of exhibitions with a preliminary result on analyzing state transition diagrams and on synthesizing tours. 
            
                What Is Senga? 
            
            ‘Senga’ (Japanese for ‘thousand images’)
                1 is a web-based participatory curation system that allows users to make a ‘tour’ of images and publish it on the Web as an exhibition. Senga is based on the idea of fragmentation and recombination of digitized books. We have digitized more than 200 academically relevant books about the Silk Road (Digital Archive of Toyo Bunko Rare Book
                2), but the academic atmosphere around those books was a barrier to the general public accessing the wealth of cultural heritage information inside the book. Our original motivation was to crop attractive parts of the book to make a collection of image fragments so that users could later collect and recombine them into a new collection for their purposes. Providing image fragments, however, is a common idea exemplified in the British Library’s million photographs at Flickr commons or the Mechanical Curator (Baker, 2013). Our contribution is in designing an interface to make a ‘tour’ of image collection. 
            
            Figure 1 shows four steps to make a tour on Senga—namely, search, collect, order, and share. A user first sets a theme, searches images by various criteria, collects appropriate images, orders them in a meaningful way, and shares them as a tour. We claim that these steps mimic an exhibition’s curation process, and a tour is a basic form of an exhibition. Hence we call Senga a participatory curation system for sharing exhibitions online. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Overview of Senga and four steps (search, collect, order, and share) to make a tour. 
            Context-Dependent Annotation 
            Senga can be regarded as a crowdsourcing system similar to crowd annotation. In crowd annotation, a user is asked annotate images with tags (Oomen et al., 2014) and named entities,
                3 and we call it context-independent annotation because metadata description is not affected by how we view the image. On the contrary, Senga deals with context-dependent annotation such as ambiguous or creative interpretations. For instance, a red rectangle is red if it is contrasted with other colors, but is a rectangle if contrasted with other shapes. An ambiguous situation also offers a chance for the exploitation of creative interpretations and contextualization. Senga asks a user to think about the meaning of an image in contrast with other images, which raises users’ interest to look into images. 
            
            Motivation to Participate 
            Senga does not offer a clear goal, however, and users of Senga are expected to find their own goals. After the release of Senga in August 2007 (Kamida and Kitamoto, 2007), we held several outreach events for the general public to use Senga and observed how they understand the concept of the system. The biggest challenge seems to be setting a goal from a pool of images on the interface, or in other words, setting the theme of a tour. Some people quickly decided on a theme and looked intrinsically motivated for improving the quality of the tour. An interesting observation is that the capability of goal-setting does not depend on age; even small kids can quickly find their themes, while some adults got lost and could not concentrate on making the tour. Since October 2011, Senga was permanently installed at Toyo Bunko Museum in Tokyo so that museum visitors can freely use it. To increase the value in the museum, we added the mechanism of extrinsic motivation, namely a free souvenir. A tour made in the exhibition room can be picked up at the museum shop after communicating with the staff to print their tours on postcards. Here a postcard serves as a tool to make a path to the museum shop and keep memories of the museum until the next visit. 
            
                Analysis of User-Generated Tours 
            
            Basic Statistics 
            As of 14 October 2014, Senga produced 2,579 tours. The system provides 3,772 image fragments, and 3,335 images (88%) appear at least in one tour. To analyze the collection of tours from the viewpoint of an exhibition, we first define an ‘exhibition’ as ‘an activity for the general public to arrange artifacts or events with an intention’ (Kawaguchi, 2009 [author’s translation]). This definition suggests that the most important factor of exhibition is ‘intention’, so we focus on two factors—arrangement and title—that are related to the intention of a tour. We check the arrangement and the title for intention and judge if both are consistent. Finally we mark a tour ‘creative’ as long as the arrangement and the title suggest interesting or unique ideas. Evaluation of 2,579 tours was performed by one woman who is not a domain specialist. Such subjective evaluation should be performed by multiple people, but evaluation by a single person is at least consistent and can be used as a good starting point for a preliminary evaluation. As a result, 34% of the tours were judged intentional and consistent, and 6% of the tours (most of them intentional and consistent) were judged creative. In contrast, 41% of the tours were judged intentional but not consistent. 
            Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches 
            The first research question is why we have more inconsistent tours than consistent ones. Our hypothesis is that this difference originates in two different approaches to making tours: top-down and bottom-up approaches. In a top-down approach, the theme of a tour is defined in the beginning, so the title could be easily given. On the other hand, in a bottom-up approach, a user starts from collecting images and later tries to give a title that best describes the collection. This is not an easy task for image collections without explicit themes, so a typical solution is to give a title not related to the content, such as the date of the visit. The result suggests a hypothesis that the bottom-up approach is slightly more popular than the top-down approach, which is probably opposite the habit of professional curators. 
            Variety of Contexts 
            The second research question is to measure the variety of contexts at an image level. Figure 2 shows the analysis of image sequences in tours to count images that come just before or just after the target image. Here the leftmost image is the target image, and other images to the right are ordered according to the number of appearances in the neighborhood. In (a), the target image was used in the context of a colorful pattern, but in (b), the target image was used in the context of either animal, pairing, or circular. Multiple interpretations emerged through the comparison of multiple images, but this level of variety is limited to a local context. 
            
            Figure 2. Variety of contexts for a single image.
            Creativity of Users 
            The third research question is to characterize users’ creativity at a tour level. Figure 3 shows an example of creative tours. The first tour has the title ‘couple’, suggesting that the intention is to arrange face images in alternating directions. This interpretation, left or right, is the most important meaning in this tour, but it may have no value in single-image annotation. The second tour has the title ‘fashion show’, suggesting that the intention is to arrange well-dressed people. These creative user-generated tours offer new interpretations for a global context and show potential for the professional curator to draw new ideas for their exhibitions. 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Creative tours: (a) couple, (b) fashion show. 
            Mathematical Model of Exhibition 
            The final challenge is to represent the collection of tours using a mathematical model to enable deeper analysis. If we assume that an exhibition has meaningful context over a local image sequence in the neighborhood, the exhibition can be mathematically represented as a Markov chain. Here an image is a node, and transition from one image to another is a directed edge between nodes. The union of nodes and edges from all tours constructs a graph structure of all tours. This graph represents collective contexts that Senga has produced, and the analysis of this graph structure leads to the collective analysis and synthesis of tours. Figure 3 shows the state transition diagram of a Markov chain for (a) intentional and consistent tours and (b) others, visualized by Gephi 0.8.2beta (Bastian et al., 2009). Specific shapes depend on the layout algorithm, but it looks as if (a) has more structure than (b), and this impression could be validated by quantitative analysis of the graph. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. State transition diagrams from (a) creative and consistent tours, (b) other tours. 
            The graph can also be used for synthesis. An example is a random walk on the graph that generates a synthetic tour. Frequency of state transitions is first converted into probability, and a self-avoiding random walk
                4 generates an image sequence as a tour. Figure 5 shows an automatically generated tour. It starts from a pattern image and gradually shifts toward Buddha and finally people, and it gives locally consistent state transitions. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Automatically generated tour using self-avoiding random walk. 
            Conclusion 
            The paper introduced a participatory curation system, Senga, and proposed a mathematical model of exhibition for analysis and synthesis. Future research challenges include detailed analysis of the mathematical model to characterize creativity. 
            Notes
            1. Senga Silk Road, http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/senga/.
            2. Digital Archive of Toyo Bunko Rare Books, http://dsr.nii.ac.jp/toyobunko/.
            3. Your Paintings Tagger, http://tagger.thepcf.org.uk/.
            4. Eric W. Weisstein, ‘Self-Avoiding Walk,’ from MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource, http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Self-AvoidingWalk.html.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baker, J. (2013). The Mechanical Curator. Digital Scholarship, http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/digital-scholarship/2013/09/the-mechanical-curator.html. 
                    
                    
                        Bastian, M., Heymann, S. and Jacomy, M. (2009). Gephi: An Open-Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. 
                        International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
                    
                    
                        Kamida, R. and Kitamoto, A. (2007). Senga: A Participatory Archive Based on the Collection and Rearrangement of Images and the Sharing of Slideshows. 
                        IPSJ SIG Computers and the Humanities Symposium 2007, pp. 339–46 (in Japanese).
                    
                    
                        Kawaguchi, Y. (ed.). (2009). 
                        Politics of Exhibition. Suiseisha (in Japanese). 
                    
                    
                        Oomen, J., Gligorov, R. and Hildebrand, M. (2014). Waisda? Making Videos Findable through Crowdsourced Annotations. In Ridge, M. (ed.), 
                        Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage. Ashgate.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Server Factories and Memory Mediators
                
                    
                        Notley
                        Tanya
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    t.notley@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Reading
                        Anna
                    
                    Kings College, London
                    A.Reading@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    server farms
                    digital memory
                    materiality
                    digital media
                    globital memory
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    anthropology
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Social media sites and mobile phones are routinely used to capture, create, store, and share personal memories (Keightley and Schlesinger, 2014; van Dijck, 2010). As our ownership of digital devices and our use of social media sites increases, our capacity to amass personal memories grows and our need for external memory storage expands. Data centers—also referred to as server factories and data warehouses—are the fixed sites that are increasingly used to store personal memories that have been uploaded to social media and other cloud-based services. This makes data centers among the most important infrastructural installations for the production and maintenance of global connection and for what we refer to elsewhere and in this paper as ‘globital memory’ (Reading 2010; 2015). 
            The number of data centers has been steadily growing for more than a decade, and one of the drivers for this growth is the uptake of cloud-based services. One data market research company estimates that ‘the number of data centers being built around the world will continue growing until it peaks at 8.6 million in 2017’, while the amount of data center space worldwide ‘will grow from about 1.58 billion square feet total in 2013 to 1.94 billion square feet in 2018’ (International Data Corporation 2014). Despite these quite remarkable growth trends, our knowledge of data centers is often obscured by business rhetoric and commercial secrecy. Very few of us know where our personal data is being stored, who it is being shared with, or the territories through which it moves when we or others seek to access or retrieve it (Blum, 2012; Mosco, 2014). 
            Beneath the surface and fuelling the growth of data centers is commercial discourse suggesting that digital memory is far more reliable and has a greater capacity when compared to our human memory. The company Memolane, for example, promised to capture ‘your entire online life in one timeline, making it easy for you to travel back in time and re-live great memories. Whether you’d like to re-discover your holiday of a lifetime, re-live that great party last week or get all nostalgic about when the kids were little, now with Memolane it’s easy to keep the memories alive’ (Memolane, 2011). Given these claims, it is ironic that this personal memory storage company collapsed just a few years after it began, and the digital memories people stored on its service were erased on only short notice (Memolane, 2014). Digital memory—as we can see from this example and many others—is far from infallible.
            The expansion and vulnerabilities of cloud services and remote digital storage industries raise important questions about their political economy and impacts. Recent research in the humanities has highlighted the environmental and social impacts of data centers, particularly in the US and European context (Reading and Notley, 2015; Hogan, 2015; Carruth, 2014; Kitchin, 2014; Maxwell and Miller, 2012; Parikka, 2011). However, there remain many gaps in this limited academic literature, particularly when it comes to examining social and personal impacts in relation to individual and collective memory. In addressing this gap, this paper asks what our ‘globital memory’ means and looks like to data center users and to the different actors that play a role in the data center industry.
            The globital memory field, which seeks to understand the synergetic combination of digitisation with globalisation, is an emergent concept within the field of memory studies. Globital memory is best understood as a cultural field that involves uneven struggles by memory agents to mobilise and secure assemblages of memory with memory capital through connective and mobile technologies. The memory ‘assemblage’ has multiple nonlinear trans-medial trajectories and connectivities that may be uneven and contradictory; these trajectories traverse conventional communicative binaries that have framed many understandings of cultural and mediated memory, such as body-machine, analogue-digital, public-private. Memory assemblages within the globital memory field are a composition of things and bodies with utterances and expressions. The assemblage’s mobilities and securities may be analysed in particular domains across six trajectories that include its transmedialities, velocity, extensity, valency, viscosity, and modality (Reading, 2010). 
            Since the data center is now one of the key domains through which digital memory assemblages are mobilised and securitised, in this paper we seek to analyse how globital memory involves the movement of assemblages of data through fixed points, which in turn serve to enable the multiple trajectories and transmedialities within the globital memory field. 
            To explore this issue, we examine discursive artifacts that illuminate the complex corporate rhetoric that serves to define digital memory, and we compare this with the material realities of data centers. Extending this analysis, our research then asks: What do data center users and workers expect of the data center and cloud service companies that store our personal memories, and how does this correspond to practices and codes of conduct? To analyse the space of server farms, we examine the rhetoric and reality around the development of Western Sydney as a ‘data centre technology hub’ for Australia. In particular, this pilot research, part of a larger research project, analyses the commercial rhetoric surrounding a single large data center situated in Western Sydney. The analysis draws on examples from news reports as well as stories by local business networks and from the company itself. This is rearticulated through examples of on-the-ground experiences and imaginaries of people in the region in Western Sydney gathered through online discussions as well as a discussion group and pilot interviews with Western Sydney residents whose everyday lives and knowledge practices are experientially situated within the new technology hub in Western Sydney. 
            We argue that, in part, public understanding of our role as memory agents within globital memory is largely determined by metaphors and rhetoric that serve to create digital imaginaries. To see how these imaginaries work, we ask: How do we experience personal memory when it is no longer contained within us or nearby us, but rather is stored remotely in data centers? When we send our data to these places, do we see the physical spaces they inhabit, including the companies and their workers who ‘watch over’ our personal memories? What do we expect of these people and companies, and how does this correspond to their motivations and codes of conduct? Or are the behaviors of these intermediaries mostly rendered invisible to us because, for example, we just don’t care or because these actors are concealed by opaque, vague, or misleading corporate rhetoric?
            By analysing the discursive rhetoric that exists in relation to globital memory within the grounded context of the emergence of data centers in Western Sydney, this paper offers original empirical material framed through new theoretical insights linking in much-needed ways work within memory studies, media studies, and the digital humanities. By connecting commercial rhetoric with on-the-ground, everyday knowledge and memory practices, the paper highlights the contradictions and frictions that exist between corporate and digital memory rhetoric and the material realities of data centers.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blum, A. (2012). Tubes: A Journey to the Center of the Internet. Harper Collins, New York.
                    
                    
                        Carruth, A. (2014). The Digital Cloud and the Micropolitics of Energy. 
                        Public Culture,
                        26: 339–64.
                    
                    
                        Hogan, M. (2015). Facebook Data Storage Centers as the Archive’s Underbelly. 
                        Television &amp; New Media,
                        16: 3–18.
                    
                    
                        International Data Corporation. (2014). Press Release: IDC Finds Growth, Consolidation, and Changing Ownership Patterns in Worldwide Datacenter Forecast. 10 November, http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25237514
                        .
                    
                    
                        Keightley, E. and Schlesiger, P. (2014). Digital Media—Social Memory: Remembering in Digitally Networked Times. 
                        Media Culture and Society,
                        3(6): 745–47.
                    
                    
                        Kitchin, R. (2014). The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures and Their Consequences. Sage, London.
                    
                    
                        Maxwell, R. and Miller, T. (2012). 
                        Greening the Media. Oxford University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        McKinsey Global Institute. (2014). 
                        Global Flows in a Digital Age. McKinsey and Company.
                    
                    
                        Memolane. (2011). About. http://wwwmemolane.com, accessed via the Internet Wayback Machine, http://web.archive.org/web/20110114090631/http://www.memolane.com/about.html
                         (accessed 5 February 2015).
                    
                    
                        Memolane. (2014). Thanks for the Memories. http://wwwmemolane.com, accessed via the Internet Wayback Machine, http://web.archive.org/web/20140126134109/http://blog.memolane.com/ (accessed 5 February 2015).
                    
                    
                        Mosco, V. (2014). 
                        To the Cloud: Big Data in a Turbulent World. Paradigm Press, Boulder, CO.
                    
                    
                        Parikka, J. (2011). 
                        Medianatures: The Materiality of Information Technology and Electronic Waste. Open Humanities Press.
                    
                    Reading, A. (2010). Globalisation and Digital Memory: Globital Memory’s Six Dynamics. In Neiger, M., Meyers, O. and Zandberg, E. (eds), 
                        On Media Memory: Collective Memory in a New Media Age. Basingstoke: Palgrave/Macmillan, pp. 241–52.
                    
                    
                        Reading, A. (2015). The Journalist as Assembler: The Globital Memory Field, Non-Memory, and the Shooting of Osama Bin Laden. In Zelizer, B. and Tenenboim, K. (eds), 
                        Memory and Journalism. Palgrave, pp. 164–78.
                    
                    
                        Reading, A. and Notley, T. (2015 in press). Bringing the Cloud to Earth. 
                        Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies.
                    
                    
                        Van Dijck, J. (2010). Flickr and the Culture of Connectivity: Sharing Views, Experiences, Memories. 
                        Memory Studies,
                        4(4): 401–15. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Significance of Linking between past and present, east and west, and various databases
                
                    
                        Nagasaki
                        Kiyonori
                    
                    International Institute for Digital Humanities, Japan
                    nagasaki@dhii.jp
                
                
                    
                        Hackett
                        Paul
                    
                    Columbia University
                    ph2046@columbia.edu
                
                
                    
                        Muller
                        A. Charles
                    
                    University of Tokyo
                    acmuller@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                
                
                    
                        Tomabechi
                        Toru
                    
                    International Institute for Digital Humanities, Japan
                    tomabechi@dhii.jp
                
                
                    
                        Shimoda
                        Masahiro
                    
                    University of Tokyo
                    shimoda@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Buddhist studies
                    interoperability
                    image database
                    Tibetan Buddhism
                    Chinese Buddhism
                
                
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    asian studies
                    cultural infrastructure
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            It is the case with Buddhist studies—as with most other fields in the humanities—that various types of digital resources have been developed. So far, there have been several core digital resources based on traditional series of Buddhist scriptures, indexes, and dictionaries, which had been published within the long era of paper media. It is, in fact, efficient to use such traditional research tools in order to connect the digital resources with existent secondary sources. In this context, digitization makes us aware of what we have been depending upon; it also helps to reveal issues that have been inherent in our work, even during the era of paper media. We will describe the significance of digitization for Buddhist studies from this viewpoint through a recent case in the SAT Database (SAT DB) (Nagasaki et al., 2013). 
            The SAT DB is a web service that delivers an integrated research environment for Buddhist studies based on a corpus of digital classical Chinese Buddhist scriptures. The SAT DB has connected with several academic and cultural resources such as the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism, a parallel corpus of the Buddhist scriptures translated into English, and several bibliographical databases and character databases—all linked by implementation of convenient interfaces. The web services are accessed over 300,000 to 500,000 times per month. The SAT DB has recently been linked text by text with several other digital resources, such as the Buddhist Canons Research Database (BCRD)
                1 and some other digital repositories. We will briefly describe the BCRD below.
            
            The BCRD is the only comprehensive index to Tibetan Buddhist canonical materials, providing cross-references between primary materials and detailed publication information to secondary literature, while incorporating hyper-text links to online resources. Standard library cataloging systems provide bibliographic information at the ‘item’ level (a monograph, a serial, etc.) only. This level of cataloging information is inadequate for classical collections such as the various Buddhist canons. To illustrate by example, the Tibetan Buddhist canon consists of approximately 5,000 individual works of varying authorship; an individual recension of the Buddhist canon is typically represented in standard library catalogs by either one or two bibliographic records. All other relevant details for accessing individual works are relegated to secondary reference literature. The same holds true for the vast majority of subsequent commentarial literature that has often been published in large collections grouped thematically or by author.
            The BCRD has compiled complete documentation for the Tibetan Buddhist canon, as well as another cross-linked 3,500 post-canonical works. It also provides the raw bibliographic resources to enable advanced research by fully documenting previous research and to provide constantly updated bibliographic references to print and digital resources in multiple languages. Such a project benefits a broad range of scholars in the humanities by providing detailed and accurate reference information otherwise not readily available, and in a quick and concise manner.
            In addition, the BCRD provides full-text searching of the entire Tibetan Buddhist canon (15 million syllables). At the present time, it has more than 700 active users and deploys cutting-edge techniques of Natural Language Processing to enable intelligent searching and precise identification of search results. As a result, user feedback has been enormously positive, and users have described the resource as ‘revolutionary’ and ‘a huge advance . . . [and] enormously beneficial to scholars in the field’.
            The linkage between the BCRD and the SAT DB has been made possible based mainly on a corresponding catalogue (Ui et al., 1934) that was a milestone in the paper media—that is, the two present resources are connected with the past resource. It has streamlined the workflow of browsing corresponding scriptures across the Chinese and the Tibetan, which had been important and inevitable but needed complex procedures in order to explore transition of various aspects of Buddhism. Moreover, each separate database project is now relieved from having to do the various works of building mutual databases. It will also be useful to explore further issues in both corresponding scriptures and to improve earlier catalogues. 
            The SAT DB also has begun to gather URLs of digital images of primary resources of Buddhist scriptures, such as manuscripts and woodcut printings, which are published in various cultural data repositories. We have tentatively obtained approximately 600 URLs and have uncovered several problems. In the case of secondary resources, the SAT DB has already provided a stable linking service by semi-automatic search by use of Web API in several search engines of journal articles. However, in this case, we were not able to use some popular convenient methods such as Web API due to the fact that the metadata in each repository are not unified and the contents cannot be retrieved by texts. Our collection must be done by manually checking each image. In Japanese cultural web resources, at least two integrated search engines are enabled, but neither provides enough search function for our usage. HathiTrust
                2 and gallica,
                3 from which we gathered URLs, are also not sufficient. In the case of HathiTrust, the names of scriptures are not yet regularized with our databases. In the latter, as it includes various fragments of manuscripts of the scriptures, we need to identify the location of them one by one in order to provide convenient usage. So far, we have targeted the repositories of HathiTrust, gallica, the National Diet Library of Japan (NDL),
                4 the University of Waseda, the University of Ryukoku, Ritsumeikan University, the National Institute of Japanese Literature, and so on (see Figures 1 and 2). As the targets will increase further, we should check URLs continuously. Meanwhile, we should analyze each repository and design appropriate metadata for our database and disseminate these for efficient interoperability according to several standards, because some repositories lack publication data, some lack a method of writing, and some don’t include format of metadata. Moreover, we released a Web API to provide our link data so that other providers can avoid reinventing the wheel. Thus, it will also be useful to provide a model case for interoperability of Eastern cultural resources. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The dialog to link with other resources.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. The relationship of digital repositories via SAT DB and BCRD.
            Notes
            1. http://www.aibs.columbia.edu/databases/New/index.php.
            2. http://hathitrust.org/.
            3. http://gallica.bnf.fr/.
            4. National Diet Library Digital Collection, http://dl.ndl.go.jp/?__lang=en.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Nagasaki, K., Tomabechi, T. and Shimoda, M. (2013). Towards a Digital Research Environment for Buddhist Studies. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(2): 296–300.
                    
                    
                        Ui, H., et al. (eds). (1934). 
                        A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons. Sendai, Japan.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Social Media Data: Twitter Scraping on NeCTAR
                
                    
                        Hutchinson
                        Jonathon
                    
                    The University of Sydney
                    jonathon.hutchinson@sydney.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Hammond
                        Jeremy
                    
                    Intersect, Australia
                    jeremy@intersect.org.au
                
                
                    
                        Martin
                        Fiona
                    
                    The University of Sydney
                    fiona.martin@sydney.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Yazbek
                        Daniel
                    
                    Intersect, Australia
                    daniel@intersect.org.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    big data
                    Social Media Network Analysis
                    cloud compute
                    twitter
                    online communities
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    internet / world wide web
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    social media
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    media studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The rapid growth in social media communications research in the last five years has seen the assembly of complexly connected datasets of a scale and scope previously rare in humanities scholarship, highlighting the sociocultural intricacies of follower networks (see Weller et al., 2013). Big data inquiry of social media has also been driven by the emergence of publicly accessible, integrated aggregation, indexing, query, and visualisation approaches (Hansen et al., 2011; Burnap et al., 2013). Indeed, the big data moment has challenged humanities researchers to develop innovative methodologies to extrapolate new social knowledge, and brought humanists and computer scientists together in the pursuit of robust eResearch infrastructure and workflows to support these objectives.
            This paper explores a novel social media network analysis (SMNA) research methodology, which resulted in the development of a Twitter visualisation tool for the NeCTAR research cloud. It explores the workflow issues of using large-scale eResearch infrastructure for digital humanities research, and discusses the results of the research program on social media network mapping. In doing so, the authors demonstrate the complexities of interdisciplinary humanities and computer science research collaboration, while revealing new insights made possible through eResearch partnerships.
            SMNA as a methodology requires the development of an integrated workflow using National eResearch Collaboration, Tools and Resources (NeCTAR) as the computing service to host both a Twitter scraper and a network visualisation tool. We used the native Twitter application programming interface (API) to maximise flexibility, minimise costs, and reduce reliance on commercial third-party data providers. The workflow included scripting an automated ‘clean-up’ phase so that hundreds of thousands of raw tweets could be gathered and indexed in a useful format. Analysing the characteristics of social networks across large datasets is computationally taxing, and to solve this problem we set up an interactive visualisation program, Gephi, in the NeCTAR cloud environment. 
            During the discovery and implementation phases of the project we made the following key observations. In Australia, there has been significant investment in eResearch infrastructure, including large-scale storage, data discovery, and high-performance and cloud computer systems. However, these services often have imposing barriers to entry for humanities researchers, who either lack the technological skills, desire, or established collaborative networks to apply these methodologies to their field of research (Meyer and Dutton, 2009). Moreover, eResearch assemblages are generally constructed by computer or physical scientists, who may be unfamiliar with the philosophies and theoretical perspectives of social scientists, and so it is not always clear that these technologies can immediately address the humanities’ ‘big data’ problems (Meade et al., 2013). However, in constructing the NeCTAR-based Twitter research infrastructure and pursuing an extended collaborative approach, the yield from the original research corpus provided more unique and novel results than either discipline could deliver alone. Traditionally, computer science researchers have sought interdisciplinary collaborations in the natural sciences and engineering to find appropriate research problems that balanced scale, complexity, and solvability. The materialisation of big data as a research concern within the humanities now gives software engineers new real-world applications of their techniques, a process that is key to the computer science discipline’s evolution (Hopcroft et al., 2011).
            The research presented in this paper demonstrates that early methodological discussions between humanists and computational specialists strengthened the research design, producing collaboratively designed research questions, while avoiding the high knowledge barriers to lay eResearch entry (Goggin et al., 2014). For example, in this research context, which drew on the expertise of University of Sydney media researchers and NSW Intersect’s computer scientists, a series of new research questions emerged while interrogating the initial social mapping results. The development of a novel computational research workflow emerged from the humanities scholars’ interest in understanding the languages, norms, or rules of communication activities within the Twitter social media platform. Following that research focus, the computer scientists explored a deeper understanding of the relationships between individual users, and the positive and negative communicative sentiment expressed in users’ interactions. The collaboration required significant mutual investment in exploring each research contributor’s agencies and abilities, and ongoing calibration of the research design.
            The resulting workflow and research tool have enabled a rigorous interrogation of the communication activities of complex follower networks within the Twitter platform, and the evolution of a methodology that addresses ethical concerns about big data research raised by boyd and Crawford (2012) along with Ess (2014). It will also underpin the development of an automated research tool that can be rolled out across a number of humanities research projects, and within virtual lab environments.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        boyd, d. and Crawford, K. (2012). Critical Questions for Big Data: Provocations for a Cultural, Technological, and Scholarly Phenomenon. 
                        Information, Communication, &amp; Society, 
                        15(5): 662–79.
                    
                    
                        Bradley, J. (2009). What the Developer Saw: An Outsider’s Ciew of Annotation, Interpretation and Scholarship. 
                        New Paths For Computing Humanists,
                        1(1).
                    
                    
                        Burnap, P., Rana, O. and Avis, N.
                         (2013). Making Sense of Self-Reported Socially Significant Data Using Computational Methods.
                        International Journal of Social Research Methodology, Computational Social Science: Research Strategies, Design and Methods,
                        16
                        (2).
                    
                    
                        Ess, C. (2014). At the Intersections between Internet Studies and Philosophy: ‘Who Am I Online?’ 
                        Philosophy &amp; Technology, 
                        25(3): 275–84.
                    
                    
                        Goggin, G., Dwyer, T., Martin, F. and Hutchinson, J. (2014). Finding Mobile Internet Policy Actors in Big Data: Methodological Concerns in Social Network Analysis. Paper presented at 
                        Australasian Association of the Digital Humanities, Expanding Horizons, Perth, Australia, 18–21 March 2014.
                    
                    
                        Hansen, D. L., Shneiderman, B. and Smith, M. A. (2011). 
                        Analyzing Social Media Networks with NodeXL: Insights from a Connected World. Morgan Kaufmann.
                    
                    
                        Hopcroft, J. E., Soundarajan, S. and Wang, L. (2011). The Future of Computer Science.
                         International Journal of Software Informatics, 
                        5(4): 549–65, http://www.ijsi.org/1673-7288/5/i110.htm.
                    
                    
                        Meade, B., Manos, S., Sinnott, R., Fluke, C., van der Knijff, D. and Tseng, A. (2013). Research Cloud Data Communities. 
                        THETA: The Higher Education Technology Agenda 2013, Hobart, Tasmania, 7–10 April 2013, http://eprints.utas.edu.au/16326/1/THETA_2013_Meade_16326.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Meyer, E. T. and Dutton, W. H. (2009). Top‐Down e‐Infrastructure Meets Bottom‐Up Research Innovation: The Social Shaping of e‐Research. 
                        Prometheus,
                        27(3).
                    
                    
                        Weller, K., Bruns, A., Burgess, J., Mahrt, M. and Puschmann, C. (2013). 
                        Twitter and Society. Peter Lang Publishing, New York. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                "Sonic Materialization of Linguistic Data" (working title)
                
                    
                        Paraskevoudi
                        Nadia
                    
                    Sonic Linguistics, Greece
                    nadiaparask@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Alexandropoulos
                        Timos
                    
                    Sonic Linguistics, Greece
                    timosalexandropoulos@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    sonification
                    social media
                    twitter
                    prosodic features
                    stress
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    prosodic studies
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    linguistics
                    programming
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    social media
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                The Problem of Sonification
            
            Kramer Gregory (1994), in his book 
                Auditory Display: Sonification, Audification, and Auditory Interfaces, defines sonification as ‘use of non-speech audio to convey information or perceptualize data’. 
            
            In our digital age we can store, edit, and examine almost all qualities and quantities as data. Sound itself can be considered as a pure stream of information able to be modulated, transformed, and analyzed in a lot of different ways. 
            The success of sonification occurs when the sound reveals one or more qualities of data or data reveals one or more qualities of sound. Thus, this kind of materialization of data is an interdisciplinary act that involves the proper analysis of data as well as the structure of sound. 
            While technology provides us with a wide variety of tools, the core of the problem still exists. As this kind of interdisciplinary knowledge is hard to be combined, there aren’t enough available tools that help artists to escape from an arbitrary mapping of data to sound qualities. This leads to arbitrary results both for the artist and the listener as the sonification process doesn’t take advantage of either the auditory perception properties or sound’s advantages in temporal, amplitude, and frequency resolution. As a result, in most cases, sonification fails its purpose, which ‘is to encode and convey information about an entire data set or relevant aspects of the data set’ (Hermann et al., 2011). 
            
                Sound and Linguistics
            
            Sonic Materialization of Linguistic Data is a series of works and a research project aiming to provide sound artists with the tools for the proper linguistic analysis of the mined data. 
            In our age of constant connectivity, social media—and especially the text-based Twitter platform—can be considered as a monitor corpus that evolves perpetually and is in a process of constant change. In order to create new structures and transform this chaotic stream of data into new material—in our case, sound—it needs to be organized according to its different kind of properties, namely here, its linguistic aspects
                . With our Sonic Materialization of Linguistic Data work, we provide different software modules that can perform real-time linguistic analysis of data and output the result for sonification purposes. 
            
            Our software consists of different kind of modules from which the user can choose only one or a combination of more. Here we present the 
                Stress Module. The program enables the user to aggregate data from different hashtag [#] feeds on Twitter in real time. The incoming data is being processed according to their linguistic features and in particular stress. The algorithm performs a series of tasks and extracts the stressed syllables of the aforementioned data. The output is a phonetic transcription code that represents each phoneme of the input Twitter feed. The encoded outputted list of data also includes suggestions for the sonic mapping that occurs from data’s linguistic features and the sound’s nature. For instance, the strong syllables are a numerical output that represents a longer sound event (time envelope), whereas the weaker syllables are a numerical representation of a briefer sound event. Similar kinds of optional mapping can also affect other sound features, such as pitch, timbre, ADSR envelopes, modulation, etc. 
            
            Stress, which can be considered as a prosodic feature, manifests itself in the speech stream in several ways. Stress patterns seem to be highly language dependent, considering that there is a dichotomy between stress-timed and syllable-timed languages. In stress-timed languages, primary stress occurs at regular intervals, regardless of the number of unstressed syllables in between, whereas in syllable-timed languages syllables tend to be equal in duration and therefore are inclined to follow each other at regular intervals of time. According to Halliday, ‘Salient syllables occur in stress-timed languages at regular intervals’ (1985, 272). Strong syllables bear primary or secondary stress and contain full vowels, whereas weak syllables are unstressed and contain short, central vowels. 
            Particularly in English, which is a stress language, speech rhythm has a characteristic pattern that is expressed in the opposition of strong versus weak syllables. Stressed syllables in English are louder, but they also tend to be longer and have a higher pitch. Despite the fact that stress can be also influenced by pragmatic factors such as emphasis, our project aims to capture the natural stress pattern of English in order to extract meaning from sound patterns, too, as they will be delineated by the phonetic structure of natural language. 
            
                Presentation
            
            For the presentation of the project we are proposing a poster with the description of how exactly the software works and what its aim is. We also would like to include a pair of headphones and a small screen (or projector) in order to have the data analysis and the sonification process in real time for the audience to experience. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). 
                        An Introduction to Functional Grammar. Arnold, London. 
                    
                    
                        Hermann, T., Hunt, A. and Neuhoff, J. G.
                         (eds). (2011). 
                        The Sonification Handbook
                        . Logos Verlag Berlin, Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Kramer, G. (1994). Auditory Display: Sonification, Audification, and Auditory Interfaces. 
                        Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Vol. XVIII. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Sounding it Out: The Mariposa Folk Festival and a Linked Open Data Digital Library Prototype
                
                    
                        Allison-Cassin
                        Stacy
                    
                    York University, Canada
                    sacassin@yorku.ca
                
                
                    
                        Suhonos
                        MJ
                    
                    Ryerson University, Canada
                    mjsuhonos@ryerson.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ruest
                        Nick
                    
                    York University, Canada
                    ruestn@yorku.ca
                
                
                    
                        St. Onge
                        Anna
                    
                    York University, Canada
                    astonge@yorku.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    linked open data
                    music
                    metadata
                    archives
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    metadata
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    music
                    knowledge representation
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    semantic web
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Big data, ubiquitous computing, and the quotidian nature of the digital point to the ways metadata touches all aspects of human life, making it increasingly clear that the quality of metadata and the number and strength of linkages surrounding an object in a library collection is vital. Content discovery is dependent upon the data, search interface, and algorithms that allow us to locate material, causing an awareness of the power of the knowledge structures that underlie these systems more crucial than ever, especially given that these structures are masked by the seemingly silent processing of machines (Kittler, 1999; Lessig, 2006; Olson, 2002). Despite this reality, library bibliographic control, as the professional practice of creating metadata for library collections, continues to be walled and trained along root-tree hierarchies. Nontextual materials are forced within systems that are conceptualized for text-based print resources. Linked Open Data (LOD)—as a form of structured metadata that allows for dynamic interlinking of data across the Web, creating an active web of relationships, rather than a static set of documents and as a technology created for the Web—is a way to rewire these entrenched systems.
            Objectives
            
                The primary goal of this project is to create a series of experimental, rhizomatic digital networks through the development of LOD prototypes of archival material related to the Mariposa Folk Festival. These prototypes will surface the multitude of relationships and contextual information normally silent in library catalogues and conceptualize this data in a fundamentally different way by activating the rich possibilities of Semantic Web technologies. Models currently being explored for the prototypes include the sonification of the network, and a network conceptualized around ideas of memory, narrative, and time. 
            
            Harmony and Dissonance
            Much of the literature on LOD has focused on the harmonization of data as a means to create semantic relationships on the Web. Open standards provide ‘a common framework that allows data to be shared and reused across application, enterprise, and community boundaries,’ and shifts the Web from being a web of documents to a web of data (W3C, 2013) by connecting discrete pieces of data rather than links between pages (Lange and Pattuelli, 2014). Information encoded as linked data interoperates with other data coded the same way, making for a rich integration of information from various data sources, allowing the Web to function like a giant database. This results in more comprehensive and accurate search results than current federated search systems (Byrne and Goddard, 2010). 
                 The use of standardized vocabularies and schemas creates harmony within an information system, but this comes at a cost. Voices that do not fit within the system must be left out. We are grappling with the implication of these choices and the difficult issue of creating specialized schemas in an environment that prizes standards above all else. 
            
            An increasing number of organizations are making LOD available, but there remains a dearth of projects putting this data into action, particularly coming from the academic library sector in Canada. With no standard, out-of-the-box mechanisms for creating and working with LOD, many in the community, while aware of the supposed benefits, are unsure of how to get there (Lampert and Southwick, 2013), leading to increasing calls for the library community to begin to prototype and experiment (Jordan et al., 2014; Salo, 2013; Singer, 2009), and leading Askey et al. (2013) to challenge libraries to be open to failure. Experimentation and divergent thinking is vital to innovation in a sector that is slow to change. 
            The Case for Music
            Music, as a sounding art that takes place in time, is not easily captured in the manner of textual or image-based documents, making it challenging to align with practices based on the creation of textual metadata. Musical works give rise to numerous possible instantiations in various media, such as recordings, scores, and moving images, making connecting all these resources challenging (Smiraglia, 2001). Additionally there are complex interpersonal relationships of mixed authorship. A single performance may have a composer, lyricist, performers, and others, such as audio engineers. Because musical objects have a dense network that is often invisible in library systems, it is an ideal case for LOD experimentation.
            The Mariposa Folk Festival is an internationally recognized Canadian music festival that began in the summer of 1961 and continues to be a key venue for the promotion of traditional music. York University holds the archives of the Mariposa Foundation. In 2009 York University Libraries received a grant from the Canadian federal government to digitize and provide public access to live sound recordings and other archival documents to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Mariposa Folk Festival. Numerous questions related to the challenges of copyright, metadata, and cultural memory from this project are being explored.
            Methodology
            We are making use of practice-based research approaches as well as theoretical methods to extend the theory and practice of library systems. This can be thought of as a ‘feedback loop’ where theorizing and prototyping perform a continuous loop, and the generation of questions is the focus over the mobilization of a final, polished product.
            The initial period involves the development of the conceptual models and the dataset necessary for the deployment of the prototypes. Once the existing metadata have been mapped, the team will begin to build in enhancements using standard schemas and ontologies. Much of the time in the first phase is focused on developing metadata, mapping, and cleanup, with the possible extensions to the York Digital Library’s Islandora platform. 
            The prototypes are the focus of the second phase. They are intended to extend technical capacity and theoretical ideas around information and mediation. If LOD is to fundamentally change the way information is navigated on the Web, then we must work to change not only the structures of the data but the conceptual models in which they are deployed.
            Challenges and Implications
            An early challenge that has developed is that much of the existing data requires checking and correction. We have reduced the size of the dataset to ensure detailed and clean metadata. This smaller grouping of documents is being grouped around a theme and time period. As much as LOD is promising, a great deal of manual work is still required.
            The real work of this project is around the development of the conceptual models, in particular trying to approach the network from the idea of the sonic and the implications of ‘sound’ on the network idea and attempting to move away from the hegemonic ‘nodes and edges’ approach to LOD. 
            Copyright has previously proved challenging and remains a challenge for this project. Rather than choosing to not include sound documents, we are attempting to leverage community relationships, link to alternate sources, and find solutions. 
            Conclusion
            This talk outlines our initial steps in creating Linked Open Data network prototypes. While we are at the initial stages of the LOD implementation, our work builds upon years of praxis and expert knowledge of library and archival descriptive practices, archival preservation, repository software, and library systems. We will discuss our plans for our LOD networks and other means of pushing the boundaries on what is considered library discovery.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Askey, D., Jordan, M., Steeves, C. and Suhonos, M. J. (2013). IT Experimentation, Innovation, and Failure. Panel discussion at 
                        Access 2013, St. John’s, Canada, 23–26 September 2013.
                    
                    
                        Byrne, G., and Goddard, L. (2010). The Strongest Link: Libraries and Linked Data. 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        16(11/12), doi:10.1045/november2010-byrne.
                    
                    
                        Jordan, M., Sahadath, C. and Suhonos, M. J. (2014). Linked Open Data and Libraries: When? or NOW! BCLA Conference, Vancouver, BC.
                    
                    
                        Kittler, F. (1999). 
                        Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
                    
                    
                        Lampert, C. K., and Southwick, S. B. (2013). Leading to Linking: Introducing Linked Data to Academic Library Digital Collections. 
                        Journal of Library Metadata, 
                        13(2–3): 230–53, doi:10.1080/19386389.2013.826095.
                    
                    
                        Lange, L. and Pattuelli, M. C. (2014). Linked Jazz: Building with Linked Open Data. EDUCAUSE Review Online, 30 June 2014, http://www.educause.edu/ero/ article/linked-jazz-building-linked-open-data.
                    
                    
                        Lessig, L. (2006). 
                        Code: Version 2.0. Basic Books, New York.
                    
                    
                        Olson, H. A. (2002). 
                        The Power to Name : Locating the Limits of Subject Representation in Libraries. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
                    
                    
                        Salo, D. (2013). Soylent Semantic Web Is People! (with notes). Slideshare slides presented at the 
                        SWIB (Semantic Web Im Bibliotheken; Semantic Web in Libraries), Hamburg, Germany, 26 November 2013, 
                        http://www.slideshare.net/cavlec/soylent-semantic-web-is-people-with-notes.
                    
                    
                        Singer, R. (2009). Linked Library Data Now! 
                        Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship, 
                        21(2): 114–26, doi:10.1080/19411260903035809.
                    
                    
                        Smiraglia, R. P. (2001). 
                        The Nature of ‘a Work’: Implications for the Organization of Knowledge. Scarecrow Press, Lanham, MD.
                    
                    
                        W3C Semantic Web Activity Homepage. (n.d.). 
                        http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/ (accessed 13 October 2014).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Statistical Institutions and Database Disasters
                
                    
                        Magee
                        Liam
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    l.magee@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Rossiter
                        Ned
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    n.rossiter@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    relational databases
                    institutions
                    governance
                    media theory
                    knowledge organization
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    knowledge representation
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    cultural infrastructure
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Arguably the relational database has had greater impact on the transformation of organizational cultures and the world economy than the Internet. The materiality of data centres coupled with the computational analytic potentials of databases has produced models of this world without historical precedent. Key here is the question of scale. The knowledge once derived from the transitional technologies of cabinets of curiosities (
                Wunderkammer), demographic registries, and Foucault’s ‘great tables’ in the 17th and 18th centuries—later systematised into various epistemic instruments that included Diderot’s encyclopaedia, the periodic table, the museum, and Linnaeus’ taxonomies—were all coincident with the rise of populations governed as statistical subjects. Such instruments can today be understood as proto-databases, foreshadowing what Gernot Böhme (2012) has called our present era of ‘invasive technification’.
            
            The advent of the relational database in the early 1970s marks a particular turning point, we argue, in the ductility and malleability of knowledge concerning technical operations and the governance of society at large. At this point information becomes in a new sense purely programmable, and available for, among other things, forms of ad hoc knowledge production. The logical interrogation of subjects is literalised with the advent of ‘structured English query language (SEQUEL)’ in 1974, which presents as its very first example a resulting ‘relation describing employees’ featuring the barely fictional cast of ‘Jones’, ‘Smith’, and ‘Lee’ (Chamberlin and Boyce, 1974). Thereafter the relational model and its lingua franca, SQL, make possible for the first time entirely new fields of data science: data mining, informatics, business intelligence, real-time analytics. This in turn has led to a technological shift in the processing and logistical operations of modern institutions, with transformative effects in the apparently mundane fields of report writing, insurance assessment, credit checks, and policy development. What were once specialised arts become template-driven forms of analysis and institutional processes designed for replication. Here, knowledge rubs up against the politics of parameters. New uses of data become a constant in the social life of institutional settings, laden with a politics that remains for the most part implicit as it is pervasive. The durability of knowledge practices is coextensive with the persistence of parameters. Political existence contracts into the embodiment of Quine’s dictum: to be is to be the value of a variable. 
            By the early 1980s, the increasing reliance of all institutions on the relatively hypostatised 
                form of the database reinforces and reinflects early-20th-century theories of institutionalism. For Weber, the institution was a necessarily constrained artefact of capitalist modernity. In the early eighties, DiMaggio and Powell (1983) revisited the ‘iron cage of bureaucracy’, reconceiving the modern institutional form as an ‘isomorphic’ entity with shared common procedures, structures, and operational norms while at the same time capable of adaptation to geographic, commercial, and industry-specific conditions. We argue that this isomorphism is recognisable by new institutionalist theorists in part due to its historical coincidence with the ubiquity and relatively enduring quality of the enterprise database, already emerging as a necessary part of modern institutional infrastructure. In the same way, the onset of flexible modes of capital accumulation was not a transformation independent of emergent developments in computational architectures. For example, the logistical world of ‘supply chain capitalism’ (Tsing, 2009) has become increasingly governed by the dual and interconnected processes of real-time computationally and just-in-time modes of production and distribution. The agility of the modern institution is, then, contingent upon the combinatory possibilities of relational databases that operate at ever increasing scales. The capacity for institutions to adapt to regimes of flexibilization is augmented, rather than replaced, by novel non-relational systems. 
            
            This twin model of data-and-institutional organization extends to the governance of logistical populations. One key example can be found in the recent challenges faced by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, which in 2014 confronted a very public institutional crisis of legitimacy based on a perception of computational failure. This crisis was precipitated by the multiplication of sites and points of data agglomeration: the ‘monopoly of knowledge’ enjoyed by the ABS for many years has now become rivalled by a diversity of institutional actors who also have considerable computational capacity to produce knowledge that bears upon how economies and populations are understood. The era of distributed computing, of virtualised clusters of machines and software that can co-operate to resolve queries over structured data on heterogeneous network and computational topologies, have been paralleled by questions of the sovereignty of singular guardians of population data. Since the 2000s, an array of new paradigms for arranging, connecting, and querying data—the Semantic Web, Linked Data, service-oriented architectures (SOA), and software-as-a-service (SaaS)—continue to bring into question claims over institutional legitimacy.
            In the Australian context, the cutbacks in the operating budget of the ABS from successive governments needs to be seen in the context of the marketization of grey literature enabled by computational processes. This is not only a case of the state increasingly outsourcing a once-sacrosanct responsibility to private service providers. The multiple diffusions and aggregations of population data throughout a heterogeneous computational and institutional network means that the ‘database’ is no longer physically or conceptually containable within the borders of a single institution. The increasing dependency by policy makers on the generation of numbers by machines is symptomatic of the automation of decision making. Such is the institutional over-reliance on the pure power of computation. No matter how many manual double-checks and regulatory procedures may constitute the repertoire of techniques deployed to guard against the sort of institutional risk exposed by the ABS debacle, the scale and distribution of computational calculation in the production of knowledge will most likely result in an increasing jostling for legitimacy among institutional actors seeking government contracts related to policy development. Implicit in this jostling is a challenge to assumptions of ‘closed worlds’ and non-monotonicity that accompany the traditional relational database form and, by association, the single institution that manages such infrastructure. Rival claims, multiple perspectives, and contradictory or indeterminate datasets form the new territory of informational contestation. The case of the ABS offers an optic through which to view the emergence of such struggles.
            Our claim is that this is less a story about decentralization and privatization of government within a neoliberal paradigm (although these are without doubt key forces), and more an instance of the technical logic of databases and distributed computing resulting in an unsettling of modern institutional authority. The relatively short history of the relational database has been mirrored, early on, by a recognition of the homologous or isomorphic character of the institutions that deploy them—and, more recently, by a sense that this isomorphism has itself ‘morphed’ or adapted into outright competition in the economy of data. Our central interest in this paper is to consider the role of the database as a technology of governance and the scramble of power as it relates to a capacity to model the world and exert influence upon it. What are the implications for public institutions as they relate to the supply of knowledge on national populations when the technologies of insight have become distributed and increasingly unaccountable across a range of actors? And what affordances does this present for the disruption of parametric politics, or the establishment, at the very least, of alternative parameters though which political life can be constituted?
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Böhme, G.
                        
                             (2012). 
                        
                        Invasive Technification: Critical Essays in the Philosophy of Technology.
                        Shingleton, C. (trans.). Bloomsbury, London.
                    
                    
                        Chamberlin, D. D. and Boyce, R. F.
                        (1974). SEQUEL: A Structured English Query Language. 
                        Proceedings of the 1974 ACM SIGFIDET (now SIGMOD) Workshop on Data Description, Access and Control
                        
                            . ACM
                        
                        , pp. 249–64.
                    
                    
                        DiMaggio, P. J. and Powell, W. M. (1983). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields. 
                        American Sociological Review, 
                        48(2): 147–60.
                    
                    
                        Tsing, A. (2009). Supply Chains and the Human Condition. 
                        Rethinking Marxism,
                        21(2): 148–76. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Steampunk and Nineteenth-Century Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Whitson
                        Roger Todd
                    
                    Washington State University, United States of America
                    roger.whitson@wsu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    maker culture
                    steampunk
                    speculative design
                
                
                    historical studies
                    literary studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    programming
                    english studies
                    social media
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster presentation will share some of my insights regarding the use of the steampunk aesthetic to inspire retro-computing projects under the umbrella of 19th-century digital humanities. Nineteenth-century DH turns to forms of material programming using microprocessors to construct gadgets inspired by Victorian narrative and design. As part of their enthusiasm regarding the aesthetic, steampunk fans have constructed everything from small Stirling engines using the steam from a teacup to the massive three-story Victorian home on tank-treads lovingly named the Neverwas Haul by attendees to the Burning Man festival. 
            For me, 19th-century digital humanities appeals to Garnet Hertz and Jusi Parikka’s notion of zombie media, the idea that programmable microprocessors can help resurrect seemingly dead media and revive them for study within the digital humanities. I am currently working with a $17,000 internal seed-grant to develop steampunk projects for the digital humanities, and I am in the design stage for a retro-computing project for an NEH Digital Humanities startup grant that will examine how to develop a functioning computer using only the technological affordances of the 19th century. My poster will illustrate the designs of my retro-computing project, and the novels and histories that help me to imagine its look and feel. It will also call for examining the 19th century as a resource to emphasize what Kari Kraus calls the conjectural side of the digital humanities: one that focuses on futures and alternate histories as alternatives to the technological present. I am eager to find collaborators as well as scholars willing to help me envision where I might go next with this project.
        
    



    
        
            
                Succession: Generative Techniques, Speculative Interpretation and Digital Heritage
                
                    
                        Whitelaw
                        Mitchell
                    
                    University of Canberra, Australia
                    mitchell.whitelaw@canberra.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    generative techniques
                    digital collections
                    speculative interpretation
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Succession (http://mtchl.net/succession) is a web-based work that uses combinatorial techniques to provide an engine for investigating the complex fields of meaning latent in digital cultural collections. This paper introduces this practice-led research project and investigates the potential of combinatoric generative techniques for imaginative, interpretive meaning-making with digital cultural collections.
            
            
                Context, Aims, and Approach
            
            Digitisation is turning out corpora that rapidly exceed human interpretive scope: the Internet Archive recently published some 2.6 million machine-extracted images to the Flickr Commons (Miller, 2014). Techniques for dealing with non-text collections at scale are developing, such as Manovich’s work on macroscopic analyses (2012). Another emerging strand of practice takes a more poetic and playful approach, offering serendipitous samples and chinks of algorithmic insight. Tim Sherratt’s Trove News Bot tweets archival news articles based on daily headlines (Sherratt, 2013); the British Library’s Mechanical Curator posts random images from the library’s digitised books (Baker, 2013). Sherratt’s Eyes on the Past (2014) harvests faces from digitised newspapers and has their eyes peer out through the interface, inviting investigation. These approaches reflect an emerging interest in collections as active sites of meaning-making and experimentation with how we might encounter such collections in an everyday digital environment.
            
                Succession addresses the industrial and pre-industrial heritage of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne and surrounds, reflecting my encounters with the city during an extended visit, and the thoughts (and affects) on energy, history, industrialisation, and capital that the place provoked. Newcastle was a key Roman settlement, later one of the crucibles of the Industrial Revolution, now finding its way in a ‘de-industrial’ Britain (Chakrabortty, 2011). While the work is highly localised, it reads this place as a cypher with far wider implications. The work’s title draws a term from ecology, alluding to continuous and ongoing change and adaptation. 
                Succession aims to mine the city’s industrial past in order to fuel consideration of our possible futures. 
            
            In practice the work is a web application that draws on a corpus of some 2,000 image records harvested from the Flickr Commons and combines these elements into new composites (or ‘fossils’). Each fossil comprises five randomly selected source images arranged, composited, and potentially repeated. Sources are cited; thus, while composites often radically obscure, transform, or juxtapose their elements, the sources and their attendant contexts remain navigable and intact. Composites may be saved, acquiring a permalink to become a new citable online object. The generative process of composition is performed live, in the browser; each viewer will encounter a series of unique composites. The system allows for around 2.5x10
                15 combinations of elements (ignoring spatial and blending variations). At a rate of one per second, it would take around 8 million years to show all permutations.
            
            Generative Digital Humanities
            Schnapp and Presner called for a ‘generative digital humanities’ in their 2009 manifesto; here ‘generative’ means hands-on, makerly, productive, and integrative. This project fits their proposal for a DH that is ‘qualitative, interpretive, experiential, emotive [and] generative in character’. I use ‘generative’ more specifically to describe formal and computational techniques; as such, my approach also reflects Berry’s call (2011) for DH to focus on the attributes of computation and their implications for knowledge. The work described here aims to be generative in both senses: a computational system that provokes experiential, interpretive modes of encounter with digitised history and culture. This is what Drucker and Nowviskie (2004) term 
                speculative computing: ‘speculative approaches to digital humanities engage subjective and intuitive tools’ while enlisting computation for augmentation, rather than simply automation. A speculative DH pursues computation that is ‘dynamic and constitutive’, ‘creating programs that have emergent properties’.
            
            As Drucker and Nowviskie show (2004), generative procedures have long been used in the arts to augment and extend thought, creating aesthetic and conceptual provocations. 
                Succession uses combinatorics, the procedural combination of specific formal elements. Permutation gives combinatorics a form of quantitative leverage: small sets of elements proliferate into vast numbers of possible outcomes. When the permuted elements are symbolic or textual, combinatorics becomes a machine for knowledge or meaning. Ramon Lull’s 
                Ars Magna (1305) permuted divine principles into sets of theological assertions; these conceptual machines marked out domains of knowledge for investigation (see Gardner, 1958). In the 1960s, poets Brion Gysin and Raymond Queneau used combinatorics to pursue unforeseen or inconceivable meaning using fixed and finite textual means. Bill Seaman’s ‘recombinant poetics’ seeks ‘emergent meaning’ within digital arrays of textual and audiovisual elements (2001). Ross Gibson and Kate Richards’ 
                Life after Wartime applies combinatorics to an archive of 1940s crime-scene photographs, showing how a generative ‘story engine’ can prompt speculative interpretations of digital heritage (Richards, 2006).
            
            Authored Spaces and Generative Artefacts
            
                Succession consists of two related domains common to any computational generative process. The first is the generative system: the set of source elements, rules, and procedures that make up the work; the second is the field of actual and potential digital artefacts produced by that system. These two domains have distinct characteristics and specific discursive modes, as outlined below.
            
            Bill Seaman describes his combinatoric generative system as an ‘authored electronic space’, emphasising that it is expansive, but not arbitrary (2001, 426). Similarly, 
                Succession’s space is authored, in part through its corpus: sources were selected for content relevance, as well as visual potential. The content base grew and was pruned around the conceptual focus in a slow process of subjective evaluation, exploratory search, and tangential investigation. In Seaman’s words, this authorship seeks out a ‘resonant unfixity’ (Seaman, 2002).
            
            In 
                Succession the rules for compositing elements are also authored, tailored around the idiosyncrasies of the sources and the poetic aims of the work. Layered composition is both formal machine and metaphor: to address a city built on coal it seemed necessary to combine and compress, to obscure while at the same time hopefully intensifying the energy latent in those sources. Thus the image blending modes are biased to overlay dark elements; this treatment resonates with the engraved illustrations in the Internet Archive and British Library collections. Process and corpus (algorithm and data) are interdependent. Where (default) Cartesian space is inert, extensive, and homogeneous, here authored space is co-constituted by an active assemblage of media, concepts, and computational processes.
            
            
                Figure 1. 
                Succession composite 1413513552860 (see http://mtchl.net/succession/#/saved/1413513552860).
            
            This saved composite in Figure 1 shows how the generated artefacts can also operate as what Drucker and Nowviskie (2004) call ‘aesthetic provocations’ while enlisting the contexts and referents of their source elements in speculative juxtapositions. This composite is dominated by a 1993 photograph of Wearmouth Colliery in its final week of operation—a poignant image of the last days of Newcastle coal. But a spectral water-bird (from Gould’s 1837 
                Birds of Europe) seems about to splash down in those desolate puddles. Faintly in the background is the bustling River Tyne itself, circa 1880, and on the left of frame appears a carriage destined for Newcastle’s Metro system, under development in the mid-1970s. Almost imperceptible at bottom left is the HMS
                 Opal, a torpedo destroyer, under construction at the Sunderland shipyards in 1915. So this composite encompasses not only 150 years of urban history but a latent portrait of 20th-century capital, the rise and (UK) fall of extractive industry, war, urbanism, and pre-Industrial naturalism and the non-human lives it records.
            
            This example shows how formal and visual transformations inflect narrative or historical interpretations, and thus that these generative artefacts are not simply bundles of citations but speculative visual propositions. Layering emphasises simultaneity and atemporal juxtaposition rather than chronology: Gould’s duck, about to dive into the colliery puddles, or perhaps swimming on the 1880s Tyne? Faded traces evoke the presence of the lost; visual collisions prompt an interpretive search for coherence, patterns of connection in the authored space of the system.
            Thus generative systems like 
                Succession can be both prompts for interpretation and humanistic ways of speaking in themselves. In addressing complex topics (or ‘wicked problems’) such as extractive industry, capital, and urban change, it seems necessary to respond in kind. Generative techniques provide a way to speak complex multitudes, as well as an engine for unforeseeable combinations, the seeds of something new. Seaman terms this ‘unfixity’; Gibson calls it a ‘restlessness’ that prompts imagination through ‘artful imbalances and implied possibilities for completion or patterning’ (Gibson, 2006). This active imagination is essential, Gibson argues, in understanding and potentially altering ‘the continuous tendencies that are making us as they persist out of the past into the present’. 
            
            Generative systems have a long history as formal tools for generating (and navigating) large fields of potential meaning in the arts. This paper argues that such systems are also relevant in the digital humanities. 
                Succession draws on networked digital heritage to create a ‘restless’ generative system that produces speculative propositions anchored in specific historical contexts, shaped by specific authorial themes and metaphors. It shows how generative techniques can support the creation of new composite cultural objects, and how these composites can use historical fragments to speak richly to the complexity of our present moment.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baker, J. (2013). The Mechanical Curator. Digital Scholarship Blog, http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/digital-scholarship/2013/09/the-mechanical-curator.html.
                    
                    
                        Berry, D. (2011). Digital Humanities: First, Second and Third Wave. stunlaw, http://stunlaw.blogspot.com.au/2011/01/digital-humanities-first-second-and.html.
                    
                    
                        Chakrabortty, A. (2011). Why Doesn’t Britain Make Things Any More? 
                        The Guardian, 17 November, http://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/16/why-britain-doesnt-make-things-manufacturing?CMP=twt_gu.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. and Nowviskie, B. (2004). Speculative Computing: Aesthetic Provocations in Humanities Computing. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 431–47, http://digitalhumanities.org:3030/companion/view?docId=blackwell/9781405103213/9781405103213.xml&amp;chunk.id=ss1-4-10&amp;toc.depth=1&amp;toc.id=ss1-4-10&amp;brand=9781405103213_brand.
                    
                    
                        Gardner, M. (1958). 
                        Logic Machines and Diagrams. McGraw-Hill, New York, http://archive.org/details/logicmachinesdia227gard.
                    
                    
                        Gibson, R. (2006). Places Past Disappearance. 
                        Transformations,
                        13, http://www.transformationsjournal.org/journal/issue_13/article_01.shtml.
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (2012). How to Compare One Million Images? In D. M. Berry (ed.), 
                        Understanding Digital Humanities. Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 249–78.
                    
                    
                        Miller, R. (2014). Millions of Historic Images Posted to Flickr. Internet Archive Blogs, http://blog.archive.org/2014/08/29/millions-of-historic-images-posted-to-flickr/. 
                    
                    
                        Richards, K. (2006). Life after Wartime. 
                        Canadian Journal of Communication,
                        31(2), http://cjc-online.ca/index.php/journal/article/view/1729.
                    
                    
                        Schnapp, J. and Presner, T. (2009). The Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0, http://jeffreyschnapp.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/Manifesto_V2.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Seaman, B. (2001). Oulipo | vs | Recombinant Poetics. 
                        Leonardo,
                        34(5): pp. 423–30.
                    
                    
                        Seaman, B. (2002). Interview with Yvonne Spielmann, http://www.fondation-langlois.org/html/e/page.php?NumPage=386.
                    
                    
                        Sherratt, T. (2013). Conversations with Collections. 
                        Discontents. http://discontents.com.au/conversations-with-collections/.
                    
                    
                        Sherratt, T. (2014). Eyes on the Past. http://eyespast.herokuapp.com/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Supporting Peer-Review for GeoHumanities and Spatially-Inflected Projects
                
                    
                        Weimer
                        Katherine
                    
                    Texas A&amp;M University Libraries, United States of America
                    k-weimer@library.tamu.edu
                
                
                    
                        Wrisley
                        David Joseph
                    
                    American University of Beirut
                    dw04@aub.edu.lb
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    geohumanities
                    spatial humanities
                    peer-review
                    evaluation
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    interface and user experience design
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            It is a truism now to say that digital academic research has evolved through forms of collaborative, interdisciplinary practice. Fitzpatrick has argued that scholars must rethink their approach to digital texts and objects to be able to assess their quality and impact (2011). Professional associations have stepped forward in recent years providing guidance for the evaluation of scholarship in non-traditional formats. 
            The Modern Language Association’s 
                Guidelines (2012) describe a review process, yet without evaluative factors. The NINES/NEH Summer Institute report (2011) gives general questions for review. As Nowviskie (2012) notes, review of digital textual scholarship is often based on a comparison to a print equivalent, an obviously inadequate metaphor for dynamic visual interfaces. Furthermore, the visual arguments of such projects can be accompanied by textual content that falls within specialized subject domains, and yet peer-review bodies such as MESA, 18th Century Connect, and NINES do not give explicit guidance for the spatial element of projects. The ADHO GeoHumanities SIG founded in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 2013 would be an ideal place to provide support for peer review. 
            
            With an eye for the complexities of authorship, collaboration, and attribution, a starting point for the specificities of spatial research might be UNL’s 
                Best Practices (2014), a document that provides a high-level overview of design principles, navigation, and testing, as well as dynamic content and multimedia. Both Drucker’s claim (2013) that our theoretical notions should be reflected in our interfaces and Rumsey’s outline of future discussion of spatio-temporality (2009) are other important starting points. Whereas the humanities have been mostly influenced by the linguistic and visual turns, Rumsey argues that they ‘have not given priority to critical spatial reasoning’. Are the basic concepts of ‘spatial literacy’ such as location, scale, adjacency, distance, and projection (Unwin, 2010) so ubiquitous as to be self-evident, or should geohumanities projects be explicit about their treatment of such concepts? 
            
            The moment for this conversation is a timely one, with the numbers of geohumanities projects on the rise. Our hope is that the poster format will allow us to engage directly with a wide variety of practitioners in Sydney to collect community input. We will begin with vernacular descriptions of spatiality in a digital environment in order to construct a set of questions for guiding reviewers of geohumanities projects. Sample questions include the following:
             • Are spatial concepts (position, representation, transformation) linked explicitly to the data model?
             • How are the infrastructural layers used in this project made explicit (geoserver, map layers, gazetteer)? Is reused data appropriately cited?
             • Does this project rely upon existing infrastructure, or has a significant part of the project consisted in the building of infrastructure (e.g., for historical GIS)?
             • Is an authoritative gazetteer used? To what extent is it linked to open data?
             • What kinds of analysis are facilitated by the map interface? How has the factor of time been accommodated?
             • How are searches contrived? Spatially? Tabularly? Textually?
             • How has the relation between spatial and textual representation been expressed?
             • If the project has involved the creation of a tool, is the code for it published and open?
             • Is the spatial data of the project published and open?
             • What aspect of the project is the strongest critical intervention (infrastructure, data model, theory)? 
            A final element of our poster will comprise a short ‘trial’ review of a few exemplary geohumanities projects, with our notes on how well they satisfy our review criteria. We hope to learn from the standards that the following project communities have made explicit: the Orbis Project (Stanford), the Early Modern Map of London (Victoria), and the Mapping the Lakes project (Lancaster). Since both the forms of scholarship and of peer review itself are changing, we intend to comment briefly on what modes of open peer review might look like for the case of the explicitly visual environment of geohumanities research. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2013). Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface. 
                        DHQ,
                        7(1). 
                    
                    
                        Fitzpatrick, K. (2011). Peer-Review, Judgment, and Reading. 
                        Profession, 123–201. 
                    
                    
                        Modern Language Association. (2012). 
                        Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities. 
                    
                    
                        NINES/NEH Summer Institute. (2011). 
                        Guidelines for Promotion and Tenure Committees in Judging Digital Work. 
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2012). Evaluating Collaborative Digital Scholarship (or, Where Credit is Due). 
                        Journal of the Digital Humanities, 
                        1(4), http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-4/evaluating-collaborative-digital-scholarship-by-bethany-nowviskie/.
                    
                    
                        Rumsey, A. S. (2009). Scholarly Communication Institute 7: Spatial Technologies and the Humanities. In 
                        Scholarly Communication Institute, Reports on Summer Institutes, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 28–30 June 2009. 
                    
                    
                        University of Nebraska–Lincoln. Center for Digital Research in the Humanities. (2014). 
                        Best Practices for Digital Humanities Projects.
                    
                    
                        Unwin, D. (2010). 
                        Numbers Aren’t Nasty: A Workbook of Spatial Concepts. TeachSpatial, http://www.teachspatial.org/spatial-concepts-workbook-Unwin. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Suspense: Language, Narrative, Affect
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark Andrew
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    mark.algee-hewitt@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Davis
                        Chelsea
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    cmdavis1@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Droge
                        Abigail
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    adroge@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Eccles
                        Tasha
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    eccles@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Eidem
                        Laura
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    lmeidem@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Frank
                        Morgan
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    emdfrank@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Fredner
                        Erik
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    fredner@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Porter
                        J.D.
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    jdporter@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Shephard
                        Andrew
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    washep@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Walser
                        Hannah
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    walser@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    suspense
                    quantitative analysis
                    social psychology
                    affective experience
                
                
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    other
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    english studies
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            As a textual phenomenon that seems to rely exclusively on the affective states of an audience, suspense would appear to be well outside of the quantifiable aspects of literature that are available to digital humanities study. Even while suspense can be understood as a genre of writing, this generic label is relegated to a relatively small group of texts, ignoring the way that many other genres—for example, horror, science fiction, mysteries, and thrillers—also make use of the same phenomenon. Compounding these difficulties, suspense is also a descriptive category that can be applied at the intertextual level (works can be ‘suspenseful’) as well as at the intratextual level (certain parts of works can be ‘suspenseful’). Finally, suspense can also manifest itself as an epiphenomenon of narrative: disentangling the ‘momentum’ of narrative propulsion from the existential suspense of genre fiction further complicates studies attempting to isolate the origins of suspense effects.
            Recent work, however, has suggested that careful digital parsing of narrative might provide clues to the origins of this effect. Richard Doust’s study ‘Narrative Structures: The Case of Suspense’ (2010) argues that if narrative units can be digitally coded, then their pattern can reveal the mechanisms of suspense. While very promising, this work relies extensively on precoded (and thus predefined) narrative units, restricting its generalizability across time and genres. Yet the promise of this work is tantalizing. If it is possible to locate lexical or semantic features that are related to the experience of suspense, we would not only gain a much deeper understanding of what suspense is, but we would also be able to investigate narrative processes at the scale of corpora in a way that current digital humanities work cannot. Moreover, such an analysis would also offer a potential bridge between the often rigidly formalist approaches characteristic of quantitative textual analysis and the primarily subjective domain of the reader’s affective experience.
            In this paper, ‘Suspense: Language, Narrative, Affect’, a collaborative project by members of the Stanford Literary Lab, we seek to unpack the transhistorical and transgeneric commonalities of suspense literature. Our goal is to isolate lexical and narrative features that, within the right context, create the potential for the experience of suspense. Drawing on previous narratological and psychological studies, our contention is that suspense, as a psychological affect, occurs in the negotiation between the reader and the text (for example, Brewer and Lichtenstein, 1982; Jose and Brewer, 1984; Carroll, 2001; Beecher, 2007; Smuts, 2008). That is, we argue that there are textual effects that create the potential for the experience of suspense, which are only realized by a reader encountering the text within a specific context.
            As part of our goal in this paper is to trace these textual features both across time and across genres that are, to varying degrees, ‘suspenseful’, we have assembled a corpus of 216 texts from between 1780 and 2013 that were unanimously deemed suspenseful by the project group. These texts not only belong to the genre of ‘suspense literature’, but also to a variety of genres for which suspense is an important component, including Gothic fiction, detective fiction, sensation literature, science fiction, and horror. As a control, we also created a corpus of 107 ‘unsuspenseful’ texts sampled from the same time period. To explore both the textual and affective components of suspense we apply a set of innovative digital humanities methods to uncover textual features shared by suspenseful texts (or suspenseful episodes within texts) combined with collaborative social psychological work to explore how these textual features impact reader experience. Through this project we investigate the following questions: (1) Is, in fact, the experience of suspense common among a group of readers? (2) Are there lexical features that are shared by suspenseful narratives or narrative episodes? (3) Do these features form identifiable patterns within narratives that are common among our historically and generically diverse corpus? In this paper, we present the results of these first three phases of investigation.
            Expert Tagging
            Before we could begin investigating the specific textual features that were common among suspenseful narrative episodes, we first sought to confirm that a group of readers could reliably and independently come to a consensus in identifying suspense within a narrative. To this end, our first experiment was to use the project participants (eight PhD candidates in English literature) as a group of expert readers who could tag short stories for the effects of suspense and whose consensus we could reliably measure. Would a group of readers with similar educational backgrounds agree on the suspenseful and unsuspenseful parts of a narrative? Our corpus for this project was 13 short stories: each story was divided into discrete narrative units (roughly corresponding to a paragraph), and each unit was rated by each reader as to how suspenseful it was. Not only did this process demonstrate a remarkable consensus among the project participants, but it also revealed a number of narrative patterns of suspense whose commonalities suggest potential categories of suspenseful narratives (Figures 1 and 2). We are currently in the initial stages of a collaboration with members of the Stanford psychology department that will expand this tagging experiment to a diverse group of participants with different educational, disciplinary, and cultural backgrounds.
            Distinctive Lexical Elements
            With the results of the tagging experiment, we then turned to the question of whether the sections of the test corpus that were hand tagged by the group as highly suspenseful shared lexical features, as well as features that were distinctive of our suspenseful corpus compared to our nonsuspenseful corpus. For both, we identified the most distinctive words, the set of words that appeared significantly more often in either suspenseful passages or novels as compared to nonsuspenseful passages or novels. These words not only gave us a set of features through which we could identify potentially highly suspenseful passages in nontagged texts but also suggested some important lexical aspects of suspense. For example, words having to do with movement on a vertical axis (descend, ascend, lower, raise, etc.) were associated with suspenseful episodes and suspenseful texts. We also employed a part of speech tagger to identify the parts of speech that were most indicative of suspense and found a disparity between the number of adjectives that appear in nonsuspenseful texts versus suspenseful texts.
            Narrative Patterns
            In the final stage of this project we sought to use our intertextual results to study the narrative patterns of suspenseful texts. Is there a pattern of groups of words, or semantic fields, within a narrative that is indicative of that narrative’s potential to create the effect of suspense? To identify these semantic clusters of words, we ran a latent dirichlet analysis, or topic model, on our suspenseful corpora and combined these results with the distinctive words we identified in part 2 of our project. These gave us discrete meaningful fields whose presence and absence we could trace across the narratives of texts in our corpus. To help identify how the patterns formed by these clusters of words helped create the experience of suspense, we also tagged the highly suspenseful (and highly unsuspenseful) passages in small group of novels from our corpus. By plotting the scaled average of our semantic fields within a moving window across the text on the same graph as our tagged suspenseful passages, we can observe, for the first time, the interaction between textual features and the suspense effect. As we were interested in semantically meaningful clusters of words, as well as potentially parts of speech, we plotted both within these graphs (see Figures 3 and 4).
            As a complementary measure of investigation, we explored how a text’s reading level varies throughout the course of its plot, and how this metric correlates with suspense. To do this, we applied Age-of-Acquisition (AOA) norms
                1 to our texts using a simple dictionary method. This AOA dataset contains 30,000 words, each with a score that corresponds to the mean age at which respondents have reported learning (or acquiring) the word. Once applied to our texts, we computed a moving average of this score to examine how AOA fluctuates in suspenseful plots, and we observed that the suspenseful moments correlate with a drop in AOA—that is, the more suspenseful an episode, the lower its reading level. 
            
            Through these three avenues of investigation, our paper explores how specific lexical features—including semantic clusters of words, parts of speech, and Age of Acquisition scores—operate within the narrative of texts to create the potential for the experience of suspense. As our study combines this digital humanities work with the methodologies of social psychology, it allows us, for the first time, to explore simultaneously the formal features of a text that are distinctive of suspenseful texts and how these features interact with readers to create the experience of suspense itself. Not only, therefore, do we offer a new way of understanding suspense as a critical narrative process that jointly operates between trackable textual features and the context in which they are encountered, but we also suggest a new avenue through which the formal and quantitative research of digital textual analysis can be combined with other fields of study to gain a holistic understanding of the aesthetic experience of reading.
            Figures
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Expert reader tagging of passages for suspense in Poe’s ‘Pit and the Pendulum’.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Expert reader tagging of passages for suspense in Saunders’ ‘The Falls’.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Moving average of most distinctive ‘suspense’ (red) and ‘nonsuspense’ (blue) words in Mary Shelley’s 
                Frankenstein (1818); red and blue bands mark locations of passages tagged for high or low suspense, respectively.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Semantic fields in Stoker’s 
                Dracula: bands mark passages tagged as highly suspenseful.
            
            Note
            1. Dataset made available by Kuperman, Stadthagen-Gonzalez, and Brysbaert (2012).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barthes, R.
                         (1975). Introduction to the Structural Analysis of Narrative.
                        New Literary History
                        , 
                        6
                        (2) (Winter): 237–72.
                    
                    
                        Bernardo, A. B. I. and Gerrig. R. J. (1994). Readers as Problem-Solvers in the Experience of Suspense. 
                        Poetics, 
                        22(6) (1994): 459–72.
                    
                    
                        Beecher, D.
                         (2007). Suspense.
                        Philosophy and Literature
                        ,
                        31
                        (2): 255–79.
                    
                    
                        Brewer, W. and Liechtenstein, E.
                         (1982). Stories Are to Entertain: A Structural-Affect Theory of Stories. Center for the Study of Reading: Technical Report 265. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
                    
                    
                        Carroll, N.
                         (2001). The Paradox of Suspense. In 
                        Beyond Aesthetics
                        . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Doust, R. (2010). Narrative Structures: The Case of Suspense. Probation Report for the Open University, 12 December
                         2010, http://www.richarddoust.eu/suspense/sqdf.html#QQ2-2-1.
                    
                    
                        Jose, P. and Brewer, W.
                        (1984). Development of Story Liking: Character Identification, Suspense, and Outcome Resolution.
                        Developmental Psychology, 
                        20
                        (5): 911–24.
                    
                    
                        Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzales, H. and Brysbaert, M. (2012). Age-of-Acquisition Ratings for 30 Thousand English Words. 
                        Behavior Research Methods, 
                        44, 978–90. 
                    
                    
                        Levine, C. (2003). 
                        The Serious Pleasures of Suspense: Victorian Realism and Narrative Doubt. University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville. 
                    
                    
                        Rabkin, E. S. (1973). 
                        Narrative Suspense. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
                    
                    
                        Smuts, A. (2008). The Desire-Frustration Theory of Suspense. 
                        Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism,
                        66(3) (Summer): 281–90.
                    
                    
                        Todorov, T. (1977). The Typology of Detective Fiction. In Howard, R. (trans), 
                        The Poetics of Prose. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 42–52.
                    
                    
                        Truffaut, F. with Scott, H. G. (1984). 
                        Hitchcock. Rev. ed. Simon &amp; Schuster, New York.
                    
                    
                        Vorderer, P., Wulff, H. J. and Friedrichsen, M., eds. (1996). 
                        Suspense: Conceptualizations, Theoretical Analyses, and Empirical Explorations. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Susurrant: A Tool for Algorithmic Listening in Networked Soundscapes
                
                    
                        Johnson-Roberson
                        Chris A
                    
                    Brown University, United States of America
                    chris.johnson.roberson@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    networks
                    sonification
                    visualization
                    machine learning
                    topic modeling
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    information retrieval
                    music
                    natural language processing
                    software design and development
                    internet / world wide web
                    content analysis
                    visualisation
                    social media
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Many methods for computational analysis of audio have been developed in the fields of music information retrieval and machine learning. Typically used for copyright protection and music recommendation, such methods can also be used to analyze audio artifacts embedded in a specific online community.
            Susurrant, an open-source tool I am currently developing, enables exploratory data analysis on a corpus of digital audio accompanied by textual and social network metadata. (Such a corpus can be derived from a music-centered social media platform like SoundCloud.) This tool utilizes probabilistic topic modeling, a family of techniques for inferring latent variables (‘topics’) that could have generated the observed data (Blei, 2012).
            Sonic features (both rhythmic and spectral content) and the text of user tags and comments are analyzed jointly in a single model. The result is a kind of auditory concordance for the corpus, linked directly to associated textual features. This builds upon work using topic models to identify latent sources in audio (Hoffman et al., 2009)
                , model musical influence (Shalit et al., 2013), and analyze shared taste in online communities (Dietz, 2009).
            
            Susurrant is meant to help researchers gain a new perspective on their audio corpora. It facilitates what Wendy Hsu terms ‘augmented empiricism’, a combination of ethnography and computational analysis that aims to ‘[document] social and cultural processes with empirical specificity and precision’ (Hsu, 2014). In this short paper, I will give a brief demo of the software (available at www.susurrant.org) and suggest ways that it might be useful for other scholars working with sound.
            Methodology
            Susurrant comprises several components: a database for storing audio metadata with textual data and social network graph, a script for semi-automated data collection, and a browser-based application that provides both visual and auditory display of analysis results. For the most part, these components make use of existing software packages such as the Neo4j graph database, the Essentia feature extraction library (Bogdanov et al., 2013), and the machine learning library MALLET (McCallum, 2002); thus, the visualization interface constitutes the bulk of this work’s contribution.
            The browser-based visualization/sonification of the corpus lets one listen to a resynthesized version of the variables characterizing each audio ‘topic’ along with representative audio samples and user comments. In another mode, it displays the subsets of the social network most closely associated with each topic, enabling comparison of the distributions of different sonic features across the community.
            I present a case study using an initial corpus of audio files and user commentary downloaded from SoundCloud. This corpus consists of music played in nightlife spaces that cater to queer and trans people of color, and is an integral part of my ethnographic work on queer of color nightlife and its online mediation. I will show how I am using this software to analyze sound in a specific social and cultural context.
            
                Theoretical Implications
            
            As well as offering a software package to facilitate multimodal analysis, this work can contribute to the theorization of ‘algorithmic listening’, a term for modes of computational analysis that have mostly been used in commercial applications but could readily be put to other uses.
            We are already surrounded by algorithms that listen. For the most part, these algorithms act as censors (as in YouTube’s Content ID system) or as recommendation engines (like those of Pandora, Clear Channel’s iHeartRadio, or SoundCloud). They rely on massive data stores and computing resources that are inaccessible to the end user, stripping away context and rendering their operations opaque even as they come to shape more and more of what we hear.
            Instead, Susurrant captures a cross-section of meaningfully related sounds as they exist within a specific interpretive community. It analyzes audio and textual features together and presents them in an integrated fashion to the researcher, ensuring that important contextual details are retained. Further, it helps us understand how an algorithm ‘hears’, when we listen to the variables learned by the model together with the original samples from which they were inferred.
            Conclusion
            The tool provides a novel means for exploratory data analysis of sound. By using sonic as well as textual data, this method calls attention to the aspects of sounds that have significance within an interpretive community and allows for exploration along different axes than those provided by extant platforms. I welcome dialogue about ways to improve this tool and extend it for other use cases.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic Topic Models. 
                        Communications of the ACM,
                        55(4), 77–84, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2133826.
                    
                    
                        Bogdanov, D., Wack, N., Gómez, E., Gulati, S., Herrera, P., Mayor, O., et al. (2013). ESSENTIA: An Audio Analysis Library for Music Information Retrieval. 
                        International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR’13), pp. 493–98.
                    
                    
                        Dietz, L. (2009). Modeling Shared Tastes in Online Communities. In 
                        NIPS Workshop on Applications for Topic Models: Text and Beyond. http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/~jbg/nips_tm_workshop/8.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Hoffman, M., Blei, D. and Cook, P. R. (2009). Finding Latent Sources in Recorded Music with a Shift-Invariant HDP. In 
                        Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Digital Audio Effects, Como, Italy, http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.154.845&amp;rep=rep1&amp;type=pdf.
                    
                    
                        Hsu, W. F. (2014). Digital Ethnography toward Augmented Empiricism: A New Methodological Framework. 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities,
                        3(1), 
                    
                    http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/3-1/digital-ethnography-toward-augmented-empiricism-by-wendy-hsu/.
                    
                        McCallum, A. (2002). MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
                    
                    
                        Shalit, U., Weinshall, D. and Chechik, G. (2013). Modeling Musical Influence with Topic Models. In 
                        Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, Atlanta, 16–21 June 2013, pp. 244–52. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Taking Stylometry to the Limits: Benchmark Study on 5,281 Texts from “Patrologia Latina”
                
                    
                        Eder
                        Maciej
                    
                    Pedagogical University, Krakow, Poland; Institute of Polish Language, Polish Academy of Sciences
                    maciejeder@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    authorship attribution
                    benchmark
                    Patrologia Latina
                    big data
                    distant reading
                
                
                    classical studies
                    literary studies
                    medieval studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In the era of large-scale stylometry—which is about to come—some basic but difficult methodological questions have not been answered yet. Certainly, the most important one is whether a given method, reasonably effective for a collection of, say, 100 texts, can be scaled up to assess thousands of texts without any significant side effects. When one deals with historical corpora, however, this question becomes much more complex, since several additional factors have to be taken into consideration. Spelling variation, insufficiently trained NLP models, corpora a priori unbalanced—these are the obvious issues. However, one should also take into account less obvious yet equally important factors that make any stylometric investigations nontrivial, to say the least. These include editorial corrections, punctuation introduced by modern scholars, hidden plagiarism and/or text reuse problems, innumerable authorship issues, and many other sources of potential stylometric ‘noise’ (Eder, 2013). 
            In the present study, some of the above issues will be undertaken. The benchmark, however, will be focused on one aspect of text classification only, namely authorship attribution. Other stylistic layers—e.g., genre recognition and topic distinction—will be addressed in a follow-up study.
            
                Dataset
            
            The complete collection of 
                Patrologia Latina that was used in this study, and that will be soon made available in the form of a carefully prepared corpus with morphosyntactic annotation (A. Guerreau, 2014, pers. comm.), gives us a great opportunity to test some of the above assumptions and possible drawbacks of the state-of-the-art stylometric methods. The aforementioned collection consists of 5,821 texts by over 700 authors—the Latin Church Fathers. It covers a time span of over 1,000 years (2nd–13th centuries). Even if the texts represent a few genres, the collection is thematically very consistent: for obvious reasons, theology overwhelms other topics. At the same time, however, 
                Patrologia Latina is a pre-Internet example of a big-yet-dirty text collection, published in the years 1844–1855; the goal was to publish all the available material in a relatively short period of time, with the assumption that particular volumes would be gradually replaced by carefully prepared critical editions. 
            
            The above factors make the electronic collection of 
                Patrologia Latina a relatively difficult benchmark corpus, close to real-life attribution cases. Since the number of texts to be analyzed is very high, one cannot inspect them manually and/or emend the transcription. Also, one cannot reliably exclude all external quotations, passages copied from other sources, and similar intertextual links; the same applies to any instances of (hidden) mixed authorship. In this case big data means big noise. On the other hand, however, being large and noisy, the collection is a perfect case for massive authorship attribution test, and particularly for exploring the ‘needle in a haystack’ attribution scenario (Koppel et al., 2009). Moreover, 
                since the texts are supplemented with grammatical codes (lemmata and POS-tags), it gives us a unique opportunity to test the attributive performance of lemmatized vs. nonlemmatized corpus, POS-tag 
                n-grams vs. MFWs, and so forth. Last but not least, the corpus is supplemented with consistent metadata—the authors’ names are easily retrievable, as well as genre, chronology, and the length of particular texts.
            
            
                Preselection of Texts
            
            The collection of 
                Patrologia Latina contains a few dozen texts known to be anonymous, as well as several works of uncertain authorship. For obvious reasons, these texts were excluded from the analysis. What should be emphasized, however, is the fact that the authorship identification of the remaining works is as reliable as the 19th-century scholarship on the Church Fathers. To give an example: the treatise 
                On the Spectacles (
                De spectaculis), for centuries attributed to St. Cyprianus and published under the name Pseudo-Cyprianus in 
                Patrologia Latina, is nowadays assumed to have been written by Novatianus. In the whole collection of over 5,000 texts, there must be a good share of similar, yet still undiscovered, mismatches.
            
            The corpus was further reduced to contain only those texts that had at least 3,000 tokens, since sample length is known to be a major issue in attribution (Eder, 2014). For the sake of supervised text classification, which requires at least two texts per author to carry out the attribution test, further culling was performed—the authors of fewer than three works have been filtered out. After all the reductions, the corpus consisted of 1,665 works by 197 authors.
            Since the number of authors is one of the most important factors affecting the performance of attribution methods (
                Luyckx and Dealemans, 2011), two smaller corpora have been prepared as well. The first consisted of a randomly chosen subset from the entire 
                Patrologia Latina (10% of texts) and further abridged to meet the criteria of 3,000 tokens and known authorship (resulting in 81 texts by 15 authors); the second corpus was based on a 5% subset from the original collection, further reduced according to the same rules (22 texts by five authors after culling). The experiments discussed in this paper have been performed on the big corpus, and then replicated using the two smaller subcorpora.
            
            
                Method of Benchmarking
            
            A standard procedure of supervised classification has been applied. Namely, the input dataset was divided (randomly) into two groups: a ‘training set’ containing two texts per each author, and a ‘test set’ for all the remaining samples. Then the stage of ‘guessing’ was applied, which was aimed to examine if the samples from the second group were correctly linked to their actual authors as represented in the training corpus. 
            A great number of independent controlled experiments have been performed for every combination of different parameters: three types of style markers (most frequent words, POS-tags, lemmata) in two variants (with and without punctuation), three levels of 
                n-grams (1-grams, 2-grams, 3-grams), at five levels of culling (0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%), for twenty different vectors of the most frequent features (100, 150, 200, 250, . . . , 1,000), and for six classifiers. The classifiers were as follows: support vector machines, nearest shrunken centroids (Jockers et al., 2008), 
                k-Nearest Neighbor classifier, naïve Bayes, classic Delta (Burrows, 2002), and a home-brew classifier available in the stylometric package ‘stylo’ (Eder et al., 2013) under the name Eder’s Delta. For each test, 20-fold cross-validation was performed.
            
            To compute such a big number of stylometric tests—the total number of experiments exceeded 30,000—a tailored version of the R package ‘stylo’ was used, supplemented by a few high-performance packages, e.g., ‘multicore’ or ‘ff’. Even still, it took several weeks to complete the task on a 6-processor Xeon machine equipped with 16 Gb of RAM.
            
                
                    Results
                
            
            The outcome of a vast majority of tests was disappointing: attribution accuracy was unexpectedly poor. First suspicion that the number of almost 200 authorial classes was responsible for this effect turned out to be unfounded when smaller subsets of 
                Patrologia Latina were scrutinized. The results were obviously better, but still unsatisfactory. For the subset of 81 texts by 15 authors, the optimal attributive success achieved was as high as 50% for the most effective set of input parameters (Figures 1 and 2). This surprisingly weak authorial signal in the corpus of medieval Latin deserves further investigation. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Performance of four methods of classification tested on the Most Frequent Words (grey lines in the background represent ca. 600 remaining combinations of style-markers, n-grams, classifiers, etc.).
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Performance of four methods of classification tested on bi-grams of frequent words including punctuation marks.
            Massive stylometric experiments allowed a systematic comparison of particular parameters’ performance. It turned out that the most accurate classifier was nearest shrunken centroids (especially when applied to long vectors of features), then came support vector machines. Eder’s Delta outperformed the classic Burrowsian measure in almost every instance; both 
                k-nearest neighbor classifier and naïve Bayes occupied the tail of the ranking. When it comes to the style-markers (features) examined, some counterintuitive results could be observed as well. Frequencies of Most Frequent Words (MFWs)—that is, the type of style markers routinely used for authorship attribution—proved to be suboptimal (Figure 1), while the best performance was achieved using frequent word bi-grams, or combinations of two adjacent words including punctuation (Figure 2). Lemmata and POS-tags followed a similar pattern: they were more accurate when combined into bi-grams including punctuation. 
            
            Although it has been shown that punctuation generally increases attribution accuracy (Baayen et al., 2002), this statement must be considered suspicious in the context of ancient/medieval Latin. It is a fact commonly accepted that Latin originally had no punctuation—it was introduced by early modern scholars (Reynolds and Wilson, 2013 [1978]). Apparently, then, it should always be avoided as an authorial style discriminator. On the other hand, however, Latin punctuation is not a randomly scattered artifact, but it inescapably follows the rules of language. Even if artificial, it reveals some linguistic characteristics of analyzed texts, like in the Platonic cave, in which vague shadows reflect some actual phenomena. Interestingly, punctuation was a stronger style discriminator than a more explicit indicator of syntax, such as 
                n-grams of POS-tags.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baayen, H., van Halteren, H., Neijt, A. and Tweedie, F. (2002). An Experiment in Authorship Attribution. 
                        JADT 2002: 6es Journées internationales d'Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles. St. Malo, pp. 29–37.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’: A Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        17(3): 267–87.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. (2013). Mind Your Corpus: Systematic Errors and Authorship Attribution. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(4): 603–14.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. (2014). Does Size Matter? Authorship Attribution, Small Samples, Big Problem. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        29, doi:10.1093/llc/fqt066.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: A Suite of Tools. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. University of Nebraska–Lincoln, pp. 487–89.
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. L., Witten, D. M. and Criddle, C. S. (2008). Reassessing Authorship of the ‘Book of Mormon’ Using Delta and Nearest Shrunken Centroid Classification. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23(4): 465–91.
                    
                    
                        Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2009). Computational Methods in Authorship Attribution. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                        60(1): 9–26.
                    
                    
                        Luyckx, K. and Daelemans, W. (2011). The Effect of Author Set Size and Data Size in Authorship Attribution. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        26(1): 35–55.
                    
                    
                        Reynolds, L. D. and Wilson, N. G. (2013 [1978]). 
                        Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin Literature. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Tales Of A Discipline In The Digital Age: Information Practices And Needs In Art History
                
                    
                        Kamposiori
                        Christina
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    christina.kamposiori.11@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Warwick
                        Claire
                    
                    University of Durham, United Kingdom
                    c.l.h.warwick@durham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Mahony
                        Simon
                    
                    University College London, United Kingdom
                    s.mahony@ucl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    art history
                    information behaviour
                    user requirements
                    digital scholarship
                    digital humanities
                
                
                    art history
                    user studies / user needs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster explores the impact that the digital age has had on the information behaviour of art historians. As the rapid technological advancements and the proliferation of digital resources in recent years have greatly affected scholarly practices in the arts and humanities, there is a rising need to study the informational and methodological behaviour of scholars in order to create functional information systems that enhance scholarship in the area. Therefore, our goal is to focus on the scholarly workflow in the field of art history as a way of identifying the information needs of its scholars nowadays. For that purpose, we will look at the information practices of art historians throughout the various stages of the research lifecycle—from the formulation of the research subject to the dissemination of results. Moreover, we will list the digital tools and services that scholars in the field use during these stages as well as the challenges they face.
            Our proposed poster reports the results of research conducted for the first author’s PhD thesis, ‘Personal Research Collections: Examining Research Practices and User Needs in Art Historical Research’, at the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, London, under the supervision of Professor Claire Warwick and Simon Mahony. This study used semistructured, in-depth interviews with 20 art historians at different career stages, as well as observation of their physical and digital personal collections in order to identify the particular needs they have when they build them. Actually, scholars’ personal collections of resources served as a departure point for examining the 
                what, where, why, and 
                how of art historians' information practices in the digital age. 
            
            Being at the core of the scholar’s workspace, personal collections play a significant role in the scholarly workflow; gathering various resources for research and teaching in art history can either constitute a solution to the many problems scholars often face (Grindley, 2006, 6), such as copyright issues, or facilitate other research activities (Palmer et al., 2009, 17–18; Kamposiori et al., 2013, 6; Long and Schonfeld, 2014, 23–24), such as writing or publishing. But what are the stories behind the building of these collections? What can they tell us about the information practices and needs of art historians at different stages of research? 
            Looking, for example, at the initial stages of a project where scholars use online resources for discovering the necessary information, our research showed that art historians nowadays tend to turn either to Google for checking ‘what is available out there’ or to resources they trust and they have always found useful, including digital libraries and museums’ digital collections. Yet we found that many scholars still had to deal with various problems when they went about looking for material—problems ranging from copyright issues and limited availability of resources in particular areas of study to the sometimes low quality of digital resources. Thus, easier access to quality information through, for instance, a ‘hub’ containing all the necessary information for useful resources in specific areas, like modern art history, was often one of their foremost wishes. 
            Furthermore, thinking about the later stages of research, the effective organisation and management of the gathered information was often a prerequisite for analysing the research data and constructing the scholarly argument. For instance, in the case of a digital art historian, digital archiving was considered a mandatory step before the analysis of data extracted from particular mailing lists; due to the ephemeral nature of this kind of information, if not archived, it would have been very difficult to find again. Hence, a tool that would make such a process easier would significantly facilitate this scholar’s research workflow.
            What can we learn from examining the practices and needs as well as the challenges a group of scholars such as art historians face at the various stages of the research lifecycle? Moreover, and most importantly, how can we apply those lessons in building digital infrastructures that truly support research and teaching in the digital age? By outlining some of our results related to the aforementioned questions, we aspire that our poster will stimulate discussion around user requirements in art history, and thus it will be of particular interest to researchers or other professionals who are building tools and services for scholars in the arts and humanities. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Grindley, N. (2006). What’s in the Art-Historian’s Toolkit? 
                        A Methods Network Working Paper, AHRC ICT Methods Network, http://www.methodsnetwork.ac.uk/resources/wkp01.html.
                    
                    
                        Kamposiori, C., Warwick, C. and Mahony, S. (2013). Building Personal Collections: Supporting the Information Practices of Art Historians in the Digital Age. Working paper presented at the 
                        Cultural Heritage, Creative Tools and Archives Workshop, National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, 26–27 June 2013, http://chcta.files.wordpress.com/2013/06/cultural-heritage-creative-tools-archives_merged.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Long, M. and Schonfeld, R. C. (2014). Supporting the Changing Research Practices of Art Historians. 
                        ITHAKA S+R, http://www.sr.ithaka.org/research-publications/supporting-changing-research-practices-art-historians.
                    
                    
                        Palmer, C. L., Teffeau, L. C. and Pirmann, C. M. (2009). 
                        Scholarly Information Practices in the Online Environment: Themes from the Literature and Implications for Library Service Development. Graduate School of Library &amp; Information Science (GSLIS), Center for Informatics Research in Science &amp; Scholarship (CIRSS). Dublin: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, OCLC Research, www.oclc.org/programs/publications/reports/2009-02.pdf
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Talking About Programming in the DIgital Humanities
                
                    
                        Rockwell
                        Geoffrey
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Sinclair
                        Stéfan
                    
                    McGill University
                    stefan.sinclair@mcgill.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    History of DH
                    Programming
                    DH Courses
                
                
                    programming
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In the first months of the HUMANIST discussion list a discussion erupted around the value of programming languages in humanities computing courses. Do computing humanists need to know how to program, or is learning expert use of applications enough? What is the point of learning to program? (McCarthy, 1987). This discussion can be traced back at least as far as the 1986 ACH/Sloan Workshop on Teaching ‘Computers and the Humanities’ Courses, where participants discussed ‘most vigorously of all whether programming should be taught, or only package programs’ (Sperberg-McQueen 1986). The issue has really never gone away as it is about disciplinary formation or ‘what it is we want our students to learn, the nature of the world into which we are sending them, and the relationship both of technology and (more fundamentally) the algorithmic approach to problem-solving’ (McCarty, 1987, 1–2). Based on a reading and analysis of a substantial collection of historical documents (journal articles, association newsletters, books, Listservs, etc.) in this paper we will examine how the humanities computing community discussed programming and how that discussion reflects changing views of the field over time. Specifically we will
             • Outline a three-part history of programming in the digital humanities starting with a concording phase when programming was not important to using computers.
             • Discuss the turn toward teaching programming as a way of teaching computational thinking.
             • Look at how the emergence of the Web changed the discussion. We will argue that as the Web became important, scripting skills suitable for building websites replaced older programming languages and it became possible to imagine the digital humanities being defined by the ability to program. 
             • Conclude with some reflections on how the case for programming has been made more recently. 
            
                Humanities Computing as Concording
            
            I’ve tried to stay free of programming. I’m perfectly innocent of any knowledge of any programming language and I feel I must remain that way if I am going to continue to function as a scholar in literature; my heartfelt advice to any of you younger people embarking on this whole venture is to do the same—to ask programmers to do for you what they know how to do and what would be costly and painful for you to learn—to learn to talk their language but not to get involved in programming research or machine research. I know the best of you will not take this advice and will, therefore, break new barriers and so on, but I persist in offering it. (Parrish, 1969, 24–25) 
            Programming in the early concording years of computing in the humanities was something often left to specialists. Stephen Parrish, who was general editor of the Cornell Concordance Series, saw himself as a ‘scholar in English literature who drifted laterally into the making of concordances’ (1969, 16). He stayed away from programming as a distraction from scholarship. This meant that concording ‘required an organized, teamwork approach, characterized by a substantial budget and a university computing centre’ (McCarty, 1993, 52–53). Parrish is not the only one to worry about programming distracting scholars, and in the presentation we will discuss other examples as a way of teasing out how programming was not considered of scholarly value. 
            
                Programming and Reasoning
            
            By the 1980s, things had changed and programming had become important, as can be seen in the way programming was included in a majority of courses. Surveys like Joseph Rudman’s ‘Teaching Computers and the Humanities Courses: A Survey’ (1987) report 175 courses teaching a programming language while 131 were ‘Applications Only’. In that survey, the most popular languages taught were BASIC (in 75 courses reporting), Pascal (30 courses), Prolog (15 courses), Lisp (13 courses), and SNOBOL (10 courses). What is impressive is the number of responses that indicated they had some sort of course for humanities students. We often assume that computing in the humanities is a recent, post-advent-of-the-Web thing, but given the number of courses, the discussions on HUMANIST, and articles in journals like 
                Computing and the Humanities, it is clear that programming was becoming an acceptable activity, especially for those in support staff positions. 
            
            Despite the popularity of programming languages like BASIC and Pascal for courses, the languages about which humanists wrote in the 1980s tended to be languages like SNOBOL and Icon—all languages that were good for string (text) manipulation, as can be seen in the attention they received in books for teaching programming to humanists like John Abercrombie’s 
                Computer Programs for Literary Analysis (1984)
                , Susan Hockey’s 
                SNOBOL Programming for the Humanities (1985)
                , and Alan Corré’s 
                Icon Programming for Humanists (1990)
                . Then there are the discussions on HUMANIST and reviews of languages like Mark Olsen’s self-explanatory ‘Beyond SNOBOL: The Icon Programming Language’. 
            
            As an aside, one could argue that SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) and later XML (Extensible Markup Language) are also forms of programming—meta-languages with which one can create descriptive languages with which to rigorously describe texts for scholarly electronic editions. These were popular in humanities computing, especially after the Text Encoding Initiative began to provide guidelines for the encoding of texts in the late 1980s. How many humanists were first introduced to computing in the humanities when asked to develop a DTD (Document Type Definition) and encode a text? 
            It is interesting that many of the discussions about programming in the 1980s and early 1990s circle around the teaching of it and that this issue is reported as contentious. No one believed that the ability to program was essential for a computing humanist, in part because so many couldn’t, but proponents of programming argued for it to be taught as way of teaching computational reasoning or problem solving. They also argued that there were social and ethical issues that could be understood through learning computing. You learned to program so as to understand what the computer could do or to be able to talk to programmers. In the presentation we will look at summative discussions of the issue like McCarty’s (1987) and a lovely balanced essay by Nancy Ide, ‘Computers and the Humanities Courses: Philosophical Bases and Approach’ that came out of the 1986 ACH/Sloan Workshop. We will also speculate as to why there was this shift towards including programming and arguing for its importance. Whatever the reasons, the discourse had changed and computing humanists were beginning to take an interest in programming and teaching it. 
            
                Programming the Web 
            
            The emergence of the Web changed the languages that humanists were likely to use for programming and, we will argue, made it possible to make programming a defining skill for digital humanists. Moreover, learning to program for the Web provided a more appealing and transferable skillset; web and application development became normalized and desirable. Because the Web provided such a convenient way to show and distribute digital research, it changed which programming languages received attention or were taught. We can see the shift in these histograms of word frequencies in the HUMANIST Archives. The string processing languages popular in the late 1980s taper off and are replaced with languages like PHP with which one can build dynamic websites. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Two graphs showing the frequency of programming languages in the annual archives of the HUMANIST Discussion Group Listserv, produced with Voyant Tools. 
            Now programming (and other web skills) went from being about teaching reasoning to being a skill students and humanists could actually use to create humanities products, i.e., websites. Programming became creative and expressive. There was also a convenient on-ramp as students could start creating HTML pages and then learn to use scripting languages like PHP that enhanced the web site until you knew enough to code a scholarly web site. 
            We will further argue that once web development wasn’t something that digital humanists would necessarily be amateurs at, then it could become a defining skill, and a source of some pride. Digital humanists finally had something that they could be good at and a set of competencies unique to the digital humanities. Digital humanists like Stephen Ramsay could provocatively say, ‘Do you have to know how to code? I’m a tenured professor of Digital Humanities and I say “yes”’ (Ramsay 2011). This led to the ‘hack vs. yack’ discussion that followed about programming and other forms of building (see Nowviskie [2014] for more general context). 
            
                Conclusions: Programming in the Humanities and Disciplinary Formation 
            
            This paper traces the ways programming has been discussed in the digital humanities. We believe that the role of programming was important to the way the field of humanities computing (and later digital humanities) conceived of itself. This is not surprising given the importance of programming to computing in general, but it is interesting to follow the particular ways programming was discussed as the discipline emerged. 
            We will end the paper by theorizing, or at least speculating, about where programming in digital humanities is going. One direction (already well under way) is towards software studies and the studying of programmed artifacts as works of human art and expression worthy of the humanities. Matthew Kirschenbaum in a fine essay for the 
                Chronicle of Higher Education talks about ‘procedural literacy’. 
            
            All programming entails world-making, as the ritual act of writing and running Hello World reminds us. . . . 
             Ultimately what’s at stake is not the kind of vocational computer literacy I was taught as an undergraduate, but what a growing number of practitioners in the digital humanities (and related disciplines, like digital art or game studies) have begun to call procedural rhetoric, or procedural literacy. (Kirschenbaum, 2009) 
            Another direction is data science. The opportunities for new insights through large-scale text mining, or what Moretti (2007) calls distant reading, have made programming languages like R attractive. There is a return to text processing languages, but now languages that can analyze large corpora or visualize results.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ide, N. M. (1987). Computers and the Humanities Courses: Philosophical Bases and Approach. 
                        Computers and the Humanities,
                        21(4): 209–15. 
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M. (2009). Hello Worlds. 
                        Chronicle of Higher Education,
                        55(20): B10, http://chronicle.com/article/Hello-Worlds/5476. 
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (1987). HUMANIST So Far: A Review of the First Two Months. 
                        ACH Newsletter, 
                        9(3): 1–3. 
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (1993). Handmade, Computer-Assisted, and Electronic Concordances of Chaucer. 
                        CCH Working Papers,
                        3: 49–65. 
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2007). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. Verso, London. 
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2014). On the Origin of ‘Hack’ and ‘Yack’. http://bit.ly/1ttih76.
                    
                    
                        Olsen, M. (1987). Beyond SNOBOL: The Icon Programming Language. 
                        Computers and the Humanities,
                        21(1): 61–66. 
                    
                    
                        Parrish, S. M. (1969). Concordance-Making by Computer: Its Past, Future, Techniques, and Applications. In Burelbach, F. M. (ed.), 
                        Proceedings: Computer Applications to Problems in the Humanities; A Conversation in the Disciplines, Conference at State University College, Brockport, NY, 4–5 April 1969, pp. 16–33. 
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2011). On Building. http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/. 
                    
                    
                        Rudman, J. (1987). Teaching Computers and the Humanities Courses: A Survey. 
                        Computer and the Humanities, 
                        21(4): 235–43. 
                    
                    
                        Sinclair, S. and G. Rockwell. (2014). 
                        Voyant Tools. http://voyant-tools.org/. 
                    
                    
                        Sperberg-McQueen, C. M.
                         (1986). Report on ACH/Sloan Foundation Workshop on Teaching ‘Computers and the Humanities’ Courses. 
                        ACH Newsletter,
                        8
                        (4): 1–2.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Technical Narratives: Novel Approaches to the Analysis and Technical Description of Software-Based Art
                
                    
                        Ensom
                        Tom
                    
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London; Collection Care Research, Tate
                    tomensom@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Hedges
                        Mark
                    
                    Department of Digital Humanities, King's College London
                    mark.hedges@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Laurenson
                        Pip
                    
                    Collection Care Research, Tate
                    Pip.Laurenson@tate.org.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    software-based art
                    digital preservation
                    art conservation
                    technical description
                    digital forensics
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The term ‘software-based artwork’ refers to art where software is the primary artistic medium. 
                Although software-based artworks might all be characterised as having code at their core, there is great variation in their constituents and form—ranging from arrays of material and hardware components installed in a physical space, to born-digital works created in 3D engines. Such works form complex systems, exhibiting a range of dependencies on changing hardware, software, interfaces, and technological environments. Software-based artworks may involve proprietary software or bespoke elements coded by the artist, and many exhibit particular behaviours, such as responding to a visitor or searching for keywords on the Internet. Such characteristics raise significant challenges for the long-term preservation of these artworks. This paper presentation will report on the early stages of the development of a documentation-centric approach to these challenges. These new strategies have potentially wider applications in digital preservation and might be applied to other complex digital objects, such as commercial software, video games, and scientific simulations. 
            
            Our primary research aim is to address how software-based artworks are to be described and represented for the purposes of preservation, understanding, and access. Up until recently, there has been little consensus regarding preservation strategies or established methodologies for identifying the characteristics or significant properties to be preserved. Appropriate strategies will typically be dependent on the specifics of each artwork; for example, in some cases it may be essential to preserve the code, in others the behaviour may be the crux of the work. There are a diversity of design approaches and implementation platforms used, and thus a variety of factors that can affect their sustainability, making it essential to capture detailed technical information about the components of an artwork and the digital environments in which they are created, curated, and stored. It is also increasingly important to provide a sense of what these works are like even when they are not on display (or for those unable to visit). We examine how to describe and represent a software-based artwork from various perspectives, ranging from that of a broad viewing audience to those involved in making decisions about the conservation and display of an artwork. Foundational in this is the development of a detailed documentation model for 
                the management of these decisions, based on the preservation ecosystem concept. This approach considers the artwork a living object in a changing environment, shifting the focus of decision-making from the object to its dependencies. Preliminary work in the development of an ecosystem model for software-based artworks will be reported on
                . This work also draws upon museum practice in relation to cataloguing, and emerging standards of practice within conservation for creating technical documentation. As well as identifying the technical information that could or should be included in a hypothetical catalogue entry, we examine whether the nature and content of current conservation-focused technical studies need to be rethought. Part of this work will involve the creation of detailed technical entries for a number of software-based artwork case studies. 
                The particular artworks to be examined include a broad range of different types of software-based artwork, including those in the Tate collection and a number of Internet-disseminated works. 
            
            Closely linked to the work outlined above is a secondary research aim: an exploration of what might constitute technical art history for software-based artworks. Technical art history is an evolving field that focuses on the material choices of the artist, the processes involved in creation, and the relationship of these to the meaning, history, and context of the work. Research in this field has up until now been largely framed around artworks that use traditional artistic materials such as paint (e.g., analysis of chemical composition), and so we examine the potential of digital analytical techniques to gather analogous information for software-based artworks. 
            In addressing both of the aforementioned research aims, this research draws on a number of fields. Existing techniques from areas such as digital forensics and software engineering provide ways by which software can be analysed and documented for purposes of appraisal and preservation. Particular avenues of interest include 
                automated metadata generation, runtime and network analysis, disk imaging and analysis, and the use of software decompilers. An initial exploration into the value of analytical tools that enable the behaviour and live environment of software to be captured and described will be reported on. 
            
            In digital preservation this research shares a number of synergies with areas of current interest to the community, such as analytical approaches to describing complex digital objects and the modelling of technological and semantic change. This research represents the first detailed technical study of software-based art to be based on the use of such analytical methods applied to the software, systems, and media on which they were developed and presented. The knowledge created by this research feeds directly into the refinement of the conservation, risk-assessment, and cataloguing methods used to support Tate’s current and future collection of software-based art, and will potentially be of great interest to many other institutions and individuals collecting similar kinds of work. It also represents a significant contribution (in both theoretical and practical terms) to research in digital preservation in a cultural heritage context, and is likely to be of interest to many other areas of research within the digital humanities.
            This work is the result of a Collaborative Doctoral Partnership between King’s College London and Tate, funded by the AHRC, and builds in part on work by research teams from both institutions engaged in the four-year EU-funded research project PERICLES (2013–2017). 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Biermann, J., Ludwig, J., Carter, A., Waddington, S. and Gill, A. (2014). 
                        PERICLES Deliverable D5.1: Initial Report on Preservation Ecosystem Management, http://www.pericles-project.eu/uploads/files/PERICLES_D5_1_1-Preservation_Ecosystem_Management_V1_0.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Corubolo, F., Eggers, A., Hasan, A., Hedges, M., Darányi, S., Waddington, S. and Kontopoulos, S. (2014). 
                        PERICLES Deliverable D4.1: Initial Version Environment Information Extraction Tools, http://www.pericles-project.eu/uploads/files/PERICLES_WP4_D4_1-Initial_version_environment_information_extraction_tools-V1_0.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Enge, J. and Lurk, T. (2013). Operational Practices for a Digital Preservation and Restoration Protocol. In 
                        Preserving and Exhibiting Media Art: Challenges and Perspectives. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, pp. 270–81.
                    
                    
                        Engel, D. and Wharton, G. (2014). Reading between the Lines: Source Code Documentation as a Conservation Strategy for Software-Based Art. 
                        Studies in Conservation,
                        59(6): 404–15, doi:10.1179/2047058413Y.0000000115.
                    
                    
                        Falcão, P. (2010). 
                        Developing a Risk Assessment Tool for the Conservation of Software-Based Artworks. MA thesis, http://www.academia.edu/6660777/Developing_a_Risk_Assessment_Tool_for_the_conservation_of_software-_based_artworks_MA-Thesis.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M., Ovenden, R., Redwine, G. and Donahue, R. (2010). 
                        Digital Forensics and Born-Digital Content in Cultural Heritage Collections. Council on Library and Information Resources, Washington, DC, http://drum.lib.umd.edu/handle/1903/14722.
                    
                    
                        Laurenson, P. (2013). Old Media, New Media? Significant Difference and the Conservation of Software-Based Art. In 
                        Preserving and Exhibiting Media Art: Challenges and Perspectives. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, pp. 73–96.
                    
                    
                        Matthews, B., McIlwrath, B., Giaretta, D. and Conway, E. (2008). 
                        The Significant Properties of Software: A Study, http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/preservation/spsoftware_report_redacted.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Rinehart, R. and Ippolito, J. (2014). 
                        Re-collection: Art, New Media, and Social Memory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                TEI Simple: Power, economy, and a processing model for encoders and developers
                
                    
                        Cummings
                        James
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    James.Cummings@it.ox.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Rahtz
                        Sebastian
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    Sebastian.Rahtz@it.ox.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Pytlik Zillig
                        Brian
                    
                    University of Nebraska - Lincoln
                    Brian.pytlikzillig@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Mueller
                        Martin
                    
                    Northwestern University
                    martinmueller@northwestern.edu
                
                
                    
                        Turska
                        Magdalena
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    Magdalena.Turska@it.ox.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    TEI
                    Text Encoding
                    XML
                    Data Modelling
                    Processing Models
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    xml
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            TEI Simple is a Mellon-funded project developing a customisation and extension of the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative. Its intent is to create a highly constrained and prescriptive subset of the TEI suitable for a straightforward representation of standard early modern and modern books and a processing model documentation for easy web presentation. The project will also develop a mapping to non-TEI ontologies, and a method of indicating the status and richness of a digital text. The outputs from TEI Simple will be integrated into the TEI infrastructure and supported by the TEI Technical Council. The project runs from September 2014 to July 2015. As DH2015 is scheduled near the end of this project, it is an ideal location to both announce the project to the wider DH community while simultaneously reporting on the status of the outputs. 
            The project is directed by Sebastian Rahtz (University of Oxford), Brian Pytlik Zillig (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), and Martin Mueller (Northwestern University). Other project staff include Magdalena Turska (DiXiT Project / University of Oxford), Lou Burnard (consultant), and James Cummings (University of Oxford). The Advisory Committee consists of Pip Willcox (Bodleian Library, Oxford), Suzanne Haaf (Deutsches Textarchiv, Berlin), Matthias Goebel (University of Gottingen), and James Cummings (University of Oxford). 
            All of the work for the project is undertaken openly through a public github repository: https://github.com/TEIC/TEISimple. 
            TEI Simple Objectives 
            TEI Simple has the following high-level objectives: 
             1. Definition of a new 
                highly constrained and 
                prescriptive subset of the TEI Guidelines suited to the representation of early modern and modern books. The degree of detail supported will be sufficient to encompass, at a minimum, the current practices of the TCP’s EEBO, ECCO, and Evans collections plus those of other major European initiatives such as Text Grid or the German Text Archive (DTA) and the Consortium Cahiers in France. 
            
             2. Developing and implementing processing rules for TEI Simple and creating a notation (as an extension to TEI’s ODD metalanguage
                1) for specifying such rules, referencing web standards such as XPath, CSS, and XSL FO. 
            
             3. Formal mapping of the elements used by TEI Simple to the Conceptual Reference Model of the International Council of Museums (CIDOC CRM), allowing for full interoperability with the Europeana Data Model, in order to facilitate the participation of projects in the Europeana repositories. 
             4. Definition and implementation of machine-readable descriptions of the encoding status and richness of TEI texts, providing ‘TEI Performance Indicators’, which help to document expectations for the encoded text. 
             5. Full integration of TEI Simple into the TEI Guidelines and infrastructure with ongoing maintenance by the TEI Technical Council. 
            More information concerning each of these objectives is detailed below. 
            
                TEI Simple Subset
            
            This subset of TEI Simple attempts to remove ambiguity for both encoders and developers. While simple does not necessarily mean ‘small’, nor does it mean ‘simplistic’, the decision was made to base the selection of elements on TEI texts from a set of large archives or text collections. This included
             • Text Creation Partnership: Evans, ECCO, EEBO (including the unreleased phase 2).
             • Oxford Text Archive: All TEI P5 files. 
             • Deutsches Textarchiv.
             • Documenting the American South. 
             • CESR. 
             • OBVIL: corpus critique. 
            The decision was also made to concentrate primarily on the &lt;text&gt; element, not the metadata stored in the &lt;teiHeader&gt;. The constraining of TEI elements, and limiting of encoding options, meant that the 546 (as of TEI P5 version 2.7.0) elements could be limited to 104 (at time of writing) not including &lt;teiHeader&gt; elements. It is anticipated that the current list of elements may change over the course of development of TEI Simple, but the elements selected were noticed to generally fall into a particular set of categories: 
            castlist &lt;actor&gt;, &lt;castGroup&gt;, &lt;castItem&gt;, &lt;castList&gt;, &lt;role&gt;, &lt;roleDesc&gt; 
            character &lt;g&gt; 
            editorial &lt;abbr&gt;, &lt;add&gt;, &lt;addSpan&gt;, &lt;am&gt;, &lt;choice&gt;, &lt;corr&gt;, &lt;del&gt;, &lt;desc&gt;, &lt;ex&gt;, &lt;expan&gt;, &lt;gap&gt;, &lt;handShift&gt;, &lt;orig&gt;, &lt;reg&gt;, &lt;sic&gt;, &lt;space&gt;, &lt;subst&gt;, &lt;supplied&gt;, &lt;unclear&gt; 
            interpretation &lt;author&gt;, &lt;date&gt;, &lt;foreign&gt;, &lt;hi&gt;, &lt;measure&gt;, &lt;name&gt;, &lt;num&gt;, &lt;q&gt;, &lt;quote&gt;, &lt;ref&gt;, &lt;rs&gt;, &lt;seg&gt;, &lt;time&gt; 
            linguistic &lt;c&gt;, &lt;pc&gt;, &lt;s&gt;, &lt;w&gt; 
            pictures &lt;figDesc&gt;, &lt;figure&gt;, &lt;graphic&gt; 
            structure &lt;ab&gt;, &lt;address&gt;, &lt;addrLine&gt;, &lt;anchor&gt;, &lt;back&gt;, &lt;body&gt;, &lt;bibl&gt;, &lt;cb&gt;, &lt;cit&gt;, &lt;div&gt;, &lt;floatingText&gt;, &lt;formula&gt;, &lt;front&gt;, &lt;fw&gt;, &lt;group&gt;, &lt;head&gt;, &lt;item&gt;, &lt;l&gt;, &lt;label&gt;, &lt;lb&gt;, &lt;lg&gt;, &lt;list&gt;, &lt;listBibl&gt;, &lt;milestone&gt;, &lt;note&gt;, &lt;p&gt;, &lt;pb&gt;, &lt;sp&gt;, &lt;speaker&gt;, &lt;spGrp&gt;, &lt;stage&gt;, &lt;text&gt; , &lt;TEI&gt;, &lt;teiCorpus&gt;, &lt;title&gt; 
            table &lt;cell&gt;, &lt;row&gt;, &lt;table&gt; 
            titlepage &lt;publisher&gt;, &lt;pubPlace&gt;, &lt;docAuthor&gt;, &lt;docDate&gt;, &lt;docEdition&gt;, &lt;docImprint&gt;, &lt;docTitle&gt;, &lt;imprimatur&gt;, &lt;titlePage&gt;, &lt;titlePart&gt;
            wrapper &lt;argument&gt;, &lt;byline&gt;, &lt;closer&gt;, &lt;dateline&gt;, &lt;epigraph&gt;, &lt;opener&gt;, &lt;postscript&gt;, &lt;salute&gt;, &lt;signed&gt;, &lt;trailer&gt; 
            We aim to link this simple taxonomy to the distinctions made in Patrick Sahle’s ‘Text Wheel’, and investigate the relationship of this to default behaviour in the Processing Model. 
            
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            In addition, TEI Simple has customised the available attribute values for a number of attributes. It has removed the @rend and @style attributes, preferring to use @rendition to document the appearance of the original object. In this attribute it uses a closed list of values that its implementations know about in the form of a private URI of ‘simple’: (e.g., ‘simple:bold’). 
            
                TEI Simple Processing Model
            
            A ‘cradle to grave’ processing model is at the heart of the TEI Simple project. The TEI Simple processing model offers a bridge across the divide between encoders and developers: the aim is to lower the access barriers to working with TEI-encoded texts in various web environments. 
            The TEI Simple project has developed a notation by which a TEI profile records the intended processing for documents meeting that profile. The TEI Simple Processing Model notation provides a way to document the intended output rending in the TEI customisation profile (TEI ODD file). This is done by means of a proposed &lt;model&gt; element for use in the context of TEI ODD at a fairly high level and in an abstract manner. The agreement on notation here, though, enables the generation of document-specific transformations. While the implementation of TEI Simple uses an open function library as a method of documenting the further processing in the case of TEI Simple documents, this same processing model notation will be incorporated into the TEI infrastructure where it will be of benefit for those wishing to use a high-level form of output specification, and who wish to develop their own function library. 
            
                TEI Simple Mapping to RDF
            
            Although simple presentation in web pages is an important aim of TEI Simple, it is also important to represent structural and semantic markup in the open data interchange format of RDF. The Europeana Data Model (EDM) and the Conceptual Reference Model of the International Council of Museums (CIDOC-CRM) are parts of an evolving ecosystem of metadata standards for cultural heritage documentation across the many languages and cultures of Europe. TEI ODD already has a notation (the &lt;equiv&gt; element) for expressing the relationship between TEI and RDF, and this has been used to map the elements from TEI Simple to CIDOC-CRM and FRBRoo. 
            
                TEI Simple Performance Indicators
            
            Although TEI Simple is designed to be very constrained, the decisions as to what to mark up are still left to the encoder. Do they choose, for example, to explicitly identify names of people and places? Will they mark where spelling has been normalized? Will all the words be marked with part of speech information for linguistic analysis? For a simple example, are &lt;name&gt; elements not present in a text because they have not been encoded, or because there are no names in this text? This will affect the 
                query potential of a corpus of texts, but cannot be determined simply by analyzing the markup. The TEI Simple project has created an extra level of metadata notation for enabling the automatic profiling of a text. 
            
            
                TEI Simple Integration with TEI Infrastructure
            
            The outputs of the TEI Simple project are being fully integrated with the existing TEI infrastructure and thus are available for all TEI users whether using TEI Simple or not. The acceptance of TEI Simple by the TEI Technical Council is one of the success criteria for the funding received. As part of the integration with TEI Infrastructure the TEI Simple project has created a teitosimple XSLT conversion that checks texts conformance to TEI Simple, converts elements where possible, and maps attributes such @rend to known @rendition values. 
            
                Further Development of TEI Simple
            
            This paper will conclude with a look at resources built on top of TEI Simple and what work might be developed from it. The TEI Simple project limited its scope to early modern and modern printed books. Under the aegis of the 
                DiXiT project (an EU Marie Curie ITN) James Cummings and Magdalena Turska have been investigating TEI Simple as a starting point for the creation of scholarly digital editions of simple (but potentially multi-witness) manuscript materials. 
            
            Note
            1. ODD is an acronym for ‘one document does it all’. The TEI ODD is an example of ‘literate programming’ and combines code and discursive documentation in a single document.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cummings, James. (2008). The Text Encoding Initiative and the Study of Literature. In Schreibman, S. and Siemens, R. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Literary Studies. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 451–76, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/. 
                    
                    
                        Cummings, J. and Willcox, P. (2013). Stationers’ Register Online: A Case Study of a Byte-Reduced TEI Schema for Digitization (tei_corset). 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, December, http://jtei.revues.org/926. 
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F. (2008). The Pluralistic Approach—The First Scholarly Edition of William of Auxerre’s Treatise on Liturgy. 
                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, http://computerphilologie.tudarmstadt. de/jg08/fischer.html.
                    
                    
                        Pytlik Zillig, B. L. (2013). Logging the Abbot: Reflection-Oriented XSLT Programming for Corpora Conversion and Verification. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, March, http://jtei.revues.org/722. 
                    
                    
                        Pytlik Zillig, B. L. (n.d.). TEI Texts that Play Nicely: Lessons from the MONK Project. 
                        Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science, 
                        1(3), https://letterpress.uchicago.edu/index.php/jdhcs/article/view/81. 
                    
                    
                        Rahtz, S. and Cummings, J. (2012). Kicking and Screaming: Challenges and Advantages of Bringing TCP Texts into Line with the Text Encoding Initiative. In Bodleian Libraries, University of Oxford, 
                        ‘Revolutionizing Early Modern Studies’? The Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership in 2012: EEBOTCP 2012 Conference Proceedings, http://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid%3Af9667884220b4ec9bb2fc79044302399. 
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P. (2013). Band 9: Textbegriffe und Recodierung. In 
                        Digitale Editionsformen, Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels, 3 Bände, Norderstedt: Books on Demand, Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 7–9, http://www.ide. de/schriften/s79digitaleeditionsformen. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Text + Creation + Partnership: Whatever Happened to the Best Laid Plans of EEBO-TCP?
                
                    
                        Popham
                        Michael
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    michael.popham@bodleian.ox.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Text
                    Partnerships
                    Open
                    Sustainability
                    Reuse
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    literary studies
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    copyright
                    licensing
                    and Open Access
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            When the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) was proposed by Mark Sandler of University of Michigan in 1999, the intention was to raise sufficient funds to produce accurate, marked-up, full-text transcriptions of 25,000 titles from ProQuest’s EEBO database of images. The main partners in the collaboration were the library at the University of Michigan, the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford, and ProQuest—which, in return for making the images available to the EEBO-TCP partners, would receive a five-year exclusivity period to exploit the full-text data. Once that period elapsed, these 25,000 carefully produced texts would be released into the public domain for use by anyone in the global scholarly community and beyond. That was the dream. This paper will describe the practical realities and challenges that were faced to make this dream come true.
            On 1 January 2015, the 25,000 electronic texts produced by Phase I of EEBO-TCP were released into the public domain. They represented the concerted efforts of a large number of individuals employed at both Michigan and Oxford—more than 20 editors who, between them, had contributed over 100 person-years of work towards the objectives of this $9,000,000+ endeavour. In terms of scale and scope of its ambition and its outputs, the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership should be recognized as a seminal project in the development of the digital humanities.
            Perhaps one of the most interesting aspects of the EEBO-TCP was the mixed nature of its underlying funding model. The anticipated cost of $9M over five years was felt to be too substantial to appeal to any single foundation or funding body. Moreover, the formal collaboration with the commercial e-publisher, ProQuest, complicated matters further and, not unreasonably, raised questions about whether this could ever be a collaboration of equals. 
            In the United States, colleagues at Michigan enthusiastically promoted the benefits of individual institutions joining the EEBO-TCP—putting heavy emphasis on the benefits of partnership. Contribution levels were adjusted to allow institutions of different sizes to join the Text Creation Partnership on an equal footing; they could choose to contribute via a single lump sum (of $50,000 on average) or by five equal annual $10,000 payments. In return for their commitment to the work of EEBO-TCP, these institutions would gain immediate access to the textual resources as they were created—via both the commercial EEBO interface offered by ProQuest and also via a more tailored platform, built on the DLXS system developed at Michigan. They would also be contributing to the production of a corpus of essential texts, published in England between 1473 and 1700, which would subsequently be made available for the benefit of all. Despite increasingly constrained budgets, almost 150 US institutions paid to support the work of EEBO-TCP.
            In the United Kingdom, we were fortunate to have the Jisc (then known as the Joint Information Systems Committee), a nationally funded service dedicated to acquiring or funding the production of content, tools, and services that would be of widespread benefit to the UK’s scholarly community. The Jisc immediately saw the merits of EEBO-TCP’s innovative approach and committed a single contribution of £1,000,000 on behalf of the UK academic community. This decision also served the Jisc, as they were involved in negotiating the relicensing of ProQuest’s EEBO database to UK universities, and the added value of full-text searching for 25,000 of these important items considerably increased its appeal to library budget holders.
            The initial successes in fundraising meant that the production work of EEBO-TCP was able to begin in 2000. A keying specification was developed, and text conversion companies were invited to tender for the work. Titles were selected in light of suggestions from an international editorial board and also colleagues at the growing number of EEBO-TCP partner institutions. The digital images of the texts were sent to the chosen keying companies, and the results were subject to robust quality assurance and markup enhancement by trained teams of digital editors based at Michigan and Oxford. Texts that did not achieve the desired quality threshold were returned for rekeying, whilst those that met the standards were fed into a delivery workflow that ensured their timely appearance in ProQuest’s products, and also the TCP’s own delivery platforms. Everything was going to plan.
            But even the best-laid plans need to account for unanticipated issues and obstacles, and this paper will share the lessons learned from this major international collaborative endeavour.
            For example, whilst the overall production workflow worked extremely well—thanks to the careful oversight of key individuals at Michigan—there is no doubt that fundraising a work-in-progress raises some additional challenges; yet had we not adopted this approach, it is probably unlikely that we would ever have secured a significant majority of the necessary funding before beginning the work. In fact, having outputs that we could 
                show to potential partners as the work moved along in many cases helped secure their commitment and enabled them to clearly understand what we were aiming to do. Even so, the hard work of attempting to raise funds to achieve the target of $9,000,000, whilst spending a proportion of that money each month on text production, resulted in the work taking longer than anyone had originally envisaged. We met our production target of 25,000 texts—but it took nearly four years longer than we had planned!
            
            In the course of our work, new questions began to emerge that we had not anticipated at the outset. In 2000, nobody asked us about the employment practices and ethical standards of the keying companies selected to work on EEBO-TCP material. By 2007, some institutions that were thinking about committing to EEBO-TCP, and even end-users of the materials, wanted reassurances that the digital data had been produced in an ethically acceptable environment. Moreover, with the growing awareness of the Google Books Library programme, some users began to question the legitimacy of ProQuest’s five-year exclusivity period to the full-text data, and understandably they wanted clarity on when that five-year embargo would elapse. EEBO-TCP had agreed that ProQuest’s exclusivity period would start from the end of the year in which production was completed (originally anticipated to be 2005), but because production was necessarily extended until 2009, the texts could not be released into the public domain until 2015.
            As the work of EEBO-TCP neared its end, other questions were also raised. The first and most rewarding for us as a project, was the request to carry on doing what we were doing: to produce 
                more texts. Whilst this was a clear demonstration that many people valued the work of EEBO-TCP, it also raised new questions about retaining and redefining our production methods and workflows, whether we could continue with the same funding model, how to select further texts, and so forth. It was tremendously rewarding to have the Jisc commit an additional £1,000,000 to EEBO-TCP ‘Phase II’ without hesitation—but this was 2008–2009, and we have undoubtedly been directly affected by the consequences of the global recession ever since.
            
            Perhaps some of the biggest questions about the 25,000 texts produced by EEBO-TCP (‘Phase I’, as it is now known) are around what we meant—and what we now understand by—the term ‘public domain’. Back in 1999 we blithely assumed that we would simply release this corpus of material into the intellectual wilds, and that ‘the community’ would assume responsibility for their ongoing maintenance and enhancement. Nowadays, we are constantly asked to consider the sustainability of digital resources—and to define what this might mean, who will do the work, and most importantly, how it will be resourced? 
            At the time of writing this abstract, the texts from EEBO-TCP have not yet been released. That will not happen until 1 January 2015. Several leading individuals and groups from around the globe have already expressed an interest in working with some or all of the corpus; for example, they have put forward ideas for how the materials can be enhanced with additional markup, or corrections crowdsourced from a community of volunteers, or their contents integrated into scholarly editions. But we do not know which, if any, of these things will happen—or if the texts will be taken up and used in wholly unexpected ways by communities with which we have yet to engage. However, by the time of the DH conference in 2015, we will be in a position to reflect on both the 15-year build-up to the release of one of the most important collections of digital texts yet to be created, and to summarize what has happened in the six months since their release. Will they have been taken up and used in new and exciting ways, been picked up by just a few people, or been resolutely ignored? 
            Whatever the impact of the release of the 25,000 EEBO-TCP Phase I texts on 1 January 2015, there will certainly be important lessons to be learned by the global digital humanities community. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Text Line Detection and Transcription Alignment: a Case Study on the Statuti del Doge Tiepolo
                
                    
                        Slimane
                        Fouad
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    fouad.slimane@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Mazzei
                        Andrea
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    andrea.mazzei@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Tomasin
                        Lorenzo
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    lorenzo.tomasin@unil.ch
                
                
                    
                        Kaplan
                        Frédéric
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    frederic.kaplan@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    text line
                    transcription
                    aligment
                    HMM
                
                
                    image processing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this paper, we propose a fully automatic system for the transcription alignment of historical documents. We introduce the ‘Statuti del Doge Tiepolo’ data that include images as well as transcription from the 14th century written in Gothic script. Our transcription alignment system is based on forced alignment technique and character Hidden Markov Models and is able to efficiently align complete document pages. 
            * * *
            Many libraries and archives are currently engaged in large-scale digitization programs to make their documents accessible to larger audiences. However, to make these ancient documents searchable and linkable, it is mandatory to go beyond digital images and encode their textual content. Text transcription is a notoriously complex and time-consuming task, requiring years of scholarly practice, particularly when one has to deal with a range of different scripts. 
            Machine learning approaches need good training sets to succeed. Luckily, several ancient manuscripts have been already transcribed by paleographers and exist as critical printed editions. These transcriptions could serve as a relevant starting point for developing automatic encoders. However, an additional step must be performed to use these materials as training sets in machine learning approaches: transcriptions must be aligned with digital images of the manuscripts. Most handwritten documents have transcription aligned only at the page level. To be used as a training set, it is necessary to generate a mapping at the line level at the very least.
            The goal of this paper is to present a full transcription alignment system for historical Latin page documents using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). In this work, we focus on the Statuti of the Doge Tiepolo, a manuscript transcribed and studied extensively by Prof. Lorenzo Tomasin (2001; 2007). Our system presents many advantages, such as the following; no segmentation into words is needed, the emission probability density functions of the HMMs can be trained to model variations of the character shapes, and the same system can be used for transcription alignment and recognition in an incremental training process. So, the decoding procedure will carry out recognition of words/lines, line/word transcription alignment, and segmentation into words/character models at the same time.
            Corpus 
            The 
                Statuta Veneta of the Duke Iacopo Tiepolo are the principal statutory norms of the Venetian Middle Ages, which were promulgated in 1242.
            
            It is one of the most ancient experiments of translation in vulgar of an Italian normative source, and it represents the act of foundation of a linguistic register. The existence of multiple medieval versions of the 
                Statuta Veneta in the vernacular has already been verified; the most ancient has been found in three manuscripts held in Vienna and in Venice (Tomasin, 2001; 2007). Prof. Lorenzo Tomasin has already carried out a complete transcription of the Vienna manuscript.
            
            In this work, we use the Venetian version of the manuscript (Senato e collegio Miscellanea Statuta Veneta) with a diplomatic transcription of 72 pages. A diplomatic transcription copies everything it sees as it is. An example of a page image and its transcription is presented in Figure 1. 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Page image and transcription from the Statuti del Doge Tiepolo corpus. 
            
                System Description 
            
            In this section we describe the four main steps of our method: page segmentation, text segmentation, textline detection, and transcription alignment. 
            Page Segmentation 
            The first processing step aims at segmenting each page of the scanned document. Each scanned image contains one page surrounded by a black border and a portion of the subsequent page (Figure 2).
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Scanned image from the Statuti del Doge Tiepolo corpus.
            To segment the page we use a binarization-based approach, as follows: 
             • 
                Binarization using the technique proposed by 
                Howe
                 (2013) (Figure 3).
            
             • 
                Contour Detection: The binarized image is processed in order to extract all the contours (Figure 4) (Suzuki, 1985). 
            
             • 
                Contour Classification: The contour having the largest area is classified as the one circumscribing the page of the text (Figure 5). 
            
             • 
                Vertical RGB Projection Profile: For each image it is necessary to detect the book binding. Each page is positioned horizontally with respect to the border of the image (Figure 6). The projection profile is processed in order to extract all the local minima. A voting system based on the a priori knowledge of the aspect ratio of the document page is used to elect the best local minima corresponding to the bookbinding separation (Figures 6 and 7). 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Howe (2013) binarization.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Contour detection.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Contour classification and image cropping.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Vertical projection profile.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 7. Page cropping.
            Text Segmentation 
            The second step aims at segmenting the pixels of the text. For this step we use the adaptive thresholding approach proposed by Howe (2013). In this case we estimate the thresholding parameters by a brute force technique applied to the 2D cost function: 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            For each iteration of the optimization procedure, the connected regions are recomputed over the binarized image. 
                Std
                x is the average standard deviation of the pixel x position of the extracted connected regions, 
                std
                y is the average standard deviation of the pixel y position, 
                area is the average surface of the connected regions, and 
                num
                contours is the number of extracted connected regions. 
            
            Textline Segmentation 
            The third step corresponds to the detection of text lines. For this task we have created a novel approach based on the following steps: 
             • Blurring of the binarized image (Figure 8).
             • Binarization of the blurred image (Figure 9).
             • Contour detection (Figure 10).
             • Iterative contour expansions: each polygon detected in the previous step is expanded iteratively by 1 pixel until it touches another polygon. The procedure stops when each polygon touches at least one other polygon (Figure 11). 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 8. Blurring of the binarized image.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 9. Binarization of the blurred image.
            
                
            
            
                
                
            
            Figure 10. Contour and textline detection.
            Transcription Alignment 
            The transcription alignment system is HMM-based. This system is inspired by Slimane et al. (2008). Figure 11 illustrates the different phases of the text recognition / transcription alignment system. 
            In the feature extraction phase, each text line is transformed into a sequence of feature vectors extracted by moving, from left to right, an analysis window with a width of 17 pixels and a shift of one pixel. Sixty-three typographical and statistical features and delta coefficients are extracted from each window. For more details, we refer to Slimane et al. (2008) and Mezghani et al. (2014). 
            In the training phase, each character model, represented by six HMM states, is trained using labeled textline images. Our system is developed with 53 character models, including white space and punctuation characters. All the observation sequences are used to estimate the emission probability functions of each character model. The training procedure involves two steps that are iteratively applied to increase the number of Gaussian mixtures to a given M value. In the first step, a binary split procedure is applied to the Gaussians to increase their number. In the second step, the Baum-Welch re-estimation procedure is launched to estimate the parameters of the Gaussians. 
            In the transcription alignment phase, the feature vector sequences of all extracted text lines of one page are first concatenated into a single sequence. Then the page HMM is created using the concatenation of all character models given by the page transcription. Finally, the Viterbi algorithm is employed for forced alignment of page image, resulting in line boundaries. So, for each line image, we will obtain the corresponding transcription. 
            This system can be used for recognition using a HMM to build an open vocabulary recognizer when all transitions from one character model to the others are allowed.
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 11. HMM-based text recognition / transcription alignment system. 
            This system, evaluated using 72 pages (2,302 text lines), achieved considerable accuracy for transcription alignment: 98.44% of the returned words were correct in terms of word position and label. 
            Conclusion 
            In this paper, we propose a fully automatic system that is able to efficiently extract handwritten text lines from images and perform their transcription alignment at the page level. 
            In the future, we will continue the optimization of the system, and we will also test it on other scripts from the Venice Time Machine project (http://vtm.epfl.ch/). 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Howe, N. R.
                        (2013). Document Binarization with Automatic Parameter Tuning. 
                        International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition (IJDAR),
                        16
                        (3): 247–58.
                    
                    
                        Mezghani, A., Slimane, F., Kanoun, S., and Märgner, V. (2014). Identification of Arabic/French–Handwritten/Printed Words Using GMM Based System. 
                        Proceedings from CIFED, Nancy, France, 18–21 March 2014, pp. 371–74. 
                    
                    
                        Slimane, F., Ingold, R., Alimi, A. M. and Hennebert, J. (2008). Duration Models for Arabic Text Recognition Using Hidden Markov Models. 
                        Proceedings from International Conference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling Control and Automation, Vienna, Austria, 10–12 December 2008, pp. 838–43. 
                    
                    
                        Suzuki, S. (1985). Topological Structural Analysis of Digitized Binary Images by Border Following. 
                        CVGIP,
                        30(1): 32–46. 
                    
                    
                        Tomasin, L. (2001). 
                        Il volgare e la legge: Storia linguistica del diritto veneziano. Esedra, Padova.
                    
                    
                        Tomasin, L. (2007). Il volgare nella cancelleria veneziana fra Tre e Quattrocento. 
                        Medioevo Letterario d’Italia, 
                        4: 69–89.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Aboriginal Dreaming meets Virtual Reality
                
                    
                        Trescak
                        Tomas
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    t.trescak@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Williams
                        Melissa
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    melissa.williams@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Sloan
                        Terry
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    t.sloan@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Bogdanovych
                        Anton
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    a.bogdanovych@uws.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Simoff
                        Simeon
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    s.simoff@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Aboriginal
                    Indigenous
                    3D
                    Simulation
                    Virtual Reality
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    historical studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    social media
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    anthropology
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            A recent study supports the claim that Aboriginal Australians are the oldest continuous living culture on the planet (
                Science, 2011), their being directly descended from the first people to leave Africa up to 75,000 years ago. Aborigines developed a rich culture involving custom, lore, and value systems based on the sustainability of their spiritual connection, belonging, obligation, and responsibility to care for their land, their people, and their environment (Andrews et al., 2006). Knowledge of this fascinating culture is still strong within Aboriginal communities and has adapted to live in two worlds, which in part is due to the recent radical change in lives of Australian Aborigines, the arrival of British colonists in the 18th century, and consequent European domination of the Australian continent. Since then, the relationship between the original Aboriginal population and more recent arrivals changed from initial curiosity, through mutual aversion, to ignorance. 
            
            In recent years, both parties are trying to improve this unfortunate situation by dealing with consequences of historical actions and better understanding each other’s cultures. Various initiatives aim to explore and preserve the oldest surviving culture in the world and to disseminate it to the broader Australian population. These efforts include developing First Peoples perspectives in mainstream institutions. Other resources on this matter include organisational web pages, multimedia, and digital archives. 
            The Aboriginal connection with the world is hard to capture, since time—particularly the dreaming or dreamtime—is difficult to express in static forms of presentation. This is where interactive workshops and focus groups can have a profound impact on the way content is consumed. Non-interactive multimedia, such as movies and videos, are a viable substitute, but their creation is expensive and, once made, the content becomes static and unchangeable. Carefully crafted web pages can combine both experiences, using multimedia for presentation and also allowing feedback from presenters. Yet web pages usually provide content for already interested parties rather than attracting a new public. 
            The main attraction of today is modern technology, enhanced with artificial intelligence, interactive multimedia, games, and virtual reality (VR). Currently, the VR hardware price has dropped down to $8 for Google Cardboard and $199 for Samsung VR, becoming available to the wide public. Computer games and virtual reality combine the interactive possibilities of workshops with multimedia. It allows us to capture and simulate the transient nature of First Peoples culture, the dreamtime, and to present these from various perspectives, either as an observer or a direct participant. Therefore, in our project, we focus on creating an immersive computer simulation, using a computer games approach and virtual reality, focusing on various aspects of life and events that have occurred throughout the history of aboriginal tribes living in Australia. 
            The benefits of our project are threefold: 
             1. 
                We seek permission from Aboriginal cultural authorities (i.e., Elders/Traditional Knowledge Keepers) to capture and record Aboriginal perspectives.
            
             For the purposes of our simulation, we collaborate with Aboriginal Elders to gain perspectives on the philosophical thinking of surviving in two worlds. Aboriginal people have a holistic worldview and belong to the land, viewing the world from a different perspective—for example, in an Aboriginal voice, ‘We belong to the land and have a responsibility to care for that land’. In this project we recorded what life was like in community pre-contact using motion capture technology. We have also recorded various stories of recollections of what life was like back then and, in collaboration with professionals, co-created with Aboriginal Elders educational plots that motivate simulation participants to explore and understand the perspectives of living in two worlds. We aim to record and digitise Aboriginal languages and place them in the situational context. This not only preserves many already disappearing languages but enables interested parties to learn them efficiently in the immersive manner.
             Along with this we are continuously co-creating with Aboriginal people, protecting their intellectual property by appropriate attribution with inputs into a large public database of Aboriginal resources, such as texts, images, videos, and references to be used throughout our project and by any other interested party (available at http://gok.scem.uws.edu.au).   
             2. 
                We engage and co-create with the Aboriginal community to understand their perspectives by using simulation technology.
            
             During the development of our simulation, we initially engage the Aboriginal community to help us co-create the content for our simulation. First, we engage and seek permission from Aboriginal Elders to access their intellectual property and record their perspectives, which can subsequently be presented in a simulation. Later, consulting with Elders and in collaboration with Aboriginal artists, we created the 3D assets of the simulation. These assets concern the landscape of the simulation, design of the original population, and wearables and objects they used. Last, we approach youth from various communities to help us co-create the 3D content and writing new stories, allowing others to re-live their experiences in the simulated environment.
             3. 
                Raise appreciation and appropriate attribution for Aboriginal intellectual property within the non-Aboriginal population.
            
             Using our simulation, participants can learn by playing a game with a carefully crafted educational plot, which incrementally raises their knowledge about the presented topics. During this experience each party is able to re-live the experience from the perspective of the other party, helping in understanding both points of the view. Moreover, using virtual reality and the gaming approach attracts the ‘digital’ generation or ‘social web’ generation, allowing them to perform in collaborative environments, providing for the deep social experience. 
            In the first phase of this project, we simulate an aspect of Aboriginal culture in the Parramatta basin in the year 1770, pre-contact and before colonisation. The simulation is presented in two formats. 
            First, an interactive 3D video game takes the participant on a quest to explore the life of a clan in the Parramatta basin. A spiritual mentor and guardian in the form of an Aboriginal Elder gradually introduces the participant to the daily life of aboriginal clans—the knowledge they possessed, rituals they performed, protocols they kept, and their connection to dreamtime. The Elder presents the participant to clan members, who are performing various tasks such as spear making, tool making, painting, fishing, or preparing food. During these interactions, the participant also learns about aboriginal medicine, astronomy, arts, as well as ceremonies, such as the smoking ceremony, thus learning about their spiritual values. 
            For the purposes of this simulation we have collected information from secondary and primary sources, captured it in text and video, and used motion capture technology to record animations. In close collaboration with Elders, we chose the best form of presentation, preparing the plot of our game (simulation). A problematic issue was the amount of dialogue we planned to use. Here, it was advised to use as little as possible and to depend mostly on non-verbal language and visual inference, so maintaining the historic accuracy. Yet, for the format of our presentation, we decided to use dialogue and written word to communicate with participants, but we are continuing to explore possibilities for meeting this requirement. 
            Second, we built a virtual reality experience, using Oculus Rift and a historical narrative to build an immersive exhibit of aboriginal life. This part of the experience no longer depends on written texts and graphical user interfaces; it fully relies on virtual interactions and dialogue. Due to various responses from our test subjects, which varied from very pleasant experiences to slight motion sickness to vertigo, we have limited the duration of the VR experience to five minutes. We are working to extend this time, better understanding the problems related to the VR simulations. Yet we already acknowledged that the biggest drawback of VR is that it will not suit everyone, and therefore we plan to maintain both 3D and VR experiences. 
            In the consecutive phases we plan to extend our simulation to re-live history through Aboriginal perspectives, from the first contact up until modern times. The goal of this simulation is to put into perspective views from both parties, to understand them and learn from them. Apart from simulating historical events, co-creating the content will open possibilities to include many different life stories and allow for interpretation of historical contexts. 
            The demo of the simulation can be found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aT_mwlobwK8. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, G., Daylight C., Hunt J., et al. (2006). Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Landscape Mapping of Coastal NSW. Prepared for the Comprehensive Coastal Assessment by the NSW Department of Natural Resources, Sydney. 
                    
                    
                        Science
                        . (2011). An Aboriginal Australian Genome Reveals Separate Human Dispersals into Asia. 7 October, 
                        334(6052): 94–98, 
                        
                            doi
                            :
                        
                        10.1126/science.1211177.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The British Library Big Data Experiment: Experimental Interfaces, Experimental Teaching
                
                    
                        Baker
                        James William
                    
                    The British Library, United Kingdom
                    james.baker@bl.uk
                
                
                    
                        Terras
                        Melissa
                    
                    University College London
                    m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Dean
                        Mohamedally
                    
                    University College London
                    D.Mohamedally@cs.ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Tim
                        Weyrich
                    
                    University College London
                    t.weyrich@cs.ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Stefan
                        Alborzpour
                    
                    University College London
                    stefan.alborzpour.13@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Stelios
                        Georgiou
                    
                    University College London
                    stelios.georgiou.13@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Nektaria
                        Stavrou
                    
                    University College London
                    nektaria.stavrou.13@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Wendy
                        Wong
                    
                    University College London
                    wendy.wong.13@ucl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    experiment
                    teaching
                    collaboration
                    computer science
                    infrastructure
                
                
                    interface and user experience design
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    information architecture
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    programming
                    cultural infrastructure
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Many digital humanities–taught programmes aim to engage undergraduate and postgraduate humanists with computational methods and practices (Hirsch, 2012; Cohen and Scheinfeldt, 2013). It is relatively rare, however, to routinely engage computer scientists with the needs, methods, and worldview of historians, literature scholars, librarians, and related researchers (Spiro, 2012). This poster describes an ongoing collaboration between British Library Digital Research
                1 and the UCL Department of Computer Science (UCLCS
                2), facilitated by the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (UCLDH
                3), that enables and engages students in computer science with humanities research issues as part of their core assessed work. We demonstrate that CS students can provide an experimental test-bed for developing, exploring, and exploiting technical infrastructure and digital content in ways that may benefit humanities researchers within a library context. Encouraging students to develop skills in a new (and often foreign) domain encourages their critical thinking and provides real-world, complex issues that stretch and develop their technical abilities as well as their understanding of user requirements. Furthermore, from the problems, issues, and potentials such collaborative working raises, we learn more about the nature of computational infrastructure we rely on for research, and perceptions of the institutions’ core business in delivering digital content. As the British Library has a vision for transforming access to and research with its digital collections, the British Library Big Data Experiment forms an important complement to the British Library’s ongoing infrastructure activities through enabling the development of experimental services that offer unconventional engagement with its digital collections (Farquhar and Baker, 2014). 
            
            All taught programmes in UCLCS require students to undertake an industry exchange
                4 where they work in teams as clients to an industry partner. Though UCLCS has experience with developing student projects in partnership with digital humanists (Martin et al., 2012), industry partners have tended to come from the financial or manufacturing sectors. The British Library Big Data Experiment is an umbrella for a series of activities where the British Library is the client for assessed UCLCS project work, allowing for a rolling, responsive program of experimental design, development, and testing of infrastructure and systems. At agreed milestones during the project, the British Library provides access to required data, knowledge of data structures, and project requirements. UCLCS and UCLDH jointly provide technical and academic support to the student teams. 
            
            In June 2014 the first British Library Big Data Experiment team was convened with a dissertation project, submitted in fulfilment of the MSc in Software Systems Engineering (Georgiou, Stavrou) and Computer Science (Alborzpour, Wong), using a collection of circa 68,000 17th- to 19th-century digitised volumes to underpin the design of a research-oriented web-based service. Microsoft Azure
                5 APIs were implemented that functionally scale to the data, whilst the students worked in close consultation with humanities researchers who may wish to use the capabilities of such a system. The final public output (http://blpublicdomain.azurewebsites.net/) represents an attempt to capture the complex and multifaceted needs of humanities researchers whilst offering unconventional services such as bulk download of text based on metadata queries, word frequency lists, and OCR text previews. Following this successful pilot, the British Library Big Data Experiment is undertaking further collaborative work, including machine learning and mobile app development strands in autumn/winter 2014 and a second MSc dissertation project in summer 2015. 
            
            Both UCLCS and its students have an appetite for embedding problems faced by memory institutions within CS learning outcomes. In partaking in such truly interdisciplinary project work, students develop new skill sets, question their assumptions about the role of library and humanities scholars, and provide useful experimental design within the institutional context. In addition, having CS students engage with humanities scholars as a routine part of their degree allows humanists to understand their research needs and institutional structures, from a different perspective. We present the British Library Big Data Experiment as a model ripe for reuse and we argue that the benefits of such collaborative programmes outweigh potential risks. The Big Data Experiment is, then, both an experiment in teaching and an experiment in involving and integrating those undertaking advanced study in computer science into memory institutions and humanities scholarship. 
            Notes
            1. http://www.bl.uk/ and http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/digital-scholarship/.
            2. http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/.
            3. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh.
            4. http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/business/partnership_programme/.
            5. An open and flexible crowd computing platform for computational processing, https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/ was used in this project due to UCL’s ongoing relationship with Microsoft. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cohen, D. J. and Scheinfeldt, T. (2013). Hacking the Academy: New Approaches to Scholarship and Teaching from Digital Humanities. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor. 
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, B. D. (2012). Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Farquhar, A. and Baker, J. (2014). Interoperable Infrastructures for Digital Research: A Proposed Pathway for Enabling Transformation. Digital Humanities 2014, http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1092550%20.
                    
                    
                        Martin, W., Abdallah, D., El-Abiary, A., Dalbah, Y., Julier, S., Terras, M., Iliffe, R., Hawkins, M. and Weyrich, T. (2012). Newton Spectrum: Nonlinear Text Browsing of a Large Corpus. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities Congress 2012, University of Sheffield, September 2012. 
                    
                    
                        Spiro, L. (2012). Opening Up Digital Humanities Education. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 331–64. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Characteristics of Personae Observed Within Toraakirabon Kyogen Scripts: Extracting Conceptual Words Using Quantitative Analysis
                
                    
                        Kawase
                        Akihiro
                    
                    National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics, Japan
                    kawase.ak@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Kyogen scripts
                    traditional comic drama
                    numerical analysis
                    discourse studies
                    corpus studies
                
                
                    classical studies
                    film and cinema studies
                    text analysis
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This study analyzes 
                Noh farces (farces in the Japanese traditional performing arts), which have not been the subject of natural language processing research until now. The goal of this study is to quantitatively analyze the text of 
                Noh farce scripts from the perspective of vocabulary to verify how the status and roles of the characters are defined. Specifically, this study compares the keywords (unique concepts) of the various statuses and roles by constructing a text corpus of 
                Noh farce character dialogues categorized by status and role, and using co-occurrence networks of frequently occurring vocabulary and statistical indices in order to make the characteristics visible.
            
            
                Noh farces are linguistic corpuses that have had an important position from medieval to early modern times (Keene, 1999). In particular, 
                Noh farces have a very high value as a spoken-language corpus because of the following three points: (1) stories proceed in dialogue format, (2) the conversation portions clearly depict situations and statuses, and (3) characters are diverse and have different statuses and roles.
            
            Therefore, organizing the text of 
                Noh farce scripts into machine-readable formats and executing quantitative analysis not only contributes to the clarification of the actual language spoken in early modern times, but is also significant because it promotes humanities research, such as the history of the Japanese language and descriptive bibliography. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of character speech in 
                Noh farces from a corpus linguistics perspective and deciphers the roles that the people play.
            
            
                Subject of Analysis
            
            The analysis in this study uses the text corpus in the 
                Toraakira Kyōgenshū (
                Toraakira Noh Farce Collection, 1642), a collection digitized, organized, and morphologically analyzed by the National Institute of Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL) (Ogiso et al., 2013). At NINJAL, digitization and morphological analysis have been done thus far on the literature of several ages and styles (e.g., Kawase et al., 2014a; 2014b). The analysis of character dialogue in this text corpus (e.g., Figure 1) was conducted using MeCab Ver.0.993 (Kudo, 2012) with the morphological analysis dictionary exclusive to 
                Noh farces.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Excerpt script of 
                Ebisu Dai-koku from 
                Toraakira Kyōgenshū.
            
            
                Word Frequency Analysis
            
            Here, both TF-IDF (term frequency-inverse document frequency) and CIDF (comparative IDF) used in Murai and Tokosumi (2009) was applied to the 
                Noh farce text corpus, and unique vocabulary was extracted for the status and role for the top 10 characters who spoke the highest number of times. 
                CIDF is an index that defines the desired word 
                t as a ratio of 
                idf
                a (IDF value found based on the number of texts 
                d
                a where that word appeared in all text 
                D
                a) and 
                idf
                g (IDF value found based on the number of texts 
                d
                g where that word appeared in all text 
                D
                g in the specific genre, which is the case in the statuses and roles of the characters):
            
            
                
            
            Table 1 shows the broader terms for the TF-IDF and CIDF value calculated for the nouns that appear in the dialogue between the 
                kaja (servant) who appears most often in the 
                Toraakira Kyōgenshū and the 
                shū (master) who appears the next most often.
            
            
                
            
            Table 1. Extracted keyword lists for 
                kaja and 
                shū using TF-IDF and CIDF.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. A keyword network (co-occurrence network) of 
                kaja.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. A keyword network (co-occurrence network) of 
                shū.
            
            
                Network Centrality Analysis
            
            In order to explore the structure of the concepts for each character, we describe a co-occurrence network of the top 50 words that appeared in the dialogue (e.g., Figures 2 and 3), and applied network analysis techniques to numerically grasp the differences among the networks. More specifically, we used several networking algorithms based on the concept of centrality (e.g., degree, closeness, and eigen value). Table 2 shows the results of a summary of the top 10 values of network centrality for 
                kaja and 
                shū. As given above, effectively using the characteristic vocabulary extracted here gives the ability to define the status and role of the characters in the situation.
            
            
                
            
            Table 2. Values of network centrality for 
                kaja and 
                shū.
            
            
                Conclusions and Future Research
            
            Since 
                Noh farces are for recreation and depict fictional worlds, and viewers understand people, events, and situations by integrating the information they obtain from the background knowledge and text (speech and behavior of the character) (van Dijik and Kintsch, 1983), the result of this study quantitatively clarified the characteristic vocabulary (references and concepts) that defines the statuses and roles of the characteristics in 
                Noh farce script texts. However, 
                Noh farces proceed in dialogue format, and the speech of the characters probably changes when the person listening to the speaker changes. A future topic is to extract the concepts for defining the statuses and roles of the characters more comprehensively and in more detail by analyzing the relationships between the speakers and the people listening, which will promote humanities research in the field of Japanese traditional performing arts.
            
            Funding
            This work was supported by the collaborative research project Design of a Diachronic Corpus and Study of the History of the Japanese Language Using Statistics and Machine Learning carried at the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Kawase, A., Ichimura, T. and Ogiso, T. (2014a). Problems in Encoding Documents of Early Modern Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne, Switzerland, pp. 225–27.
                    
                    
                        Kawase, A., Ichimura, T., and Ogiso, T. (2014b). Quantitative Analysis of Dialogues in 
                        Toraakira Kyōgenshū. 
                        Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of NLP 2014, Baltimore, MD, pp. 662–65.
                    
                    
                        Keene, D. (1999). 
                        A History of Japanese Literature. Vol. 2. 
                        World within Walls. Columbia University Press, New York.
                    
                    
                        Kudo, T. (2012). MeCab: Yet Another Japanese Dependency Structure Analyzer. https://code.google.com/p/mecab/.
                    
                    
                        Murai, H. and Tokosumi, A. (2009). Towards a Quantitative Research Approach to Literary Review: Quantitative Analysis of Book Reviews. 
                        Journal of Japan Society of Information and Knowledge,
                        19(2): 120–25.
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Ichimura, T. and Kouno, T. (2013). Prelminary Study of Morphological Analysis of Early Modern Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Corpus Japanese Linguistics, pp. 145–50.
                    
                    
                        Van Dijik, T. A. and Kintsch, W. (1983). 
                        Strategies of Discourse Comprehension. Academic Press, New York.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Dariah Reference Curriculum for Digital Humanities (DARIAH-RC)
                
                    
                        Schreibman
                        Susan
                    
                    Maynooth University
                    susan.schreibman@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Clivaz
                        Claire
                    
                    University of Lausanne
                    claire.clivaz@unil.ch
                
                
                    
                        Tasovac
                        Toma
                    
                    Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities
                    ttasovac@transpoetika.org
                
                
                    
                        Ping Huang
                        Marianne
                    
                    Aarhus University
                    mph@au.dk
                
                
                    
                        Benardou
                        Agiati
                    
                    Athena Research Center
                    agiati.benardou@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Scagliola
                        Stef
                    
                    Erasmus University Rotterdam
                    scagliola@eshcc.eur.nl
                
                
                    
                        Wandl-Vogt
                        Eveline
                    
                    Austrian Academy of Sciences
                    Eveline.Wandl-Vogt@oeaw.ac.at
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    pedagogy
                    multilingualism
                
                
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In November 2014 a consortium of universities and research centers associated with the European Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities (DARIAH-EU) received an ERAMUS+ grant to establish a strategic partnership in digital humanities teaching. As part of the 30-months grant, Aarhus University (Denmark), the Austrian Academy of Sciences, the Athena Research Center (Greece), the Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities (Serbia), Erasmus University Rotterdam (Netherlands), the Maynooth University (Ireland), and the University of Lausanne (Switzerland) will build an extensible, open-source, and open-access reference curriculum platform and develop modules to promote multilingual DH education. Our poster will present an overview of the project and the results of the first six months of the grant period. The project started on 1 January 2015.
            The DARIAH Reference Curriculum (DARIAH-RC) project builds upon previous initiatives to develop and deliver a model for open-source asynchronous online educational materials from which a wide variety of communities of practice can benefit. 
            The training materials will be designed as building blocks tailored to the exigencies of teaching situations and will be based on a format that allows easy localization and adaptation (via translation, subtitles, domain-specific examples, etc.). The language of all the materials will be English, with translations or subtitles (as appropriate) in the language of the partner-country that will develop specific modules. Moreover, the modules are being developed across multiple disciplines, genres, and formats, including text images, moving images, and sound. 
            The training materials will present content in various degrees of complexity, allowing for use and re-use at different levels and different modalities of education: from formal classroom settings, to professional development in the form of workshops and summer schools, to nonformal individual learners wishing to improve their skills. 
            The direct result of the partnership during the grant period will be the first multilingual collection of DH training materials that is freely available and openly accessible. By embedding and promoting localization principles to the field of DH education and by fostering multilingualism—not only theoretically, but also practically—this partnership will make a significant new contribution to the internationalization of the digital humanities landscape.
            In addition to being directly accessible through our custom-built web platform, the materials will also be hosted by the French national repository HAL, which is maintained by DARIAH-FR (at the joint service unit CCSD of CNRS, Inria, and University of Lyon). 
            The expertise of project and partner countries will be leveraged in the DARIAH-RC project by situating the digital humanities curriculum development in the wider European landscape of digital resources and digital cultural heritage, so that participating institutions start building strategic alliances across disciplinary boundaries. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brier, S. (2012). Where’s the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. K. (ed.)., 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                    
                        Clement, T. (2012). Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills, Principles, and Habits of Mind. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Ives, M. (2014). Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Hitting the Wall and Bouncing Back. 
                        CEA Critic,
                        76(2) (July). 
                    
                    
                        Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (2012). Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers.
                    
                    
                        TEI By Example. (n.d.). http://www.teibyexample.org/.
                    
                    
                        Walzer, L. (2012). Digital Humanities and the ‘Ugly Stepchildren’ of American Higher Education. In Gold, M. K. (ed.)., 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The DH Experience
                
                    
                        Palmer
                        Zachary Selman
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    zspalmer@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Rockwell
                        Geoffrey
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    grockwel@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Ruecker
                        Stan
                    
                    Illinois Institute of Technology
                    sruecker@id.iit.edu
                
                
                    
                        Montague
                        John
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    jmontagu@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Frizzera
                        Luciano
                    
                    Simon Fraser University
                    dosreisf@ualberta.ca
                
                
                    
                        Gil
                        Alex
                    
                    Global Outlook::Digital Humanities
                    colibri.alex@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        O'Donnell
                        Daniel
                    
                    Global Outlook::Digital Humanities
                    daniel.odonnell@uleth.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    game theory
                    interdisciplinarity
                    global DH
                    collaboration
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    games and meaningful play
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Despite the hope that digital humanities is necessarily collaborative, multidisciplinary, and multilingual, plenty of global DH efforts operate without recognition. What projects and centres exist around the world that don’t make it to conferences? And what tools can we use to discover and connect global DH projects?
            Last year, we developed
                 DH Experience, a cooperative serious board game inspired by Matt Leacock’s 
                Pandemic (2008), with the intent of promoting and modelling the global, interdisciplinary, and collaborative character of the digital humanities. With the input of Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH), we have created a new version of the game that has players play with real-life DH centres and projects. Like GO::DH’s Around DH in 80 Days project—the main source for representative global DH efforts used in the board game—
                DH Experience is intended to be a tool for discovery, highlighting worldwide DH research. In this poster presentation, we will
            
             • Introduce the game, demonstrating gameplay and how it relates to the global, collaborative experience of DH.
             • Talk about the testing and reception of the game.
             • Describe GO::DH’s contribution to the 
                DH Experience project.
            
             • Introduce the new, global, reality-based version of the game.
            The Game
            
                DH Experience is a cooperative board game where players take on the roles of DH researchers and professionals racing to complete projects as a group before a window of opportunity passes. Players gather data from a nodal world-map board and contribute that data to a set of available projects while the game itself provides opposition by unpredictably changing the availability of those projects. The object is for the players (as a group) to complete more projects (though not all projects are weighted equally) than those that ‘fall off’ the board as game turns pass. The main challenge of the game lies in determining the most efficient way to use each player’s location, data, special resources, and their role’s skills to tackle projects at the right moments.
            
            
                 DH Experience was initially developed as we were experimenting with visual workflow metaphors. Some of the prototypes we developed (Frizzera et al., 2013) suggested board game spaces, so we decided to experiment with board games as a form of workflow that could be tested in play. The board game let us play with paper prototypes before developing a general workflow editor for the Web, which has now been prototyped under the name Wrkflux (https://github.com/lucaju/Wrkflux). The game, however took on a life of its own as we tested it and imagined it for other uses.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Sample of board and the cards used in the first version of the game. 
            In the presentation, we will demonstrate how the game works and provide copies of the rules, board, and cards needed for participants to play.
            Testing and Reception
            Once the initial rounds of developer ‘balance testing’ were concluded, we engaged in several rounds of play-testing involving both volunteer DH research colleagues and acquaintances who had no connection to DH but are experienced board game players. Footage of a play session is available at http://hucodev.artsrn.ualberta.ca/jmontagu/dh_exp/ (along with PDFs of the materials needed to play yourself). Although expectations were low among almost all parties, both groups reported greatly enjoying the game experience; researchers, regardless of their love of games, are keen on the narrative. Game players, regardless of their research experience, appear to enjoy the game balance and cooperative mechanics. Researchers were able to provide valuable feedback regarding the nature of the research experience, as measured against what the game provided (skill ideas, special-ability card ideas, etc.). Gamers provided valuable game balance and playability feedback (how many cards in the timeline, how quickly resources should appear, etc.). 
            
                DH Experience has also been formally presented at conferences to get feedback from the game studies community: the 2014 Canadian Game Studies Association conference at Brock University and Replaying Japan 2014 at the University of Alberta. On both occasions, every copy of the game was quickly snapped up by interested DH practitioners after the presentation. Informal presentations at DH 2014 in Lausanne had similar results, suggesting that the level of interest was sufficient to redevelop the game with real centres and projects. At that point we partnered with GO::DH.
            
            
                GO::DH’s Around DH in 80 Days Project and 
                DH Experience
            
            Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH) is a Special Interest Group (SIG) of the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations (ADHO). Its purpose is to help break down barriers that hinder communication and collaboration among researchers and students of the digital arts, humanities, and cultural heritage sectors across political, economic, and regional boundaries.
            The origins of GO::DH lie in Melissa Terras’ infographic ‘Quantifying the Digital Humanities’ (http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/dh/2012/01/20/infographic-quantifying-digitalhumanities/). This contained a map showing the distribution of physical centres in the digital humanities (as defined by members of ADHO communities) across the globe. Its most striking feature, however, were the absences: apart from a thin band of centres across the Northern Hemisphere and in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, the majority of the world appeared as ‘empty space’; while digital work in the humanities was being conducted by researchers, teachers, and scholars in these areas, it remained, for the most part, invisible to researchers in the Global North associated with the largest international digital humanities societies and organisations. There was a literal disconnect between researchers in these (largely mid- and low-income economic) regions and those appearing on the map (for the most part found in high-income regions): the researchers were simply not part of the same digital, academic, and social networks.
            The GO::DH approach to breaking down these barriers is extremely practical: the organization develops complementary strengths, interests, abilities, and experiences of its membership through special projects, events, activities, and publicity. Its core activities are discovery, community-building, research, and advocacy. It helps its members learn more about digital work in the arts, humanities, and cultural heritage sectors; it acts to foster collaboration and cooperation across regions and economies; it coordinates research on and in support of the use of technology in these areas across the globe; and it advocates for a global perspective on work in this sector.
            One major example of this approach is the Around DH in 80 Days project, led by GO::DH’s founding vice chair Alex Gil. Around DH is an online project intended to foster discovery of current DH projects from around the world, beginning as a (still open) collaborative spreadsheet of DH projects populated by volunteers suggesting different projects by region. Eighty projects were featured—one per day—at www.arounddh.org, with introductory summaries of the projects edited by a team of editors from around the world. All the projects are displayed as nodes on an interactive map.
            The New Game
            The new incarnation of 
                DH Experience builds on GO::DH’s Around DH in 80 Days project. To transform 
                DH Experience’s hypothetical projects and centres into real ones, we used the Around DH master list, and we anticipate using similar means to keep the game up to date. Using GO::DH’s list of global DH centres, we modified the first design of the board to feature broader geographic regions as spaces, rather than just significant urban areas. A modular deck of cards highlights participating DH centres. Similarly, we updated the project cards to feature actual DH work being performed around the world. With these changes, 
                DH Experience can be used to explore the global and collaborative nature of DH through a board game. It now introduces players to some of the main global actors within DH. Like Around DH in 80 Days, the game can serve as an introduction to the global scope of DH research—a tool for mutual discovery. 
            
            While the game is played physically, it exists and is distributed as a freely printable document on the Web, allowing us and others to adapt the board and cards easily, should other centres or projects request to be represented in the game. More to the point, we believe that some of what makes the game engaging is the iterative redesign of the game, whether changing the board, rules, or cards. For this reason we maintain the game as a living document, updating the components to highlight new projects and centres by request.
            Conclusion
            Why a board game? As discussed above, the initial reason was experimentation with workflow as a way of representing information. Games offer ‘players continual opportunities to learn, solve problems, and become more skilled. That is, indeed, what makes [. . .] games fun’ (Gee, 2005, 29). Games for us offer a way of testing interface ideas (while having fun). We think of play as a method for producing new knowledge (Thomas and Brown, 2007), and game design as part of research play. This poster presentation will include reflections on game design as an iterative method for the digital humanities.
            Finally, we understand that designed gameplay—especially gameplay modelling life—comes laden with our own assumptions and limited perspectives. Far from intending to reify these assumptions, we instead hope to offer this game as a provocation or a starting point to ask more questions of the intersection between games and scholarship. Are there models of DH research that this game occludes? Where are the points of friction between simulation and elegant, engaging gameplay? What other mechanics, modes of play, or entire games could the DH theme support? 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Frizzera, L., Radzikowska, M., Roeder, G., Peña, E., Dobson, T., Ruecker, S., Rockwell, G., Brown, S. and the INKE Research Group. (2013). A Visual Workflow Interface for the Editorial Process. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(4): 615–28.
                    
                    Gee, J. P. (2005). 
                        Why Video Games Are Good for Your Soul: Pleasure and Learning. Common Ground Publishing, Melbourne.
                    
                    Leacock, M. (2008). 
                        Pandemic. Z-Man Games, Mahopac, NY.
                    
                    Russell, I. G. (2014). Geographical and Linguistic Diversity in the Digital Humanities. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, advanced access, DOI:10.1093/llc/fqu005.
                    
                    Thomas, D. and Brown, J. S. (2007). The Play of Imagination: Extending the Literary Mind. 
                        Games and Culture, 2(2): 149–72, doi:10.1177/1555412007299458.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Enchantment of Civilization/Civility: the Digital Humanity Study of the “Obsession” with “Wenming”(文明) in Modern China
                
                    
                        Yang
                        Jui-sung
                    
                    National Chengchi University, Taiwan, Republic of China
                    jyang@nccu.edu.tw
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    Wenmin
                    Civilizaton
                    Civility
                    China
                    Japan
                
                
                    historical studies
                    asian studies
                    cultural studies
                    translation studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            One key issue in the study of humanities and social sciences is to figure out clearly the formation of certain important ideas and concepts. Traditionally, this kind of investigation is usually carried out based on informed speculations at best. Thanks to the new methods informed by digital humanities study, the elusive process of idea formation can now be examined more accurately. By means of these methods, we can observe the trajectory of idea formation, tracing important development of ideas in terms of key word analysis. As a result, we can not only pinpoint the origin of ideas but also realize how their meanings develop and change in different historical contexts. 
            It is almost impossible for any visitor to today’s China to fail to notice the popularity of the term ‘wenming’ (civilization/civility) in public life. Various kinds of posters commonly invoke the term ‘wenming’ in their slogans to exhort citizens to have manners, to behave properly in public life. For example, even in the public restrooms, salient slogans such as ‘a little step forward, a giant step toward wenming’ are used to remind people of urinating in the right place. Indeed, as is well known, since the late 19th century, the term ‘wenming’ had been widely used in China to honor the European ‘modern/advanced’ ways of life and institutions. Many Chinese intellectuals had come to describe the European nations as ‘wenming guo’ (civilized nations), which are paradigms for China to emulate. To be sure, ‘wenming’ was used as a prefix to describe explicitly many things coming from the West. For example, the Western gentleman’s cane was translated in China as ‘wenming gu’ (civilized stick). In short, the popularity of the term ‘wenming’ is very indicative of the enchantment of the modern (Western) way of life in modern China, especially from the late 19th century to the mid-20th century. 
            However, after the Chinese Communist Party took power in 1949, many Western things were denounced as ‘capitalistic’ and ‘imperialist’ and therefore no longer appreciated, according to the official ideology. On the other hand, nationalism and patriotism are emphasized more to boost national pride. Still, intriguingly, under such circumstances, the term ‘wenming’ did not lose its allure and became even more popular. PRC government propaganda has adopted this term to strongly promulgate ‘civic orders’, to stress the importance of proper manners in public life. In other words, ‘wenming’ has come to stand for ‘civility’ rather than ‘things explicitly Western’. In a way, that many behavior codes originating from the West are now promoted as ‘wenming’ ways of life—i.e., universal, civilized ways of life—symbolizes a cultural policy and strategy aiming to maintain a balance between modernization and westernization. 
            My study of the changing meaning of the concept ‘wenming’ (civilization/civility) in modern China is based on the rich resource provided by the database of Modern Chinese Intellectual and Literature History (1830–1930), which includes more than 120 million words from original important historical texts. In addition, the whole content of 
                People’s Daily (1946–present) is now available online, which can provide a lot of related information concerning ‘wenming’ in the modern period. In order to explore deeply the historical significance of this idea in modern China, I aim to study it with the help of the digital humanities. First of all, I will utilize the ‘pat-tree’ and ‘key word search’ methods to analyze the discourse contexts in which ‘wenming’ was used in various historical situations. Moreover, I will investigate the frequency of the appearance of this key term in important journals during the period between the late 19th century and the early 20th century, a crucial period for the construction of modern China’s collective identity. Third, I will try to analyze the significance of its appearance with other important terms, such as ‘modernity’, to further explore how these ‘family terms’ were utilized in shaping the modern Chinese collective identity and consciousness. 
            
            My initial investigation of the origin of the modern meaning of ‘wenming’ has revealed that modern Japan might be the source. In the late 19th century this term was transmitted to China from Japan, where the Western nations were also highly regarded as the models to follow. Indeed, the historical fact of this development is strongly supported by the findings based on digital methods. By surveying the aforementioned database in terms of the key word ‘wenming’, I have found that the high frequency of using the term ‘wenming’ in its modern meaning appeared in a number of famous journals published after in Japan by the exiled Chinese intellectuals and students there. By more clearly pinpointing the trajectory of the idea ‘wenming’ transmitting from Japan to China, my study will illuminate further the complicated relationship between China and Japan in terms of their modernization and Westernization processes. 
            By historicizing and denaturalizing the key term ‘wenming’ in the discourse of modern China, my study will not only closely probe into a new set of issues, shedding new light on our understanding of modern Chinese identity, but also demonstrate the power and importance of digital methods in the study of intellectual and cultural history.
        
    



    
        
            
                The Harpur Critical Archive
                
                    
                        Eggert
                        Paul R
                    
                    Loyola University Chicago, University of New South Wales Canberra
                    peggert@luc.edu
                
                
                    
                        Schmidt
                        Desmond Allan
                    
                    Loyola University Chicago, University of New South Wales Canberra
                    desmond.allan.schmidt@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Charles Harpur
                    scholarly edition
                    critical archive
                    MVD
                    AustESE
                
                
                    literary studies
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    scholarly editing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The Harpur Critical Archive (HCA) is both a digital archive and a scholarly edition of the poetic works of Charles Harpur. It addresses complex problems of availability that are a direct result of Harpur’s life story.
            Born in 1813 in colonial NSW only 25 years after European settlement, Harpur was Australia’s first important native-born poet. Although of ex-convict stock he acquired a literary education. His poetry would be deeply in tune with the contemporary taste for wild nature and the sublime. Although he would never become a radical original in his poetry, he was easily able to master 18th-century verse forms and was equally at home with the blank verse of the Romantics, with its flexible imitation of the tones of the speaking voice and the inner rhythms of thought.
            His mission would be to give poetic expression to the shared colonial experience of a natural antipodean world. He began contributing poems to the Sydney newspapers in 1833. The young man soon proved adept not only at love poems but at satires and squibs usually directed at his natural enemies, the Exclusivists, who separated themselves from those like Harpur with the convict taint. An Australian patriot, he was soon preaching republican, as opposed to monarchist, politics in the vain attempt to secure independence from Britain for the still-young colony. He signed one of his manuscript volumes resonantly: ‘Charles Harpur / An Australian’. He added long prose notes to the newspaper appearances of his poems to prosecute his various agendas.
            Unluckily for Harpur, the local book-publishing industry would not get onto a royalty-paying footing for literature until the 1890s, more than two decades after his death in 1868. Never wealthy, Harpur could not pay to be published in book form. Newspapers were his only option. From the 1840s, he kept cuttings of his poems as they appeared. In his later years, yearning for a London book publication that would never happen, he copied out, revised, and sequenced his newspaper and manuscript poems into manuscript books. At his death there were 24 such compilations, now in the Mitchell Library in Sydney, as well as nearly 800 newspaper appearances. There were also some pamphlets of his poems; a number were appended to his play 
                The Bushrangers published in 1853, and a posthumous volume appeared in 1883, a substantial selection organised by his widow but edited by a literary gentleman who adapted and abridged the poems to meet the new tastes of the day.
            
            In total, then, for the period to 1900 we have over 2,800 versions of some 700-odd works, some of which are very long. Capturing the documentary evidence, presenting edited reading texts, annotating them, and collating the variant versions has been recognised as a scholarly necessity since the late 1940s but has never been realised in book or any other form. The HCA aims to make good by seeking simple rather than complicated digital solutions. 
            The conceptualisation behind the technical design has been crucial. The project has two, linked expressions: archival and editorial. The archival expression aimed to gather and display the basic data: digital images of each manuscript page and newspaper or other printed appearance, and transcriptions of each one. This took about four years. The 5,000 manuscript pages were transcribed in a simplified subset of TEI-XML by master’s students at Jadavpur University in India, specially employed for the job. The transcriptions were painstakingly checked in Melbourne by a specialist research assistant, who also transcribed the newspaper poems. Along with copies of the tiff and jpeg images, the transcriptions are now archived by the Sydney University Library in its D-Space database. It can store files for preservation purposes but never delete or modify them. Done under a signed agreement, this arrangement ensures long-term storage by an institution well set up to provide it and with an interest in doing so.
            This arrangement is a fail-safe; a Google search will find these files, which by themselves are not user-friendly; but metadata directs the user to our site, charles-harpur.org. That in turn flicks the user to the government-funded NeCTAR cloud-server that actually hosts the HCA. The project has a back end where the files are stored and managed, and where the editor and any registered collaborators work. There is also a public-facing front end, where readers will find a variety of ways of accessing and understanding Harpur’s oeuvre.
            For the editorial expression of the HCA project, the facsimile images of the manuscripts and ephemeral printed objects are the central resource. Apart from the 5,000 manuscript pages professionally scanned in colour from the originals in the Mitchell Library, we have nearly 800 images from newspapers, using TROVE wherever possible, and images of another 500 pages from book, pamphlet, and broadside printed materials. Harpur’s correspondence is also represented. Readers are thus now in a position to understand the actual material basis of the editorial endeavour that has produced the reading texts that they encounter. 
            We envisage various categories of reader. Schoolteachers not knowing the titles or first lines in advance but wanting a few poems on rivers, or about the bush or Aborigines, will be able to find them via the subject index. It was semi-automatically generated from the subject terms given to Harpur’s poems indexed for the AustLit database. Local historians from, say, the NSW south coast or the Hunter Valley or the Hawkesbury—all of which Harpur celebrated—can similarly find what they are looking for. Social historians wanting to gather evidence of Harpur’s interventions in colonial debates, or literary critics wishing to follow the gradual unfolding of his poetic career, will have, via a timeline of biographical events and Harpur’s compositions, reliable datings and reading texts for the actual versions written at any particular time—rather than, as previously, being restricted to texts of works of indeterminate date. That traditional aesthetic perspective is now being productively complicated by the historical one at version rather than work level offered by the HCA.
            The back-end system is based on AustESE, a NeCTAR-funded project for writing tools for scholarly editing, based at the University of Queensland during 2012–2013. Its ontology provides a model of the primary associations between people, material objects, and the concepts commonly used in scholarly editing. The primary classes of the ontology are Artefact, Version, Work, Agent, and Event. 
                The AustESE WorkBench acts as a repository for transcription files and image files. Each such digital resource then serves as a target for analysis, specifically for annotation and textual commentary. As the user-creator adds metadata, relationships or associations among the digital surrogates are automatically asserted. A text-to-image linking tool allows the user to create links between individual words on the page of a manuscript or printed text and its transcription, mostly automatically. A minimal markup editor allows editing to be performed in an environment that presents together the page image and its transcription, together with a live preview of how the edited text will appear in the final reading text. These three components are scrolled synchronously, so that the editor never loses track of which part of the page-image corresponds to the section of text being edited. There is also an events editor that can deal with fuzzy dates and an editor for creating ordinary HTML documents intended for the scholarly editor’s use in creating annotations and introductory materials.
            
            
                A Multi Version Documents (MVD) service allows the assembly and textual collation of versions of the same work, thus providing the basic data for the editor’s commentary and text-editing. The TEI-XML files are first separated into text and markup. If those versions contain deletions and additions, they are automatically separated out into layers of alteration, which may also be manually adjusted to show chronologically linked revisions. No traditional textual apparatus display is necessary since the archival recording and listing of editorial emendations that it provided are now taken care of by other means. Simplicity has been our touchstone, together with our belief that the archive does not replace the edition, especially not its provision of reading texts, textual commentary, and other annotation.
            
            Although the users of the system are, in the first instance, the project creator and any assigned collaborators, AustESE allows later users to be granted permissions to add, for example, new annotations, transcriptions, or images. Thus the project need never be closed.
            One obvious moment to publish is at the point when the archival capture appears to be complete, and the more interpretative editorial stage is about to begin. As the editorial phase progresses, further publication in tranches may be conveniently done. It is likely that Sydney University Press will be the publisher of the HCA, probably in EPUB3 format. These products will likely be sold commercially. Each one will be a subset of the project aimed at a particular audience and responding to a perceived need, even as the website of the whole HCA remains open and free. The press appears content with this arrangement of combining two of the dominant digital media of today in a single scholarly publishing enterprise. 
        
    



    
        
            
                The History and Provenance of Cultural Heritage Collections: New Approaches to Analysis and Visualization
                
                    
                        Burrows
                        Toby Nicolas
                    
                    King's College London
                    toby.burrows@uwa.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Cultural heritage
                    provenance
                    manuscripts
                    graph databases
                
                
                    medieval studies
                    metadata
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Each object in contemporary cultural heritage collections has its own history and its own historical significance, as Neil McGregor demonstrated so vividly with one hundred objects chosen from the collections of the British Museum (McGregor, 2010). An important part of that history is the process by which each object came to reside in its current location and its current collection. Each object has usually been part of a series of collections over its lifetime, and this movement of objects between collections has its own history. Similarly, each collection has its own history of formation and (usually) dispersal. These collections include personal and individual collections, private institutional collections, and modern public collections.
            These relationships between cultural objects, collectors, and collections over time are an important example of what Alan Liu has described as ‘network archaeology’ (Liu, 2012) —the recovery and analysis of cultural, social, and artistic relationships at a particular period of time. As well as studying how and why some objects survived while others did not, and how and why the ownership of these objects changed, this ‘network archaeology’ can also address several larger research questions. Cultural collections can reflect broader historical trends and are shaped by them. In the European context, these include the dissolution of religious institutions, the decline of royal and aristocratic patronage, the rise of public cultural institutions (especially museums and libraries), the emergence of wealthy collectors in the industrial era, European global expansion and imperial power, and the repatriation of cultural objects. The network of relationships between people and institutions involved in the ownership and transmission of cultural collections can also reveal a good deal about the more general networks of cultural influence and social and political relationships in a particular society.
            In the 19th century, the English collector Sir Thomas Phillipps (1792–1872) assembled the largest private collection of European medieval and early modern manuscripts and documents. It is estimated to have contained more than 40,000 items, making it considerably larger than most of the collections in public institutions today, and included many manuscripts of considerable historical, textual, and artistic significance. The manuscripts had very varied geographical origins across Western Europe, are written in various different European languages, and cover a wide range of different subjects and topics. Their modern locations are spread across the globe—the dispersal of the Phillipps Collection took place gradually over more than one hundred years, and numerous institutions and collectors were involved. As a result, the history of the Phillipps Collection provides a much richer and more varied set of data than a single contemporary institutional collection would provide.
            In this paper, I will report on a project to reconstruct and analyse the history and provenance of the manuscripts that formed the Phillipps Collection. The scale of the Phillipps Collection has proved a significant challenge to traditional research methods in the past; the English librarian A. N. L. Munby spent more than a decade compiling a overview of Phillipps’ collecting activities and of the dispersal of the collection up to the mid-1950s (Munby, 1951–1960). In this project I am employing innovative data modeling and analysis techniques to build a digital environment for tracing the entire history of these manuscripts, as far as it can be known. I am interested in mapping the provenance events and ownership networks that, taken together, constitute the history of these thousands of manuscripts over hundreds of years. 
            My paper will focus particularly on four key technical aspects of the project.
             • 
                Frameworks for modeling and representing the data relating to ownership and provenance, using an event-based approach
            
             Events are central to provenance research, but they have proved difficult to represent in existing ontologies and data models, with a variety of different approaches being used. I will discuss the various alternatives—including CIDOC-CRM and the Europeana Data Model—before presenting my own approach based on property graphs (Blanke et al., 2013).
             • 
                Techniques for importing and combining existing data relating to manuscript histories
            
             The existing data relating to the Phillipps manuscripts are scattered across numerous digital and physical sources, in multiple languages. They are, inevitably, in a variety of different formats and schemas, ranging from relational databases and MARC records to handwritten notes and card indexes. Capturing these data and aligning them to a common data model are complex tasks that require multiple ingestion paths and crosswalks.
             • 
                The deployment of suitable software to manage the data and to support analysis and visualization
            
             Suitable software is critical for a project of this kind. I will report on the options available, and discuss the reasons for my choice of the graph database software Neo4j to store, manage, and present the data (Van Bruggen, 2014). Like Blanke et al. (2013), I consider that graph databases are a good fit for ‘how humanities researchers think about their data and its relationships’. I will also discuss the implementation of the data model for aggregating the provenance data used in this project.
             • 
                Methods for visualizing and analyzing the data produced by the project, and for making them available for re-use by other researchers
            
             I will look at a series of use cases and research questions related to the aggregated data, and will demonstrate how Neo4j can be used to produce analyses and visualizations in response to these requirements. I will also discuss methods for linking the data produced by this project with the wider Linked Data cloud, in order to enable wider contextualization and analysis. I will compare the results made possible by my software environment and data model with those produced by the Schoenberg Database of Manuscripts—a relational database that focuses on manuscript provenance. The graph database approach enables more sophisticated and complex pattern-matching across the full range of provenance data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blanke, T., Bryant, M. and Hedges, M. (2013). Back to Our Data—Experiments with NoSQL Technologies in the Humanities. Paper presented at 
                        2013 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Santa Clara, CA, 6–9 October 2013.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2012). Remembering Networks: Agrippa, RoSE, and Network Archaeology. Paper presented at 
                        Network Archaeology Conference, Miami University, Miami, OH, 21 April 2012.
                    
                    
                        McGregor, N. (2010). 
                        A History of the World in 100 Objects. Allen Lane, London.
                    
                    
                        Munby, A. N. L. (1951–1960). 
                        Phillipps Studies, 5 vols. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Van Bruggen, R. (2014). 
                        Learning Neo4j. Packt Publishing, Birmingham, UK.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The History of Science in the Age of Networked Digital Humanities
                
                    
                        Weldon
                        Stephen P.
                    
                    University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, United States
                    stephenpweldon@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Ratowt
                        Sylwester
                    
                    University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, United States
                    sylwesterr@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Railiene
                        Birute
                    
                    Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences, Vilnius, Lithuania
                    b.railiene@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Smith
                        Ailie
                    
                    The University of Melbourne, Australia
                    ailie.smith@unimelb.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        La Rosa
                        Marco
                    
                    The University of Melbourne, Australia
                    m@lr.id.au
                
                
                    
                        McCarthy
                        Gavan
                    
                    The University of Melbourne, Australia
                    gavan.mccarthy@unimelb.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Panel / Multiple Paper Session
                
                
                    History of Science
                    Bibliography
                    Networks
                    Standards
                    XML
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    xml
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This session reports on a significant information infrastructure project in the history of science as the discipline prepares itself to deal with the major scholarly and societal challenges of the 21st century. History of science scholars are seeking new analytical tools and research methodologies and are looking to computer-aided tools that utilise well-structured data. The session is drawn from participants in an international collaborative project between the History of Science Society, the University of Oklahoma, the University of Melbourne, and the Division of History of Science of the International Union of the History and Philosophy of Science. Simply stated, the IsisCB project is taking 100 years of history of science bibliographic data and transforming it into a web or graph of information objects that represent not just the cited works but, more importantly, the people, organisations, events, subjects, themes, and time periods of the world captured in the work of the historians. The project involves digitisation of print-only materials, optical character recognition, computer-aided parsing, semantic transforms, large-scale data transfer, industrial‐scale search and faceted browse facilities, visual analytics, application programming interfaces, and user‐facing design. It involves taking a community and a well-established print-focused way of working on a revolutionary change process to create an open, persistent, citable, high-quality data source that will be amenable to utilisation using linked data protocols and technologies.
            The history of science is a global, multidisciplinary endeavour that seeks to help us understand one of the most potent forces that has shaped contemporary society—namely, science. Although often represented as a discipline in its own right, practitioners are frequently located in other disciplinary settings, such as history, philosophy, population health, medicine, social science, and media and communication studies. Its themes and studies, while often starting with a local story, inevitably, like the science itself, document networks and interconnections that cover all continents. In the early 20th century, a community of practice began to emerge in Europe as historians of science started to formalise their own networks and communication channels. In 1913 they created the
                 Isis Current Bibliography of the History of Science, and it has been maintained as an annual print‐based bibliography ever since. The latest edition was published by the History of Science Society in 2014 and included references to over 4,000 scholarly works. The total corpus will comprise hundreds of thousands of records and millions of relationships and will continue to grow. 
            
            The three papers will be presented by members of the IsisCB project working group, covering a range of the technical and informatic challenges, and exploring the opportunities for the history of science discipline emerging as a result of the development of the IsisCB web resource.
            
                1. Mapping the History of a Discipline through Curated Bibliographic Data: A Case Study of Social Networks as Found in the Isis Bibliography of the History of Science, 1913–2013
            
            Stephen P. Weldon
            University of Oklahoma
            Sylwester Ratowt
            University of Oklahoma 
            Birute Railiene
            Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences 
            John Stewart
            University of Oklahoma
            The 100-year-old Isis Bibliography is a valuable data resource for exploring the development of the field of history of science over the course of the 20th century. The recent collaborative project between the Isis Bibliography of the History of Science and the eScholarship Research Centre (ESRC) at the University of Melbourne has created a robust digital research dataset consisting of over 300,000 bibliographic citation records going back to 1913. The new tool, called the IsisCB Platform, is more than a bibliographic database; it makes use of bibliographic data but supplements that data with links to other content using Linked Open Data protocols. 
            To create this tool, we have had to ingest new data and rethink how bibliographic data can be used in a big-data, computational environment. Part of the IsisCB project involved digitizing 60 years of data in several volumes of cumulative print bibliographies. We are now parsing and merging this data with 40 years of born-digital data. The combined bibliographic dataset covers 100 years and spans the period in which history of science developed as an academic discipline. By reconceptualizing this dataset as a resource linking publications, institutions, and people, it becomes an information-rich resource that can be used to tell the story of scholarship in this area over the 20th century. 
            This paper serves two functions. First, it introduces the IsisCB Platform and explains how the bibliographic dataset has been reconceptualized so as to create a scholarly tool with multiple research capabilities. Second, the paper provides a brief example of how a subset of this data can be used to explore the history of the discipline itself. By using computational tools, we can address historical questions about the social, institutional, and intellectual history of the scholars themselves. It will be shown how the IsisCB data can serve as the foundation for digital humanities research when it has been thoughtfully restructured in the right way.
            Bibliographic records contain extensive information about the institutional and publication information of people. Information scholars working on social network analysis have developed various ways of comparing and understanding multiple kinds of networks that can be produced from bibliographic data (Batagelj and Cerinšek, 2013). We will be employing some of these methods. Recent work in social network analysis has shown the utility of bibliographic datasets for exploring history of disciplinary change in the humanities (So and Long, 2013). Such an analysis has not yet been done to any great extent in the field of history of science, but the field is ripe for this kind of work (Laubichler, Maienschein, and Renn, 2013). 
            The composition of the Isis Bibliography dataset over the years makes this analysis both possible and exciting. The Isis Bibliography contains full author, title, and citation information for each of its entries. Unlike some bibliographic databases, the Isis Bibliography also has classifications or subject index terms for most of the items, along with descriptive material for many of them. Moreover, because there have been relatively few bibliographers over the years, there has been a great deal of consistency in the categorization and tagging of the records (Weldon, 2013a).
            Finally, the Isis Bibliography contains the best set of information on the academic network of historians of science. The first installment of the Isis Bibliography was one of the critical moments in the founding of the discipline. George Sarton published his bibliography in 1913 in the first issue of his journal 
                Isis. Over the next couple of decades, Sarton and several other scholars in Europe and America began producing bibliographies, publishing journals, and holding conferences. These would ultimately lead to the creation of a small but dedicated community of scholars focused on the study of the history of science. As the discipline grew, so did the Isis Bibliography. 
            
            We will conclude our paper by looking at how data in the IsisCB can illuminate historical questions. We will build a few network graphs to help us analyze the scholarly genealogy of the discipline. We will try to tease out some of the stories that lie buried within it: Which universities and research institutes have been instrumental to the growth of the discipline? How so? In what ways has gender played a role in the development of the discipline? Do the data help us identify national styles? In the end, the paper will showcase preliminary results of our analysis to show how bibliographic data can be applied in new and unique ways when the data are made available in accessible ways.
            References
            
                Alfonso-Goldfarb, A. M., Waisse, S. and Ferraz, M. H. M. (2013). From Shelves to Cyberspace: Organization of Knowledge and the Complex Identity of History of Science. 
                Isis,
                104(3): 551–60, doi:10.1086/673274.
            
            
                Allen, C. and the I Group. (2013). Cross-Cutting Categorization Schemes in the Digital Humanities. 
                Isis,
                104(3): 573–83, doi:10.1086/673276.
            
            
                Alsukhni, M. and Zhu, Y. (2012). Interactive Visualization of the Social Network of Research Collaborations. 
                2012 IEEE 13th International Conference on Information Reuse &amp; Integration (IRI), doi:10.1109/IRI.2012.6303017.
            
            
                Anderson, R. J. (2013). The Organization and Description of Science Archives in America. 
                Isis,
                104(3): 561–72, doi:10.1086/673275.
            
            
                Batagelj, V. and Cerinšek, M. (2013). On Bibliographic Networks. 
                An International Journal for All Quantitative Aspects of the Science of Science, Communication in Science and Science Policy,
                96(3): 845–64, doi:10.1007/s11192-012-0940-1.
            
            
                Coscia, M., Giannotti, F. and Pensa, R. (2009). Social Network Analysis as Knowledge Discovery Process: A Case Study on Digital Bibliography. 
                2009 International Conference on Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, doi:10.1109/ASONAM.2009.65.
            
            
                Huang, Z., Yan, Y., Qiu, Y. and Qiao, S. (2009). Exploring Emergent Semantic Communities from DBLP Bibliography Database. 
                2009 International Conference on Advances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, doi:10.1109/ASONAM.2009.6.
            
            
                Laubichler, M. D., Maienschein, J. and Renn, J. (2013). Computational Perspectives in the History of Science: To the Memory of Peter Damerow. 
                Isis,
                104(1), 119–30, doi:10.1086/669891.
            
            
                Mattison, D. (2010). The Twittering of the Search World (LiveLinks). 
                Searcher,
                18(7): 24.
            
            
                Mullins, N. C. and Mullins, C. J. (1973). 
                Theories and Theory Groups in Contemporary American Sociology. Harper &amp; Row.
            
            
                Schatten, M. (2013). What Do Croatian Scientists Write About? A Social and Conceptual Network Analysis of the Croatian Scientific Bibliography. 
                Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems,
                11(2): 190.
            
            
                Sidiropoulos, A. (2012). Finding Communities in Site Web-Graphs and Citation Graphs, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1208.5464.pdf.
            
            
                So, R. J. and Long, H. (2013). Network Analysis and the Sociology of Modernism. 
                Boundary 2,
                40(2): 147–82, doi:10.1215/01903659-2151839.
            
            
                Tang, J., Zhang, D. and Yao, L. (2007). Social Network Extraction of Academic Researchers. 
                Seventh IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2007), doi:10.1109/ICDM.2007.30.
            
            
                Weldon, S. P. (2013a). Bibliography Is Social: Organizing Knowledge in the Isis Bibliography from Sarton to the Early Twenty-First Century. 
                Isis,
                104(3), 540–50, doi:10.1086/673273.
            
            
                Weldon, S. P. (2013b). Introduction. 
                Isis,
                104(3): 537–39, doi:10.1086/673272.
            
            
                Yan, E. and Ding, Y. (2012). Scholarly Network Similarities: How Bibliographic Coupling Networks, Citation Networks, Cocitation Networks, Topical Networks, Coauthorship Networks, and Coword Networks Relate to Each Other. 
                Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                63(7): 1313–26, doi:10.1002/asi.22680.
            
            
                2. Why Standards Are Critical: Graphing Knowledge by Building on Well‐Established Entity‐Relationship Standards Can Look Well into the Future
            
            Ailie Smith
            University of Melbourne
            Marco La Rosa
            University of Melbourne
            Through its history as the Australian Science Archives Project (1985–1999), and the Australian Science and Technology Heritage Centre (1999–2007) (eScholarship Research Centre, n.d.), the eScholarship Research Centre (ESRC) at the University of Melbourne has well‐established links with the international history of science community. Since 2014 the ESRC has been collaborating with Dr. Stephen Weldon from the University of Oklahoma on an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation–funded project, the Isis Document Indexing Platform: A Curated and Community‐Based Resource for History of Science.
            The ESRC has been using the World Wide Web to publish and disseminate history of science and other humanities datasets—including bibliographic data, archival descriptive data, and contextual information—since the mid‐1990s. Examples of these are web resources such as the 
                Frank Macfarlane Burnet Guide to Records (McCarthy et al., 2001) and the 
                Encyclopedia of Australian Science (eScholarship Research Centre, 2012), which includes bibliographic records from the ‘Bibliography of the History of Australian Science’, published annually in 
                Historical Records of Australian Science (Cohn, 2014).
            
            These resources are created from data captured in two systems developed by the ESRC: the Online Heritage Resource Manager (OHRM) and the Heritage Documentation Management System (HDMS). Both of these systems are based on international archival descriptive standards (ISAD[G] and ISAAR[CPF]) (International Council on Archives, 2000; 2004) and have long been used for the generation of HTML outputs for dissemination of information as web resources. However, these outputs are not readily sharable with other organisations or other resources operating in a similar sphere, resulting in limited reuse of this data and increased potential for duplication of work.
            The increasing use of Extensible Markup Language (XML) schemas by information professionals to enable system interoperability, data sharing, and data reuse has provided the ESRC with greater opportunities to collaborate, to rethink the way we present information online, to share data with and harvest data from other systems, and to represent and reinterpret data through the use of a variety of search and analytical tools.
            By generating Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS), Encoded Archival Description (EAD), and Encoded Archival Context–Corporate Bodies, Persons and Families (EAC‐CPF) (Library of Congress, 2013a; 2013b; Staatsbibliothek Zu Berlin, 2012) XML outputs for these resources—in parallel with the web presentation HTML outputs—the ESRC can make better use of the data underpinning these resources. This includes not only the applications and services developed to display and navigate individual datasets but also the capacity to build services that run across a range of datasets, and to harvest and share data with external sources at national and international levels to improve collaboration and extend the use of the data beyond individual research projects.
            It was a natural progression for the ESRC to begin working with Dr. Stephen Weldon from the University of Oklahoma on the Isis Document Indexing Platform: A Curated and Community‐Based Resource for History of Science project. The IsisCB web resource brings together 100 years of bibliographic records from the 
                Isis Current Bibliography of the History of Science (‘About Isis CB’) with the technology base of the ESRC to create a rich, searchable, contextualised online resource for exploring publications relating to the history of science. Working with researchers from the University of Oklahoma, the ESRC is helping to create XML records, develop ingests of XML and free‐text content, and build on existing technology platforms to create search and browse interfaces for interacting with the bibliographic data. This work will take resources that have previously been available in static print formats and allow them to be explored and recompiled in new ways, providing a valuable tool for historians of science.
            
            The work on the IsisCB Platform builds on a range of technology developments that the ESRC has undertaken and collaborated on over recent years, making use of XML data. Internally, the ESRC has been developing indexing, search, and faceted browse and filtering capabilities using XML data and Solr/Lucene technology, supported by high-availability, large-scale server infrastructure that has been developed and continues to be supported in-house (La Rosa et al., 2014). In addition, XML data are being used by the ESRC to develop flexible online presentation of humanities datasets that are targeted at the needs of specific user communities.
            Externally, two of the ESRC’s web resources began being harvested in 2010 by the National Library of Australia’s Trove service (Dewhurst, 2010), which had adopted the EAC‐CPF schema for harvesting information about people and organisations and their related records and publications (Dewhurst, 2008)
                . XML data from a number of ESRC resources have also been harvested by the Humanities Networked Infrastructure (HuNI) project (Deakin University, 2014), and the underlying data structure has been mapped to the Registry Interchange Format–Collections and Services (RIF‐CS) schema used by Australian National Data Service (ANDS) for their Research Data Australia registry (Australian National Data Service, n.d.). Through collaborations with other professionals—within and beyond information professions—the eScholarship Research Centre is contributing to and developing research infrastructure, information resources, and public knowledge spaces that widely communicate humanities research data.
            
            With a focus on the development of the Isis Document Indexing Platform, this paper will investigate the ESRC’s experience in the development and utilization of MODS, EAD, and EAC‐CPF XML data exported from its systems, and the collaboration with other researchers to develop XML outputs from their own systems. It will also look at a range of tools and services that leverage the standards‐based XML outputs to allow researchers to explore, interrogate, and present the data in order to reinterpret and derive new understandings of it, and the technologies that underpin these services. The paper will also discuss the potential to better engage with public search interfaces such as Google by including schema.org markup metadata in web templates in order for resources to reach a wider audience (Starr, 2014). The paper will explore the way the standards‐based approach will help to create the Isis Document Indexing Platform as a sustainable history of science resource well into the future.
            References
            
                ‘About Isis CB’. (n.d.). ISIS Current Bibliography, http://isisbibliography.org/about/ (accessed 3 November 2014).
            
            
                Australian National Data Service. (n.d.). Research Data Australia, http://researchdata.ands.org.au/.
            
            
                Cohn, H. M. (ed.). (2014). Bibliography of the History of Australian Science, No. 34, 2013. 
                Historical Records of Australian Science, 
                25(1): 123–41.
            
            
                Deakin University. (2014). HuNI Virtual Laboratory, https://huni.net.au.
            
            
                Dewhurst, B. (2008). People Australia: A Topic-Based Approach to Resource Discovery. 
                VALA2008 14th Biennial Conference and Exhibition, http://www.valaconf.org.au/vala2008/papers2008/116_Dewhurst_Final.pdf.
            
            
                Dewhurst, B. (2010). Encyclopaedia of Australian Science Available via Trove. ARDC Party Infrastructure Project Blog, National Library of Australia, 7 May 2010, https://wiki.nla.gov.au/display/ARDCPIP/2010/05/07/Encyclopaedia+of+Australian+Science+available+via+Trove.
            
            
                eScholarship Research Centre. (2012). 
                Encyclopedia of Australian Science, http://www.eoas.info.
            
            
                eScholarship Research Centre. (n.d.). Our History, http://www.esrc.unimelb.edu.au/about?us/our?history/ (accessed 3 November 2014).
            
            
                International Council on Archives. (2000). 
                ISAD(G): General International Standard Archival Description. 2nd ed., http://www.icacds.org.uk/eng/ISAD(G).pdf.
            
            
                International Council on Archives. (2004). 
                ISAAR (CPF): International Standard Archival Authority Record for Corporate Bodies, Persons and Families. 2nd ed., http://www.icacds.org.uk/eng/ISAAR(CPF)2ed.pdf.
            
            
                La Rosa, M., McCarthy, G. and Smith, A. (2014). Nothing Can Ever Be Lost: Infrastructure for Archival Research and Dissemination. eResearch Australasia 2014, http://eresearchau.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/eresau2014_submission_29.pdf.
            
            
                Library of Congress. (2013a). Encoded Archival Description: Version 2002 Official Site, http://www.loc.gov/ead/ (accessed 3 November 2014).
            
            
                Library of Congress. (2013b). Metadata Object Description Schema: Official Web Site, http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/ (accessed 3 November 2014).
            
            
                McCarthy, G., Manhal, O., O’Sullivan, L., Tropea, R. and Sherratt, T. (2001). 
                Frank Macfarlane Burnet Guide to Records, Australian Science and Technology Heritage Centre, Melbourne, http://www.austehc.unimelb.edu.au/guides/burn/burn.htm (accessed November 2014).
            
            
                Staatsbibliothek Zu Berlin. (2012). 
                Encoded Archival Context Corporate Bodies, Persons and Families, http://eac.staatsbibliothek?berlin.de/ (accessed 3 November 2014).
            
            
                Starr, B. (2014). Demystifying the Google Knowledge Graph. 
                Search Engine Land, 2 September 2014, http://searchengineland.com/demystifying?knowledge?graph?201976. 
            
            
                3. The Case of the Missing Records: The Long Journey of the Correspondence of Ferdinand Von Mueller into the World of Digital History of Science
            
            Gavan McCarthy
            University of Melbourne
            Within the context of the development of the Isis Cumulative Bibliography Online (IsisCB) as a global information infrastructure service for the history of science community, this paper presents a case study that demonstrates how a long-term research activity, through the creation of a scholarly edition of scientific correspondence, can be liberated from its print paradigm strictures to join the 21st-century world of interconnected knowledge. The Von Mueller Correspondence project has produced a corpus of over 15,000 digitally transcribed letters from the 1840–1896 period. These are complemented by materials in a range of forms that refer to Mueller dating from 1814 to 1931. Mueller was a prolific correspondent and established links with hundreds of fellow botanists and biologists across the globe; most of these, and certainly the most notable, will be registered in the IsisCB as Authority Records with links to publications about them and in some cases publications by them. The plan is to systemically interlink the Von Mueller Correspondence digital corpus and the IsisCB and develop the synergies that will drive digital humanities analysis and future scholarly endeavour.
            In 1987 Professor Rod Home of the Department of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Melbourne embarked on a project to locate, edit, and publish the correspondence of Baron Ferdinand von Mueller. Mueller was Victorian government botanist (1853–1896) and one of Australia’s most well-known 19th-century scientists, not just in Australia but across the globe. Mueller was also director of the Melbourne Botanic Gardens (1857–1873) and played a major role in the establishment of the Herbarium at the Gardens as a centre of research and the dissemination of Australian plants and botanical knowledge. These roles remain the foundations of the Gardens and the Herbarium today, over 160 years later.
            The major challenge of this project, which included collaborators from the United Kingdom and Germany, was to locate as much of the outgoing correspondence as could be found in archives, universities, museums, and herbaria across the world. This need to reconstruct the Mueller ‘archive’ resulted from the destruction of the locally held letter-copy books, inward correspondence, and associated files about three decades after Mueller’s death in 1896. Why these records were destroyed is still shrouded in mystery. Subsequent research revealed that Mueller may have sent out well over 100,000 letters during his career. The research team, over the last 25 years, have managed to locate, copy, transcribe, and prepare for scholarly publication over 15,000 items. Over 750 selected documents have been published in print form, with some made available on CD-ROM (Home et al., 1998; 2002; 2006). This work still continues today due to the continuing commitment of the scholars, despite the initial funding having been exhausted for many years. New letters and related documents continue to appear, and new knowledge that helps in the understanding and annotation of the existing materials continues to be unearthed. This process of steady accumulation and explication of knowledge sits at odds with the original print-based paradigm that configured the project at its commencement in the late 1980s. It would appear that an online edition capable of batch-processed updating could provide both the research team and scholars from all nations with a reference and analytical resource geared to the expectations of 21st-century digital humanities.
            In 2011 Professor Rod Home approached the eScholarship Research Centre (ESRC) at the University of Melbourne for ‘advice on databases’ in relation to the Mueller Correspondence project. However, the subtext was both more revealing and ultimately more worrying. The Mueller project team had been using Apple Macintosh computers since 1987 and had been transcribing the photocopied source materials into Word for Mac Version 1, which had originally been released in 1985. The request in 2011 was prompted by two events: the Mac used to hold the corpus was showing signs of not booting up correctly, and the upgrade to the latest edition of Word for Mac revealed that a few hundred items were in the earliest forms of Word and could not be brought forward without the loss of the styling and annotation that the scholars used to mark up the letters. Although the scholars were interested in and aware of mark-up languages, such as SGML, at the outset of the project, they had not conceived it as a digital humanities project but as a traditional edited scholarly correspondence project with a print form being the final output. The scholars used digital technology that was readily available, improved productivity, and helped them achieve their print publications. They had not anticipated time frame of the project, now entering its fourth decade, nor the changes in technology that would occur over that period.
            To deal with the ‘crisis’ facing the project—that is, the potential loss of the 15,000 items—a full copy of the corpus and related materials was copied to the ESRC project ‘file share’ (a structured and managed digital object storage platform) and protocols enacted for batch updates as required. The original folder structure and file-naming protocols were problematic in a generalised digital world, so changes were instigated. However, the next key issue was the upgrading of all old format files into a recent format that would enable batch processing of the corpus in the future. Research by Chris Kirk at the ESRC revealed that Microsoft had no records of the internal proprietary formats used in the original Word for Mac releases, which meant that programmatic conversion was not technically feasible without significant expense. In the end it was cheaper and quicker for the scholars to re-style the few hundred items by hand.
            Once the uniform corpus had been established, a new goal was set to transform the .doc files into TEI P5 (Test Encoding Initiative) XML schema form, a non-proprietary form suitable for long-term digital preservation; a form that could be ingested into search, retrieval, and analytical engines such as Solr/Lucene; and a form that could be readily transformed to HTML for web presentation. Although the .doc form was not amenable to these types of transforms, it was found that the styles and annotations employed by the scholars were adequately preserved in the .docx form, and that using Oxgarage these versions of the items could be successfully transformed into TEI P5. At the time of writing the pipeline processes for the full transforms are being prepared. In the meantime the lead scholars, now in their seventies, are still able to keep working on the corpus, adding and refining their knowledge in technologies they are comfortable using.
            Despite what appeared to be two cases of the destruction of records that could have resulted in considerable loss of historical knowledge, the dedication of a few scholars will result in a digital corpus of significance to the history of science in Australia. In addition it will also reflect on the social life of the Australian colonies in the 19th century, contribute to research into Australian flora and the study of our natural environment, and contribute to the characterisation of Australian colonial administration and the relationship of Australian scientists to the national and international scientific communities. Moreover, with a suite of over 15,000 uniquely and globally identified and citable XML objects, the next generation of scholars using annotation and mark-up tools will be able to continue to add value to the collection. The transform of the Isis bibliographies into an informatically similar form will enable the two systems to share data and create many intersections. The new world of interconnected datasets and computable social networks is not something that the Mueller scholars could have envisaged in 1987. For Mueller himself, it was his world, and those networks and connections were held in his mind and externalised for posterity in his records. With a little care and attention from digital humanities curators and the emergence of robust digital preservation and publication platforms, the knowledge conceived in the critical scholarly print form will have its value multiplied many times over.
            References
            
                Home, R. W., Lucas, A. M., Maroske, S., Sinkora, D. M. and Voigt, J. H. (eds). (1998).
                 Regardfully Yours: Selected Correspondence of Ferdinand von Mueller. Vol. 1:
                 1840–1859. Peter Lang, Bern.
            
            
                Home, R. W., Lucas, A. M., Maroske, S., Sinkora, D. M. and Voigt, J. H. (eds). (2002)
                . Regardfully Yours: Selected Correspondence of Ferdinand von Mueller. Vol. 2:
                 1860–1875. Peter Lang, Bern.
            
            
                Home, R. W., Lucas, A. M., Maroske, S., Sinkora, D. M., Voigt, J. H. and Wells, M. (eds). (2006). 
                Regardfully Yours: Selected Correspondence of Ferdinand von Mueller. Vol. 3:
                 1876–1896. Peter Lang, Bern.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Generating Navigable Semantic Maps from Social Sciences Corpora
                
                    
                        Poibeau
                        Thierry
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    thierry.poibeau@ens.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Information extraction; graphs; vizualisation
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    natural language processing
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    knowledge representation
                    content analysis
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                A Practical Example: Mapping the 2007-2008 Financial Crisis
                The 2007-2008 financial crisis was a dramatically complex event and the political responses to this event were at least as complex. These responses can be studied thanks to a huge amount of documents produced by various bodies during the crisis and made available since then. 
                An American initiative aims at studying the response of the American authorities to the crisis through PoliInformatics, defined as “an interdisciplinary field that promotes diverse methodological approaches to the study of politics and government” 
                    (
                    http://poliinformatics.org/
                    ). We participated in the first PoliInformatics challenge, as we describe in following. 
                
                The organizers of the challenge made available a series of documents on the 2007-2008 financial crisis. The shared task consisted in developing solutions to address questions such as “Who was the financial crisis?” or “What was the financial crisis?”. Of course, these questions are too complex to receive a simple and direct answer. So our strategy has been to provide tools to process and visualize the most relevant data, so that experts can easily navigate into this flow of information and make sense of the data. While we believe in semi-automatic corpus exploration, we do not think it is possible or even desirable to provide fully automatic answers to the above questions.
                We have as far as possible used available tools to extract and visualize information. More precisely, we have used the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (Finkel et al., 2005) and the Cortext platform (
                    http://www.cortext.net/) for information extraction. As for data visualization, we have used Gephi (Bastian et al., 2009) to observe semantic and social networks, and the Cortext platform to observe the evolution of the domain over time. However, these tools are not enough to obtain meaningful representations: for example, new developments are necessary for named entity normalization and linking, esp. to link text with ontologies (Ruiz and Poibeau, 2015). The result should then be filtered following precise, domain-dependent criteria, so as to obtain navigable and readable maps with the most salient information. 
                
            
            
                Technical Overview 
                
                    Named Entity Recognition and Normalization
                    The first step was to extract named entities from the different corpora. Named Entity Recognition is a mature technology that has been used in several Digital Humanities projects (see Van Hooland et al., 2013 for a discussion of some recent projects). However, the use of NER in the analysis of political science texts seems to have been limited, e.g. Grimmer and Stewart’s (2013) survey of text analytics for political science includes no discussion of this technology. 
                    In order to perform entity extraction, we used the Stanford NER, based on Conditional Random Fields, with MUC tags (Time, Location, Organization, Person, Money, Percent, Date) (Finkel et al., 2005). Certain entities appear under different forms. For instance, “Standard and Poor” might occur as “Standard &amp; Poor”, “S&amp;P” or “Standard &amp; Poor’s executive board” (this last sequence in fact refers to a slightly different named entity); in a similar fashion, a person as “Mary Schapiro” may appear as “Schapiro”, or “Miss Schapiro” or “Chairman Schapiro”. We implemented a simple normalization method based on the maximization of common sub-sequence between two strings and obtained qualitatively good results when compared to other more sophisticated algorithms (Gottipati and Jiang, 2011; Rao et al., 2011). Entity linking could then be applied on the result. 
                
                
                    Visualizing entities
                    We used the Gephi software (Bastian et al., 2009) so as to create graphs for each corpus, such that:
                    
                        a node corresponds to a cluster of persons or organizations in the corresponding corpus;
                        an edge between two nodes corresponds to the number of co-occurrences of the two nodes within the same sentence in the corpus.
                    
                    We chose to consider persons and organizations together since they can play a similar role in the event, and metonymy is often used, so that a person can refer to a company (and vice versa). 
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        Figure 1: Visualization of links between entities with Gephi
                    
                    Some results can be seen on figure 1 (which is hardly readable in small format but can be interactively explored by the experts in the field on a computer). Some links correspond to well establish relations like the link between an organization and its CEO (see for ex. the link between Scott Polakoff and OTS, or between Fabrice Tourre and Goldman Sachs). However, we are also able to extract less predictable links that could be of interest for scholars and experts in the field. As an example, we observe a link between the Fed Consumer Advisory Council and the Board of Governors (for ex. Bernanke, Mark Olson, and Kevin Warsh) since the first group of people (the council) warns vigorously the Board of Governors about the crisis. An interesting methodological issue to consider when elaborating these networks is that different automatic linguistic analyses can affect the complexity of the network: For instance, depending on the strategy to calculate intra-document coreference (e.g. whether we consider pronouns referring to an entity as an instance of the entity or not), the amount of edges in the graph will vary. Rieder and Röhle (2012) have discussed interpretation problems for visualizations, and Rieder (2010) has commented on how different graph layout algorithms can lead to representations that promote opposite interpretations of a network for the same corpus. We are as well interested in exploring how the computational linguistics tools employed in order to assess co-occurrences, even before applying a graph layout, can influence the graphs ultimately produced. 
                
                
                    Visualizing temporal evolution
                    The visualizations we produced should be explored and tested by specialists who could evaluate their real benefits. A historic view on the data would also be useful to analyze the dynamics and the evolution of the crisis, through for example the evolution of terms associated with named entities over different periods of time.
                    We tried to explore and visualize the temporal evolution of the financial crisis, more specifically the evolution of the perceived role of organizations over time. To do so, we produced Sankey diagrams of the correlation of organizations and domain related terms in the corpus. With this strategy, Sankey diagrams take into account the temporal evolutions of entities and actions along the crisis.
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        Figure 2: Evolution of the links between named entities and topics over time
                    
                    Figure 2 reveals a modification in the data between 2006 and 2008, a period which approximates the start of the financial crisis. For instance, the stream in purple in this graph reveals many co-occurrences of Fannie Mae and subprime loans for the period 1990-2007 while for the period 2008-2010, Fannie Mae is more closely associated with ’bank regulators’, or ’Federal Financial Services Supervisory Authority’. In a more general way, all the streams of data represented in the diagram are dramatically modified after 2007. 
                
            
            
                Evaluation and Future Work
                The work presented here has been evaluated by a panel of experts in the field. They assessed the utility of the tools and helped us define ways to improve these first results. Perspectives are thus twofold: on the one hand enhance data analysis so as to provide more relevant maps and representations, and on the second hand work closely with domain experts and provide interactive ways of navigating the data. Concerning interactions with experts, it is clear that end users could provide a very valuable contribution in the selection of relevant data as well as in the way they are linked and mapped. Some experiments are currently being done with a focus group gathering social science as well as information science experts. They will assess that the solution is useful and workable and more importantly, will give feedback so as to provide better solutions.
            
            
                Acknowledgements
                This work has received support of Paris Sciences et Lettres (program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL*) and of the laboratoire d’excellence TransferS (ANR-10-LABX‑0099). Pablo Ruiz is funded thanks to a grant from the Region Ile-de-France.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bastian, M., Heymann, S. and Jacomy M. (2009). Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating networks. In International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), San Jose, pp. 361–362.
                    Finkel, J.R., Grenager, T. and Manning, C. (2005). Incorporating non-local Information into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling. In Proceedings of the conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor, pp. 363–370.
                    Gottipati, S. and Jiang, J. (2011). Linking entities to a knowledge base with query expansion. In Proc. of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Edinburgh.
                    Grimmer J. and Stewart, B.M. (2013). Text as Data: The Promise and Pitfalls of Automatic Content Analysis Methods for Political Texts. Political Analysis, 21(3), 267–297. doi:10.1093/pan/mps028. 
                    Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    Rao, D., McNamee, P. and Dredze, M. (2011). Entity linking: Finding extracted entities in a knowledge base. In Multi-source, Multi-lingual Information Extraction and Summarization, pp. 93–115. Berlin: Springer. 
                    Rieder, B. (2010). One network and four algorithms. http://thepoliticsofsystems.net/2010/10/one-network-and-four-algorithms/, date accessed 25 February 2014. 
                    Rieder, B. and Röhle, T. (2012). "Digital methods: Five challenges." Understanding Digital Humanities: 67-84. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    Ruiz, P. and Poibeau, T. (2015). Entity Linking Combining Open Source Annotators via Weighted Voting. Denver: Proceedings of Semeval 2015.
                    Van Hooland, S., De Wilde, M., Verborgh, R., Steiner, T. and Van de Walle, R. (2013). Exploring entity recognition and disambiguation for cultural heritage collections. In Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Old Familiar Faces: On The Consumption of Digital Scholarship
                
                    
                        O'Donnell
                        Daniel Paul
                    
                    University of Lethbridge, Canada
                    daniel.odonnell@uleth.ca
                
                
                    
                        Singh
                        Gurpreet
                    
                    University of Lethbridge, Canada
                    gurpreet.singh@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Rosselli Del Turco
                        Roberto
                    
                    Universita degli studi di Torino
                    roberto.rossellidelturco@unito.it
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    editing
                    dissemination
                    user training
                
                
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    user studies / user needs
                    philology
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    english studies
                    history of Humanities Computing/Digital Humanities
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Ten years ago, Peter Robinson reviewed the state of digital editing at the end of its first decade in the Internet era in a trio of important articles (Robinson and Taylor, 1998; Robinson 2003; 2005).
            The results were not good. On the one hand, there were, by that point, a large number of digital editions and a great interest in the community of textual scholars in the possibilities of the digital edition. On the other, there was very little evidence that users were turning to digital editions: there were still many print editions being made and evidence of citations suggested that scholars preferred, on the whole, to work with familiar print editions over their newer counterparts (Robinson, 2005).
            Robinson, for his part, argued that a good part of this problem lay with the lacuna in the digital editions themselves (Robinson, 2003). While it was difficult even in those days to find ‘a single large-scale editorial project in western Europe or America which does not have already have, or is not actively preparing, a digital dimension’ (Robinson, 2003), this work was itself still quite conservative in its use of the technology: there was much experimentation, but the result was very little that could not be found in print contexts (esp. Robinson, 2005)—a problem compounded by difficulties in using the technology of the day (Robinson, 2005; O’Donnell, 2010).
            Ten years later, the digital is now even more firmly established as a primary method of scholarly communication and humanistic research (Robinson, 2010; Gold, 2012; Thaller, 2012). Moreover, interest in the significance and utility of the digital as a method of editing continues unabated (Mandell, 2010).
            But what about Robinson’s original point about how these digital editions were being used? While textual scholars, editors, and digital humanists discuss the possibilities of the genre, and the improvements they have brought to our ability to present textual scholarship, is there any evidence that the supposed end users of these editions are recognising the benefit that digital editions offer to their research?
            A review of contemporary secondary literary scholarship suggests that they are not. Despite the publication of a large number of new digital scholarly editions and great improvements in delivery methods that have all but eliminated difficulties of access experienced by scholars in the 1990s and early years of this century, bibliographic evidence suggests that digital textual editions are still passed over in actual use by scholars in preference for often superseded print editions. In contrast to the early years of this century, when scholars rarely cited electronic editions, scholars now frequently cite but rarely actually use their digital descendents. The actual text cited, as often as not, comes from the print editions that preceded these digital texts.
            This paper presents the results of an ongoing study of this problem, based on a comparative longitudinal citation analysis of select digital and print editions of the same literary work. As part of this research, the authors have compared the rate at which citations to a ‘newer’ (approx. 10 years old) digital edition of a standard medieval vernacular poem have been disseminated through the secondary literature and compared this to the rate at which previous (print) critical editions of the same work were disseminated within a similar time frame in earlier periods. The results suggest that editorial research may simply disseminate more slowly than was previously thought: it appears to take about a decade before the text of a ‘new’ edition begins to be used as the basis of new critical arguments within the main text of secondary research (as opposed to being mentioned in passing in bibliographic notes and asides); it appears to take about two decades before a ‘new’ edition begins to become the default choice within a given research domain.
            The final part of the paper turns to consider the implications of these findings for contemporary DH researchers. The first is that the slower-than-expected diffusion rate for digital scholarship places an even greater emphasis than before on issues of longevity and preservation. Ten years ago, O’Donnell demonstrated how few of the early digital editions of medieval texts had survived even a half-decade in an operational format (O’Donnell, 2004). This current research suggests that creators of digital editions need to think instead in terms of decades when it comes to preservation and longevity.
            A second implication involves the question of delivery format. While this study compares the diffusion rates for digital and print editions of the same text over several decades, the editions are similar in that all were disseminated as discrete bibliographic items: as books in the case of the print editions, as a CD-ROM in the case of the digital text. Evidence from other disciplines, however, suggests that web-based open-access publications have stronger citation rates (and, possibly, quicker dissemination rates as well) than closed-access publications (see, e.g., Laakso, 2014). In this particular case, no comparable web-based editions of this text exist, and none of the few web-based critical editions of comparable texts from the same period survive in nonarchived format. This suggests that while web-based publication may speed up dissemination rates, this speed must be balanced against the evident difficulty such projects have had, historically, in ensuring their survival—especially in the case of a time frame measured in years.
            And finally there is the question of training. The evidence suggesting that dissemination proceeds more slowly that has been previously anticipated suggests that digital editors also have a different type of training problem than they may have initially thought: instead of focussing on the short-term, early adopters of such technology, editors need instead to think about use cases 10 or 20 years down the road—of future scholars who have yet to begin their undergraduate careers, and current colleagues who may not see a citation to a digital edition for another 15 or 20 years.
            In discussing the success (or lack thereof) of digital editions in making an impact on the larger domains to which they aim to contribute, it is common to attribute the problems they have experienced in gaining acceptance to problems with the genre, its producers, or its audience. The research in this paper, however, suggests that the real problem may be simply that digital editorial scholarship is still too recent to have had much of an impact on secondary study of the texts they mediate, as a very similar problem appears to have affected earlier print editions of such works in their first few years. But if the ‘problem’ with digital editions is simply that they are too new, then this changes our perspective on a number of other issues commonly discussed in relation to the discipline. Faced with a dissemination rate that suggests it may take 20 or more years before any edition can be considered ‘standard’, digital editors need to rethink questions of preservation, format, and training.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gold, M. K. (ed.). (2012). 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
                    
                    
                        Laakso, M. (2014). Measuring Open Access: Studies of Web-Enabled Innovation in Scientific Journal Publishing. PhD thesis, Helsinki: Hanken School of Economics Information Systems Science, Department of Management and Organisation, https://helda.helsinki.fi/handle/10138/45238.
                    
                    
                        Mandell, L. (2010). Special Issue: Scholarly Editing in the Twenty-First Century—A Conclusion. 
                        Literature Compass,
                        7(2): 120–33, doi:10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00684.x.
                    
                    
                        O’Donnell, D. P. (2004). The Doomsday Machine, Or, ‘If You Build It, Will They Still Come Ten Years from Now?’: What Medievalists Working in Digital Media Can Do to Ensure the Longevity of Their Research. 
                        Heroic Age,
                        7, http://www.mun.ca/mst/heroicage/issues/7/odonnell.html.
                    
                    
                        O’Donnell, D. P. (2010). Different Strokes, Same Folk: Designing the Multi-Form Digital Edition. 
                        Literature Compass,
                        7(2): 110–19, doi:10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00683.x.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2003). Where We Are with Electronic Scholarly Editions, and Where We Want to Be. 
                        Jahrbuch Für Computerphilologie,
                        5, http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg03/robinson.html.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2005). Current Issues in Making Digital Editions of Medieval Texts—Or, Do Electronic Scholarly Editions Have a Future? 
                        Digital Medievalist,
                        1, http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/1.1/robinson/.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2010). Editing without Walls. 
                        Literature Compass,
                        7(2): 57–61, doi:10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00676.x.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. and Taylor, K. (1998). Publishing an Electronic Textual Edition: The Case of the Wife of Bath’s Prologue on CD-ROM. 
                        Computers and the Humanities,
                        32(4): 271–84, doi:10.1023/A:1000943530396.
                    
                    
                        Thaller, M. (ed.). (2012). Controversies around the Digital Humanities. Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung, 
                        37(1). Köln: Published jointly by QUANTUM [and] Zentrum für Historische Sozialforschung.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Ontological Designing of the Digital
                
                    
                        Mellick Lopes
                        Abby Arwen
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    a.lopes@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    ontological design
                    digital humanities
                    image ecologies
                    visualisation
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    interface and user experience design
                    ontologies
                    philosophy
                    user studies / user needs
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper offers a theoretical proposal for understanding the relation between design and the digital humanities with a focus on resource consumption. It proceeds from the position presented by Burdick et al. (2012) that the digital humanities move design to the centre of the research questions it poses. From this central position, design enables an unprecedented reach and capacity for the generation and management of information and the creation of new forms of knowledge. In this short paper I argue that the designed platforms sustaining the digital humanities are not simply enabling; they are agential in the development of new ways of encountering and knowing the world. 
            The digital humanities depend on design and its objects, and yet in its tool-like practicality and normative intent, design so often evades scrutiny. 
                Design disappears. As Clive Dilnot (1998, 22) has remarked, ‘If something cannot be made a matter of speech then it tends to disappear as such, i.e., it does not enter discourse as such and therefore remains invisible. Hence of course, one of design’s ironic conditions: that it is everywhere seen and everywhere remains invisible’. 
            
            This paper will critically attend to three territories of design that tend to withdraw as objects of critical attention within the digital humanities:
             1. Product-systems shaping digital engagement and participation.
             2. Material infrastructures sustaining digital data.
             3. Image ecologies encoding and communicating digital information.
            Taking each of these design territories in turn: 
            Digital 
                product-systems have very quickly materialised what David Michael Levin presciently called the ‘frontal ontology’ of our age, an interpretation substantiated by the prevalence of mobile screen-based engagement as a new bodily posture, a rise in immediate encounters with worldviews designed by others and attached to these new social practices that extend between online and material environments. I will consider how new ontologies are shaped and activated by digital environments, particularly the proposition of Fry (2005) that ‘our mental ingenuity at finding ever more novel ways to relieve physical effort far outstrips the slower evolutionary time of our physicality’.
            
            Vast, energy-intensive 
                infrastructures sustain, store, and distribute data at an exponential rate and unimaginable scale. While innovation drives patterns of obsolescence in product-systems, data seems interminable. We lose touch with the material substrate as digital information has a powerful symbolic vitality that manifests independently of how it is being resourced and reproduced. I will consider how big energy consumers such as Google are reporting their resource consumption and what their analytical stories reveal about how ecologies are being understood, interpreted, and communicated.
            
            As rhetorical devices at the forefront of digital systems, 
                images can be conceptualised as energetic and cognitive materials that are reshaping how we see and understand our living environments. As designed systems become more complicated, big and live consumption data are packaged to promote more ecologically literate and aware ways of being in the world. Yet we might ask to what extent can new visualities of ecology generate the sensory intuitions we need to live more sustainably? There is an anxiety around visualising data without there also being a strong sense of how visualisation shapes both cognition and action. With reference to key living experiments and projects, I will consider how participatory forms of data collection and reporting of resource consumption might inform more reflexive forms of ecological data visualization. 
            
            All three territories warrant being made discursive in the context of the digital humanities as they have, to paraphrase Burdick et al., profound implications for what it means to be human in the networked information age. The question of what it means to be human is, of course, a fundamental question for the digital humanities. My claim is that any response to this question must now also interrogate the extensively and intensively designed nature of the worlds in which we live, dream, and build knowledge.
            In order to perform this interrogation, I mobilise the emerging theory of ontological design. Ontological design is a theory that characterises the nature and agency of design as a fundamental human activity shaping the condition or behaviour of ‘what is’ (Willis, 2006, 81). It is also a method of relational critical analysis. My critique will therefore demonstrate how the unique areas of infrastructure, software, and image design are relationally implicated. The theory of ontological design is based on the hermeneutic phenomenology of Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg Gadamer, with more explicit design interpretations in the work of Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores, Anne-Marie Willis, as well as Tony Fry and Arturo Escobar. Ontological design understands that ‘our very “being-in-the-world” is shaped by knowledge we pursue, uncover, and embody’ (Fry, 2012, 43). 
            By bringing a consideration of the ontological implications of digitisation within the remit of the digital humanities, an ongoing critical discourse regarding design’s making and unmaking of material and symbolic worlds is invited. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burdick, A, et al. (2012). 
                        Digital Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Dilnot, C. (1998). The Science of Uncertainty: The Potential Contribution of Design to Knowledge. Draft paper, https://www.academia.edu/447813/The_Science_of_Uncertainty_the_Potential_Contribution_of_Design_to_Knowledge (accessed 3 November 2014).
                    
                    
                        Fry, T. (2005). Rematerialisation as a Prospective Project. 
                        Design Philosophy Papers,
                        2, http://www.desphilosophy.com/dpp/dpp_journal/journal.html.
                    
                    
                        Fry, T. (2012). 
                        Becoming Human by Design. Berg, London.
                    
                    
                        Willis, A. (2006). Ontological Designing: Laying the Ground. 
                        Design Philosophy Papers,
                        2, http://www.desphilosophy.com/dpp/dpp_journal/journal.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Pedagogical Hermeneutics and Teaching DH in a Liberal Arts Context
                
                    
                        Jakacki
                        Diane Katherine
                    
                    Bucknell University, United States of America
                    diane.jakacki@bucknell.edu
                
                
                    
                        Faull
                        Katherine Mary
                    
                    Bucknell University, United States of America
                    faull@bucknell.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    digital humanities pedagogy
                    hermeneutics
                    undergraduate liberal arts
                    peer learning
                    archival studies
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In the summer 2014 issue of 
                CEA Critic authors Lindsay Thomas and Dana Solomon remarked on the notable lack of discussions of pedagogy in the development of DH in undergraduate institutions (2014). Arguing that DH pedagogy should be something far more than an afterthought, Thomas and Solomon outlined how their undergraduate project RoSE at the University of California, Santa Barbara developed students to be active users and researchers of DH. In the same issue of 
                CEA Critic, E. Leigh Bonds drew on the discussions of Melissa Terras, Stephen Ramsey, Alan Liu, et al. about the fundamental difference between the learning goals of DH courses and those of traditional courses in the humanities (2014). In the case of working with archival materials, how do we teach students to be makers and doers together? Or, in Liu’s terms, how do we develop a pedagogical hermeneutic of ‘practice, discovery, community’ (2009)?
            
            This paper will focus on the teaching experience of Drs. Katherine Faull and Jakacki in the fall of 2014 to show how the planning, design, and execution of a new project-based course—HUMN 100: Digging into the Digital and the Humanities Now!—introduced students to the world of digital humanities through the use of selected digital tools and methods of analysis. This course, taught within the Comparative Humanities program, was designed specifically for first- and second-year students in order to encourage the development of digital habits of mind at the earliest phases of their liberal arts curricular experience (Clement, 2012). Developed to encourage examination and experimentation with a range of digital humanities approaches, students worked with primary archival materials to encourage digital modes of inquiry and analysis. The decision to root the course in a multifaceted analysis of archival materials provided the rare chance for students to engage in the research process typical for a humanities scholar: namely, the discovery of artifacts, the formulation of research questions, followed by the analysis and synthesis of findings culminating in the publication of initial findings in a digital medium. In the process, we introduced students to the basic structure of how to develop a DH research project. 
            For Bucknell University, the focus in digital humanities scholarship and learning has been primarily on spatial thinking (Pacchioli, 2013). It was important to both instructors to emphasize that objective in the development of the course and its learning outcomes, and so they focused upon the importance of finding materials that would be of interest to students ‘in place’. We decided to run the course in two sections, anticipating an opportunity to reflect different perspectives of the instructors’ expertise with DH methods and tools. One section focused on the Colonial mission diaries of the Moravians from Shamokin, Pennsylvania. Written in English, the diary sections selected dealt with interactions between some of the first Europeans to the area and the Native peoples they met and worked among. The other section considered a subset of the diaries of James Merrill Linn, one of the first graduates of the university and a soldier in the American Civil War. Both choices reflect and extend Bucknell’s interest in digital/spatial thinking in terms of its place in the larger historical and cultural narrative. 
            In this paper we demonstrate how scaffolding the course—establishing a parallel structure that spanned both sections—accommodated both core texts while reinforcing the importance of considering how different DH-based methods would strengthen students’ understanding of that subject matter. This approach allowed both instructors to develop more sophisticated and complex course modules while assisting one another through the strengths and skills of each. We will discuss how this challenged us to consider whether we were co-teaching two sections of one course or two courses in collaboration, and where we were successful in identifying moments that offered a richer learning environment for both sections, supporting each other in our separate sections when our own DH expertise and pedagogical approaches were needed by the other. In essence, we had to learn how to teach one another while we were teaching the subject matter to our students. 
            This course was developed to encourage examination and experimentation with a range of digital humanities approaches, and how digital humanists apply computational methods that involve textual analysis and data visualization. The sequencing of the modules was carefully designed so that the ‘product’ of each module then became the ‘data’ of the next module. Throughout the course, students developed a database of names, people, places, and connections that grew organically out of the focus of each specific section. This data, crucial to the success of the students’ assignments, needed some restructuring as we moved onto the next module; for example, students’ close reading in the TEI module led to the development of a prosopography that led to data for entry into Gephi that was then built out in adding geospatial data for GIS. Extensive use was made of online platforms that emphasize important forms of digital engagement, including collaborative online writing environments. Each module ended with a short assignment and also a reflective public-facing blog post that became an unmarked form of intellectual interaction. 
            Student enrollment in the two sections of the course was purposely limited to first- and second-year undergraduates with no background in digital humanities. Accordingly, the course was designed with the goal of not only exposing them to tools of distant and close reading, and network and spatial visualization, but also requiring that they learn to think critically about what each of these methods reveals in the manuscript texts they themselves transcribed; finally, the students were required to produce digital artifacts. 
            This paper will argue that the placement of this course within the interdisciplinary context of the program in Comparative Humanities underscored the program learning goals both of comparativity and interdisciplinarity and the course-specific goals of a new pedagogical hermeneutic. Teaching students to compare meaningfully intellectual materials of different or opposing types, and to theorize the difference between textual and material artifacts, narrative and non-narrative texts, and visual and analytical modes of thought was central to the course. To promote this, each module required students to read key secondary texts that were then integrated into their own reflections on the module. What does Johanna Drucker say about the visual rhetoric of visualization (2014)? How does Elena Pierazzo argue for the epistemic difference of diplomatic editions (2011)? What do Daniel Rosenberg and Anthony Grafton say about the development of timelines and the conceptualization of history (2000)? The interdisciplinary humanistic approach was thus clearly and directly linked to the learning goals of the course. Students also learned to identify, use, and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of different DH methodologies and tools and were encouraged to identify and use key DH terms and concepts. As a result, students learned to develop research questions that could be answered with DH tools and methodologies, and work collaboratively in groups to create projects that related to their own research interests. 
            The development and implementation of HUMN 100—a course without precedent at Bucknell and few guiding models at other undergraduate institutions—was far from easy. While both instructors had co-taught courses before, neither had developed what both agreed was a high-risk, high-profile course that could have significant impact on our colleagues as well as on our students. We knew that we were establishing a foundation that could (hopefully) scale to a much broader presence for the digital humanities across the Bucknell curriculum.
                1 We realized early on in course development that in order for our students to understand the evolving nature of DH research, we would have to reveal our own status as learners. Teaching unfamiliar material—not only across sections, but within a particular class—required an at times uncomfortable degree of transparency. 
            
            However, for all the challenges involved in teaching the class, there were moments of glory. Disengaged students became engaged; solitary learners recognized the essential need to collaborate in order to succeed; participants recognized the transformative nature of the course to their own concepts of the humanities. Students were eager to participate in crowdsourced data collection; they were intrigued to visualize ego-networks as they learned the concepts of network theory; they were excited to see their marked-up transcriptions published in an online digital edition. Through these experiences, they realized that they were creating a community of young DHers and expressed eagerness to take part in more of these learning experiences. 
            We believe that this paper is important to the community that will be present at DH2015 because it provides a model for how digital humanities can and should be taught at the earliest stage of an undergraduate’s university experience, and how this type of learning experience is transformative in terms of demonstrating the interdisciplinarity within the humanities. If such courses are well planned, modestly ambitious, and truly collaborative in both conceptualization and execution, they promote radically new ways of understanding the goals of humanistic enquiry, a new pedagogical hermeneutic for teachers as well as students. 
            Note
            1. In ‘Digital Learning in an Undergraduate Context: Promoting Long-Term Student-Faculty (and Community) Collaboration in the Susquehanna Valley’ (under review), we argue for the importance of such DH methods courses as crucial to the development of a larger curricular program of research-based learning environments that engage students in digital public humanities projects.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bonds, E. L. (2014). Listening In on the Conversations: An Overview of Digital Humanities Pedagogy. 
                        CEA Critic,
                        76(2) (July): 147–57. 
                    
                    
                        Clement, T. (2012). Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills, Principles, and Habits of Mind. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2014). Interpreting Visualization::Visualizing Interpretation. In 
                        Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 56–137.
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2009). Digital Humanities and Academic Change. 
                        English Language Notes, 
                        47(1) (Spring/Summer): 17–35. 
                    
                    
                        Pacchioli, D. (2013). Thinking in Place. 
                        Bucknell Magazine, Fall, http://www.bucknell.edu/x83427.xml.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2011). A Rationale of Digital Documentary Editions. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        26(4): 463–77. 
                    
                    
                        Rosenberg, D. and Grafton, A. 2000. Time in Print. In 
                        Cartographies of Time: A History of the Timeline. New York: Princeton Academic Press, pp. 10–15. 
                    
                    
                        Thomas, L. and Solomon, D. (2014). Active Users: Project Development and Digital Humanities Pedagogy. 
                        CEA Critic,
                        76(2) (July): 211–20. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Problem of Digital Dating: A Model for Uncertainty in Medieval Documents
                
                    
                        Stokes
                        Peter Anthony
                    
                    King's College, London, United Kingdom
                    peter.stokes@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    manuscript studies
                    diplomatics
                    palaeography
                    modelling
                
                
                    historical studies
                    medieval studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The dates of medieval documents are often not precisely known and so are catalogued with labels such as ‘early 12th century’. While these labels are useful and meaningful for a medievalist, they present difficulties in a digital context in terms of searching, sorting, and aggregating existing descriptions. This paper will examine these challenges, propose an alternative way of modelling dates, and then make some suggestions for representing these in user interfaces. It draws on work for Models of Authority, a new project on Scottish charters of the 12th century that is funded by the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council and that uses and extends the DigiPal framework (DigiPal, 2010–14).
            
                The Problem 
            
            Scholars have developed conventions for recording the various degrees of uncertainty in dates of manuscripts and documents.
                1 To take an example from Models of Authority, National Library of Scotland GD55/32 was written between 1189 and 1196; by convention this is indicated ‘1189×1196’ (POMS document no. 3/14/3). However, one or both dates in this range may be approximate or uncertain (‘circa 1192 × 24 March 1201’: POMS 3/486/8), or different date ranges may be possible (‘A.D. 670 × 671 [? A.D. 681]’: eSawyer S.1168). Alternatively, only a general date might be known (‘late 12th / early 13th century’: POMS no. 3/590/9). Other possibilities include ‘early’, ‘mid’, or ‘late’ in the 12th century; the first or second half of the century; and sometimes the second quarter, the first third, and so on (see further examples in DigiPal, 2010–14; eSawyer, 2010; as well as DigiPal, ‘Glossary’).
            
            This system of dating has served medievalists well. However, there is no obvious way of searching for or ordering material labelled in this way. When exactly does ‘late 12th century’ begin and end? Does it include the last quarter of the century? Does the first quarter of the 12th century come before or after the ‘early’ 12th century? Where does ‘A.D. 670 × 671 [? A.D. 681]’ fit on a timeline? We can decide answers to all of these questions in any given application, as indeed has been done (Stokes, 2012; see also the ‘search by date’ function in Manuscripts Online, and DigiPal’s faceted search, among many others). However, the result will necessarily be arbitrary and therefore difficult for others to understand. It will also inevitably be inconsistent with practice in other projects, and this in turn will lead to problems with linked data or aggregating sites (examples of which in this context include Biblissima, MESA, and Manuscripts Online). One could try to recover the intentions of the original cataloguer(s), but this is often lost and, even if recoverable, is unlikely to be consistent from one source to the next. Models of uncertainty do exist that go some way toward capturing these formulae, such as that in the TEI Guidlines (§§13.1.2 and 21.2), and those described by Grossner (2013), as well as projects such as TopoTime (Meeks and Grossner, 2013–) and PeriodO (Rabinowitz et al., n.d.). However, they still leave open these problems of searching and presenting the material, are very early in development, and/or do still not seem to adequately capture the specifics of manuscript studies. Instead, an alternative is required.
            
                The Model
            
            It is argued here that asking if ‘early 12th century’ includes the year 1100 is legitimate in a digital context, but to medievalists the question is in many ways meaningless, since if cataloguers knew that the manuscript was written after 1100, then they would have specified this. ‘Early 12th century’ does not mean ‘no earlier than midnight 1 January 1100 and no later than midnight 31 December 1115’, but rather something closer to ‘probably some time in the first 15 years or so of the century, but perhaps a little later or earlier’. To indicate this difference more concretely, it is useful to use probability density functions. Summarising crudely, a probability density function (pdf) represents the likelihood that a given variable has a given value. For instance, if we know when a document was written, then it has 100% probability of being written then and 0% probability of being written any other point of time; the resulting pdf is the Dirac delta function and is conventionally represented as shown in Figure 1. The assumption implicit in many search interfaces that ‘early 12th century’ has a fixed and firm beginning and end—say 1100×1115—and can be represented using the rectangular distribution shown in Figure 2. In contrast, judging intuitively from my own experience with manuscripts, ‘early 12th century’ is probably captured more accurately by something like a normal distribution (Figure 3). We can also combine these for more complex cases like ‘A.D. 670 × 671 [? A.D. 681]’ (Figure 4). Indeed, the range of possible curves is essentially limitless, and the model is sufficiently general to allow for any curve that best represents the particular case at hand.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Dirac delta function representing ‘1107’.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Rectangular distribution representing ‘1100×1115’.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Normal distribution representing ‘early 12th century’.
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Hybrid distribution representing ‘A.D. 670 × 671 [? A.D. 681]’.
            It is important to emphasise that these curves do not necessarily represent the mathematical likelihood of the date of writing, or even of the cataloguer’s judgment, since accurately quantifying human impressions is difficult and problematic. Indeed, the resulting curves need not even necessarily be true pdfs. They may be mathematically valid and numerically accurate in a given implementation, but this assumes a reliable statistical model and so seems only appropriate for those projects that are sufficiently quantitative that such a model is available (examples may include DEEDS and work described by Smit [2011] or Wolf [2015]). However, it would be incumbent on people using this approach to demonstrate the validity of their statistical representation (for cautions against which, see Sculley and Pasanek [2008]; Stokes [2009]; Hassner [2013]). The point is in fact the opposite: rather than providing exact figures, they are intended instead to represent more meaningfully in digital form when the scholar in question considered the document to have been written. For instance, if I want to communicate the approximate frequency of a given letter-form in time, then instead of using a simple timeline like that shown above, I can instead calculate the sum of the distribution functions of all the scribal hands that show this form. Figure 5 shows the resulting curve for all occurrences in the DigiPal database of the tall-
                e form of the letter 
                æ, and this seems to effectively capture the received view that the letter-form was common early in the 11th century but went out of use soon after (Ker, 1957; Stokes, 2014). Alternative representations could include lines of varying colour, adjusting the value or saturation according to the value and thereby allowing easier comparison of different categories, or perhaps even transparency, where users adjust the date and, according to their distribution, images of the relevant letters fade in and out of view. The curves could also be used to provide a significance value for search results by taking the integral of the curve across the time interval that the user has specified, or again adjusting the transparency of images representing these forms.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. Distribution curve for occurrences of the tall-e form of æ.
            Conclusion
            As noted above, the highly quantitative nature of this model does not bring any more certainty, nor does it address all of the concerns raised at the start of this paper. However, it does seem to promise a more intuitive and meaningful way of interacting with the content. It has been observed that the computer should not be used to provide firm answers or proving the truth of hypotheses regarding historical fact, but should instead provide means for interaction, visualisation, and knowledge creation (Clement et al., 2009; Jessop, 2008; Sculley and Pasanek, 2008). Paradoxically, then, the benefit of the model proposed here could lie not in its mathematical accuracy but the opposite: by highlighting the ‘fuzziness’ of the content it may help to break down the illusion of certainty that the computer typically brings, and may instead present a more useful and meaningful interface. Initial experiments and informal surveys with medievalists to date have suggested very strong support indeed for this approach. No doubt that other, better models will be developed by others in due course, but the point remains for now that the representation of dates in databases of manuscripts and documents is too narrow, and more imagination is required if we are to make the best use of what we have.
            Funding
            This work was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council [AH/L008041/1].
            Note
            1. This section of the proposal draws extensively from Stokes (2012).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Biblissima. (n.d.). Patrimoine écrit du Moyen Age et de la Renaissance, http://www.biblissima-condorcet.fr. 
                    
                    
                        Clement, T., et al. (2009). How Not to Read a Million Books. Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, http://www3.isrl.uiuc.edu/~unsworth/hownot2read.rutgers.html.
                    
                    
                        DEEDS. (n.d.). The Documents of Early English Data Set. University of Toronto, http://www.utoronto.ca/deeds. 
                    
                    
                        DigiPal. (2010–14). Digital Resource and Database of Palaeography, Manuscript Studies and Diplomatic. London: King’s College, http://www.digipal.eu.
                    
                    
                        eSawyer. (2010). The Electronic Sawyer: Online Catalogue of Anglo-Saxon Charters. London: King’s College, http://www.esawyer.org.uk/.
                    
                    
                        Grossner, K. (2013). A Space-Time Datatype for Historical Place? https://cga-download.hmdc.harvard.edu/publish_web/SpaceTime/DH2013_Grossner_SpaceTimeDatatype.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Hassner, T., et al. (2013). Computation and Palaeography: Potentials and Limits. 
                        Dagstuhl Manifestos,
                        2: 14–35, doi:10.4230/DagMan.2.1.14.
                    
                    
                        Jessop, M. (2008). Digital Visualisation. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        23(3): 281–93, doi:10.1093/llc/fqn016.
                    
                    
                        Ker, N. R. (1957). 
                        Catalogue of Manuscripts Containing Anglo-Saxon. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Levy, N., et al. (forthcoming 2015). Consolidating the Results of Automatic Search in Large-Scale Digital Collections. In Brookes, S., Rehbein, M. and Stokes, P. A. (eds), 
                        Digital Palaeography. Aldershot: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Manuscripts Online. (n.d.). Written Culture, 1000 to 1500. Version 1.0, http://www.manuscriptsonline.org.
                    
                    
                        Meeks, E. and Grossner, K. (2013–). TopoTime Gallery and Sandbox. Stanford University Libraries, Stanford, CA, http://dh.stanford.edu/topotime/. 
                    
                    
                        MESA. (n.d.). Medieval Electronic Scholarly Alliance. http://www.mesa-medieval.org.
                    
                    
                        POMS. (n.d.). People of Medieval Scotland, 1093–1314. King’s College, London, http://www.poms.ac.uk.
                    
                    
                        Rabinowitz, A., et al. (n.d.). PeriodO: A Gazetteer of Period Assertions for Linking and Visualising Data. http://perio.do/.
                    
                    
                        Sculley, D. and Pasanek, B. M. (2008). Meaning and Mining: The Impact of Implicit Assumptions in Data Mining for the Humanities. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        23(4): 409–24, doi:10.1093/llc/fqn019.
                    
                    
                        Smit, J. (2011). The Death of the Palaeographer? Experiences with the Groningen Intelligent Writer Identification System (GWIS). 
                        Archiv für Diplomatik, Schriftgeschichte, Siegel- und Wappenkunde,
                        57: 413–25.
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A. (2009). Computer-Aided Palaeography: Present and Future. In Rehbein, M., et al. (eds), 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im Digitalen Zeitalter—Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age. Norderstedt: Books on Demand, pp. 309–38, http://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/volltexte/2009/2978/pdf/KPDZ_I_Stokes.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A. (2012). The Problem of Digital Dating, Part I. In DigiPal (q.v.), http://www.digipal.eu/blog/the-problem-of-digital-dating-part-i/.
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A. (2014). 
                        English Vernacular Minuscule from Æthelred to Cnut, circa 990–circa 1035. D. S. Brewer, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        TEI: The Text Encoding Initiative. (2014). P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Version 2.7.0. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ (last updated 16 September 2014).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Question of the Luminary: Building a Resilient Campus DH Culture
                
                    
                        Morgan
                        Paige Courtney
                    
                    McMaster University, Canada
                    pmorgan@mcmaster.ca
                
                
                    
                        Askey
                        Dale
                    
                    McMaster University, Canada
                    askeyd@mcmaster.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    infrastructure
                    initiative development
                    community building
                    sustainability
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper explores a phenomenon that we have both noticed in recent years: that digital humanities programs and progress are driven by the presence of luminaries. A DH luminary is someone who identifies clearly as a digital humanist and is known in the international DH community; they are the people who keynote at DH, DHSI, and similar conferences. The presence of a luminary leads to significant success in attracting grant funding, graduate students, speaking engagements, etc. We are not the only ones who have noticed this phenomenon. In his 2011 blog entry ‘The (DH) Stars Come Out in LA’, Matt Kirschenbaum calls for a more direct engagement by DHers with the effects of celebrity in the field.
            In discussing luminary figures, it is not our intention to criticize them or in any way to diminish the hard work that has contributed to their status. Instead, we want to discuss the challenges that luminaries present for developing a resilient DH culture that supports training and individual member projects, and which will persist even if the luminary departs. While acquiring a luminary can go a long ways towards ‘making DH happen’ at a school, it can also engender concerns for future sustainability. In this paper, we address a few of the specific trade-offs/challenges that luminaries present, and identify actions that schools wanting to develop a DH initiative could take. By DH initiative, we mean the alchemistic mix of a DH community, program (i.e., formalized instruction, whether certificate or degree), physical centres, and DH-focused research entities that taken in sum represent a given institution’s DH culture. A DH initiative is intended to be a sustained and ongoing investment, rather than the temporary program of a pre-determined span of time.
            Besides funding and publicity, luminaries contribute direction to a DH program, orienting its content towards a particular area: making, text analysis, software development, pedagogy, etc. Another vital (though intangible) ingredient that luminaries bring is the insurance of having succeeded previously. A luminary’s presence can serve as justification for a new and relatively untested practice. Both of these qualities are especially important in light of the lack of general DH knowledge distributed throughout humanities departments. Arguably, then, the presence of a luminary provides a DH program with a specific identity. Luminaries help to ensure success of a particular kind, easily recognisable in traditional departments, even when the medium of scholarship is different: a project is released, generating responses within the disciplinary community.
            Without a luminary, a new DH centre will lack the insurance of previous successes as well as the established identity/direction. The work of achieving both components will then fall on the centre’s faculty, staff, and early participating graduate students. This creates an uphill slope for those involved: a substantial part of their work will involve trial-and-error experimentation, and their progress will almost certainly depend on their finding local allies, and their ability to connect with larger DH social networks either in person or via social media. This type of work is undeniably valuable, and applicable to many contexts, within and outside of academia. However, the work that is about producing infrastructure and culture, rather than scholarship, gains the most plaudits—in short, the work that leads to luminary status. 
            A luminary at the helm is an attractive prospect for any university that wants to make a substantial investment in the digital humanities. Moreover, universities love quick victories that give rise to press releases, photo ops, and instant notoriety. In light of the continuing lack of funding for higher education, and for humanities initiatives in general, acquiring a luminary figure to guide development may seem like the best strategy for ensuring that a new DH initiative will not fail. However, a sustainable DH community does not necessarily follow from a quick victory. More often, such a community is a slow-burn development involving a wide range of people and the formation of collaborative relationships that contribute to student training and career growth for all involved. The advantages that come with luminaries can be accompanied by challenges, specifically:
             • The leadership of a luminary figure can generate energetic activity in an initiative—but this activity may reflect the luminary’s charisma rather than the growth of a widespread DH culture within the community.
             • Luminaries, while powerful, are not guarantors of continuity: contingency plans are needed for sabbaticals or departures.
             • While DH ostensibly transcends disciplinary boundaries, when programs are built around luminaries their disciplinary focus may be overemphasized, excluding other disciplines.
             • Luminaries’ successes can become normative, creating challenges for those who want to develop new initiatives. Instead of looking at a particular community’s strengths and needs, the goal becomes reproducing what was achieved with a previous initiative or at another university. The result is that the culture of DH becomes more narrow, rather than becoming more varied and diverse.
            These challenges can be summed up by saying that luminaries seem to provide instant infrastructure, when in reality, their contribution is superstructure.
            As we consider the future of digital humanities on a global scale, the question we focus on is how to make a DH space and/or community accessible that allows all interested graduate students, staff, and faculty to be fully involved in shaping the collective identity of their campus DH culture, so that leadership is shared and can easily pass from person to person, with no single individual responsible for carrying the community. Such a community may have luminaries in it—but the sustainability of the program does not depend on their presence. 
            DH initiatives and programs often face scalability and sustainability challenges. Even the brightest of luminaries is only one person and can mentor only a limited number of students. Currently, luminaries are especially valuable as evangelists for DH, drawing people in, but eventually the number of eager community members will outpace the luminary. How will universities address the needs that arise when this moment arrives? We will close by presenting specific strategies for broadening and diversifying the development of DH initiatives, and for making the development of DH culture the collective work of communities, rather than of a single individual.
        
    



    
        
            
                The Transported Imagination: Magazines, Travel And The Pacific 1920s-30s
                
                    
                        Kuttainen
                        Victoria
                    
                    James Cook University, Australia
                    victoria.kuttainen@jcu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Liebich
                        Susann
                    
                    James Cook University, Australia; Heidelberg University
                    susann.liebich@jcu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Galletly
                        Sarah
                    
                    James Cook University, Australia
                    sgalletly86@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Australian Magazines
                    Pacific
                    Travel
                    Spatial Analysis
                    Network Visualisation
                
                
                    literary studies
                    content analysis
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    english studies
                    cultural studies
                    visualisation
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In the 1920s and 1930s, glossy, quality magazines brought a flair of cosmopolitanism, glamour, and exoticism to Australian readers. Travel, especially across the Pacific, was a key component of general-interest magazines of this era, which opened up a new world beyond Australia’s shores to readers, whether travellers themselves or aspirational armchair travellers. This project explores Australia’s geographical imaginary and representations of travel as expressed in popular print culture to question the status of cultural nationalism as the dominant ideology of the period. It conceptualizes modern mainstream magazines as mediated portals through which contemporary readers could observe the historically changing conception of the Pacific during the golden age of passenger liner travel. By utilising digital mapping and network visualisation methods, this project draws attention to the emerging transpacific imaginary these magazines capture to interrogate and problematise existing notions of Australian culture and illuminate the highly interconnected nature of the periodical marketplace in this period. The interwar period in Australia is often identified as seeing the emergence and consolidation of nationalism, reflected not least in cultural and literary expressions that emphasised the nation. Yet this period was also characterised by high levels of travel and mobility; passenger liners and a bourgeoning tourism and cruising industry allowed unprecedented numbers of Australians to cruise and cross the Pacific. While much scholarly attention has focussed on the development of Australian literary culture from the 1940s onwards, the literary output of Australian writers in the period immediately before, and especially writing in commercial outlets like mainstream magazines, has largely been overlooked. 
            Specifically, this project builds upon our manual collection and collation of metadata on the content of three Australian magazines: 
                The Home (1920–1942), 
                BP Magazine (1928–1942), and 
                Man (1936–1974)
                . By digitally mapping the content of these magazines—ranging from short stories, feature articles, and travel writing, to book and film reviews, society notes, and advertisements—a distinct Pacific imaginary emerges that encompassed places in South and Southeast Asia as well as the Pacific Islands, and reached north as well as east. Displaying the content spatially reveals the larger patterns of Australia’s Pacific-mindedness but also the nuanced differences in geographical representations according to genres and magazine titles. Network visualisation techniques and tools allow us to re-create the publishing and authorial networks that existed both within and across these three magazines in the 1920s and ’30s, revealing new print culture hierarchies and offering new modes of understanding print culture between the wars. By imagining these publications as information ‘networks’ comprising links and nodes between places, products, and people, we can better comprehend the cultural work these magazines undertook and the imaginative sway they held over readers’ perceptions of the Pacific region. 
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Trials of Tokenization
                
                    
                        Hoover
                        David L.
                    
                    New York University, United States of America
                    david.hoover@nyu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Python
                    tokenization
                    word frequency lists
                    programming
                    punctuation
                
                
                    natural language processing
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    programming
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The process of tokenizing texts is typically out of sight and almost out of mind—often handled invisibly by the analyst’s program or R script, and rarely described, discussed, or even mentioned. For ‘big data’, even if questions did arise about the nature of the word list produced, testing is not feasible. Furthermore, tokenizer accuracy is so critically affected by the state and nature of the texts that probably no general measure of accuracy or appropriateness is possible. Finally, built-in programming functions and libraries are all too often used uncritically with little realization that their output does not conform to the assumptions or expectations of the analyst. I suggest that we should pay a little more attention to the theory and practice of tokenization.
                1
            
            Consider a hypothetical case. Let’s say I want to analyze 5,000 novels, have access to the texts at HathiTrust, download 5,000 novels in plain text, and tokenize them. Below is part of a page from Elizabeth Gaskell’s 
                Cranford, from HathiTrust (Gaskell, 1910 [1851], 107):
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
                Cranford, Elizabeth Gaskell, from page 107.
            
            A human reader would have little trouble tokenizing this passage, and it is not extremely problematic, though minor OCR problems exist (mainly spacing issues around single quotation marks / apostrophes and dashes, and the line-end hyphen). I tokenized this passage with The Intelligent Archive (2012), KWIC (Tsukamoto, 2004) WordSmith Tools (Scott, 2012), Voyant (Sinclair et al., 2012), and Stylo (Eder et al., 2014).
                2 Even on this short text, the five programs identify three different numbers of types and two different numbers of tokens, largely because of the handling of single quotation marks. KWIC and WordSmith produce identical lists, as do Voyant and Stylo, but neither of these match The Intelligent Archive.
            
            Now consider Charles Chesnutt’s 
                The House Behind the Cedars (1900, 13), also from HathiTrust:
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. 
                The House Behind the Cedars, Charles Chesnutt, from page 13.
            
            The dialect in this passage is challenging even for human readers, and the OCR is more problematic. For example, the printed text (judging from the PDF) had spaced contractions, which explains ‘you 're’ in the fourth line from the bottom and the space in ‘lie 's’ in the first line, where the text reads “he 's.” This classic OCR problem occurs several times in this novel. And in the last line ‘you '11’ has both a space and an erroneous number 11 for the ‘ll’ (double el), another common OCR problem. Those analyzing big data usually rely on the insignificance of random error, but these and many other kinds of error are not random, and systematic error within one text, one author, one genre, or one collection could easily lead to thousands of inaccurate word frequency counts in this hypothetical study of 5,000 texts.
            The use of apostrophes in the Chesnutt passage to indicate dialect pronunciations can also severely affect tokenization. Although The Intelligent Archive, KWIC, and WordSmith Tools produce exactly the same lists for this brief passage, and Voyant has the same number of types and tokens, Voyant removes all initial (but not final) apostrophes, creating different words for eight of the 97 types. Stylo removes all numbers, all initial and final apostrophes, and many internal apostrophes, retaining them only in 
                ain^t, gentleman^s, and 
                spen^s (replaced with a caret). It produces six more tokens and four more types than the other programs, and many more differences in the word list. Unfortunately, in Chesnutt’s short novel, more than 650 words begin and/or end with apostrophes crucial to the identity of the word, so that the word lists produced by Voyant and Stylo are quite inaccurate. Furthermore, only KWIC and WordSmith Tools let the user choose whether apostrophes and hyphens are part of a word, and whether numbers can appear in the word list or not. Only WordSmith Tools allows the user to choose whether to allow apostrophes at the beginnings and/or ends of the word as well as internally.
            
            Obviously, the two texts examined above cause different problems, and different tokenizers are more accurate for one than for the other. Worse yet, these problems are found even in relatively carefully edited texts like those from Project Gutenberg. Although Gutenberg’s 
                The House Behind the Cedars does not have spaced contractions, and correctly has 
                he’s in the first line and 
                you’ll in the final line, the 29 initial and final dialect apostrophes remain problematic. The Gutenberg text also represents dashes as two hyphens without spaces, creating more problems for tokenizers. The Intelligent Archive and Stylo treat these double-hyphen dashes as breaking characters, while retaining single hyphens within compound words, but KWIC, WordSmith Tools, and Voyant treat them like single hyphens, creating compounds with double hyphens where dashes are needed. The situation is still more complex if a double-hyphen is preceded or followed by a breaking character. If this sounds esoteric, consider that this short novel contains nearly 400 double-hyphen dashes (Dickens’ 
                Dombey and Son has more than 2,200). And this problem, too, is highly systematic: words vary considerably in how frequently they are preceded or followed by a dash, and 1,000 dash errors per text would produce 5,000,000 errors in our hypothetical 5,000 novels. (For a practical example of the effects of error, see Matt Jockers’ discussion of topic modeling and several ‘topics’ that arose from OCR error and metadata (Jockers, 2013, 135).
            
            It might seem that we just need more sophisticated tokenizers, but the required level of sophistication to handle double-hyphen dashes correctly is quite high, and the problems caused by apostrophes and single quotation marks cannot be correctly solved computationally at all. In some cases, not even a human reader can tokenize with certainty; in others, a computer can solve problems a human cannot. 
            Let’s consider a few further tokenization questions:
            He said, “That’s ’bout ‘nough, sho’.”
            “That’s ‘bout’, not ‘fight’; ’nough said,” Nough said.
            “John tried that ‘Nough told me to’ on me,” Bill whined.
            He remarked, “John said, ‘Bout starts at nine.’”
            He remarked, “John said, ‘It’s ’bout time.’”
            He remarked, “John said, ‘‘Bout time.’” Can these apostrophes/single quotes be handled correctly computationally? How about the two single quotes before ‘Bout’ in the last example?
            I visited the U.S.S.R. Four tokens? Seven? Is the final period part of the final token?
            I visited the U.S.S.R.! Four tokens? Seven? Is the final period part of the final token?
            Is that C------? Is ‘C------’ the token ‘C’ followed by a dash, or the token ‘C------’? What about ‘C—’? Or ‘C-’?
            C------ is here. Same questions.
            Oh d--n it! Is ‘d--n’ the tokens ‘d’ and ‘n’ separated by a dash, or the token ‘d--n’? How about ‘d---n’? or ‘d-n’? or ‘G-d’?
            I said--never mind. If ‘d--n’ is a token, can we prevent ‘said--never’ from being a token here?
            That’s what I--a mistake, sorry. How do we get ‘d--n’ correct without failing here?
            You’re a real %#@$! Three tokens? Four? Does the last include the final ‘!’? What if there were a period after the ‘!’?
            You’re a real %#@$!. How about now?
            I am working on a Python tokenizer that can handle most of these issues correctly, and some of these problems are fairly rare, but I despair of the possibility of creating a word frequency list that is ‘correct’ even in my own opinion. For many years I have ‘corrected’ the texts before tokenizing, but that is not a practical solution for 5,000 novels and presents its own problems.
            Perhaps in sufficiently big data, the error introduced by tokenizers will not significantly alter the results, and Maciej Eder (2013) has recently shown that some corpora are remarkably resistant to some kinds of intentionally introduced error. And improving the quality of the corpus had a relatively small effect on the attribution of the Federalist Papers (Levitan and Argamon, 2006). More study seems needed before we can be complacent, however, even in large-scale problems involving only authorship or classification. For smaller-scale stylistic studies, tokenization decisions can clearly have serious repercussions. Consider Ramsay’s (2011) analysis of 
                The Waves, where decisions about tokenization significantly alter the lists of men-only and women-only words and words that characterize the six narrative voices (see Hoover [2014a] and Plasek and Hoover [2014], for discussion). Another example that replicates an experience I have had several times is that a Full Spectrum analysis (Hoover, 2014b), based on Craig’s version of Burrows’s Zeta (Burrows, 2007; Craig and Kinney, 2010) can give strange results if uncorrected texts are inadvertently included. For example, in a test of Charlotte Brontë versus Anne and Emily Brontë, 11 of the 100 most distinctive words were words with inappropriate initial “apostrophes” because the novels of Anne and Emily in the analysis both used single quotation marks for dialogue.
            
            Far from being an insignificant tool that can be taken for granted, a tokenizer expresses its author’s theory of text and can significantly affect the results of many kinds of text analysis.
            Notes
            1. As a reviewer of this paper has pointed out, the problems of tokenization have been more widely recognized recently in the NLP community. For example, Dridan and Oepen (2012) and Chiarcos et al. (2012) address and suggest partial solutions for some of the problems discussed here. Even if the problems had all been solved within the NLP community (a fact not in evidence), however, this would not diminish the force of my argument for the DH community, where there has been much less attention paid to them.
            2. These programs represent a variety of those used in DH work (in order): a mature Java program with a database function, a venerable corpus linguistics program with lots of functions and user-options, a highly customizable and powerful commercial program from OUP, a widely used online tool, and a recently developed set of tools written in the currently popular R.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burrows, J. F. (2007). All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata. 
                        LLC,
                        22(1): 27–47.
                    
                    
                        Chesnutt, C. W. (1900). 
                        The House Behind the Cedars. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?view=plaintext;size=100;id=nc01.ark%3A%2F13960%2Ft7cr7221k;page=root;seq=25;num=13.
                    
                    
                        Chiarcos, C., Ritz, J. and Stede, M. (2012). By All These Lovely Tokens . . . : Merging Conflicting Tokenizations. 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation,
                        46(1): 53–74. 
                    
                    
                        Craig, H. and Kinney, A. F. (2010). 
                        Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of Authorship. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Dridan, R., and Oepen, S. (2012). Tokenization: Returning to a Long Solved Problem: A Survey, Contrastive Experiment, Recommendations, and Toolkit. 
                        Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 378–82.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. (2013). Mind Your Corpus: Systematic Errors in Authorship Attribution. 
                        LLC,
                        28(4): 603–14.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Rybicki, J. and Kestemont, M. (2014). Stylo.
                    
                    
                        Gaskell, E. (1910 [1851]). 
                        Cranford. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?q1=twelve;id=hvd.32044097042071;view=plaintext;start=1;sz=10;page=root;size=100;seq=143;num=107.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2014a). Making Waves: Algorithmic Criticism Revisited. 
                        DH2014, Lausanne, Switzerland: EPFL-UNIL, pp. 202–4.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2014b). The Full-Spectrum Text-Analysis Spreadsheet. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013, Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, Lincoln, NE, University of Nebraska, pp. 226–29.
                    
                    
                        The Intelligent Archive. (2012). Centre for Literary and Linguistic Computing, University of Newcastle, Australia.
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. L. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press, Urbana-Champaign.
                    
                    
                        Levitan, S. and Argamon, S. (2006). Fixing the Federalist: Correcting Results and Evaluating Editions for Automated Attribution. 
                        Digital Humanities 2006. Paris: Centre de Recherche Cultures Anglophones et Technologies de l’Information, pp. 323–26.
                    
                    
                        Plasek, A. and Hoover, D. L. (2014). Starting the Conversation: Literary Studies, Algorithmic Opacity, and Computer-Assisted Literary Insight. 
                        DH2014, Lausanne: EPFL-UNIL, pp. 305–6.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2011). 
                        Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
                    
                    
                        Scott, M. (2012). WordSmith Tools version 6. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis Software.
                    
                    
                        Sinclair, S., Rockwell, G. and the Voyant Tools Team. (2012). Voyant Tools (web application).
                    
                    
                        Tsukamoto, S. (2004). KWIC Concordance for Windows version 4.7.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The Unspoken Word: Race and the New Language of Identity
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Bridget Frances Beatrice
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    bridgeta@stanford.edu
                
                
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt
                        Mark Andrew
                    
                    Stanford University, United States of America
                    mark.algee-hewitt@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    race concept
                    anthropology
                    human variation
                    discourse analysis
                    text mining
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    text analysis
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    anthropology
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In a statement on the meaning of ‘race’ within physical anthropology, Alice Brues (2009) raises the spectre of a mismatch between our biological understanding of human variation, and the work that the word ‘race’ performs within academic, and specifically anthropological, literature: ‘The visible difference between different populations of the world tells everyone that there is something there. We had better be prepared to explain what is there, and why, before we discuss what it does or does not mean’
                . Yet contrary to the meaning behind her question, it is apparent that race 
                already has meaning as a clearly articulated concept in both the popular and academic understanding, whether it exists in an objective biological reality or not. Yet despite its ubiquity, few discourses are more contentious. At best, critics claim that race is cultural construction with no basis in biological fact; at worst, the language of ancestry has been accused of perpetuating the dark histories of racial categorization and eugenics. But our understanding of the evolution of this discourse is clouded both by individual agendas and specific cultural concerns: what we lack, we argue, is a comprehensive and critical understanding of the patterns that the language of race has assumed throughout recent academic discourse, and specifically within the discipline of physical anthropology, whose practitioners are, whether consciously or unconsciously, implicated in this discourse through their work on human variation and forensic identification. 
            
            Through this paper, we seek to explore the latent discourse of race that characterizes the anthropological study of human variation. How has the emergence of forensic anthropology and genetics altered the way in which physical anthropologists interpret concepts such as race, ancestry, or ethnicity? Are there discrete and recognizable patterns of discourse that have shaped our understanding of race? This project aims to reconstruct this history by bringing to bear the new methodologies of digital humanities on a representative sample of scholarly articles on ‘race’ from the field of anthropology. The goal is not to reify race as a concept, but explore how the discourse is operational within the work of anthropology, considering both its literature that supports it and literature that argues against it. By leveraging the new computational techniques of the digital humanities, we seek to isolate the ways in which the language surrounding the concept of race has changed over the last century and how these discursive shifts have organized the approach to human variation in physical anthropology. We provide comparative data by also exploring the same questions for cultural anthropology and the forensic sciences.
            The way we talk about race, in other words, is an indicator of how we understand it.
            Sample
            As our study is primarily concerned with the ongoing transformation of ‘race’ in the field of physical anthropology, the majority of our sample is taken from articles published in the 
                American Journal of Physical Anthropology (AJPA) throughout its publication history. Similarly, as current anthropological thinking on race, whether as a proxy for biological difference or as a social reality, is deeply affected by the practical necessities of the forensic sciences, we also drew part of our sample from articles published in the 
                Journal of Forensic Sciences (
                JFS). In order to compare the specific configurations of ‘race’ within the discourse of physical anthropology to the study of the field at large, the final subset of our sample is composed of articles published in 
                Current Anthropology (
                CA). In addition to these three core publications, we also add to our study a corpus of genetics articles that allow us to capture how the language of race is inflected by recent work in human genetics. For this part of our corpus we draw on the journals 
                Human Biology, the 
                American Journal of Human Genetics, and 
                Genetics, using the same search criteria as in our physical anthropology corpus. By combining peer-reviewed academic articles from these six publications, our study is able to examine the transformations in the anthropological discourse of race through time and across the disciplinary configurations of the field. 
            
            Our primary physical anthropological sample contains 440 articles published between 1918 and 2013 and that contain some cognate of the words ‘race’, ‘ancestry’, or ‘ethnic’ within either the title or article description. Of these, 299 were published in 
                AJPA, 79 were published in 
                CA, and 63 were published in 
                JFS. In preparation for our analysis, we divided our sample twice: by publication and by period. These two taxonomies of the corpus allowed us to identify trends in discourse over time (period) and across the disciplinary boundaries (publication). The period divisions were informed by the distribution of the sample and correspond to the early to mid-20th century (1918–1972 or Early), the late 20th century (1973–1999 or Mid), and the 21st century (2000–2013 or Late). Our turn towards genetics has allowed us to more than double our corpus size and gives a critical window into the ways in which the discourse around recent technological innovation is bringing back older conceptions of human variation
            
            Methodology
            Distinctive Words
            While unsupervised computational linguistic techniques such as topic modeling (Blei, 2006; 2007) would allow us to extract clusters of highly correlated words from across the sample (thus approximating the ‘topics’ of the articles), the variety of these clusters would obscure the nuances of any potential ‘race’ topic. In other words, we seek to capture the ways that the discourse of race manifests itself even (and especially) when the topic of race is not overtly at issue. Instead, therefore, we chose to target specifically the language of ‘race’ and to extract the vocabulary in which it is embedded. We queried our sample of texts for our target terms (‘race’, ‘ancestry’, ‘ethnic’) and extracted the 15 words before and after, effectively performing a collocation analysis on each text. We selected 15 as our horizon as it is the average length of a sentence within our sample, ensuring that each extraction captured at least one complete syntactical unit. After excluding both stopwords and low frequency words (n&lt;50), we applied a Fisher’s Exact Test to each of the remaining words to test for significant word usage (α=0.05) within the vicinity of either ‘race/racial’, ‘ancestry/ies’, or ‘ethnic/ity,’ with the goal of identifying the category of racial terminology with which each word was most highly correlated. These sets of significant words (n=230) represent the lexical ‘fingerprint’ of each of our concepts.
            By tracing the relationships between articles based on their usage of these words, we are able to identify how the discussion of race structures the corpus across time and disciplinary approach. Similarly, we are also able to trace the relationships between the words themselves in order to uncover the ways in which these individual discourses co-evolved over the course of the 20th century. 
            Topologies
            Our primary visualization strategy uses a topological representation of either the corpus (Figure 1) or the semantic fields (Figure 2). Based upon an extension of a visualization technique using Voronoi diagrams developed by Bell Labs (Gansner et al., 2009; Algee-Hewitt and Piper, 2013; Algee-Hewitt, 2011; Okabe et al., 2000), the topology reconfigures similarity as a function of distance within a spatial representation. The resulting map provides a more complex visualization of relationships among the individual members and their local neighborhoods, replacing raw distances and word frequencies with a depiction of relationality based on proximity, area, and conjunction. The close proximity of article-tiles in our corpus maps indicates a strong similarity in their use of the vocabulary of race, while articles located on opposite sides of the topology indicate their difference. Similarly, words appearing next to each other in the word maps appear frequently together, while those far apart are rarely used within the same text. Tile size within these maps is a function of density. The smaller the tile, the more tightly embedded each object is within its surrounding cluster, while large tiles indicate their dissimilarity from the immediate neighborhood. We are also able to visualize another layer of data by adding a color mapping to the topology.
            Our corpus maps are colored for both period and publication: this reveals a strong disciplinary cohesion between the publication and the precise mix of words that characterize its articulation of the ‘race’ concept. Similarly, there is a less strong, but still significant correlation between the language of race in each article and its data of publication. Our word maps are colored based upon the individual word memberships in our race concept categories. This allows us to observe clusters of words that form across time and within particular disciplines, suggesting the ways in which the discourse of race has been affected by (and, in turn, shaped) the individual disciplines or study (physical anthropology, cultural anthropology, forensic anthropology, and genetics). Further, it allows us to witness the configurations of this discourse across our three period divisions: from the early studies of human diversity in the early 20th century through the current genetics revolution. Through a careful parsing of these topologies, we are able, in this paper, to give a clear and concise account of the ways in which the race concept has been mediated within the different disciplinary discourses of anthropology and, most importantly, the ways in which its evolving central term (from ‘race’ to ‘ethnicity’ to ‘ancestry’) has carried along with it discursive configurations that remain constant across all of our disciplines and periods. 
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Topology of articles derived from shared clusters of words, colored for publication source.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Topology of ‘race’ terms, clustered by co-occurrence, colored by term group membership. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt, B. F. B. (2011). If and How Many ‘Races’? The Application of Mixture Modeling to World‐Wide Craniometric Variation. Knoxville: TRACE, University of Tennessee.
                    
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt, M. A. and Piper, A. (2013). The Werther Effect I: Goethe Topologically. In Erlin M. and Tatlock, L. (eds), Distant Readings/Descriptive Turns: Topologies of German Culture in the Long Nineteenth Century. Rochester, NY: Camden House, 2014.
                    
                    
                        American Anthropological Association (AAA). (1999). American Anthropological Association Statement on Race. American Anthropologist, 
                        100: 712–13. 
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. and Lafferty, J. (2006). Correlated Topic Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 
                        18: 147–54.
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. and Lafferty, J. (2007). A Correlated Topic Model of Science. Annals of Applied Statistics, 
                        1: 17–35.
                    
                    
                        Brown, R. A. and Armelagos, G. J. (2001). Apportionment of Racial Diversity: A Review. Evolutionary Anthropology, 
                        10: 34–40.
                    
                    
                        Brues, A. M. (2009). The Objective View of Race. In Gordon, C. C. (ed.), Race, Ethnicity, and Applied Bioanthropology. Chichester: John Wiley, pp. 74–78
                    
                    
                        Cartmill, M. (1998). The Status of the Race Concept in Physical Anthropology. American Anthropologist, 
                        100: 651–60. 
                    
                    
                        Foster, J. W. and Sharp, R .R. (2002). Race, Ethnicity, and Genomics: Social Classifications as Proxies of Biological Heterogeneity. Genome Research, 
                        12: 844–50. 
                    
                    
                        Gansner, E., Hu, Y., Kobourov, S. and Volinsky, C. (2009). Putting Recommendations on the Map—Visualizing Clusters and Relations. Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, New York, pp. 345–48.
                    
                    
                        Kaszycka, K. A., Štrkalj, G. and Strzałko, J. (2009). Current Views of European Anthropologists on Race: Influence of Educational and Ideological Background. American Anthropologist, 
                        111: 43–56. 
                    
                    
                        Lieberman, L., Hampton, R. E., Littlefield, A. and Hallead, G. (1992). Race in Biology and Anthropology: A Study of College Texts and Professors. Journal of Research in Science Teachng, 
                        29(3): 301–21.
                    
                    
                        Okabe, A., Boots, B., Sugihara, K. and Chiu, S. N. (2000). Spatial Tesselations: Concepts and Applications of Voronoi Diagrams. 2nd ed. Wiley, Chichester.
                    
                    
                        Ousley, S. D., Jantz, R. L. and Freid, D. (2009). Understanding Race and Human Variation: Why Forensic Anthropologists Are Good at Identifying Race. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 
                        139: 68–76. 
                    
                    
                        Sauer, N. J. (1992). Forensic Anthropology and the Concept of Race: If Races Don’t Exist, Why Are Forensic Anthropologists So Good at Identifying Them? Social Science and Medicine, 
                        34: 107–11. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Through the Magnifying Glass: Rolling Stylometry for Collaborative Authorship
                
                    
                        Eder
                        Maciej
                    
                    Pedagogical University, Krakow, Poland; Institute of Polish Language, Polish Academy of Sciences
                    maciejeder@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    rolling stylometry
                    authorship attribution
                    collaborative authorship
                    sequential analysis
                
                
                    classical studies
                    literary studies
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    authorship attribution / authority
                    visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This poster introduces a new stylometric method that combines supervised machine-learning classification with the idea of sequential analysis. Developed to assess mixed authorship, it can also be used as a magnifying glass to inspect works with an unclear stylometric signal.
            Sequential analysis is a very attractive way of assessing linear phenomena. The concept of the moving window is particularly important to measure given elements in their sequential order. It has been introduced to stylometry and extended by van Dalen-Oskam and van Zundert in their study on the medieval Dutch poem titled ‘Roman van Walewein’ (van Dalen-Oskam and van Zundert, 2007). Other notable approaches to visualize stylistic shifts using moving windows include papers on Middle Dutch rhyme words (Kestemont, 2010), on three disputed English prose texts (Burrows, 2010), and on 
                The Tutor’s Story by Kingsley and Mallet approached with 
                t-tests (Hoover, 2011). Recently, Rolling Delta has been applied to examine collaborative works by Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Ford (Rybicki et al., 2014).
            
            The new stylometric method as discussed in this study is based on the above approaches. Its general idea is very simple: a text to be analyzed (e.g., an anonymous text to be attributed) is chunked into equal-size blocks (partially overlapping). Then, instead of attributing the text in its entirety, the goal is to perform an independent similarity test for each chunk, and to inspect the results as a sequence of ordered stylistic signals. Arguably, any classification method can be combined with this procedure. In the present study, support vector machines (SVM), nearest shrunken centroids (NSC), and Delta in its classical Burrowsian flavor have been used (Eder, 2015).
            The method is designed to detect stylistic takeovers. An example is 
                The World’s Desire, a classic fantasy novel written collaboratively by Henry Rider Haggard and Andrew Lang in 1890. It is a story of the hero Odysseus, who returns home to Ithaca after his journey: instead of finding his home at peace, however, he is involved in several new adventures. The plot of the novel as well as its mythological background was set by Lang, while Haggard—the author of several appreciated adventure novels—contributed his imagination and style. It is assumed that Haggard reworked Lang’s drafts and actually wrote most of the novel except the first four chapters, which were written entirely by Lang.
            
            An experiment involving a reference corpus of eight novels by Haggard and eight by Lang corroborates the hypothesis. In Figure 1, the results of the rolling technique in Delta flavor have been shown. When the novel in question is split into sequentially ordered chunks, one can easily observe its development and—more importantly—a stylistic takeover in the first part of the text. The break point takes place roughly after the fourth chapter.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. 
                The World’s Desire by Haggard/Lang assessed using Rolling Delta and 100 MFWs. Sections recognized to have been written by Haggard are marked black; Lang’s sections are marked gray.
            
            Two other variants of the rolling technique will be demonstrated using the Latin translation of the Bible known as the Vulgate. It is a very interesting example of a multi-level collaborative work. On the one hand, the original biblical text itself has many authors; on the other hand, the Latin translation is partially attributed to St. Jerome, and partially adopted from the already-existing Old Latin version (Vetus Latina). Thus, the authorial signal of the original interferes with translatorial takeovers: it is known that St. Jerome rendered most parts of the Old Testament and adopted the New Testament from earlier Latin versions. Detecting the translatorial voice might be a challenging task, since the author of the original is usually stylistically predominant in a translated text (Rybicki, 2012). Moreover, one should remember that two different languages of the Bible—Hebrew and Greek—might produce yet another stylometric signal. 
            The testing procedure started with transplanting two training samples: one sample for St. Jerome’s translatorial voice, and one for the Old Latin translation as included in the Vulgate. The Book of Genesis and Acts were chosen, respectively. Next, the subsequent sections of the entire Vulgate were tested against the training samples. The results are shown in Figures 2 and 3. Rolling NSC and Rolling SVM both reveal similar stylistic takeovers. Interestingly, the main change in style takes place roughly between the Testaments (dashed vertical line).
            
                
            
            Figure 2
                . The Vulgate assessed using Rolling NSC and 1000 MFWs. Sections recognized to be similar to the Book of Genesis are marked gray
                ; sections similar to Acts are marked black.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. The Vulgate assessed using Rolling SVM and 100MFWs.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2010). Never Say Always Again: Reflections on the Numbers Game. In McCarty, W. (ed.), 
                        Text and Genre in Reconstruction: Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviors, Products and Institutions. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 13–36.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M. (2015). Rolling Stylometry. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. 7 April, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqv010.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2011). ‘The Tutor’s Story’: A Case Study of Mixed Authorship. In 
                        Digital Humanities: Conference Abstracts, Stanford, CA, pp. 149–51.
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M. (2010). Velthem et al.: A Stylometric Analysis of the Rhyme Words in the Account of the Battle of the Golden Spurs in the Fifth part of the Spiegel Historiael. 
                        Queeste,
                        17: 1–34.
                    
                    
                        Rybicki, J. (2012). The Great Mystery of the (Almost) Invisible Translator. In Oakes, M. P. and Ji, M. (eds), 
                        Quantitative Methods in Corpus-Based Translation Studies. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 231–48.
                    
                    
                        Rybicki, J., Kestemont, M. and Hoover D. (2014). Collaborative Authorship: Conrad, Ford, and Rolling Delta. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        29(3): 422–31.
                    
                    
                        van Dalen-Oskam, K. and van Zundert, J. (2007). Delta for Middle Dutch: Author and Copyist Distinction in Walewein. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        22: 345–62.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                TILT 2: Text to Image Linking Tool
                
                    
                        Schmidt
                        Desmond
                    
                    Queensland University of Technology, Australia
                    desmond.allan.schmidt@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    OCR
                    text-to-image linking
                
                
                    image processing
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    software design and development
                    programming
                    visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            TILT is a Web-service and graphical user interface designed to make it easier to study printed books or handwritten manuscripts. TILT recognises word-shapes in page images, then links them to words in an already existing transcription. Unlike a traditional OCR program, no actual characters are recognised. Instead, the links are used to provide visual cues to the user by highlighting corresponding parts of the image and the text as the user moves the mouse over the words or taps them.
            Text-to-image linking was ﬁrst explored by Seales et al. (2000) in electronic editions of old English texts at the University of Kentucky. Their technique was to manually draw mostly rectangles around areas of manuscripts and then link them to the text by means of embedded markup in the transcription (Dekhtyar et al., 2005), developing eventually the commercial EPT tool. Other examples include the British Museum’s electronic 
                Codex Sinaticus (BM, 2009) and, using a different display technique, the ‘zoom topographic’ view of the Samuel Beckett digital manuscript project (Hulle et al., 2011), the TILE project (Reside et al., 2011), and the TextGrid text-to-image link editor (Al-Hajj and Küster, 2013). However, all of these methods were predominantly manual. Rather than automatically processing the text and images, they invite the user to manually draw shapes (rectangles, ovals, and polygons) around words, and to link them one at a time to words in the text. This is very tedious, and the linking methods also lead to problems of overlapping markup that can only be resolved by creating two separate transcriptions: one to contain the text-to-image links and one the formatted text (Middell and Wissenbach, 2011). 
            
            The earlier TILT tool (Schmidt, 2013) attempted to address the automation of the text-to-image links by allowing words to be outlined via a single click, and for entire pages to have their shapes recognised and 
                linked to the corresponding words of the transcription largely automatically. But TILT 1 proved to be limited in the way it could deliver a user interface. The key problem was that in order to automate the linking, it would be necessary to have access to a fully featured suite of image-processing tools. For this, the Java class library was chosen. However, the only way to mediate the automation process was to present the tool as a Java applet, which is notoriously difficult to run in a web context.
            
            TILT 2 attempts to address this problem by separating the front-end GUI (link editing and management of the recognition process) from the back-end (page recognition) part. The back-end is accessible via a test interface (Schmidt, 2014), and is designed to act as a faceless service usable by anyone who has a page image and a transcription, and wants to link the two. The front-end GUI is currently under development and contains tools for revising the automatically generated word-shapes and links using standard web technologies.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Text-to-image links and polygons as invisible GeoJSON overlay.
            Rather than use embedded markup in the transcriptions to link word-shapes with the corresponding words in the text, TILT uses GeoJSON (Butler et al., 2014) to describe the page and its recognised shapes, and annotates it with the positions of the words in the text. As shown in Figure 1, both the text-to-image links and the polygons that overlay the image are wholly contained in an invisible GeoJSON document, which can be loaded from a database or generated if required. The transcription can be in HTML or plain text formats. 
            Page Recognition 
            Given the immense variety of manuscript types, the TILT service is divided into clear stages. Each stage feeds the result into later stages, ending in the generation of the word-level links. The stages are:
             1. Conversion to greyscale. 
             2. Conversion to two-tone. 
             3. Removal of borders. 
             4. Line recognition. 
             5. Word recognition. 
             6. Linking word-shapes to actual words. 
            Of these, the first three conform closely to the standard processing steps of OCR and use techniques in the Java class library or the Ocropus toolset (Google, 2014).
            The fourth step, however, represents a departure from standard OCR techniques. In order to recognise words, they must first be organised into lines. In printed books, recognition of lines is relatively easy. OCR programs use heuristics to determine text blocks and assume even line spacing. Skewed or warped lines must first be deskewed or dewarped. Since lines may curve or tilt naturally in manuscripts, a general line-recognition algorithm is needed that can cope with both printed and handwritten material. TILT’s approach is to first divide the image into narrow vertical strips. The strips are then reduced to a single average column of pixels, which is smoothed via a moving average algorithm. The peaks in the black pixels of each strip then are taken to correspond to lines. Finally, the peaks are linked up across the page using a greedy approach, by linking the closest points in each pair of adjacent columns first, then progressively more distant points, so long as this does not cause the lines to cross (Figure 2) (BL, 2014).
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Line-recognition (Court of Oyer and Terminer for Trial of Attained Traitors record book [1796] from Grenada). 
            Once lines have been recognised they can be subdivided into words. (This assumes that texts 
                have word divisions, which may not be the case in certain languages.) The current method uses the two-tone image to identify ‘blobs’ of connected pixels in an image, then surrounds them with a polygon, and finally measures the gaps between polygons (Stamatopoulos et al., 2010). So on a page with 230 words on 30 lines, the number of inter-word gaps to be expected would be 229−29=200. So, assuming that the 200 largest gaps are inter-word gaps, polygons not separated in this way can be merged to form word-shapes. Although this works well for printed texts, with success rates often as high as 98 to 100%, variation in the use of spacing in manuscripts limits its success. An alternative technique (Manmatha and Srimal, 1999) tries to determine an appropriate Gaussian blur to join up blobs into the expected number of words, and then split words on that basis, achieving 86% average word recognition on the test documents. Application of this technique to TILT2 is planned but not yet implemented.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Alignment of word-widths in text and image.
            The final linking step is actually the most reliable part of TILT. Since the numbers of word-shapes and words are now known, the approximate width of a single letter can be calculated. This allows the estimation of the pixel-widths of words in the text. Since the sequence of word-shapes in the image must match the sequence of word-shapes in the transcription, the two can be aligned by modifying a classic diff algorithm, such as Ukkonen’s (Ukkonen, 1985). But instead of matching letters in two texts, TILT matches word-widths and allows either several word-shapes in the page image to match one word of the transcription or several words in the transcription to match one word-shape in the image, as shown in Figure 
                3. This can result in polygons being split or merged to correct the alignment. 
            
            Editing Interface
            The editing interface aims to visualise the automatically generated text-to-image links and allow the user to adjust them manually. This uses a number of semi-automatic techniques to speed up the editing process (Figure 
                4): 
            
             1. Redistributing words among the word-shapes between any two manually specified anchor points. 
             2. Merging two selected polygons when a word-shape has been incorrectly split by dragging across the shapes. 
             3. Splitting of polygonal shapes by dragging a line across merged words. 
            In addition to these techniques, manually adding and deleting points, and adjusting shapes provide a fallback when automatic methods fail. 
            Although currently incomplete, the editing interface is anticipated to be ready for demonstration at the conference (Schmidt, 2015).
            
                
                
                
                Figure 
                    4: Semi-automatic editing tools: realignment with anchors (top), merging a split word (middle), splitting two merged words (bottom).
                
            
            Acknowledgements
            The TILT2 tool was one of two winners of the British Library Labs Competition 2014. The Center for Biodiversity Informatics at the Missouri Botanical Garden is currently supporting further development of the tool.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Al-Hajj, Y. A. A. and Kuster, M. W. (2013). The Text-Image-Link-Editor: A Tool for Linking Facsimiles and Transcriptions, and Image Annotations. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(2): 190–98. 
                    
                    
                        BL. (2014). Endangered Archives: EAP295/2: Collection of Court Records Held by the Grenada Supreme Court Registry [1765–1797]. http://eap.bl.uk/database/overview_item.a4d?catId=140831;r=21726.
                    
                    
                        BM. (2009). Codex Sinaticus. http://www.codexsinaiticus.org/en/manuscript.aspx.
                    
                    
                        Butler, H., Daly, M., Doyle, A., Gillies, S., Schaub, T. and Schmidt, C. (2014). Geojson. http://geojson.org/.
                    
                    
                        Dekhtyar, A., Iacob, I. E., Jaromczyk, J. W., Kiernan, K., Moore, N. and Porter, D. C. (2005). Support for XML Markup of Image-Based Electronic Editions. 
                        International Journal on Digital Libraries, 
                        6(1) (February): 55–69
                        .
                    
                    
                        Google. (2014). The OCRopus(tm) Open Source Document Analysis and OCR System. https://code.google.com/p/ocropus/.
                    
                    
                        Manmatha, R. and Srimal, N. (1999). Scale Space Technique for Word Segmentation in Handwritten Documents. In Nielsen, M., Johansen, P., Olsen, O. and Wieckert, J. (eds), 
                        Scale-Space Theories in Computer Vision. 
                        Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 1682. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 22–33.
                    
                    
                        Middell, G. and Wissenbach, M. (2011). Faust: Multiple Encodings and Diplomatic Transcript Layout. In 
                        Philology in the Digital Age Annual TEI Conference, Wurzburg, 10–16 October 2011, http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/MembersMeetings/2011/ﬁleadmin /04100700/_temp_/TEI_Book_of_Abstracts.pdf, p. 29.
                    
                    
                        Reside, D., Lester, D., Porter, D. and Walsh, J. (2011). Tile–Text Image Linking Environment. http://mith.umd.edu/tile/.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2013). Text to Image Linking Tool (TILT). In 
                        Digital Humanities 2013 Proceedings, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 16–19 July 2013, http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-112.html.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2014). TILT2 Test Interface. http://ecdosis.net/tilt/test/post.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2015). TILT2. http://www.github.com/AustESE-Infrastructure/TILT2.
                    
                    
                        Seales, W. B., Griﬃoen, J., Kiernan, K., Yuan, C. J. and Cantara, L. (2000). The Digital Atheneum: New Techniques for Restoring and Preserving Old Documents. 
                        Computers in Libraries,
                        20(2) (February): 26–31. 
                    
                    
                        Stamatopoulos, N., Louloudis, G. and Gatos, B. (2010). Efficient Transcript Mapping to Ease the Creation of Document Image Segmentation Ground Truth with Text-Image Alignment. In 
                        Proceedings of 12th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, Kolkata, 16–18 November 2010. IEEE, pp. 226–31.
                    
                    
                        Ukkonen, Esko. 1985. Algorithms for Approximate String Matching. 
                        Information and Control,
                        64: 100–118. 
                    
                    
                        Van Hulle, D., Nixon, M. and Neyt, V. (2011). Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project. http://www.beckettarchive.org/demo/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Topic Modeling French Crime Fiction
                
                    
                        Schöch
                        Christof
                    
                    University of Würzburg, Germany
                    christof.schoech@uni-wuerzburg.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    topic modeling
                    French literature
                    crime fiction
                    genre
                    authors
                
                
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    french studies
                    content analysis
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This study applies topic modeling to a collection of French crime fiction novels in order to discover topic-related patterns. The results show both expected and unexpected patterns related to authors, subgenres, and time period. Topic modeling proves highly useful for investigating the history of French crime fiction. 
            French Crime Fiction
            Crime fiction is a type of narrative prose fiction involving the elucidation of a (usually) violent crime through a (more or less) rational investigation (often) taking place in an urban setting and (typically) involving (one or several) investigators, victims, witnesses, suspects, and criminals. French crime fictionʼs rich history goes back to the 1860s and has many highly prolific proponents. Prototypical detective fiction is easily recognized, but the boundaries of the genre and its internal division into subgenres remain controversial (see Todorov, 1971; Lits, 1993; Colin, 1999; Lavergne, 2009). The abundant material is a challenge to any readerʼs memory but an opportunity for quantitative methods.
            Research Questions
            This study addresses the following questions: How prevalent are expected, genre-related topics such as crime and investigation, and which other topics are important? What relations exist between topics and categories like authorship, subgenre, or time period? What kind of groupings of novels does one obtain based on topic similarity? What new insights into the history of crime fiction does topic modeling allow?
            Data
            For this study, a collection of 270 French novels published between 1858 and 2012 was created. The vast majority are crime fiction novels, but some non–crime fiction novels have also been included. The collection includes novels pertaining to seven subgenres and written by 14 different authors. It has around 16 million word tokens. Texts in the public domain have been obtained online (from ebooksgratuits.com), while additional texts have been obtained by full-text digitization.
            Method
            Topic modeling is an unsupervised method of discovering latent semantic structure in large collections of texts. Technically, a topic is a probability distribution over word frequencies, and each text is characterized by a distribution over topics (see Steyvers and Griffiths, 2006). In practice, the words with the highest scores in a given topic are mostly semantically related words; the topics with the highest scores in a text represent the textʼs major themes or motives. 
            The most widely known algorithm is Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA; see Blei et al., 2003), but several precursors and alternatives exist—for instance, Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (Lee and Seung, 1999). Several tools are available, like MALLET (McCallum, 2002) or gensim (Rehurek and Sojka, 2010), as well as tutorials (e.g., Graham et al., 2012, Riddell, 2014). Topic modeling has proven immensely popular in digital humanities (e.g., Blevins, 2010; Rhody, 2012; Jockers, 2013).
            For the results reported here, the following parameters have been used: Lemmatization has been applied to the texts, because French is a highly inflected language. After POS-tagging with TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994), nouns have exclusively been selected for analysis. Each novel has then been split into segments of approximately 150 nouns each. MALLET has been run with 60 target topics and 10,000 iterations. 
            Results and Discussion
            Topics Obtained
            The topics obtained can manually be labeled by their dominant semantic trait (see Figure 1).
            Figure 1. Selection from the 60 topics obtained (with topic ID and 20 top-ranked words).
            The subjective topic coherence is very high: few top-ranked words do not share semantic traits, and few topics are hard to interpret (but see Chang et al., 2009; Schmidt, 2012). Many topics could appear in any type of novels, such as topics #28, #38, and #01 (labeled ‘family’, ‘money’, ‘train’). Only nine out of 60 topics are related to crime fiction, such as #15, #33, and #53 (labeled ‘investigators’, ‘fire arms’, ‘jewelry’). Judged by topic composition alone, crime fiction appears to be a less distinctive novelistic sub-genre than expected. Note that topics are based on various types of similarity: topic #44 (‘interiors’) is related to a recurrent setting, topic #22 (“informal1”) to a specific register.
            Authorship, Subgenre, and Time
            Topic scores per text segment can be aggregated and averages obtained, for instance, at the document, author, genre, or time period levels. 
            On the author level (see Figure 2), it appears that several (but not all) authors have a distinctive ‘signature topic’: a topic with a particularly high score in comparison both to other topics for the same author and to the same topic for other authors (i.e., across rows and columns). 
            
            Figure 2. Distribution of topic scores at the author level (15 topics with the largest variation across authors, measured in standard deviations).
            Gaboriau
                ʼs signature topic is very general (#11, ‘bourgeoisie’) while Simenonʼs is more genre-specific (#29, ‘office’) and Maletʼs is not thematic (#22, ‘informal1’). For some authors (Leroux, Manchette, Ponson), no clear signature topic emerges. 
            
            Compared to authors, most subgenres have less marked characteristic topics (Figure 3).
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Topic scores aggregated to the subgenre level (20 topics with the largest variation, measured in standard deviations, across genres).
            For example, the classical detective novelʼs most characteristic topic is #29 (‘office’). However, the traditional genre labels used here are problematic, because they tend to refer to periods rather than structural types and correlate strongly with authorship. 
            When average topic scores are obtained across all novels for each successive tenths of novels, and topic score progressions are compared across subgenres, genre-specific patterns appear (see Figure 4). 
            
                
            
            Figure 4. Topic score progression for topic #26 (average topic scores per text segment and subgenre).
            For instance, topic #26 (‘twilight’) decreases over the course of the average detective fiction novel, but remains stable at a higher level over the course of ‘roman noir’. In the former, darkness and uncertainty are being dispelled and order restored, while in the latter, they are not. 
            The distribution of topics at the level of time period (Figure 5) shows that, as expected, some topics gain while others lose in importance over time. Some very similar topics ‘take turns’, as it were, with successive peaks (‘informal’, right). Others reflect larger societal changes (different means of 
                communication, left).
            
            Figure 5. Topic scores per decade for two topic groups.
            For the ‘informal’ topics, each peak is associated with one author and their period of activity: Malet, Dard, and Vargas (see Figure 2). The topicʼs rapid rise in the 1940s underlines how bold Maletʼs use of informal language was, but also shows the (problematic) impact of individual authors on these temporal patterns.
            Beyond individual topic development over time, the cumulated rate of change in topic scores from one decade to the next gives an insight into the thematic innovation cycles of crime fiction (Figure 6). 
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Cumulated absolute differences between topic scores from one decade to the next.
            Values above trendline indicate periods of intense topic-related innovation and, possibly, generational shifts (notably, 1880s–1900s and 1930s–1940s). Values below indicate periods of relative continuity (notably, 1910s–1920s and 1940s–1960s). Such results provide a fresh perspective on periodization in literary history. 
            Author Similarity
            Based on the topic scores per novel, author, or genre, Principal Component Analysis (see Joliffe, 2002) yields groupings of topically similar items, independently of preexisting classifications. The PCA plots in Figure 7 are based on topic scores aggregated to the author 
            level and have been obtained 
                using the stylo package for R (Eder et al., 2013). The first two components retain large parts of the variation in the data (31.3% and 12.6%, respectively).
            
            Figure 7. PCA plot of aggregated topic scores per author: authors (right) and loadings (left).
            Not surprisingly for a collection of texts spanning 150 years, the first component is correlated 
            with time period: authors active before 1930 are located to the east of the plot, those active from 1930 to 1960 close to the middle, and those active after 1960 to the west. A notable exception is Fred Vargas: although writing in the late twentieth century, she appears close to Malet and Dard: the topic-based grouping reveals a link between the now classic ‘roman noir’ and its later reinterpretation by Vargas. Note that although the three authors each have an ‘informal’ topic as their ‘signature topic’ (see above), their proximity remains unchanged even when these topics are removed. Japrisotʼs unique work rightly stands out, but his relative proximity to Simenon remains to be explained. 
            Conclusions and Future Work 
            The results obtained here shed a new light on the history of French crime fiction. Authors, subgenres, and time periods each have distinctive topic characteristics. Some well-understood facts about the genre can be confirmed (e.g., author groupings), but new insights into the genreʼs thematic history also become possible (e.g., thematic innovation cycles). Topic modeling proves to be a valuable tool, providing a fresh perspective on literary history and prompting new interrogations about periodization and the contours of subgenres. 
            Future work will involve two areas: The text collection will be expanded to reduce correlation between authors, subgenres, and time period. Also, the precise relation between topics and certain categories (e.g., subgenres) will be further investigated using supervised/labeled topic modeling (see McAuliffe and Blei, 2008; Ramage et al., 2009). 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blei, D. M., Griffiths, T., Jordan, M. I. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2004). Hierarchical Topic Models and the Nested Chinese Restaurant Process. In Thrun, S., Saul, L. K. and Schölkopf, B. (eds), 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 16. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. 
                        Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
                        3: 993–1022.
                    
                    
                        Blevins, C. (2010). Topic Modeling Martha Ballard’s Diary. http://historying.org/2010/04/01/topic-modeling-martha-ballards-diary/.
                    
                    
                        Chang, J., Boyd-Graber, J. L., Gerrish, S., Wang, C. and Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading Tea Leaves: How Humans Interpret Topic Models. In 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pp. 288–96.
                    
                    
                        Colin, J.-P. (1999). 
                        La belle époque du roman policier français. Aux origines d’un genre romanesque. Delachaux et Niestlé, Lausanne.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: A Suite of Tools. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. Lincoln: University of Nebraska, pp. 487–89. 
                    
                    
                        Graham, S., Weingart, S. and Milligan, I.
                        (2012). Getting Started with Topic Modeling and MALLET. The Programming Historian, http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/topic-modeling-and-mallet
                        .
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. L. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    
                        Joliffe, I. T. (2002). 
                        Principal Component Analysis. 2nd ed. Springer. 
                    
                    
                        Lavergne, E. (2009). 
                        La naissance du roman policier français. Garnier, Paris. 
                    
                    
                        Lee, D.D. and Seung, H. S. (1999). Learning the Parts of Objects by Non-Negative Matrix Factorization. 
                        Nature,
                        401(6755): 788–91.
                    
                    
                        Lits, M. (1993). 
                        Le roman policier. Introduction à la théorie et l’histoire d’un genre littéraire. CÉFAL, Liège.
                    
                    
                        Mcauliffe, J. D. and Blei, D. M. (2008). Supervised Topic Models. In Platt, J. C., Koller, D. Singer, Y. and Roweis, S. T. (eds), 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20, http://papers.nips.cc/paper/3328-supervised-topic-models.pdf, pp. 121–28. 
                    
                    
                        McCallum, A. K. (2002). 
                        MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
                    
                    
                        Mesplède, C. (ed.). (2007). 
                        Dictionnaire des littératures policières. Joseph K., Paris.
                    
                    
                        Ramage, D., Hall, D., Nallapati, R. and Manning, C. D. (2009). Labeled LDA: A Supervised Topic Model for Credit Attribution in Multi-labeled Corpora. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume 1, pp. 248–56. 
                    
                    
                        Rehurek, R., Sojka, P. (2010). Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In 
                        Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, Valletta, Malta: ELRA, pp. 45–50. 
                    
                    
                        Rhody, L. M. (2012). Topic Modeling and Figurative Language. 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities,
                        2(1), http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-and-figurative-language-by-lisa-m-rhody/.
                    
                    
                        Riddell, A. B. (2014). Text Analysis with Topic Models for the Humanities and Social Sciences (TAToM). DARIAH-DE, https://de.dariah.eu/tatom/.
                    
                    
                        Rubin, T. N., Chambers, A., Smyth, P. and Steyvers, M. (2012). Statistical Topic Models for Multi-Label Document Classification. 
                        Machine Learning,
                        88(1–2): 157–208, doi:10.1007/s10994-011-5272-5.
                    
                    
                        Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees. In 
                        Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester, UK.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, B. M. (2012). Words Alone: Dismantling Topic Models in the Humanities. 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities,
                        2(1), http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/words-alone-by-benjamin-m-schmidt/.
                    
                    
                        Steyvers, M. and Griffiths, T. (2006). Probabilistic Topic Models. In Landauer, T., McNamara, D., Dennis, S. and Kintsch, W. (eds), 
                        Latent Semantic Analysis: A Road to Meaning. Laurence Erlbaum.
                    
                    
                        Todorov, T. (1971). Typologie du roman policier. In 
                        Poétique de la prose. Paris: Seuil, pp. 55–65.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Toward Predication-Based Semantic Trawling for Folk Narrative Studies
                
                    
                        Darányi
                        Sándor
                    
                    University of Borås, Sweden, Sweden
                    sandor.daranyi@hb.se
                
                
                    
                        Malec
                        Scott
                    
                    University of Texas School of Biomedical Informatics, Houston, USA
                    scott.malec@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Cohen
                        Trevor
                    
                    University of Texas School of Biomedical Informatics, Houston, USA
                    trevor.cohen@uth.tmc.edu
                
                
                    
                        Widdows
                        Dominic
                    
                    Microsoft Bing, USA
                    dwiddows@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    folklore
                    semantic markup
                    biomedical research
                    predication space
                    analogical information retrieval
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    information retrieval
                    metadata
                    ontologies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    semantic analysis
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    knowledge representation
                    internet / world wide web
                    content analysis
                    morphology
                    folklore and oral history
                    semantic web
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            There is growing interest in intangible cultural heritage for narrative generation (Peinado and Gervás, 2006), yet with no test collections of tales or myths available, the computational modeling of narratives is still in its infancy (Finlayson et al., 2014). On the other hand, folk narratives are a global phenomenon, amply documented by fieldwork. These on the one hand pin down the major tale types as canonical motif sequences (Uther, 2004), so that storyline variants can be grouped under such types as document classes. Also, there exist lists of indexing criteria, which can be used to describe the content of such narratives on different conceptual levels (Thompson, 1955–1958). Therefore, methods that can accommodate nested compositional structure are required to index such material. 
            At the same time, information societies increasingly exploit digitized content for knowledge discovery, the scalability of data often leading to unforeseen opportunities for data analytics (Virshup et al., 2013). As there are apparent structural similarities between the recombinative transmission mechanisms of hereditary material in biology vs. cultural memories inherent, e.g., in texts, departing from earlier work on narrative genomics (Darányi et al., 2012; Ofek et al., 2013), and by calling in significant theoretical and development progress in analogical information retrieval and inference in the biomedical domain (Cohen et al., 2012; 2014), here we report on a new integrated methodology for narrative analysis. The idea goes back to literature-based discovery (Swanson, 1986; Cohen et al., 2010), and implements Propp’s formalism to analyze Russian fairy tales as representations of sets of concept-relation-concept triplets, or predications, in high-dimensional space. 
            Predication-based semantic trawling (PBST) is designed to both aggregate material conformant with specific semantic markup in a knowledge base and to improve the robustness of the same knowledge base by a feedback loop. The idea goes back to the metaphor of a fishing net with variable mesh size, implemented as (1) a knowledge base with a learning component; (2) storing semantically marked-up source material as a test collection, where markup regulates content granularity, i.e., the mesh size; (3) using the knowledge base for information filtering (Brin, 1998; Agichtein and Gravano, 2000) by trawling external data; (4) iteratively expanding the test collection by trawling results; and (5) periodically analyzing incoming data with the results fed back to the learning base. 
            Our new methodology is designed with scalability, quality, and automation in mind. To this end, we consider the respective integration of available technological steps into a single processing workflow as the missing link to get from little to big data in folk narrative analysis (Malec et al., 2014). These technological steps come from a combination of biomedical text analysis with the Proppian analysis of fairy tales. 
            In biomedical text analysis, Predication-based Semantic Indexing (PSI) provides the means to efficiently search across tens of millions of concept-relation-concept triplets, known as semantic predications, extracted from the biomedical literature using a Natural Language Processing (NLP) system called SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003). SemRep uses the UMLS
                1 and MetaMap
                2 to map relevant expressions from free text to concepts in a controlled vocabulary, and extracts relationships between these concepts using underspecified syntactic parsing, a set of indicator rules, and constraints present in the UMLS semantic network. PSI derives high-dimensional vector representations of concepts from the predications they occur in, effectively circumventing the combinatorial explosion of possible pathways between concepts by converting the task of traversing individual predications into the task of measuring the similarity between composite concept vectors. Consequently, search time for single, double, or triple predicate paths is identical once the relevant concept vectors have been constructed. This method can also detect double and triple predicate pathways connecting example pairs of therapeutically related drugs and diseases, and use these inferred pathways to guide search for treatments for other diseases. Further, PSI has been used to mediate semantic search by utilizing high-dimensional vector representations to infer the nature of the relationship between query concepts and other concepts in relevant documents. Inference is accomplished in high-dimensional space using Expansion-by-Analogy, a novel analogical approach to pseudo-relevance feedback, in which the relationships between query concepts and other concepts in documents they occur in guide the query expansion process. The semantic vector–based approaches developed show improvements in performance over a baseline bag-of-concepts model, and these are most pronounced on queries that are not conducive to keyword-based search (Cohen et al., 2014). This approach can be used to create predication-based semantic space for folk narratives. 
            
            V. J. Propp’s theory that the canonical form of Russian fairy tales is a compulsory sequence of actions—called 
                functions and selected from a list of 31 typical activities performed by typical actors—was based on a limited sample of cca 50 fairy tales from the Afanas’ev collection, itself comprising cca 600 stories, selected and compiled in the 19th century (Propp, 1968). Whereas the in-principle applicability of the scheme, with or without modifications, has been extensively debated ever since, researchers have started to look at the reproduction of Propp’s conclusions only recently (Bod et al., 2012). The scheme lends itself to semantic markup (Malec, 2010; Lendvai et al., 2010), with subject-verb-object (SVO) triples underlying Proppian functions suitable for predicate encoding of tale content, an observation first publicly observed among Western readers by Rumelhart (1975). 
            
            The following are typical examples of predication from the biomedical informatics domain: 
            
                Concept_1 
                Relation 
                Concept_2 
            
            Mammalian Oviducts LOCATION_OF Sterility 
            Thymol turbidity test DIAGNOSES Disease 
            Epididymis LOCATION_OF Obstruction 
            In comparison, predicates based on Russian fairy tales look like the following: 
            
                Concept_1 
                Relation 
                Concept_2
            
            Baba Yaga IS_A donor 
            Golden apple IS_A gift 
            Baba Yaga LIVES_IN hut on chicken legs 
            Donor GIVES gift (direct object) 
            Donor GIVES_TO protagonist (indirect object) 
            In the Proppian sample corpus, e.g., Baba Yaga gives a magic apple to Ivan Simpleton, who therefore is the protagonist,
                3 exemplifying the ‘donor’ function. The following tale segment helps to identify this function (Afanas’ev 96: ‘Morozko/Jack Frost’): 
            
            The poor little thing remained there shivering and softly repeating her prayers. 
            Jack Frost came leaping and jumping and casting glances at the lovely maiden. 
            
                ‘Maiden, maiden, I am Jack Frost the Ruby-nosed!’ he said. 
            
            
                ‘Welcome, Jack Frost! God must have sent you to save my sinful soul.’
            
            
                Jack Frost was about to crack her body and freeze her to death, but he was touched by her wise words, pitied her, and tossed her a fur coat.
                4
            
            Here the ‘maiden’, a stepdaughter, is ordered by her stepmother to be left out to the elements in the forest, a plot element representative of Cinderella-like tales (ATU Type 510A) called ‘mat’ padcheritsa’ or ‘Zolushka’ tales in Russian folklore tradition. Jack Frost is clearly the donor. The verb ‘tossed’ is mapped to the ‘GIVES_TO’ relation for its predicate
                . 
            
            Steps in the processing workflow are as follows: 
             • Apply PoS tagging,
                5 anaphora resolution,
                6 and semantic role labeling with SemLink
                7 (Palmer et al., 2010). 
            
             • Normalize concepts and predicates and identify triplets (Rusu et al., 2007). 
             * Decompose tales sentence by sentence, noting context with respect to Proppian function sequence. 
             * Shallow parsing of texts using Stanford parser or OpenNLP to identify SVO. 
             * Extract triples. 
             • Situate these normalized concept and predicate triplets as metadata within the marked-up corpus as the Proppian SemRep (PSR) output. 
             * Through a kind of hermeneutic circle, create an analogy of the UMLS in biomedical domain, except with domain knowledge particular to folk narratives, e.g., a controlled vocabulary for predicates (GIVES_TO, ACCEPTS, PUNISHES, etc.), concepts (hero). 
             * Index predications into PSI-space and index corpus with permuted random indexing (PRI), then visualize results by Epiphanet (Schvaneveldt, 1990) and the query/d3.js interface. 
             * Extract triples from the Morphology itself to create a knowledge base for purposes of reasoning about the Russian fairy tale domain. 
            The PSR tool allows for the sequential encoding of marked-up text by circular holographic reduced representation (De Vine and Bruza, 2010), the binary spatter code (Kanerva, 1996), or PRI (Sahlgren et al., 2008) to map them in predication space. For this, different open-source software components are available, prominently the SemanticVectors package.
                8 The output of PSR enables the analogical retrieval of predicates, finding missing pieces of evidence to reason about dramatic personae and the plot logic of magic tales. 
            
            The core of the tale set for the initial knowledge base are a subset of more than 45 tales in English translation to reflect the subset of Afanas’ev’s tales in Propp’s schema in appendix III. The second sweep will cover a larger subset of the Afanas’ev collection, namely that which Propp himself stated at the outset as his concern
                9 before the semantic trawling of web resources may commence. 
            
            We have presented here a very rough model and a proof of concept. There will likely be room to address some aspects of the complex issue of the dynamic learning of narrative macro-structures, which tend to be distinctive of particular traditions and populations (Colby, 1973). Finally, our contribution ought to be seen in the light as ‘bootstrapping’ an artificial system to facilitate analogical reasoning about a limited subset of themes, structures, and encoding devices of traditional narrative.
            Notes
            1. http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/. 
            2. http://metamap.nlm.nih.gov/.
            3. This is a special case where we need an indirect object, Ivan Simpleton. 
            4. https://github.com/kingfish777/ProppModel/blob/master/000_096_Morozko.xml.
            5. http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml.
            6. http://cswww.essex.ac.uk/Research/nle/GuiTAR/gtarNew.html.
            7. http://verbs.colorado.edu/semlink/. Semlink can create mappings between PropBank, VerbNet, WordNet, and FrameNet.
            8. https://code.google.com/p/semanticvectors/. 
            9. Tales #93-270 from Afanas’ev, inclusive of the tales already mentioned.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Agichtein, E. and Gravano, L. (2000). Snowball: Extracting Relations from Large Plain-Text Collections. In 
                        Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Digital Libraries. ACM, pp. 85–94.
                    
                    
                        Bod, R., Fisseni, B., Kurji, A. and Löwe, B. (2012). Objectivity and Reproducibility of Proppian Narrative Annotations. In Finlayson, M. (ed.), 
                        Third Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, pp. 17–21, http://narrative.csail.mit.edu/cmn12/proceedings.pdf. 
                    
                    
                        Brin, S. (1998). Extracting Patterns and Relations from the World-Wide Web. In 
                        Proceedings of the 1998 International Workshop on the Web and Databases (WebDB ’98), Valencia, Spain, 27–28 March 1998. 
                    
                    
                        Cohen, T., Schvaneveldt, R. and Widdows, D. (2010) Reflective Random Indexing and Indirect Inference: A Scalable Method for Discovery of Implicit Connections. 
                        Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
                        43(2): 240–56. 
                    
                    
                        Cohen, T., Widdows, D. and Rindflesch, T. C. (2014). Expansion-by-Analogy: A Vector Symbolic Approach to Semantic Search. In 
                        2014 International Conference on Quantum Interaction (QI). Springer, Berlin. 
                    
                    
                        Cohen, T., Widdows, D., Schvaneveldt, R. W., and Rindflesch, T. C. (2012). Discovery at a Distance: Farther Journeys in Predication Space. In 
                        Bioinformatics and Biomedicine Workshops (BIBMW), 2012 IEEE International Conference. New York: IEEE Press, pp. 218–25.
                    
                    
                        Colby, B. N. (1973). A Partial Grammar of Eskimo Folktales. 
                        American Anthropologist,
                        75: 645–62. 
                    
                    
                        Darányi, S., Wittek, P. and Forró, L. (2012). 
                        
                            Toward Sequencing ‘Narrative DNA’: Tale Types, Motif Strings and Memetic Pathways
                        . 
                        Proceedings of CMN-12, Istanbul, 26–27 May 2012, pp. 2–10, http://narrative.csail.mit.edu/ws12/proceedings.pdf.
                    
                    
                        De Vine, L. and Bruza, P. (2010). Semantic Oscillations: Encoding Context and Structure in Complex Valued Holographic Vectors. In 
                        AAAI Fall Symposium: Quantum Informatics for Cognitive, Social, and Semantic Processes, pp. 48–55. 
                    
                    
                        Finlayson, M. A., Meister, J. C. and Bruneau, E. G. (eds). (2014). 
                        Proceedings of 5th Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, 31 July–2 August 2014, Quebec City, Canada. 
                    
                    
                        Kanerva, P. (1996). Binary Spatter-Coding of Ordered K-Tuples. 
                        Artificial Neural Networks—ICANN,
                        96: 869–73.
                    
                    
                        Lendvai, P., Declerck, T., Darányi, S. and Malec, S. (2010). Propp Revisited: Integration of Linguistic Markup into Structured Content Descriptors of Tales. In 
                        Conference for Digital Humanities 2010, King’s College, London, 7–10 July 2010.
                    
                    
                        Malec, S. (2010). AutoPropp: Toward the Automatic Markup, Classification, and Annotation of Russian Magic Tales. In Darányi, S. and Lendvai, P. (eds), 
                        First International AMICUS Workshop on Automated Motif Discovery in Cultural Heritage and Scientific Communication Texts, University of Szeged, pp. 65–74. 
                    
                    
                        Malec, S., Darányi, S., Cohen, T. and Widdows, D. (2014). Closing the Methodological Gap: From Little to Big Data in Folk Narrative Studies. Paper read at the 
                        First International Workshop of Big Data in Cultural Heritage, International Conference on Cultural Heritage EUROMED-14, Lemessos, Cyprus, 3–8 November 2014. 
                    
                    
                        Ofek, N., Darányi, S. and Rokach, L. (2013). Linking Motif Sequences to Tale Types by Machine Learning. In Finlayson, M. A., Fisseni, B., Löwe, B. and Meister, J. C. (eds)., 
                        Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative 2013, OpenAccess Series in Informatics, Schloss Dagstuhl—Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany, pp. 166–82. 
                    
                    
                        Palmer, M., Gildea, D. and Xue, N. (2010). Semantic Role Labeling. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies. Morgan &amp; Claypool Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Peinado, F. and Gervás, P. (2006). Evaluation of Automatic Generation of Basic Stories. 
                        New Generation Computing,
                        24: 289–302.
                    
                    
                        Propp, V. J. (1968). 
                        Morphology of the Folktale. University of Texas Press, Austin. 
                    
                    
                        Rindflesch, T. C. and Fiszman, M. (2003). The Interaction of Domain Knowledge and Linguistic Structure in Natural Language Processing: Interpreting Hypernymic Propositions in Biomedical Text. 
                        Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
                        36(6) (December): 462–77.
                    
                    
                        Rumelhart, D. (1975). Notes on a Schema for Stories in Representation and Understanding. In Bobrow, D. G. and Collins, A. (eds), 
                        Studies in Cognitive Science. New York: Academic Press. 
                    
                    
                        Rusu, D., Dali, L., Fortuna, B., Grobelnik, M. and Mladenic, D. (2007). Triplet Extraction from Sentences. In 
                        10th International Multiconference on Information Society-IS, pp. 8–12. 
                    
                    
                        Sahlgren, M., Holst, M. and Kanerva, P. (2008). Permutations as a Means to Encode Order in Word Space. In 
                        30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Washington, DC, 23–26 July 2008.
                    
                    
                        Schvaneveldt, R. W.
                         (ed.). (1990).
                        Pathfinder Associative Networks: Studies in Knowledge Organization.
                        Ablex, Norwood, NJ.
                    
                    
                        Swanson, D. R. (1986). Fish Oil, Raynaud’s Syndrome, and Undiscovered Public Knowledge. 
                        Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
                        30(1): 7–18. 
                    
                    
                        Thompson, S. (1955–1958). 
                        Motif-Index of Folk-Literature: A Classification of Narrative Elements in Folktales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Medieval Romances, Exempla, Fabliaux, Jest-Books, and Local Legends. Indiana University Press, Bloomington. 
                    
                    
                        Uther, H. J. (2004). 
                        The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson. Academia Scientiarum Fennica, Helsinki. 
                    
                    
                        Virshup, A. M., Contreras-Garcia, J., Wipf, P., Yang, W. and Beretan, D. N. (2013). Stochastic Voyages into Uncharted Chemical Space Produce a Representative Library of All Possible Drug-Like Compounds. 
                        Journal of the American Chemical Society, 
                        135: 7296–303. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Towards an Ontopedia for Post-Medieval Hebrew Manuscripts
                
                    
                        Prebor
                        GIla
                    
                    Bar Ilan University, Israel
                    gila.prebor@biu.ac.il
                
                
                    
                        Zhitomirsky-Geffet
                        Maayan
                    
                    Bar Ilan University, Israel
                    maayan.zhitomirsky-geffet@biu.ac.il
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Ontology for historical manuscripts
                    Hebrew historical handwritten manuscripts
                    manuscript biographic ontology
                    semantic web
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    medieval studies
                    ontologies
                    semantic analysis
                    knowledge representation
                    information architecture
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    cultural studies
                    semantic web
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Digitization of the national cultural heritage is a rapidly expanding field essential for preserving and maintaining the historical data and leveraging its future research. Historical handwritten Hebrew manuscripts are one of the most unique and authentic evidences of the Jewish culture and thought that survived through the centuries. Scholars from various fields increasingly study these manuscripts to reveal historical, linguistic, religious, philosophical, and social aspects of the Jewish life in different times and places (Sirat, 2002; Richler, 2010–2011). Currently, the only available digital representation of these manuscripts’ metadata is library catalogs. The largest collection of Hebrew manuscripts metadata is offered by the catalog of the Institute of Microfilmed Hebrew Manuscripts in the National Library of Israel (http://web.nli.org.il/). This catalog is accompanied with a search engine to retrieve records by a limited number of parameters, such as author, title, date, and subject, while most of the data still remain unsearchable and thus undiscovered. Many important research questions cannot be answered by searching the existing manuscript catalogs, e.g.: How many works on specified subjects were composed in this period in different countries? What people were involved in their creation and distribution? Are these people related to each other, and how? What historical events could influence these people and their works? Are these original works or copies of older works from other manuscripts or even from printed books? Hence, to enable a systematic research of the knowledge embedded in the manuscripts there is a need for a formal conceptual data model with a high level of semantic granularity, an ontology. To the best of our knowledge, there is no formal ontology for the realm of historical handwritten Hebrew manuscripts. 
            Therefore, in this research we design an ontological model to reflect all the cultural riches stored in post-medieval Hebrew manuscripts. We focus on the post-medieval period (16th century and later), because tens of thousands of works that belong to this period are underexplored in the research literature (Prebor, 2015). The underlying philosophical approach behind the proposed ontology is to view a manuscript as a ‘living entity’ and develop a data model of its story. This model includes stages and milestones in its biography (e.g., creation, printing, or acquisition), and its influence and interactions with other manuscripts, people, places, and historical and cultural events (see Figure 1). A sequence of events and places (as Jewish writers were spread over the world) constitutes a timeline of history against which manuscripts, people, and their relationships can be placed. Apparently, this ontology creation requires researching the most appropriate existing ontologies for the domain of cultural heritage (such as CIDOC-CRM, a result of a 10-year project [Doerr, 2003] and Europeana Data Model [Winer, 2014]).
            
                
            
            Figure 1. A proposed conceptual model for the upper-level historical manuscript ontology. The square boxes represent the top-level classes and their subclasses; the properties are displayed by single-line arrows, while the names of properties appear near the corresponding arrows. Child-parent arrows represent IS-A/subclass relationships.
            Finally, the ontopedia (online ontology-based encyclopedia) for the Hebrew historical manuscripts will be constructed as a culmination of this multidisciplinary study that comprises and integrates research in various fields of science. Thus, computer scientists are involved in automatic mapping of catalog fields to ontology and user interface design, information experts contribute to the conceptual model development and evaluation, librarians sort and analyze catalog records, while researchers of Hebrew paleography complete the missing features of the manuscripts and build query sets for extending the ontopedia. 
            The results of our project will greatly contribute to the study of Hebrew manuscripts and cultural heritage. It will enable posing queries and cross-referencing data from various vocabularies in the Semantic Web (as in Figure 2). Large-scale automated reasoning will also enable a comparison of the effect of time and place on qualitative characteristics and quantitative distribution of manuscripts. 
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Sketch of the user interface for query construction for selected ontological relations by browsing the ontology. A sample query is: ‘All the Rabbinic figures who authored post-medieval manuscripts related to some historical event in Russia’.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Doerr, M. (2003). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Module: An Ontological Approach to Semantic Interoperability of Metadata. 
                        AI Magazine,
                        24(3): 75–92.
                    
                    
                        Prebor, G. (2015). The Manuscript 
                        Collection of the Séminaire Israélite de France. Towards a New Catalog. 
                        La Bibliofilia, CXVII.
                    
                    
                        Richler, 
                        B. (2010–2011). Lezione Dottorale, 
                        Materia giudaica, XV–XVI, 14–16.28.
                    
                    
                        Sirat, C. (2002). 
                        Hebrew Manuscripts of the Middle Ages. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Winer, D. (2014). Judaica Europeana: An Infrastructure for Aggregating Jewish Content. 
                        Judaica Librarianship,
                        18(1): 88–115. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Traces of Lives in Digital Archives: Life Writing, Marginalia and Google Books
                
                    
                        Barnett
                        Tully
                    
                    Flinders University, Australia
                    tully.barnett@flinders.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    book digitisation
                    digital reading
                    marginalia
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    literary studies
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The first decade of the ambitious Google Books project has produced a great deal of controversy as well as a valuable resource. The project has been consistently challenged by authors’ and publishers’ groups mounting legal action. The rhetoric that Google uses to justify the project frequently concerns fair use, access, marginal voices, a so-called global library, and the role of access to information in supporting a strong democracy. 
            In the process of digitization, the books are transformed considerably. The act of reading texts on Google Books is complicated by the many figures crowding the text and the act itself. In addition to the author/s of the work in question, there may be, scattered throughout the text, traces of a person who has gifted the book, of the borrowers whose trace is marked by library loan stamps, and there are the multiple readers who have left physical marks of their reading upon the page. This marginalia can be found in the form of underlines in the text and marks in the margins—from simple ‘X’s, to detailed comments of varying degrees of legibility, to questions asked of the text and doodles drawn on the page. Also present in the text, on occasion, and complicating reception, is the ghostly figure of the book scanner whose labour is made visible by spectral fingers caught in the scan and numerous other kinds of scanning errors that, given the haste of the project, make it through quality control and into the online space.
            
                
            
            But the Google Books reader does not leave a trace. I, reading the text on the screen, make no marks upon the text to leave for others. Although my digital trace may be recorded in the IP number, I cannot leave a trace of my reading for the next reader to examine or build upon. I may transcribe the text. I may now download (selected) books to read on a plethora of devices. I may use the clip tool to take or even share a passage with my social network. But I cannot alter the book as it appears in the archive. While I can annotate—publically or privately—a Kindle book, leaving traces in the form of underlines signifying highlights and notes, I cannot annotate a Google book. The object is frozen for all time in its scanned state (or states, since frequently scans exist from a number of different editions or copies of a book). 
            The presence of the reader on the page of the printed book has been a marginal concern for the field of book history for scholars from manuscript culture and before to the recent obsession with David Foster Wallace’s cacophonous presence on the pages of his library, now acquired by the Harry Ransom Centre at the University of Texas. Marginalia tell us something about the reader’s response to the work, and it tends to be the marginal notes of literary giants that receives attention from scholars (Nabokov, Kerouac, Wilde).
            The presence of life narrative voices in the archive, and the material conditions they reflect, has significant ramifications for how we see the texts. How then do we approach the case of a published family history that has been housed for over a century in a public library and in that time has been heavily annotated with additions, comments, responses, notes, and interjections? To pursue this train of thought, I want to use as a case study a life narrative texts in the Google Books archive. 
                Memoir of the Farrar Family was published in 1847 by Timothy Farrar (1788–1874). The book exists in multiple online formats. It is available as full text from Archive.org as well as from Google Books. It is available for purchase on Amazon, with a caveat that the work comes from a scan and may have marks and imperfections. The book is referred to on many genealogical websites, which tells us something about the sort of text that it is. The inside cover says, ‘A Discourse occasioned by the centennial anniversary of Hon. Timothy Farrar, LL. Delivered at Hollis, N.H. July 11 1847 by Timothy Farrar Clary. Printed by Request. Andover: Printed by William H. Wardwell. 1847’.
            
            Google’s bibliographic information for the book tells us that it was originally digitized on 18 September 2007 from a text located at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. What makes this case so curious is that the book as it exists in the Google Books archive is riddled with the markings of a later reader. The handwriting is persistent throughout the pages of the short work, and the marginalia take the form not of active reading, of someone underlining the work as they go, but of a reader supplementing and correcting the text’s facts.
            This paper considers the implications of Google Books on the life writing it digitizes and on the notion of the library/archive and the interplay of voices in the digitization not only of a polished and published family history but also of the voices added to the text in less formal ways. The paper uses frameworks from the history of the book discourse, marginalia studies, and new media studies to consider the residual marks of other readers in ephemera and marginalia on the page and uses as case studies two works of life writing from the 19th century to examine the implications of autobiographical voices unbound by Google Books and the intellectual labour/vandalism represented by the works’ many readers. I apply Alexander Galloway’s view of the interface as ‘a generative friction between different formats’ (2012, 31) and look to media archaeology and Lisa Gitelman’s work on the history of documents for a means of understanding the layers at work in reading an annotated digitized work of life writing, a genre in which the traces of readers and digitization procedures are more keenly felt. 
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Borgman, C. L. (2000). From Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure: Access to Information in the Networked World. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Brockmeier, J. (2010). After the Archive: Remapping Memory. Culture &amp; Psychology, 
                        16(1) (March): 5–35.
                    
                    
                        Darnton, R. (2011). Six Reasons Why Google Books Failed. New York Review of Books, 28 March, http://www.nybooks.com/blogs/nyrblog/2011/mar/28/six-reasons-google-books-failed/.
                    
                    
                        Esposito, J. (2011). The Terrible Price of Free: On E-Reading Jane Austen via Google’s E-books. Scholarly Kitchen, 14 March, http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2011/03/14/the-terrible-price-of-free-on-e-reading-jane-austen-via-googles-e-books/.
                    
                    
                        Galloway, A. R. (2012). The Interface Effect. Polity, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Gitelman, L. 2014. Paper Knowledge: Toward a Media History of Documents. Duke University Press, Durham, NC.
                    
                    
                        Jackson, H. (2001). Marginalia: Readers Writing in Books. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M. (2013) Bookscapes: Books in Electronic Space, http://mkirschenbaum.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/bookscapes.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Lessig, L. (2010). For the Love of Culture. New Republic, 26 January, http://www.newrepublic.com/article/the-love-culture.
                    
                    
                        Nunberg, G. (2009). Google’s Book Search: A Disaster for Scholars. Chronicle Review, http://chronicle.com/article/Googles-Book-Search-A/48245/.
                    
                    
                        Pressman, J. (2013). The Literary and/as the Digital Humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        7(1).
                    
                    
                        Sheringham, M. (2005). Memory and the Archive in Contemporary Life-Writing. French Studies, 
                        59(1): 47–53.
                    
                    
                        Smith, S. and Watson, J. (2010). Reading Autobiography: A Guide for Interpreting Life Narratives. 2nd ed. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
                    
                    
                        Swanstrom, L. (2011). From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts; Digitize This Book! The Politics of New Media, or Why We Need Open Access Now; Poetic Acts and New Media. American Literature, 
                        83(2): 466–68.
                    
                    
                        Wilson, K. 2015. The Art of Google Books. http://theartofgooglebooks.tumblr.com/.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Tracing the afterlife of iconic photographs using IPTC
                
                    
                        Kleppe
                        Martijn
                    
                    Erasmus University Rotterdam, Netherlands, The
                    kleppe@eshcc.eur.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    photographs
                    metadata
                    image recognition
                    iptc
                
                
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    historical studies
                    media studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In recent popular and scientific products of historiography, ever more similar-looking photographs of (mostly symbolic) happenings are used as an instrument to tell a story about important events or structural trends. These types of images can be called iconic photographs (Hariman and Lucaites, 2007). We consider iconic photos as photographs that have been reproduced more than once and have a special composition. They refer to archetypes and have the potential to be an archetype itself, and thus represent more than what is being displayed. Although this symbolic meaning is immediately obvious, it may change over time when the photograph is published in different contexts during its afterlife (Kroes, 2007). Since a group of people know these photographs and attribute the same meaning to it, they are part of a ‘collective memory’ (Kleppe, 2013a). Well-known examples of iconic photographs are the photo of a girl running naked and screaming after a napalm bombardment in Vietnam in 1972 or the man in front of a line of tanks at Tiananmen Square, Beijing, in 1989. These examples can be considered to be ‘global super icons’. However, iconic photographs also exist within a national context (Paul, 2008). This paper describes how we determined which Dutch photographs can be called iconic by using IPTC technology. This technique is being used in the media industry to transfer information on photographs in unified standards. We applied this technology to efficiently research our two questions that form two elements of the above-formulated definition of an iconic photograph: (1) Which photo is published most often in a dataset and therefore functions as an iconic image, and (2) How can the changing symbolic meaning during the afterlife of iconic photos be studied? 
            Method 
            The International Press Telecommunication Council (IPTC) develops technical standards for news organisations.
                1 By applying the same standards, a photographer can embed the information of a photo inside the file and send this to an editor at a newspaper who can download the metadata in the local ICT-infrastructure. This technique not only facilitates the exchange of files between journalists, but academics, digital libraries, and cultural heritage institutions can also use IPTC to include information about their objects in the digital files (Grijsen, 2012; Reser and Bauman, 2012). 
            
            We used this technology to determine which Dutch photos are published most often by analysing 5,000 photographs in 400 Dutch history textbooks, published in the period from 1970 to 2000. All photos were digitized and analyzed by assigning 41 variables (such as topic, caption, person, and year). However, finding similar images in a large dataset can be a challenge given the high level of subjectivity when interpreting photographs (Finnegan, 2006; Rose, 2007) and the lack of standardized thesauri to describe photographs (Kleppe, 2012). To overcome this ‘semantic gap’ (Smeulders et al., 2000) we formulated a list of historical events based on a literature review, creating metadata that were tailored to our research question (Wallace, 2010). Together with all factual information about the photo, this data was included in the IPTC fields that are embedded within the digital file of the photograph by using the commercial software program Fotostation Pro.
                2 This program not only allowed us to do full text searches through all assigned metadata but we were also able to share our research data with other researchers who could import the information in the IPTC fields of their photo-, editing- and viewing software. Moreover, we were able to export all values to CSV-files that were importable into statistical software packages such as SPSS. 
            
            Results 
            By making frequency tables of the list of topics we described about all photos, we calculated which topics were most present in the set of photographs. We then manually went over the images that illustrate these topics to find the images that were used most often. This method allowed us to answer our first research question on which photo is published most often and therefore functions as an iconic image. Results show that a 1912 photograph of Dutch socialist politician Pieter Jelles Troelstra is used most often in the analyzed textbooks. On the photo, Troelstra gives a speech in which he pleads for universal suffrage (see photo 1). 
            
                
            
            Photo 1. The photo of Pieter Jelles Troelstra that was published most often in the analysed Dutch History textbooks. Source: Cornelis Leenheer, IISG, https://www.flickr.com/photos/iisg/4071852722/in/set-72157622724066432. 
            To study our second research question on the changing symbolic meaning of iconic photographs during its afterlife, we could return to our database since each photo is not only described based on the list of historical events, but we also noted factual information such as the chapter title in which the photo was published and the accompanying caption. By going over this information we could examine in which context the photo of Troelstra was used. By simply typing in the name ‘Troelstra’ in Fotostation Pro, we found all books in which the photo was used and could go over the information in the accompanying IPTC field. By following this approach we could answer our second research question on the changing symbolic meaning during the afterlife of iconic photographs. 
            In the case of the photo of Troelstra, we found that the photo is incorrectly dated in one-third of all history textbooks. Nowadays, in Dutch historiography Troelstra is not known for his plea for universal suffrage but mainly for his failed attempt to start a revolution to overthrow the queen in 1918. Our research shows that in one-third of all Dutch history textbooks the photo of 1912 is used to illustrate the events of 1918 instead of the demonstration of 1912, clearly illustrating the changing symbolic meaning of this iconic photograph during its afterlife as visual illustration in history textbooks. 
            Discussion 
            Even though our database is relatively small, the case study of the photo of Troelstra shows that by adding metadata in the IPTC fields, we were able to quickly track down all the textbooks in which the photo is used to determine the context in which the photo appears. Studying this afterlife can even be taken a step further when databases with the same approach can be linked, e.g., collections that are described with the ICONCLASS System (Brandhorst, 2012) or the GTAA (Oomen and Brugman, 2010). It will then be possible to research how photos are being reused in other types of historical sources, such as newspapers or magazines. Therefore we made our database available for future researchers (Kleppe, 2013b) in order to be reused to answer humanities research questions or further exploration on the use of IPTC within the digital humanities. 
            However, going over the frequency tables and subsequently looking up the information in the database and IPTC fields remained a manual process. Even though the software allowed us to quickly search through all data, we still had to rely on our own judgment and scrutiny, leading to inevitable human errors or false interpretations. Therefore, we envision that the current developments in image retrieval by using image recognition (Wu et al., 2009) will be of assistance for this type of research. At this moment, several search engines offer reversed image lookup (RIL), such as Google Images and Tineye.
                3 Users can upload an image and retrieve similar images located at indexed websites. This type of technology is already being used by commercial parties to track down copyright-protected images across the Web,
                4 to assess the impact of scholarly images online (Kousha, 2010), to find patterns in large image databases (Losh, 2014; Manovich, 2009), or to analyse the reuse of digital images of cultural and heritage material (Terras and Kirton, 2013). Applying this type of reversed image lookup to find similar images within a dataset has only recently been explored by Resig (2013) and Doug (2014), who developed software based on TinEye’s MatchEngine.
                5 Given its promising results, scholars using visual sources to study the afterlife of imagery should explore the possibilities of computer vision to find the recurrent use of similar images in visual datasets. 
            
            Notes
            1. http://www.iptc.org.
            2. http://www.fotoware.com/en/Products/FotoStation/. 
            3. https://images.google.com; https://www.tineye.com/.
            4. http://blog.photoshelter.com/2013/04/find-your-images-online-using-reverse-image-search-on-google/.
            5. https://services.tineye.com/MatchEngine.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brandhorst, H. (2012). The Iconography of the Pleasures and Problems of Drink: Thoughts on the Opportunities and Challenges for Access and Collaboration in the Digital Age. 
                        Visual Resources,
                        28(4): 384–90. 
                    
                    
                        Doug, R. (2014). Using Computer Vision to Improve Image Metadata. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-294.xml.
                    
                    
                        Finnegan, C. A. (2006). What Is This a Picture of? Some Thoughts on Images and Archives. 
                        Rhetoric &amp; Public Affairs,
                        9: 116–23. 
                    
                    
                        Grijsen, C. (2012). In perspectief: behoud en beheer van born-digital fotoarchieven [In perspective: Conservation and management of born-digital photo archives]. 
                        Fotografisch Geheugen, 
                        75: 24–26. 
                    
                    
                        Hariman, R. and Lucaites, J. L. (2007). 
                        No Caption Needed: Iconic Photographs, Public Culture, and Liberal Democracy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Kleppe, M. (2013a). Canonieke Icoonfoto’s. De rol van (pers)foto’s in de Nederlandse geschiedschrijving [Canonical iconic photographs: The role of (press) photos in Dutch historiography]. Eburon, Delft. 
                    
                    
                        Kleppe, M. (2013b). Foto’s in Nederlandse Geschiedenisschoolboeken (FiNGS) [Photos in Dutch history textbooks]. http://www.persistent-identifier.nl/?identifier=urn:nbn:nl:ui:13-l37n-bi. 
                    
                    
                        Kleppe, M. (2012). Wat is het onderwerp op een foto? De kansen en problemen bij het opzetten van een eigen fotodatabase [What is the subject of a picture? The opportunities and difficulties in setting up their own photo database]. 
                        Tijdschrift voor Mediageschiedenis,
                        2: 93–107. 
                    
                    
                        Kroes, R. (2007). 
                        Photographic Memories: Private Pictures, Public Images, and American History. Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH. 
                    
                    
                        Kousha, K., Thelwall, M. and Rezaie, S. (2010). Can the Impact of Scholarly Images Be Assessed Online? An Exploratory Study Using Image Identification Technology. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                        61(9): 1734–44. 
                    
                    
                        Losh, E. (2014). Visualizing Global News. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-869.xml. 
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (2009). Cultural Analytics: Visualing Cultural Patterns in the Era of More Media. 
                        Domus,
                        923. 
                    
                    
                        Oomen, J. and Brugman, H. (2010). Thesauri gekoppeld [Thesauri linked]. 
                        Digitale Bibliotheek,
                        2(5): 18–21. 
                    
                    
                        Paul, G. (2008). 
                        Das Jahrhundert der Bilder: 1949 bis heute. Göttingen. 
                    
                    
                        Reser, G. and Bauman, J. (2012). The Past, Present, and Future of Embedded Metadata for the Long-Term Maintenance of and Access to Digital Image Files. 
                        International Journal of Digital Library Systems,
                        3(1): 53–64. 
                    
                    
                        Resig, J. (2013). Using Computer Vision to Increase the Research Potential of Photo Archives. http://ejohn.org/research/computer-vision-photo-archives/#analysis-implementations. 
                    
                    
                        Rose, G. (2007). 
                        Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to the Interpretation of Visual Materials. Sage Publications, London. 
                    
                    
                        Smeulders, A. W. M., et al. (2000). Content-Based Image Retrieval at the End of the Early Years. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
                        22: 1349–80. 
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. M. and I. Kirton. (2013). Where Do Images of Art Go Once They Go Online? A Reverse Image Lookup Study to Assess the Dissemination of Digitized Cultural Heritage. 
                        Selected Papers from Museums and the Web North America, pp. 237–48. 
                    
                    
                        Wallace, D. (2010). Words as Keys to the Image Bank. In Bailey, C. and Gardiner, H. (eds), 
                        Revisualizing Visual Culture. Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Wu, Zhong, et al. Bundling Features for Large-Scale Partial-Duplicate Web Image Search. In 
                        Proceedings of IEEE Conference Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Translation, Annotation and Knowledge Modelling of the Babylonian Talmud: the Traduco System
                
                    
                        Albanesi
                        Davide
                    
                    ILC Institute for Computational Linguistics - CNR Italy, Italy
                    davide.albanesi@ilc.cnr.it
                
                
                    
                        Bellandi
                        Andrea
                    
                    ILC Institute for Computational Linguistics - CNR Italy, Italy
                    andrea.bellandi@ilc.cnr.it
                
                
                    
                        Benotto
                        Giulia
                    
                    ILC Institute for Computational Linguistics - CNR Italy, Italy
                    giulia.benotto@ilc.cnr.it
                
                
                    
                        Giovannetti
                        Emiliano
                    
                    ILC Institute for Computational Linguistics - CNR Italy, Italy
                    emiliano.giovannetti@ilc.cnr.it
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    computer assisted translation
                    Babylonian Talmud
                    semantic annotation
                    translation memory
                
                
                    literary studies
                    natural language processing
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    knowledge representation
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    linguistics
                    translation studies
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this work we are going to present the 
                Traduco System, a collaborative web-based application for the translation of the Babylonian Talmud (BT) into Italian. The system has been designed around a computer-assisted translation (CAT) component (Gordon, 1996; Huerta, 2011), constituting its core. However, 
                Traduco is not limited to assisting the translation process and providing printing functionalities. In fact, it allows linguistic and semantic annotations and advanced searches, paving the way to the construction of a Talmudic knowledge base. In order to achieve these results, the 
                Traduco development process abided by a model that took into account aspects of Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering. The component-based architectural structure was implemented using the object-oriented Java 2 Enterprise Edition framework.
            
            In particular, each 
                Traduco component implements specific functionalities targeted at different types of users:
            
             1.
                 Translators and 
                revisors are supported by the use of CAT technologies, including a Translation Memory (TM) designed to ‘remember’ every translated portion of text. The system takes as input the Hebrew text segment to be translated, queries the TM, and suggests the Italian translations relative to the Hebrew text segments recognized to be more similar to the one that has to be translated (Bellandi et al., 2014a), as illustrated in Figure 1.
            
             2.
                 Philologists and 
                linguists can insert notes, comments, and bibliographical references (HaCohen-Kerner, 2010).
            
             3.
                 Domain experts are allowed to structure relevant terms into glossaries (for example, proper names, plants, measures, concepts) and, potentially, domain ontologies (Guarino, 1998) represented in Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) or Ontology Web Language (OWL), by using a graphical ontology editor (see Figure 2), which is currently under development (Bellandi et al., 2014b).
            
             4.
                 Researchers and 
                scholars can carry out complex searches on both a linguistic and semantic basis. In more detail, we are developing two morphological analysers, one for Italian and one for Mishnaic Hebrew. These instruments should allow the creation of lexical indices, where each entry (‘lemma’ or ‘root’) will be associated to all its morphologically correlated inflected forms and to all the contexts in which they occur.
            
             5.
                 Editors can easily produce the printed edition of the translation of the BT by arranging translations and notes in standard formats for desktop publishing software (typically XML-based, see Figure 3).
            
            Needing a common and shared platform for the translation, revision, and editing of the BT, we went to the Web and the related technologies, providing users the ability to work on the same data collaboratively. Furthermore, it allows the supervisors to keep track, in real time, of the work done by the translators on the portions of the Talmud they were assigned to.
            
                Traduco can be used for translating other texts by adapting its linguistic analysis and semantic annotation components to different languages and domains with relative ease. In particular, the approach employed by 
                Traduco for the processing of Italian and Hebrew is based on extensively tested and state-of-the-art machine learning technologies (see Bar-Haim et al., 2005; Itai, 2006), built on highly flexible supervised models that can be trained using pre-annotated texts. Concerning the knowledge engineering components, the model allows for the definition of arbitrary semantic classes, thus enabling users to construct specific domain ontologies starting from the annotated terms. 
            
            Acknowledgement
            This work has been conducted in the context of the research project TALMUD and the scientific partnership between S.c.a r.l. ‘Progetto Traduzione del Talmud Babilonese’ and ILC-CNR, and on the basis of the regulations stated in the ‘Protocollo d’Intesa’ (memorandum of understanding) between the Italian Presidency of the Council of Ministers; the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities, and Research; the Union of Italian Jewish Communities; the Italian Rabbinical College; and the Italian National Research Council (21 January 2011).
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Translation Suggestion Component (five stars indicate an exact match). The translations in English, starting from the first, are: (i) 
                On the fruits of the earth he says, ‘He who owns, creates the fruit of the earth’; (ii) 
                On vegetables he says, ‘He who creates the fruit of the earth’; (iii) 
                On the fruits of the trees he says, ‘He who creates the fruit of the tree’.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. GUI for building the Talmudic knowledge base starting from domain terms (under development).
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Publishing software export functionality. Example related to the Adobe InDesign export.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bar-Haim, R., Sima’an, K. and Winter, Y. (2005). Choosing an Optimal Architecture for Segmentation and POS-Tagging of Modern Hebrew. 
                        Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, Michigan, June 2005.
                    
                    
                        Bellandi, A., Bellusci, A. and Giovannetti, E. (2014a). Computer Assisted Translation of Ancient Texts: The Babylonian Talmud Case Study. 
                        Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Cognitive Science, Venice.
                    
                    
                        Bellandi, A., Bellusci, A., Giovannetti, E. and Carniani, E. (2014b). Content Elicitation: Towards a New Paradigm for the Analysis and Interpretation of Text. 
                        Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Informatics, Innsbruck, February 2014.
                    
                    
                        Gordon, I. (1996). Letting the CAT out of the Bag—or Was It MT? 
                        Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Translating and the Computer, London.
                    
                    
                        Guarino, N. (1998). Formal Ontology in Information Systems. 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference (FIOS’98), Vol. 46. June. Trento: IOS Press.
                    
                    
                        HaCohen-Kerner, Y., Schweitzer, N. and Shoham, Y. (2010). Automatic Identification of Biblical Quotations in Hebrew-Aramaic Documents. 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Information Retrieval, Valencia, October 2010.
                    
                    
                        Huerta, J. M. (2011). Towards Efficient Translation Memory Search Based on Multiple Sentence Signatures, Speech and Language Technologies. DOI:10.5772/16327. 
                    
                    
                        Itai, A. (2006). Knowledge Center for Processing Hebrew. 
                        Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Workshop ‘Towards a Research Infrastructure for Language Resources. Genoa, May 2006. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Uncanny Projections / Site-Writing Places
                
                    
                        Barns
                        Sarah
                    
                    University of Western Sydney, Australia
                    s.barns@uws.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    projection
                    digital interfaces
                    site-writing
                    community
                    public art
                
                
                    archaeology
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    film and cinema studies
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The tricks of illumination and digital projection exploit the possibilities of contemporary technical tools—3D architectural mapping, sensors, software-enabled visual distortions, real-time image manipulation of the ever-growing, luminous flux of data—to introduce into public spaces a sense of the ‘technological uncanny’, a phantasmagorical urban world in which to the receptive viewer anything, 
                seemingly, is possible (Edensor, 2012, 1107). 
            
            For many creators of projection artworks, the topography of the built environment itself becomes a different kind of screen (Sassen, 2009, 29) to program and design to spectacular effect. But site-specific projection artworks can also be conceived not only as light and colour displays but as mixed-reality interventions that combine past and the present spaces in novel ways. 
            This paper will present on a set of public art interventions that seek to ‘surface’ archival recordings about a specific location using contemporary interfaces of projection design and acoustic installation. The paper will address two personal projects produced in 2014–2015 in Bathurst and Canberra that reflect intensive research into multiple film, sound, and image collections as resources through which to design and curate contemporary interpretative displays and events. These are presented alongside the projection work of artist Shimone Attie in Berlin during the early 1990s and the contemporary work of the Niño Viejo (‘Old Child’) collective in Valencia, Spain. 
            Reflecting across these different, site-specific projection pieces, the paper considers the use of digital projection as a form of ‘site-writing’, or writing a place as opposed to writing about it (Rendell, 2010). Where they draw from and recompose the ‘trace elements’ of past urban spaces, it reflects on how these different projection artworks might be understood to contribute to the ‘displacing forwards’ (Freud, 1901/1960) of contemporary memory practice, while opening up new territories for engaged digital humanities research. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Edensor, T. (2012). Illuminated Atmospheres: Anticipating and Reproducing the Flow of Affective Experience in Blackpool. 
                        Environment and Planning D: Society and Space,
                        30: 1103–22.
                    
                    
                        Freud, S. (1960/1901). The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. In 
                        The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume 6. Translated from the German under the general editorship of James Strachey. Hogarth Press, London. 
                    
                    
                        Rendell, J. (2010). 
                        Site-Writing: The Architecture of Art Criticism. IB Tauris, London.
                    
                    
                        Sassen, S. (2009). Reading the City in a Global Digital Age. In McQuire, S. (ed.). 
                        Urban Screens Reader. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Using Feature Structures for the study of medieval manuscripts
                
                    
                        Bermúdez Sabel
                        Helena
                    
                    University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
                    helena.bermudez@usc.es
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    digital edition
                    historical linguistics
                    diachronic variation
                    portuguese medieval poetry
                    collatio
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    literary studies
                    medieval studies
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    philology
                    xml
                    linguistics
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Scholars would agree on the importance of doing a comprehensive linguistic study of every witness that integrates a manuscript tradition. However, such a detailed research on large traditions can be rather laborious. 
            A possible alternative to limit the object of study is, to my mind, to examine the most important linguistic phenomenon, namely linguistic variation. By focusing on all the language variants found after collating every witness, we report on the distinctive linguistic features of every manuscript, thus making the study of a manuscript tradition much more practicable (Roudil, 1986). 
            For a period such as the Middle Ages, which featured rather flexible writing codes, textual variation can be very informative. Taking a corpus of formal features as a reference and comparing it with other texts, for which there is a high degree of certainty about the conditions in which they were written, can actually provide useful information regarding their writing standards, that is, the 
                scriptorium.
            
            Linguistic variants usually occur as a result of the self-dictation that the copyist does after reading and memorizing the extract he intends to copy, hence reflecting features of the his idiolect. The study of those features contributes to gain a better understanding of the witness production, since it provides evidence of the human resources who participated in this production. 
            Copy errors are another gold mine, and their systematic classification and study provides information related to the sources, distinctive features of the model (e.g., a common graphic substitution in the copy means that the two graphemes were very similar in the model), and linguistic data, among others.
            Therefore, in order to compile all these data I propose a digital edition based on the collation of every reading of every witness an edition that is applied to the Galician-Portuguese secular lyric.
                1
            
            After using regular expressions and XSLT to create a preliminary interlinear collation, I manually corrected certain elements, such as the 
                scripta continua found in some parts of certain witnesses or the accurate markup of lacunae and transpositions. I then transformed again the transcription, applying for this purpose a collation style sheet that I created and that tokenizes and compares each element generating an apparatus tagset that records every variant. This encoding is done according to the Text Encoding Initiative module ‘Parallel Segmentation’ method, a feature of the 
                TEI Guidelines that allows multiple versions of a text to be encoded in one document.
            
            Once all variants were marked up, I followed the TEI module ‘Feature Structures’ to categorize them. I created a very detailed feature-value library, in which every variant has its correspondent &lt;fs&gt; element defined by five to ten individual features. This kind of combination make it possible to query the corpus with high precision. The retrieval of information is thus very efficient, mainly because I can use the same language, XQuery, to query and transform the data (Siegel and Retter, 2015).
            As has been mentioned, this encoding and its manipulation provides, on one hand, the description of the various graphic systems used, by decoding the spelling rules present in the witnesses. A graphemic analysis will not only help to identify phenomena of language variation, but it will also clarify certain elements of the genesis of these manuscripts, such as graphic substrates, the origin of the copyists, and the textual sources that were used.
            On the other hand, these data will serve to analyse the linguistic variation in the corpus, at the phonetic, phonological, morphological, syntactic, and lexical levels. This information can be subsequently used to conduct a descriptive study, explaining the main features of the Galician-Portuguese grammar of the High and Late Middle Ages, concluding in a general study of historical linguistics, taking drawing examples from this corpus.
            Finally, scholars specialised in this literary tradition will find a very useful resource to prepare scholarly editions thanks to the thorough linguistic information and the informative collation.
            Note
            1. For an initial approach, the 
                Cantigas Medievais Galego Portuguesas [online database] offers all the 
                cantigas (songs) contained in the medieval Galician-Portuguese 
                cancioneiros (songbooks), the manuscripts’ images, and also the music—both the medieval and the contemporary versions.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Lopes, G. Videira, et al. (2011). 
                        Cantigas Medievais Galego Portuguesas [online database]. Lisbon: Instituto de Estudos Medievais, http://cantigas.fcsh.unl.pt.
                    
                    
                        Roudil, J. (1986). 
                        Summa de los nueve tiempos de los pleitos. Édition et étude d’une variation sur un thème par Jean Roudil. Klincksieck, Paris.
                    
                    
                        Siegel, E. and Retter, A. (2015). 
                        eXist. A NoSQL Document Database and Application Platform. O’Reilly, Sebastopol.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (eds). (n.d.). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.7.0. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5 (last modified date: 16 September 2014).
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Using Multiple Strategies To Find Connections In Digital Archives: Making Sense of Historical Data
                
                    
                        Lester
                        Connie Lee
                    
                    University of Central Florida, United States of America
                    Connie.Lester@ucf.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Archives
                    Sensemaking
                    Connections
                    Interdisciplinary
                    Visualization
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    historical studies
                    metadata
                    natural language processing
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    visualisation
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            RICHES Mosaic Interface
                TM (RICHES MI; https://richesmi.cah.ucf.edu
                ) is the interactive and innovative digital platform for the Regional Initiative for Collecting the History, Experiences, and Stories (RICHES™) of Central Florida, an interdisciplinary project housed in the History Department at the University of Central Florida in Orlando. The mission of RICHES MI is to enable users to 
                search the database using natural language, tags, topics, and categories to maximize their search results; 
                analyze the results of their search using the ‘Connections’ module to show the relationship between the returned item and other items in the digital archive using a RICHES™-developed algorithm; 
                visualize results through digital exhibits, map overlays, and visualizations, and 
                learn regional history and historical methods as teachers and students use the RICHES™-produced digital modules and source sets. Combining multiple search and analytical tools in an interactive database offers a more effective approach to historical analysis and more closely approximates the process that historians traditionally use in research projects.
            
            As historians moved into digitization of archival collections, the initial excitement of having ready access to rare documents and images took precedence over search and analysis problems that also accompanied this undertaking. Recent conference presentations and white papers demonstrate acknowledgement of these problems and advance solutions that call for greater collaboration between historians and archivists to write more detailed metadata and offer textual analysis tools for understanding larger datasets. A 2011 National Endowment for the Humanities–funded project on changing research practices among historians called for increased digitization of archival sources, the creation of new tools for interactive use of digital sources, and the development of capabilities for connecting smaller archives to larger repositories (Rutner and Schonfeld, 2012). In a discussion on digital history published in the 
                Journal of American History, Daniel Cohen predicted that the next iteration of scholarship would include ‘methods like collaborative filtering and recommendation systems’ (Cohen et al., 2008). Historians have followed the lead of digital literature scholars in the utilization of data mining and text analysis tools (Nelson et al., 2012), but we believe that historians need to view the results of such tools in context with other documents in order to gain insight into their broader meaning.
            
            RICHES MI addresses a number of issues previously raised by digital historians and moves into the realm of analysis through the Connections tool. Still in its early stages of development, Connections intersects with scholarship on sensemaking that is most frequently associated with intelligence analysis and journalism (Pirolli and Card 2005; Pirolli and Russell, 2011). In the model advanced by Pirolli and Card, ‘The sensemaking process is organized into two major loops of activities . . . a foraging loop . . . [and] a sensemaking loop’. Our system seeks to address some of these challenges posed by the search for relationships between data and apply leverage to some key points of the sensemaking processes. 
            Designed and developed by an interdisciplinary team of historians and computer scientists, RICHES MI was constructed using several open-source programs, including Omeka, Google Maps, and MALLET (topic modeling). Plugins that permit users to contribute to the database and that enable the mapping of multiple sites for a single item were added. The Connections tool (which can be used in the Search and in the Bookbag) provides users with a tree diagram of related items and enables them to visualize the connections by time, location, tags, and topics. Finally, users can save selected items to a Bookbag, where they can organize the items into folders and annotate them. By following a well-known sensemaking process, our system supports digital research that more closely replicates the archival experience across multiple collections and large datasets.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cohen, D. J., et al. (2008). Interchange: The Promise of Digital History. 
                        Journal of American History, 
                        95(2) (September).
                    
                    
                        Nelson, R. K., et al. (2012). A Conversation with Digital Historians. 
                        Southern Spaces: An Interdisciplinary Journal about Regions, Places, and Cultures of the U.S. South and Their Global Connections, https://southernspaces.org/2012/conversation_digital_historians.
                    
                    
                        Pirolli, P. and Card, S. (2005). The Sensemaking Process and Leverage Points for Analyst Technology as Identified through Cognitive Task Analysis. In 
                        Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis. Vol. 5. McLean, VA: Mitre.
                    
                    
                        Pirolli, P. and Russell, D. M. (2011). Introduction to This Special Issue on Sensemaking. 
                        Human-Computer Interaction, 
                        26(1–2) (March): 1–8.
                    
                    
                        Rutner, J. and Schonfeld, R. C. (2012). Supporting the Changing Research Practices of Historians. Final report from 
                        ITHAKA S+R.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Venice Time Machine: Recreating the density of the past
                
                    
                        di Lenardo
                        Isabella
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    isabella.dilenardo@epfl.ch
                
                
                    
                        Kaplan
                        Frédéric
                    
                    EPFL, Switzerland
                    frederic.kaplan@epfl.ch
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Venice
                    Historical GIS
                    Archive
                    Big data
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    art history
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    renaissance studies
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This article discusses the methodology used in the Venice Time Machine project (http://vtm.epfl.ch) to reconstruct a historical geographical information system covering the social and urban evolution of Venice over a period of 1,000 years. Given the time span considered, the project used a combination of sources and a specific approach to align heterogeneous historical evidence into a single geographic database. The project is based on a mass digitization project of one of the largest archives in Venice, the 
                Archivio di Stato. One goal of the project is to build a kind of ‘Google map’ of the past, presenting a hypothetical reconstruction of Venice in 2D and 3D for any year starting from the origins of the city to present-day Venice.
            
            Venice is an extremely relevant case study for such an enterprise for at least two reasons. Its transformations are well documented by a large number of sources (numerous historical maps, huge administrative documents, etc.). Its evolution has essentially been ‘organic’ in the sense that most of the urban transformations have left visible traces, and in many cases the original shape of the city has not changed too much. In this article, we demonstrate how sources are used to reconstruct a dense network of information about Venice covering the 1,000-year period. 
            The project uses a large variety of sources, as summarized in Table 1. 
            The Historical Geographical System (HGIS) is initiated using the most up-to-date information about Venice contained in the ITB (
                infrastruttura di dati territoriali di base), produced by public authorities (Type A sources in our classification). The quality and the resolution of these initial data are crucial for the success of the project. 
            
            Going back in time, the most ancient survey that geometrically measured the ground of the city corresponds to the Napoleonic cadaster (1808–1813) drawn in 1808. Along with the Austrian and the Austrian-Italian cadasters, the Napoleonic cadaster is the most ancient ‘geometric intermediate’ plan that can be used to reconstruct footprints of buildings, streets, channels, wells, public monuments, and other important metadata (census information, property and renting, height, functions and conditions of the buildings) (Noizet et al., 2013). Partial surveys archived at the Archivio di Stato and other cartographic sources can be used in addition to the cadasters (e.g., the ‘Combatti’ map of the 19th century, and the ‘Ughi’ of the 18th century) for the planimetries of monumental buildings (B and C sources).
            To geo-reference historical maps and align them with contemporary GIS coordinates, one must choose control points homologous between the raster and the vector files (Figure 1). This is a crucial moment of the analysis, a process that needs a significant knowledge of cartographic conventions, both in terms of drawing and historical notions (Gregory et al., 2001). Each cartographic source has a certain number of peculiarities linked with the city history, the 2D architectural description, the hierarchical importance of the drawn elements, and different values ​​of granularity in the map design. Cartographic sources of type 
                B and C must be constantly crossed with iconic sources of type 
                D, documenting the city through paintings or engravings, and bibliographical sources of type 
                F studying Venetian urban history. Combining these sources, we can outline each structural class of elements, reediting different layers for lands, buildings, porticos, bridges, wells, banks, sea sands, public monuments, and so on (Gregory et al., 2001). Good geometric approximation of a diachronic visualization of data until at least the 1729 Ughi map can be achieved using this approach.
            
            For the preceding centuries, some Venetian public institutions have managed to produce very comprehensive, albeit incomplete, documentation of several pieces of the urban structure. All these documents, currently being digitized at the Archivio di Stato di Venezia, provide an indispensable source to perform spatial analysis and introduce other information about every structural element of the city previously chosen.
            Another ‘temporal nexus’ of particular importance in the history of the Renaissance cartography is the Jacopo de Barbari bird’s-eye view of Venice, published around 1500 (see Balistreri et al., 2000). This source, which we can include as a general iconographic type D source, is at the same time an excellent document from which one could extract a 2D plan and an accurate 3D reconstruction of the city (Figure 2). Thanks to the realignment of the perspective and an architectural analysis of the elements, conducted ad hoc, we can infer and draw a ‘2D de Barbari map’ and proceed to extend the layers of the HGIS up to the year 1500.
            Each structural unit of the GIS is also an entry to a database. The objects are organized hierarchically based on their scale from the largest entity, the laguna, to the footprint of each structure. A list of sources (from type A to F) can be associated to each element, cataloguing all the evidence that could be used to define its structure and the events associated with it. 
            Events describe all the major changes that affect the structural unit (e.g., construction, renovation, extension, destruction) but also other historical moments (e.g., consecration, property change). Each event is associated with a (potentially fuzzy) time span. 
            Particular series of administrative documents (type E) are extremely important to complement the other sources. Venice performed a series of tax campaigns in which all Venetians had to spontaneously describe their property (Condizioni di decima). These tax campaigns provide six additional temporal nexus for the years 1514, 1566, 1582, 1661, 1771, and 1740. For each of these years, they play the role of a ‘snapshot’ of the urban structures for the whole city. The main information concerns the owners and tenants of the structural unit, providing a lot of social information about them (name, religion, citizenship, origins, profession, political role, etc.). Other kinds of information present in the archives (death certificates, testaments, inventories, and other notarial acts) can be used to extend the information contained in these snapshots in order to create dense social networks of the past. Spatial queries can be performed, crossing social data with geographic information—studying, for instance, the urban repartitions of foreigners, the organization of particular professions in specific neighborhoods, and so on. 
            Precise addresses in Venice are linked with the first cadasters. Earlier, administrative documents provided only names or textual descriptions of the places they mentioned. Luckily, most names of most Venetian places have been rather constant in time. The toponomastic services designed in the database allow the transformation of place names into the corresponding geographical structural unit. In cases where names are unknown or absent and only descriptions are present, the database allows for a fuzzy zoning of the hypothetical designated areas. Between 1000 and 1550, most historical evidence is of this kind. 
            The diversity, quantity, and accuracy of the Venetian administrative documents are unique in Western history. By combining this mass of information, it is possible to reconstruct large segments of the city’s past: complete biographies, political dynamics, and the urban evolution of most Venetian neighborhoods. The documents are intricately interweaved, telling a much richer story when they are cross-referenced. This precise and detailed reconstruction can only be achieved as a collective endeavor. 
            Acknowledgements
            The Venice Time Machine is an international scientific program launched by EPFL and the University Ca’Foscari of Venice with the generous support of the Fondation Lombard Odier. About a hundred researchers and students currently collaborate on this program. We would like to thank in particular Oliver Dalang, Melanie Fournier, and Marc-Antoine Nuessli for their work on the historical geographical information system used in the project. 
            
                
                    Type A: Contemporary GIS models (venetian ITB) and 3D scanning data. They constitute the starting point of the modelisation.
                
                
                    Type B: Historical maps covering the whole city, sufficiently accurate to be geo-referenced. The most ancient of such representations is the Napoleonian cadaster published in 1808.
                
                
                    Type C: Partial cartographic elements used as illustrations of particular administrative documents (S.E.A. series of documents from Archivio di Stato di Venezia).
                
                
                    Type D: Iconographic documents such as paintings or engravings of the city.
                
                
                    Type E: Primary sources (e.g., tax declarations) and documents describing textually the evolution of the city
                
                
                    Type F: Secondary sources (e.g. monographies or articles) studying certain aspects of the evolution of the city.
                
            
            Table 1. Six types of sources used in the project.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Choice of homologous control points.
            
            Figure 2. 3D reconstruction from ‘de Barbari’ bird’s-eye view of Venice, 1500. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Balistreri, T. C., Balistreri, E., Ghion, A. M. and Zanverdiani, D. (2000). 
                        Venezia città mirabile. Cierre edizioni. Venezia.
                    
                    
                        Gregory, I. N., Kemp, K. and Mostern, R. (2001). Geographical Information and Historical Research: Current Progress and Future Directions. 
                        Humanities and Computing,
                        13: 7–22.
                    
                    
                        Noizet, H., Bove, B. and Costa, L. (eds). (2013). 
                        Paris de parcelles en pixels. Presses Universitaires de Vincennes, Paris, http://www.apur.org.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Visual First Amendment: A Case Study in Empricial Legal Studies, Visualization, and User Experience
                
                    
                        Sula
                        Chris Alen
                    
                    Pratt Institute, United States of America
                    csula@pratt.edu
                
                
                    
                        Rabina
                        Debbie
                    
                    Pratt Institute, United States of America
                    drabina@pratt.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    visualization
                    statistics
                    law
                    networks
                    usability
                
                
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    user studies / user needs
                    law
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper uses the Visual First Amendment (VFA) project to highlight the use of data visualization, user experience studies, and computational methods in the study of law. VFA presents visitors with interactive displays that allow them to explore the interrelation of issues, cases, courts, and justices over time, and to consider the broad social and legal changes that have impacted the United States Supreme Court’s ruling on the First Amendment freedoms of religions, speech, press, assembly, and petition. We begin by situating our project in the emerging field of empirical legal studies and describing the open data sources used to create our visualizations. We also discuss several usability tests conducted to improve our visualizations, and the development of the project cycle from concept to dissemination. Explicit attention is given throughout to digital humanities aspects of the project. 
            * * *
            In 1897, future U.S. Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. observed, ‘For the rational study of the law the black-letter man may be the man of the present, but the man of the future is the man of statistics and master of economics’ (Buckler, 2012). Holmes was addressing the need for law to look beyond historical examples to the social realities of the time. His methodological suggestion, however, has found new life in the era of digital humanities. 
            This paper presents the Visual First Amendment (VFA) project, which applies empirical methods and visualization techniques to the study of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. VFA aims to 
             • Provide a deeper understanding of the American constitutional freedoms of religion, speech, press, assembly, and petition.
             • Engage citizens in a discussion of rights, as interpreted now and in the future.
             • Raise awareness of First Amendment issues from a historical and legal perspective.
             • Racilitate research surrounding the First Amendment across a range of education levels and information tasks.
             • Serve as a model for representing Supreme Court data generally. 
            We begin by giving an overview of empirical legal research and similar projects that have been attempted to date. Following that, we describe the data sources and visualization tools behind several VFA interfaces. Finally, we present the results of user experience studies, as well as future directions. 
            
                Background
            
            Traditional legal scholarship consists of detailed analysis of primary sources (e.g., legislation and court rulings), supplemented by secondary sources such as legal scholarship. Empirical legal research, first employed in American legal scholarship in the late 1990s, ‘uses data analysis to study the legal system’ (Georgetown Law, 2014). While this approach is still not widespread, it has been described as ‘the next big thing’ in legal intellectual thought (George, 2006).
            Cane and Kritzer (2010) describe empirical legal research as involving ‘the systematic collection of information (“data”) and its analysis according to some generally accepted method’ and the (possibly numeric) coding or tagging of units of text. This research is often interdisciplinary—examining questions in the intersection of law, society, and economics, as well as judicial behavior and politics—and uses both quantitative/statistical and qualitative methods. Most data used in empirical legal studies are ambient in the sense that they are generated through judicial processes rather than through experiments, which would raise ethical risks in the case of law (Epstein and Martin, 2010). 
            The proliferation of law-related datasets and the increasing availability of data to the general public represent an important step toward increased civic engagement. The U.S. Open Government Initiative makes available over 200 datasets, which are used by journalists, researchers, and the general public for a variety of purposes, among them government oversight and accountability. The Sunlight Foundation, for example, has supported several projects that draw on publicly available data to promote government oversight practices such as tracking the link between campaign contributions and congressional votes on legislation and public policy. 
            To date, however, few attempts have been made to visualize court rulings, and none are focused on presenting data about the First Amendment for a wide variety of audiences: 
             • One of the earliest projects, Visualizing Legal Information (http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/west-legal), was created in the late 1990s in the Human Computer Interaction Lab at the University of Maryland. It is no longer updated, and most of the visualizations are no longer functional. 
             • A group of researchers from the University of Oslo is working on an interdisciplinary Law and Visualization project (http://www.jus.uio.no/english/research/areas/law-history/projects/law_visualization.html), which focuses on the relations between law and visualization as expressed in art, architecture, and film. Though the project is described as ‘empirical’, it does not employ data-driven methods, instead examining the experience of aestheticians and their concepts of law. 
             • The Judicial Research Initiative (http://artsandsciences.sc.edu/poli/juri) from the University of South Carolina aims to ‘provide a comprehensive access point to the most recent and cutting-edge research on law and judicial politics.’. This project only has datasets available for download and does not include visualization. 
            Visual First Amendment is unique among these projects as it applies visualization techniques to First Amendment data for a wide range of users. The information presented by the site is also highly contextualized both historically and thematically. 
            Project Design 
            Visual First Amendment draws on three freely available data sources, which have been selected for their recognized excellence in the field: 
             • First Amendment Timeline is compiled by the First Amendment Center, an operating program of the Freedom Forum located at the Newseum and Vanderbilt University. The Timeline is a chronological list of 150-plus American historical events, Supreme Court rulings, and legislation relating to the First Amendment from 1215 to 2011, with narrative descriptions of each event. 
             • Supreme Court Database (SCDB) is a National Science Foundation project hosted by the Center for Empirical Research in the Law at Washington University in St. Louis with nearly a dozen contributing law schools. SCDB contains data on 8,407 cases, 655 of which are classified as First Amendment cases, with over 200 pieces of information coded about each case. While this schema has received some criticism (Shapiro, 2008), it is highly regarded and used by scholars in various publications (Buckler, 2012; Sharma, 2013; Stearns, 2013), including a recent book on behavior of federal judges (Epstein et al., 2013). The project currently covers cases between the 1946 and 2012 terms and has a timetable established for the addition of other years. 
             • Supreme Court Citation Network Data, compiled by James H. Fowler (UCSD) and Sangick Jeon (Stanford), contains 202,167 citations to and from 30,288 Supreme Court majority opinions over the 1800–2002 period.
            The initial VFA prototype contains a range of visualizations based on these data sources. A complete list of these pairings is given in Table 1, and each type of visualization is described below. 
            
                Visualization Type Software Data 
            
            timelines TimelineJS First Amendment Center Timeline 
            statistical charts and graphs Tableau Public SCDB 
            networks Gephi SCDB, Citation Network Data geographic maps Leaflet, QGIS, Tableau Public SCDB 
            Table 1.
            Timelines 
            Timelines are the simplest and most easy-to-read displays used in the project. The current prototype includes a timeline of 100-plus major cases and historical events, as well as curated timelines around specific First Amendment stories. Users can swipe through the timeline using their mouse or touchscreen, and events are divided into a number of categories, including world/national events and various First Amendment freedoms.
            Visual First Amendment Timeline Browser 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. http://visualfa.org/timeline/.
            Statistical Charts and Graphs 
            VFA includes several statistical charts and graphs about First Amendment rulings as well as Supreme Court justices. These visualizations are interactive, allowing the user to select, filter, and manipulate the information presented, and can be shared or embedded across blogs, websites, and social media. 
            Justice Voting Patterns by Ideology 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. http://visualfa.org/statistics/justices-by-ideology/.
            Network Maps 
            Networks are among the most complex yet frequently discussed visualizations in the initial prototype. These graphs illustrate the relationships between court opinions and agreement between justices. Each dot represents a case; hovering over the dot calls up the name of the case, and clicking on it opens a sidebar with full case details. Cases are searchable by name or by topic. 
            Citation Network of Majority Opinions by First Amendment Issue 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. http://visualfa.org/citation-network-maps/network-maps-a-guided-tour. 
            Geographic Maps 
            Geographic maps are some of the first visualizations that young users learn to read, and they bring a new dimension of spatial reasoning to historical and thematic content. Several maps in our initial prototype illustrate the behavior of circuit courts, visually investigating whether these courts merit their reputations as being conservative or liberal in their rulings. A separate map examines the number of cases that arise from each state, filterable by issue, petitioner categories, respondent categories, and more. 
            Circuit Court Map by Decision Ideology 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. http://visualfa.org/circuit-court-map/. 
            User Experience 
            In spring 2014 the Visual First Amendment team conducted an initial round of user experience tests (Pratt IRB #189/2-12-14) at the American Civil Liberties Union and New York Civil Liberties Union offices in downtown Manhattan. Five users were tested using a talk-out-loud method in which they were asked to complete tasks and to narrate their decisionmaking process as they go. The tests were recorded using the Silverback Screen Capture software so that user behavior could be examined later. Users were also asked for general feedback on the site, including its potential audiences. We also spoke more informally with law students, law faculty, and law librarians, who have a special interest in the content of the project. This research has led to a number of site revisions, including 
             • Site navigation with multiple points of entry.
             • Contextual information and details on demand within visualization interfaces.
             • Curated datasets and stories that introduce more advanced interfaces. 
            Future Directions 
            At present, we are working to collaborate with humanities scholars, legal advisors, and media experts on content and visualizations that reflect general/public interest. To further public engagement, the project would benefit from additional user testing with broader audiences as well as the creation of additional tutorial videos and other instructional materials for the website. Finally, we hope to create an integrated user experience across multiple types of visualizations and to link with external resources, such as news stories and reference sources. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Buckler, K. G. (2012). The Newsworthiness of U.S. Supreme Court Criminal Procedure Cases (1994–2010 Terms): Assessing the Effects of Case Salience and Case Complexity across Elite and Populace Press. 
                        Criminal Justice Review, 
                        39(2): 140–59, http://cjr.sagepub.com/content/39/2/140.short. 
                    
                    
                        Cane, P. and Kritzer, H. M. (2010). In Cane, P. and Kritzer, H. M. (eds), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Empirical Legal Research. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 1–7. 
                    
                    
                        Epstein, L., Landes, W. M. and Posner, R. A. (2013). 
                        The Behavior of Federal Judges: A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Rational Choice. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Epstein, L. and Martin, A. D. (2010). Quantitative Approaches to Empirical Legal Research. In Cane, P. and Kritzer, H. M. (eds), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Empirical Legal Research. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 901–25. 
                    
                    
                        George, T. E. (2006). An Empirical Study of Empirical Legal Scholarship: The Top Law Schools. 
                        Indiana Law Journal, 
                        81: 141–61. 
                    
                    
                        Georgetown Law. (2014). Statistics and Empirical Legal Studies Research Guide. http://www.law.georgetown.edu/library/research/guides/empiricallegalstudies.cfm (accessed 1 June 2014). 
                    
                    
                        Shapiro, C. (2008). Coding Complexity: Bringing Law to the Empirical Analysis of the Supreme Court. 
                        Hastings Law Journal,
                        60, http://ssrn.com/abstract=998639. 
                    
                    
                        Sharma, H. (2013). The Ideological Relationship between Elected Officials and Supreme Court Justices, 1946–2012: Reframing the ‘Activism’ Debate to Incorporate Issue-Specific Analysis and Intra-Court Controls. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2277096. 
                    
                    
                        Stearns, M. L. (2013). Constitutional Law in Social Choice Perspective (2013). 
                        Public Choice,
                        157(2013), University of Maryland Legal Studies Research Paper No. 2013–57. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Visualizing Japanese Language Change During the Past Century
                
                    
                        Hodošček
                        Bor
                    
                    Osaka University, Japan
                    bor@lang.osaka-u.ac.jp
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    diachronic corpus
                    Japanese language change
                    genre
                    register
                    cooccurrence networks
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    metadata
                    stylistics and stylometry
                    linguistics
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This study introduces an online system for the visualization and analysis of over a century (1874–2008) of Japanese language change. A comprehensive account of register variation in contemporary Japanese has recently become possible with the public availability of the Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (BCCWJ), a 100-million-word corpus that contains a wide variety of written Japanese collected and curated by the National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics. Increasingly, too, public releases of new corpora that record various genres of modern (Meiji-era) Japanese writing have paved the way to enabling more comprehensive diachronic analysis (analysis of language development and evolution through time) of Japanese. Still, especially compared to recent efforts in English, which include large book digitalization projects such as the Google Books corpus (Michel et al., 2011), as well as more curated historical corpora such as the Corpus of Historical American English (COHA) or the register-balanced Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) (Davies, 2010; 2011), the available resources and research tools for investigating diachronic language change as well as register variation in Japanese lack in two respects: balanced representation of registers throughout time, and unified and sophisticated search interfaces.
            We combine the use of corpus metadata and annotations with textual features to model language change through time and between different registers from the following six corpora:
            • The Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (c. 1975–2008).
            • The Sun corpus (c. 1895–1925).
            • The Meiroku Zasshi corpus (c. 1874–1875).
            • The Kindai Josei Zasshi corpus (c. 1894–1925).
            • The Kokumin no Tomo corpus (c. 1887–1888).
            • A subset of the Aozora Bunko (c. 1890s–).
            All text is first converted into a unified structured format that includes structural information (paragraphs, headings, titles, lists, etc.) as well as other information (spoken text, quotations, etc.), where available, from the different textual or XML encodings of the corpora. Next, we process sentences into morpheme tokens using the morphological analyzer MeCab and, depending on the time period, the modern or contemporary version of the UniDic morphological dictionary. A unique property of both variants of UniDic is their organization of word tokens under lemma that cover the many orthographic variants observed in Japanese writing. Taking the basic lemma, word orthography, and POS triplets as a base, we construct co-occurrence networks between all words occurring in the same sentence or paragraph. This co-occurrence network is constructed so that we are able to generate sub-networks that match some metadata query, such as year and NDC code, which can then be used to compare with other sub-networks. The query and visualization interface thus provides a timeline for choosing specific time-related subsets from the corpora, as well as a visual way of selecting from other metadata, including categorical (gender, media type, etc.) and hierarchical (NDC, topic, etc.) information, which allows the user to further constrain the scope of investigation into language change to some register within a chosen time period or to instead focus on the differences between registers by comparing between two or more different registers within a set time period.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Davies, M. (2010). The Corpus of Historical American English: 400 Million Words, 1810–2009. http://corpus.byu.edu/coha/ (accessed 1 November 2014).
                    
                    
                        Davies, M. (2011). Google Books (American English) Corpus (155 Billion Words, 1810–2009). http://googlebooks.byu.edu/ (accessed 1 November 2014).
                    
                    
                        Michel, J.-B., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray, M. K., Pickett, J. P., . . . Orwant, J., et al. (2011). Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books. 
                        Science,
                        331(6014): 176–82.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Visualizing Text Alignments: Image Processing Techniques for Locating 18th-Century Commonplaces
                
                    
                        Roe
                        Glenn
                    
                    Australian National University, Australia
                    glenn.roe@anu.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Abdul-Rahman
                        Alfie
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    alfie.abdulrahman@oerc.ox.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Chen
                        Min
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    min.chen@oerc.ox.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Gladstone
                        Clovis
                    
                    University of Chicago, United States of America
                    clovisgladstone@uchicago.edu
                
                
                    
                        Morrissey
                        Robert
                    
                    University of Chicago, United States of America
                    rmorriss@uchicago.edu
                
                
                    
                        Olsen
                        Mark
                    
                    University of Chicago, United States of America
                    markymaypo57@gmail.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Sequence Alignment
                    Text Reuse
                    Visual Analytics
                
                
                    image processing
                    literary studies
                    content analysis
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper examines the use of ‘visual analytic’ techniques to scrutinise and refine current approaches and algorithms for the identification of text reuse and alignment. In particular, we compare text alignment approaches using the ViTA (Visualization for Text Alignment) system we have developed in the context of a Digging into Data project that seeks to identify 18th-century commonplaces in large-scale historical datasets. By leveraging the flexibility of image processing techniques to visualize text alignments in a variety of ways and using multiple parameters, we can improve upon current alignment algorithms in an iterative and integrated process of automated text mining, multivariate visualization, and human-computer interaction. 
            * * *
            Recent scholarship has demonstrated that the various rhetorical, mnemonic, and authorial practices associated with Early Modern commonplacing—the extraction and organisation of quotations and other passages for later recall and reuse—were highly effective strategies for dealing with the perceived ‘information overload’ of the period, as well as for functioning successfully in polite society (Yeo, 2001; Blair, 2001; Allan, 2010). But the 18th century was also a crucial moment in the modern construction of a new sense of self-identity, defined through the dialectic of memory (tradition) and autonomy (originality), the resonances of which persist long into the 19th century and beyond (Dacome, 2004; Bénichou, 1996). In the context of a larger Digging into Data Round 3 project, we are examining this paradigm shift in 18th-century culture from the perspective of the commonplace, a nexus of intertextual relationships that we aim to explore through the concerted application of sequence alignment algorithms and large-scale visual analytics. 
            In our previous work on text reuse (Horton et al., 2010; Allen et al., 2010), we came across numerous examples of textual borrowings and shared passages that exhibited the characteristics of commonplaces. However, traditional text mining and sequence alignment approaches for the identification of text reuse in the sort of large-scale data repositories that interest us entail no small amount of methodological challenges. For this reason, data visualization is a crucial element to this project, and will be used not merely as a means of presenting the end results of text mining but rather as an analytic approach to data at all points in the text-mining process: from the initial stages of data exploration and hypothesis evaluation, to user-driven feedback for refining text-mining rules and parameters, to generating new hypotheses and questions previously unseen in the data. This type of methodological approach is known as ‘visual analytics’, and this paper outlines our attempts to leverage image processing techniques to refine our previous text-mining assumptions, practices, and rules. 
            The concept of visual analytics was first proposed by Jim Thomas and his colleagues at the National Visualization and Analytics Center in 2004 (Thomas and Cook, 2005). It has become the de facto standard process for integrating data analysis, visualization, and interaction to better understand complex systems. The concept rests on the following assertions (Chen et al., 2011): 
             • Statistical methods alone cannot convey an adequate amount of information for humans to make informed decisions—hence the need for visualization.
             • Algorithms alone cannot encode an adequate amount of human knowledge about relevant concepts, facts, and contexts—hence the need for interaction.
             • Visualization alone cannot effectively manage levels of details about the data or prioritize different information in the data—hence the need for analysis and interaction.
             • Direct interaction with data alone (e.g., search by queries) is not scalable to the amount of data available—hence the need for analysis and visualization. 
            ViTA: Visualization for Text Alignment 
            In order to benchmark and test the boundaries of our current approach to text alignment, we have developed a visual analytic system named ViTA: Visualization for Text Alignment. By comparing output from our alignment system PhiloLine
                1 to output from the ViTA system, we can visualize text alignments on a dot-matrix image—alignments that might have been missed and/or misrecognized by our current n-gram-based approach. Using the information gained from this interface, we can then begin to construct a set of refined alignment rules that incorporate these new findings. For example, in Figure 1 we see two alignments found by the PhiloLine system. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1.
            The red output was detected by PhiloLine as an alignment. The blue represents what might also be considered a match, but that the algorithm, for various reasons, missed. Given the strictures of our current n-gram matching model, isolated and highly frequent words (such as ‘et’ and ‘en’) are not be considered as part of potentially larger alignments. Using the ViTA visual analytics system, however, our capacity for detecting a matching pattern on a visual plane helps us identify the gaps in these longer sequences and eventually help in fine-tuning the matching algorithm. If we start with simple word-to-word matching, here is what the ViTA output for the above passages looks like, where matching words from each text (the horizontal and vertical axes) are plotted as single pixels in a dot-matrix (Figure 2): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2. ViTA output: Any word with default settings.
            We can clearly detect the matching sequence, but the gaps in the alignment show the limits of one-to-one word matching. If we change the system’s matching parameters to look only for trigrams, we allow for more variance within each match (Figure 3): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3. ViTA output: Any word; +1 word on each side; minimum score of 3; image darkening &gt;.4.
            We see that much of the noise has been removed, which is to be expected as matching trigrams are relatively rare. The greyscale seen here accounts for n-grams that only have two tokens in common. While this has helped clear the image of unrelated matching unigrams, it still does not constitute the clear alignment that one sees when reading the passages. If we loosen our matching further to look for pentagrams, while also allowing for some variance in the content of matching n-grams, we can allow even more variance in n-gram matching: e.g., two tokens out of five tokens matching still constitutes a match, though not as strong as a true 5-gram, and is therefore represented in a lighter shade of grey (Figure 4): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 4. ViTA output: Any word; +2 words on each side; minimum score of 5; image darkening &gt; .2). 
            As you can see, the alignment has stretched even further, with very little additional noise. If we try to loosen our parameters further, and use heptagrams, we can allow an even greater variance in the n-gram matching. Since heptagrams will be extremely rare, partially matching heptagrams above a certain threshold will be displayed in a lighter shade of grey (Figure 5): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5. ViTA output: Any word; +3 words on each side, minimum score of 7; image darkening &gt; .2. 
            What these examples demonstrate effectively is that the combination of an improbable hypothesis, such as using heptagrams for sequence alignment, with image processing tools such as darkening (a threshold determining what should constitute a match, and shading the strength of the match accordingly) can in fact provide longer visual alignments, regardless of the various gaps that could separate matching patterns. In other words, this is a perfect example of how visual analytic tools can build upon our human capacity to discern hard-to-find matches visually and then leverage this information to refine our algorithms. 
            This is equally true for smaller matches, or alignments that would have otherwise been missed due to certain trade-offs between match resolution and computing efficiency. One such trade-off is the elimination of high-frequency and short stopwords at the pre-processing stage of PhiloLine alignments. The assumption here is that important and relevant matches are made primarily on content words like nouns or proper nouns. When dealing with dirty OCR data, however, the challenges of pattern matching are quite different, as matches are often missed because these content words have not been properly recognized by the OCR engine. Below is an example of two shared passages that our text alignment system missed (Figure 6): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6. Dirty OCR matches that were missed by text alignment system.
            Using the ViTA system, we can see precisely why these matches were missed by matching only on words longer than two characters (left) and/or by looking for matching trigrams (right) in Figure 7: 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 7. Matching unigrams and trigrams with small words removed.
            As we can see in both cases, the matching pattern is very small and would normally be dismissed as insignificant. If we leverage the flexibility of the visual analytic system, however, we can reintroduce stopwords into the mix, extending our matches to both any matching word (left), and then to matching partial trigrams (right) (Figure 8): 
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Figure 8. Matching all words and partial trigrams. 
            The above alignments demonstrate forcefully that many of our text-mining assumptions, such as the removal of stopwords before matching, may not hold true when using image-based processing of text alignments. These findings suggest that further analysis will enable us to define and redefine our matching algorithms as we proceed. 
            Conclusion 
            To conclude, we assert that the identification of commonplaces is a non-trivial intellectual undertaking. Technical challenges arise not only with the size of our data, but also with the multifaceted nature of computational rules designed to capture the diverse aspects associated with commonplaces. These aspects may include, but are not limited to, word occurrence and co-occurrence, grammatical structure, linguistic properties, etc. Thus, to compile a global commonplace book computationally, one needs efficient and effective means for identifying appropriate rules, determining appropriate parameters, verifying text mining results, and most importantly, gaining an understanding of the relationship between different algorithmic choices (rules and parameters) and the quality of the corresponding text mining results (e.g., in terms of recall and precision). The ViTA system outlined above is designed to facilitate just such a process. We thus intend to move beyond conventional text alignment techniques by adopting an iterative development process that combines complex analytical tasks through an integrated process of automated text mining, multivariate visualization, and human-computer interaction. 
            Note
            1. https://code.google.com/p/text-pair/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Allan, D. (2010). 
                        Commonplace Books and Reading in Georgian England. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
                    
                    
                        Allen, T., Cooney, C., Douard, S., Horton, R., Morrissey, R., Olsen, M., Roe, G. and R. Voyer. (2010). Plundering Philosophers: Identifying Sources of the Encyclopédie. 
                        Journal of the Association for History and Computing,
                        13(1) (May). 
                    
                    
                        Bénichou, P. (1996). 
                        Le Sacre de l’écrivain (1750–1830). Gallimard, Paris. 
                    
                    
                        Blair, A. (2011). 
                        Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern Age. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 
                    
                    
                        Chen, M., Trefethen, A., Banares-Alcantara, R., Jirotka, M., Coecke, B., Ertl, T. and Schmidt, A. (2011). From Data Analysis and Visualization to Causality Discovery. 
                        IEEE Computer,
                        44(10): 84–87. 
                    
                    
                        Dacome, L. (2004). Noting the Mind: Commonplace Books and the Pursuit of the Self in Eighteenth-Century Britain. 
                        Journal of the History of Ideas,
                        65(4) (October): 603–25. 
                    
                    
                        Horton, R., Olsen, M. and G. Roe. (2010). Something Borrowed: Sequence Alignment and the Identification of Similar Passages in Large Text Collections. 
                        Digital Studies / Le Champ,
                        2(1).
                    
                    
                        Thomas, J. J. and Cook, K. A. (eds). (2005). 
                        Illuminating the Path: The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
                    
                    
                        Yeo, R. (2001). 
                        Encyclopaedic Visions: Scientific Dictionaries and Enlightenment Culture. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Visualizing the Digital Mitford Project’s Prosopography Data
                
                    
                        Beshero-Bondar
                        Elisa
                    
                    University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg, United States of America
                    ebb8@pitt.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    TEI
                    digital archive
                    prosopography
                    network analysis
                    textual scholarship
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    literary studies
                    metadata
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    xml
                    bibliographic methods / textual studies
                    visualisation
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper introduces the Digital Mitford project (http://mitford.pitt.edu), and its practices of correlating prosopography information from TEI markup of its range of texts and metadata in a heterogeneous database of letters and literary texts of multiple genres, by prolific 19th-century author Mary Russell Mitford. Our editing team marks prosopography data (the names of historical people, places, and events), plus publication titles and names of fictional characters by Mitford and the many other writers she references. Our prosopography markup contributes to a detailed, centralized file holding canonical references to correlate our project’s wide range of files. This in turn helps us to generate network diagrams, maps, and other useful visualizations and search features to navigate and document patterns of information in the Mitford corpus. We will share network graphs and other visualizations drawn from our prosopography to facilitate serendipitous discoveries among clusters of texts in the Digital Mitford database.
            * * *
            Mary Russell Mitford was featured by Franco Moretti in his book 
                Graphs, Maps, and Trees, in which he mapped a distinctive range of walkable locations in her popular text, 
                Our Village. However, Moretti’s selection of this text reflects the bias toward prose fiction in digital literary studies, a bias we seek to redress in the Digital Mitford project, which aims to introduce and correlate Mitford’s letters with her staged dramas, her poetry, and her prose fiction. A long-lived, prolific, and highly networked writer of the first half of the 19th century, Mary Russell Mitford (1787–1855) set important precedents for women as professional writers, yet literary scholarship to date has been divided across period and genre lines in evaluating her most popular works. Scholars of the Victorian period have prioritized the popular prose fiction sketches of 
                Our Village and have studied these as an index of peaceful English nationalism without attention to the politically provocative elements of her plays.
                1 Digital humanists, too, may only know about Mitford’s 
                Our Village thanks to Franco Moretti. Meanwhile, scholars of Romanticism addressing the verse tragedies concentrate on their complex politics, their topical similarity to Lord Byron’s work, and their position within a newly forming liberal ideology of the 1820s—and these studies make only passing references to the 
                Our Village sketches (see Newey, 2000; Saglia, 2005; Pietropoli (2008). To address these divisions, The Digital Mitford project formed as a large 20-member team of editors in 2013 and 2014 to attempt a comprehensive scholarly archive of Mitford’s writings, with a larger goal of compiling a database of information from Mitford’s collected writings and letters to help address the gaps in our understanding of the overlap of ‘Romanticism’ and ‘Victorian’ writing, and of poetic, dramatic, and prose forms in the 19th century. Comprehensive scholarly editing of Mitford’s correspondence together with her literary texts stands to bridge the substantial gaps in period-based literary scholarship, and serves to bring to light significant proposography data on the print publishing, artistic, political, and theatrical worlds in which Mitford circulated. 
            
            The Digital Mitford calls itself an archive but is actually a network of linked data—a database from which we can extract and study information we are collecting about people and texts of the 19th century. Ed Folsom (2007) and Kenneth M. Price (2009) have each discussed the Walt Whitman Archive as something more complex and expansive than an ‘archive’, though they, too, have used the word ‘archive’ for much the same reasons that we have: because the word meets conventional expectations of comprehensive storage paired with digital access of a large corpus of texts. Our collective project deploys TEI text encoding far more significantly to build a database of Mitford’s writings. Mitford appears to have shared with Whitman a strong inclusive tendency reflecting wide reading and conversational intersections with other writers and text, which makes for a richly diverse database. 
            We expect that our most important contribution to 19th-century studies will be a heterogeneous database containing XML markup of upwards of Mitford’s 2,000 known letters paired with her literary texts published over a long and successful literary career. Through our editing of Mitford, we aim to make available hitherto unknown data about publishers of periodicals, theatre managers and actors, poets, artists, as well as politicians and educators—an extensive network bonded by mutual influence and support.
                2 Unusual intersections are coming to light from our coding of Mitford’s letters, her journal, and 
                Our Village, demonstrating, for example, that Jane Austen is discussed in the same documents with Lord Byron, William Macready, Gilbert White, and Walter Scott. In light of the prolific discussion of writers, performers, and public figures, we have begun producing network graphs to help visualize social interactions, as well as shared contexts in the discussion of fictional characters and literary texts.
            
            The Digital Mitford project, at http://mitford.pitt.edu, involves a large team of editors working individually and collaboratively in set stages of work. Working with TEI XML, our project involves producing digital surrogates of Mary Russell Mitford’s letters, drama, poetry, and prose fiction and essays, to present these texts as an integrated unit, organized chronologically over a series of years. For the ongoing test-bed stage of our project, we have selected a period between 1819 and 1825, the period in which Mitford was especially active as a playwright and prose fiction writer—two very different genres in which she attained remarkable transatlantic popularity. This test-bed phase represents a complete and significant freestanding effort in its own right. Our editing of the hybrid cross-section of Mitford's texts from the 1820s is demonstrating hitherto unexplored intersections among Mitford’s letters, prose fiction, and verse tragedies during the decade in which her reputation as a dramatist and as a periodical contributor and publisher of fiction was growing in the English-speaking world. 
            This paper introduces the Digital Mitford’s practices of correlating prosopography information from TEI markup of its range of variant texts and metadata within its heterogeneous archive. The TEI’s guidelines include tools for marking and compiling contextual information in central places—an efficient system of indexing—so that our TEI coding not only presents texts for reading, but also tags and identifies contextual information systematically. Thus, our editing team marks prosopographical data (the names of historical people, places, and events) as well as titles of literary texts and names of fictional characters by Mitford and other writers referenced in the archive. We extract our prosopography markup from editing each text to develop a detailed, centralized file listing contextual information. We then ensure that each reference to a particular individual (often with variable names) throughout the archive points to a single entry in our centralized list of persons (or ‘personography’) that includes a complete and standard name, details on birth and death, significant life events, relation to Mitford, and other pertinent information, including relationships with other people, literary texts, fictional characters, events, and places. We are thus tapping into the potential of the TEI as a mechanism not only for archiving the content and structure of Mitford’s texts but also for compiling and connecting contexts and metadata across hundreds of files. Our coding work is internal and shared among the project team, and all project team members are working in TEI under the supervision and guidance of the principal editor and author of this paper. 
            Contextual markup of named persons, places, and texts supports our goal to generate indexes and search features as well as to produce charts, network diagrams, maps, and other useful visualizations to navigate and document patterns of information in the Mitford corpus, an extensive archive of many different kinds of texts. This paper will demonstrate our work in progress on data visualizations designed to assist navigation of the Digital Mitford Archive. We have begun to develop network graphs with a goal of facilitating serendipitous research discoveries among clusters of related material. We aim to provide data visualization tools to direct our readers to the important intersections illuminated in the prosopography: to connect the worlds of Mitford’s correspondence, her historical tragedies, and her prose fiction sketches in 
                Our Village. Our network analysis plots will help to highlight relationships among letters and literary texts, and relationships between institutions—such as periodical publishers and theatre houses. We are also working on designing maps as a guide for users of our site to understand the London postal network of Mitford’s day, as well as relationships between fictional representations of places and locations known to Mitford. In discussing the visualizations produced from our test-bed markup, we hope to model and prompt discussion of new directions in digital archive development, to model XML editions as relational databases.
            
            Notes
            1. See, e,g., Lynch (2000). For a critique of the overemphasis on nationalism in recent criticism of 
                Our Village, see Morrison (2008).
            
            2. Describing Mitford’s interactions with just a handful of women writers, Katie Halsey (2011) has discussed the importance of sharing, promoting, and discussing texts as forms of influence and mutual support.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Enter your references here:
                    
                        Folsom, E. (2007). Database as Genre: The Epic Transformation of Archives. 
                        PMLA,
                        122(5): 1571–79.
                    
                    
                        Halsey, K. (2011). ‘Tell Me of Some Booklings’: Mary Russell Mitford’s Female Literary Networks. 
                        Women’s Writing,
                        18(1): 121–36.
                    
                    
                        Lynch, D. (2000). ‘Homes and Haunts’: Austen’s and Mitford’s English Idylls. 
                        PMLA,
                        115: 1103–8.
                    
                    
                        Morrison, K. A. (2008). Foregrounding Nationalism: Mary Russell Mitford’s 
                        Our Village and the Effects of Publication Context. 
                        European Romantic Review,
                        19(3): 275–87.
                    
                    
                        Newey, K. (2000). Women and History on the Romantic Stage: More, Yearsley, Burney, and Mitford. In Burroughs, C. (ed.), 
                        Women in British Romantic Theatre. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 79–101.
                    
                    
                        Pietropoli, C. (2008). The Story of the Foscaris, a Drama for Two Playwrights: Mary Mitford and Lord Byron. In Crisafulli, L. M. and Pietropoli, C. (eds), 
                        The Languages of Performance in British Romanticism. New York: Peter Lang, pp. 115–26.
                    
                    
                        Price, K. M. (2009). Edition, Project, Database, Archive, Thematic Research Collection: What’s in a Name? 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        3(3).
                    
                    
                        Saglia, D. (2005). Mediterranean Unrest: 1820s Verse Tragedies and Revolutions in the South. 
                        Romanticism,
                        11(1): 99–113. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                What Do You Do With A Million Readers?
                
                    
                        Bandari
                        Roja
                    
                    Twitter Inc., United States of America
                    roja.bandari@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Tangherlini
                        Timothy Roland
                    
                    UCLA, United States of America
                    tango@humnet.ucla.edu
                
                
                    
                        Roychowdhury
                        Vwani
                    
                    UCLA, United States of America
                    vwani_rc@yahoo.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Short Paper
                
                
                    reader response
                    plot
                    machine learning
                    crowd sourcing
                
                
                    literary studies
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    content analysis
                    crowdsourcing
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In 2006, Gregory Crane posed the provocative question, ‘What do you do with a million books?’, a question that captured the increasing anxiety in the humanities that accompanied the rapid digitization of many library collections, and the distribution of more and more books in digital form (Crane, 2006). Far more books than could ever possibly be read by a single person were now machine actionable, requiring a response from the intellectual community. In the ensuing years, that response has emerged from the digital humanities community, and DH projects have focused on a broad range of approaches to the study of literature at scale, operationalizing the ‘distant reading’ that Franco Moretti had already proposed in his well-known article, ‘Conjectures on World Literature’ (Moretti, 2000; 2013). Yet what has been overlooked in many of these studies is that, alongside the explosion in the digitization of world literature, there has been an equally large explosion of readers commenting on books in online forums and other easily accessed electronic venues. The analysis of these responses allows for the consideration of reader response at scale. The goal of our work is to provide a preliminary answer to the question, ‘What can one do with a million readers?’ At the very least, we want to know what types of information one can extract automatically from thousands of reader posts about a particular work of literary fiction, and what this can tell us about how people (or classes of people) read.
            The target data for our study are reader reviews of sixteen works of fiction, five of which we focus on in this presentation (
                The Hobbit; 
                Gone with the Wind; 
                The Life of Pi; 
                Frankenstein; 
                Of Mice and Men). The works were chosen from the list of the most frequently rated books on the Goodreads site (number of ratings &gt; 500,000). From these books, we downloaded the maximum allowed 3,000 reviews. The sixteen works we ultimately chose were selected on the basis of the broad disparity in their narrative structures, number of characters, and character relationships. The initial goal was to develop a review-based summary of the novel in the form of a character graph (Figure 1), with dramatis personae and pair-wise connections between them based on actions, events, or other relationships. These graphical representations can be seen as an abstraction of what the reviewers on Goodreads collectively imagine who the main characters and what the main events to be, and the relationships between these characters and events.
            
            The reviews were harvested using a crawler specifically designed for this project. Readily available information on the reviewer was retained as metadata for use in addressing second-order questions related to classes of reviewers (e.g., gender, age, frequency of reviewing). To evaluate reader reviews at scale, we devised two metrics related to plot: completeness and accuracy. We used SparkNotes as a basis for ‘gold standard’ summaries, a choice motivated by SparkNotes’ high degree of completeness and accuracy for target features (entities and relationships), and the brevity of the summaries. 
            We devised several progressively more difficult challenges to test the type of information we could derive from the approximately 48,000 reader reviews we crawled from Goodreads. First, without any training data, could we successfully discover the main dramatis personae in each novel? Second, could we automatically discover the action-based relationships between characters as represented by the reviewers? Third, could we discover the ‘events’ in which dramatis personae played a role? And fourth, could we develop a visualization that captured these relationships in a clear and engaging fashion that also represented the varying degree or strength of relationships between these entities? 
            
                To achieve reproducible results, we devised a simple workflow that can be applied to other similar sites. This workflow consists of a preprocessing step, a statistical entity ranking step that surfaces the main dramatis personae in any given work, a pair-wise relationship discovery step, and a visualization step. As with most blogs and crowdsourced data sources, the Goodreads reviews are ‘noisy’. Consequently, preprocessing focused on reducing noise. We also ran language detection on the reviews to eliminate non-English reviews, and a stemmer to aggregate inflected words.
            
            In our efforts to discover the dramatis personae for any target work, we experimented with three main approaches. LDA proved to be successful at separating the works; we intend to explore this approach more thoroughly in future work for classifying reviews that are not preclassified as they are on Goodreads. Traditional NER (named entity recognition) approaches proved to be less accurate, given the broad variance in orthography that typify these reviews. Ultimately, the most successful approach was based on a statistical ranking of tokens between the review corpus and the individual subcorpus of target work reviews.
            The next challenge was to discover the relationships between dramatis personae as represented in the reviews. Here, we focused on the verbs, extracted using POS tagging, between two entities, after discovering all sentences with pairs of entities. In future work, we hope to refine these pair-wise relationships by collapsing verbs into a series of higher-level representations of the entity-relationship space. Even without this processing, the current approach discovers important relationships. For example, by looking at the reviews for 
                The Hobbit, the relationship between ‘Tolkien’ and ‘Hobbit’ is dominated by the verb ‘write’ with a directional relationship in which ‘Tolkien’ inhabits the subject position and ‘Hobbit’ the object position. Similarly, ‘Bilbo’ has a relationship with ‘ring’ characterized by ‘find’, and a relationship with ‘adventure’ of ‘go on’, while the dragon ‘Smaug’ has a relationship with ‘treasure’ of ‘guard’. Interestingly, the reader reviews also generated a relationship between ‘Bilbo’ and ‘Smaug’ characterized by ‘kill’, an inaccurate depiction of the actual events (Bard the Bowman slays Smaug). Our automatic method is able to build a surprisingly large number of relationships between discovered entities without any training data, nor any preexisting lists of entities or relationships.
            
            For evaluation, using only the SparkNotes plot summaries, experts created a list of nouns including (1) names, (2) locations, (3) objects, and (4) concepts that are explicitly mentioned in the summary; these were considered the true dramatis personae. Completeness was quantified by computing the proportion of this list also produced by the algorithm. We measured both Precision (proportion of main characters produced by the algorithm) and the False Detection Rate (proportion of produced characters not in the relevant set). Similarly, using only words explicitly found in the SparkNotes plot summary, experts derived relationships based on verbs that connected pairs of characters mentioned above. We again measured the Precision and the False Detection Rate (FDR) for these relationships. As an example, applying this to 
                The Hobbit reviews produced a measure of Completeness (or precision) for dramatis personae of 0.6 and Accuracy (False Detection Rate) of 0.13. 
            
            The final challenge was to present these relationships in a visually engaging manner (see Figures 1 and 2). We have developed directional, multicolored graphs that represent the strength (or confidence) of a relationship by an edge of varying width. These graphs are easily compared with the ‘gold standard’ ground truth graphs, and they provide us with a visual representation of our Completeness and Accuracy measures. What is immediately clear is that reader reviews have significantly lower Completeness than a resource dedicated to providing comprehensive summaries, while the Accuracy of described relationships is good (Bilbo’s dragon-slaying feats notwithstanding). The comparison raises intriguing issues about memory—for example, why is it that certain events disappear from the user-driven graphs, while others become accentuated?
            Other graphs are generated for classes of reviewers: e.g., female reviewers vs male reviewers of 
                The Hobbit, which allow for a different type of comparison. Here the question is on which aspects of a story different types of reviewers tend to comment. Additional refinements could include metrics that reveal the number of reviews that mention particular entities or particular relationships. Currently, a missing component is a dynamic representation of reviewers’ concepts of plot (dynamics), which we are reserving for future work. 
            
            The approach we describe here is widely applicable to other crowdsourced response sites. Of particular interest are movie review sites such as Rotten Tomatoes that, much like Goodreads, allow viewers to present their own reviews of popular films. An intriguing aspect of many of these review sites is the propensity of reviewers to provide ‘plot summaries’ as opposed to critical engagements of more sophisticated thematic analysis. While this may drive many literary scholars toward the brink of insanity, it does allow us to consider questions regarding the popular engagement with literature and other forms of artistic production. Given the responses that people do post, can we use the scale of these sites to derive insight into how people (or groups of people) not only read but also remember? It is our contention that what people remember, and what people forget (or choose to leave out), can be very telling indicators of popular engagement with art. 
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1. Character/relationship graph of 
                The Hobbit.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2. Character/relationship graph of 
                Frankenstein
                .
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Crane, G. (2006). What Do You Do with a Million Books? 
                        D-Lib Magazine,
                        12(3): 1.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on World Literature. 
                        New Left Review, 
                        1 
                        (January–February): 54–68.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013).
                         Operationalizing: or, the Function of Measurement in Modern Literary Theory. 
                        New Left Review,
                        84
                        (November–December): 103–19.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Whatever Happened to Interchange?
                
                    
                        Holmes
                        Martin
                    
                    Humanities Computing &amp; Media Centre, University of Victoria, Canada
                    mholmes@uvic.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    TEI
                    interchange
                    interoperability
                    XML
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    publishing and delivery systems
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    user studies / user needs
                    xml
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Interchange and Interoperability
            In his 2011 paper at the Balisage conference, Syd Bauman (2011) draws a clear and useful distinction between two terms that are often lazily conflated: 
                interoperability and 
                interchange. Interoperability, he says, involves ‘little or no human intervention’; data is pulled from one site or system and plugged unchanged into another. Interchange, on the other hand, involves human actions, either through direct communication between individuals, or through indirect human mediation in which the re-user of data makes an effort to learn about it through reading documentation supplied with it, and then modifies or transforms it in order to put it to use in his or her own work.
            
            The Text Encoding Initiative, as Unsworth (2011) points out, originally aimed at interchange rather than interoperability, with the ‘I’ in TEI standing in the Guidelines document itself for ‘Interchange’ rather than ‘Initiative’. Perhaps because of the increasing range of big-data projects and tools looking for texts and corpuses they can absorb and process, the focus nowadays is on interoperability and on the difficulties and failures we encounter with it (see, for example, McDonough [2009] for a detailed discussion of the chequered history of interoperability in XML encoding standards used in libraries and archives). But interoperability is hard, especially in the case of literary and historical encoding projects with unique interests and research agendas producing densely encoded texts. The TEI schema is as large and complex as it is because its user community has a wide variety of precise requirements and the need to express them at different levels of specificity. As Bauman reminds us, ‘Interoperability and expressiveness are competing goals constantly in tension with each other’, and encoding with interoperability in mind results in encoding likely to be ‘substandard, less faithful to the document, or outright incorrect’. We obviously do not want this; but when Desmond Schmidt (to take one example) complains that ‘because the choice of tags is guided by human interpretation, TEI-XML encoded files are in general not interoperable’, it is this very expressiveness he is complaining of.
            In this paper I would like to re-focus on interchange, for several reasons. Interchange is a common way for TEI files to be re-used, and this is especially common in teaching environments and among novice users. Despite this, other than insisting that detailed documentation is essential and expecting re-users to read that documentation, we do little in the way of encouraging and assisting in the re-use of our data. Paying more attention to the needs of users who might want to take and work with our TEI files has a number of significant benefits to the source project, not only in terms of ordinary documentation, but also with regard to clarifying, streamlining, and normalizing practices and schemas. Finally, I would argue that making sincere efforts to enhance the practicality of interchange actually contributes significantly towards enabling interoperability, the much harder problem. I will be primarily concerned with TEI here, but the principles involved are generalizable to any formal data structure.
            
                Barriers to Interchange
            
            If we share our XML at all (and many projects do not), we typically share a single version of it: the version we created and customized in order to be as expressive, as faithful to the data, and as useful for the goals of our project as possible. On the face of it, this is rather strange. Most modern web-based digital edition projects (to take one large subset of the XML encoding world) provide a wide variety of output formats, including various web views (for desktops and mobile devices), printable formats such as PDF, and even plain text. Interactive web views of documents often allow the user to choose between a variety of display options—TAPAS, for instance, allows the user to switch between diplomatic and normalized views, and between ‘TAPAS Generic’ and ‘TEI Boilerplate’ renderings.
                1 It is regarded as good practice to try to predict the variety of
            
            users who will visit a project, and to answer their needs as flexibly as possible. And yet, when it comes to our XML data, we do not do this; we typically provide a single XML dump for a document (in the TAPAS case, ‘Download TEI’).
            In most projects, this XML view is likely full of peculiarities of encoding, rarely used elements and attributes, intra-project links, and other features that, even if well-documented, will present barriers to re-use. A brief analysis of the encoding in our Map of Early Modern London project shows many such issues, from which I examine three:
             • Use of many project-specific private URI schemes for linking:
            
                &lt;pb 
                facs=
                ‘moleebo:13311|2’
                /&gt;
            
             • Complex encoding of dates with custom dating attributes:
                2
            
            
                &lt;date 
                notBefore-custom=
                ‘1438-08-31’
                notAfter-custom=
                ‘1439-08-30’
                datingMethod=
                ‘mol:julian’
                calendar=
                ‘mol:regnal’
                &gt;17thof
            
            
                &lt;name 
                ref=
                ‘mol:HENR2’
                &gt;Henry VI
                &lt;/name&gt;&lt;/date&gt;
            
             • Standoff markup in the form of pointers to personographies, taxonomies, etc. in other files within the project:
            
                &lt;l&gt;The honour due by graue Antiquitie,
                &lt;/l&gt;
            
            
                &lt;l&gt;Then giuen to 
                &lt;ref 
                target=
                ‘mol:LOND5’
                &gt;London
                &lt;/ref&gt;s
            
            
                &lt;name 
                ref=
                ‘mol:DRAP3’
                type=
                ‘org’
                &gt;Draperie
                &lt;/name&gt;,
                &lt;/l&gt;
            
            
                &lt;l&gt;By Royall 
                &lt;name 
                ref=
                ‘mol:RICH2’
                &gt;Richard
                &lt;/name&gt;, who in me,
                &lt;/l&gt;
            
            All of these encoding practices are perfectly reasonable, and are well-documented, but they are likely to stand in the way of scholars wishing to take one of our documents out of its surrounding infrastructure and work with it in another context. The solution is obvious: in all of these cases, we can replace the problem feature with a more common encoding. For example, to make our date encoding more broadly useful, we could easily convert the date from the Julian calendar to the proleptic Gregorian, and remove the 
                @datingMethod attribute:
            
            
                &lt;date 
                notBefore=
                ‘1438-09-09’
                notAfter=
                ‘1439-09-08’
                 calendar=
                ‘mol:regnal’
                &gt;17th of
            
            
                &lt;name 
                ref=
                ‘mol:HENR2’
                &gt;Henry VI
                &lt;/name&gt;&lt;/date&gt;
            
            Similarly, we can expand the private URI schemes into full URLs, so that 
                ‘moleebo:13311| 2’ becomes:
            
            
                &lt;pb 
                facs=
                ‘http://eebo.chadwyck.com/fetchimage?
            
            
                vid=13311&amp;page=2&amp;width=1200’
                /&gt;
            
            Intra-project links to personographies, gazetteers, bibliographical references, and similar resources can be expanded in similar ways. However, many users will prefer a version of the document that does not depend on resources in linked files. We can provide for this by importing external resources into the appropriate locations in the host document, creating, for example, 
                &lt;particDesc&gt; containing a 
                &lt;listPerson&gt; in the header, and a 
                &lt;listBibl&gt; for a bibliography in the 
                &lt;back&gt;.
            
            With strategies such as these, we can create a complete, standalone version of the encoded document that eschews unusual project-specific encoding practices.
            Targeting Specific Output Formats
            Producing a more standardized and self-contained document is one step on the path to effective interchange, but it will be useful only to a subset of potential users. The TEI schema, even if we restrict ourselves to the more common encoding practices, is still huge and daunting particularly to novice users, and problematic for the tools they are likely to use (TEI stylesheets, collation tools, rendering tools such as TEI Boilerplate,
                3 and so on). We can go further by providing output in simpler, more constrained versions of TEI, such as TEI Lite
                4 or the nascent TEI Simple.
                5
            
            Naturally, there are tradeoffs here. We might characterize such conversions as lossy downsampling; most highly expressive project-specific encoding strategies will suffer in the translation to a much simpler and more constrained format. For example, the current version of the TEI Simple proposal states that ‘We will preclude use of 
                @rend and 
                @style’, and ‘We will produce a closed list of values for 
                @rendition using a pseudo-protocol of “simple:”’. Our project uses 
                @style and 
                @rendition extensively with CSS code to describe the appearance, layout, and typography of primary source documents. To convert this to TEI Simple, we will have to create a complex system that analyses that CSS code and converts it to the nearest possible representation in ‘simple:’ tokens, discarding information that cannot be represented. Similarly, Simple (currently) lacks the 
                &lt;mentioned&gt; element, which we use extensively; this will have to be mapped to a more generic representation, such as 
                &lt;seg type=‘mentioned’&gt;.
            
            This is an uncomfortable prospect, perhaps, but it does have some positive aspects. First of all, it causes us to evaluate all our encoding practices and to consider whether we really do need to use a particular formulation when something plainer might do. Second, downsampling or simplification in the process of rendering a widely used constrained format constitutes what we might call ‘enacted documentation’; by mapping our encoding to a simpler representation, we provide another level of description of our encoding practice. For example, this template, part of a conversion to TEI Lite, shows how the 
                &lt;supplied&gt; element, not present in TEI Lite, is replaced with a 
                &lt;seg&gt; element, documenting in the process not only how the output is produced but how the 
                MoEML project typically uses 
                &lt;supplied&gt; and its attributes: 
            
            
                
                &lt;!-- No &lt;supplied&gt;. Have to make do with &lt;seg&gt;. --&gt;
                
                &lt;xsl:template
                 match=
                "supplied"
                &gt;
                
                &lt;seg
                 type=
                "supplied"
                 n=
                "{concat(@reason, if(@evidence) then concat('; evidence: ', @evidence) else '')}"
                &gt;
                
                &lt;xsl:apply-templates
                 select=
                "@*|node()"
                /&gt;
                
                &lt;/seg&gt;
                
                &lt;/xsl:template&gt;
            
            It might seem that such conversion processes should be undertaken by the end user, not the source project. However, in dealing with unusual encoding practices or rare elements and attributes, the source project’s encoders will have a much better understanding of what is intended, and how best to represent it in the target output; the example above, for instance, shows that in 
                MoEML documents, 
                &lt;supplied&gt; can be assumed always to have 
                @reason, and often also 
                @evidence. An outsider coming to the project may not be willing or able to undertake the work involved in reading the project documentation and building an appropriate transformation such as this; and even worse, an automated tool may simply throw away important information without comment. For instance, the Abbot Text Interoperability Tool,
                6 in converting one of our project documents to TEI Lite, simply throws away without comment the five 
                &lt;egXML&gt; elements that are the heart of the document; these could actually be represented quite well using 
                &lt;eg&gt;, which is available in TEI Lite. When lossy conversions are written by the progenitors of a project’s data, they are likely to be considerably less lossy.
            
            Conclusion
            While it has been argued that TEI XML has not lived up to its early promise with regard to interoperability, the focus on interoperability (unmediated re-use) has largely eclipsed interchange (human-mediated re-use), which is far more practical in most cases. By putting some effort into providing a range of different versions of our XML source encodings, targeted at different use-cases and user groups, we can greatly facilitate the re-use of our data in other projects; this process causes beneficial reflection on our own encoding practices, as well as an additional layer of documentation for our projects. Furthermore, by generating specific highly constrained output formats such as TEI Simple, we also help to facilitate interoperability. 
            In the Map of Early Modern London project, we have been enhancing the variety of XML renderings of our documents, and now provide four different views: ‘Original,’ ‘Standard,’ ‘Standalone’, and TEI Lite; see, for example, 
                http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/METR1.htm. TEI Simple will be added when it stabilizes. A further documentation page
                7 provides an explanation of how each of these formats is derived, and suggests what kind of end-use it might be appropriate for. We are aiming to present a model example of how we might stimulate interchange and contribute to interoperability. Based on the demonstrable value of outputs created specifically for interchange, I would argue that such outputs should be incorporated as a formal component of plans and grant applications for all digital edition projects, and that granting agencies should be encouraged to look for and value this factor in project plans.
            
            Notes
            1. See, for example, http://tapasproject.org/digital-mitford/lettertotntalfourd28oct1821/16145.
            2. See Holmes, Jenstad, and Butt (2013) for an argument that sophisticated encoding of historical dates is essential for some types of interoperability.
            3. http://teiboilerplate.org/.
            4. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/Customization/Lite/.
            5. https://github.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple.
            6. http://abbot.unl.edu/cocoon/vicar/Vicar.html.
            7. 
                http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/xml_outputs.htm.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bauman, S. (2011). Interchange vs. Interoperability. In 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2011. Montréal, Canada, http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol7/html/Bauman01/BalisageVol7-
                    
                    Bauman01.html.
                    
                        Holmes, M., Jenstad, J. and Butt, C. (2013). Encoding Historical Dates Correctly: Is It Practical, and Is It Worth It? In 
                        Digital Humanities 2013 Conference Abstracts, Lincoln, NE, 
                        http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-179.html. 
                    
                    
                        McDonough, J. (2009). XML, Interoperability and the Social Construction of Markup Languages: The Library Example. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(3),
                    
                    http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000064/000064.html.
                    
                        Rahtz, S. (2014). TEI Simple: Summary. 
                        TEI Simple GitHub Repository,
                    
                    https://github.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/blob/master/advisory/report1.xml.
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2014). Towards an Interoperable Digital Scholarly Edition. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 
                        7, 10.4000/jtei.979.
                    
                    
                        Unsworth, J. (2011). Computational Work with Very Large Text Collections:
                    
                    Interoperability, Sustainability, and the TEI. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 
                        1 (June), 10.4000/jtei.215.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                When Does (German) Literature Take Place? – On the Analysis of Temporal Expressions in Large Corpora
                
                    
                        Fischer
                        Frank
                    
                    Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities, Germany
                    frank.fischer@zentr.uni-goettingen.de
                
                
                    
                        Strötgen
                        Jannik
                    
                    Heidelberg University, Germany
                    jannik.stroetgen@informatik.uni-heidelberg.de
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    temporal tagging
                    literary studies
                    corpus analysis
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    text analysis
                    german studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Workflow
                Our workflow consisted of four steps that were performed in parallel: (1) compilation of a suitable (German-language) corpus; (2) collection of data using the temporal tagger HeidelTime (Strötgen and Gertz, 2012) for the automatic extraction of temporal expressions according to the guidelines of the temporal markup language TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003); (3) data analysis (from heat maps to individual cases); and (4) development of an Android app for exploring the ‘literary year’.
                Out of the two biggest corpora with German literary texts, the TextGrid Repository
                    1 and Gutenberg-DE,
                    2 we chose the latter. We prepared the corpus so it would only contain fiction and ended up with 2,735 works by 549 authors, the majority of which had been published between 1840 and 1930. The resulting 900 MB of text were fed into HeidelTime to extract date specifications. Just using the explicit (and therefore very correct) expressions, we created a calendar heatmap (where ‘1’ means 0–9 occurrences, ‘2’ means 10–19 occurrences, etc., and ‘+’ means 90 or more occurrences; days with more than 50 occurrences are 
                    highlighted). Some expected and unexpected accumulations turned up:
                
                JAN: 
                    +333222323131323223222222222131
                    FEB: 43322222133212332332212322231
                    MAR: 
                    73334322233243422433
                    63232322252 (21
                    st)
                    APR: 
                    +33233223432223223332322223323
                    MAY: 
                    +3544332353
                    64353232424323223244 (12
                    th)
                    JUN: 
                    733233323333324432343324433233
                    JUL: 
                    9444332333243
                    652333432224223223 (14
                    th)
                    AUG: 
                    83
                    6442232
                    72444
                    63344533332323222 (3
                    rd, 10
                    th, 15
                    th)
                    SEP: 
                    854433233332234233233221222323
                    OCT: 
                    +353322224223552253432222222133
                    NOV: 
                    944233333
                    723225213232222222224 (10
                    th)
                    DEC: 55223412132232321322333
                    92122224 (24
                    th)
                
                As we can see, first days of a month and fixed holidays (New Year, Christmas) have a much higher frequency. But some other days also stick out, an example being the ‘10th of August’. A look into our results files showed that 74% of its occurrences provide a temporal setting for the fictional plot. The above-average frequency of the 10th of August, though, has to do with a historical event, the storming of the Tuileries Palace on 10 August 1792. About 21% of the occurrences are references to this historical date (cf. Georg Büchner’s play 
                    Danton’s Death: ‘
                    First Citizen: Danton was with us on the 10th August, Danton was with us in September’). Therefore, it is necessary to distinguish between historical dates that left their traces in literary texts and explicit dates that provide a temporal setting of a fictional plot. The collection and analysis of such date accumulations will be systematically expanded, in regard to specific authors, languages, and nations.
                
            
            
                Significance for Literary Studies
                Along the lines of Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht’s study on the year 1926, it would be useful and feasible to assemble the literary history of individual days. Every date has its own literary history, as is indicated by the example of Paul Celan and the ‘20th of January’.
                In Celan’s prose poem 
                    Conversation in the Mountains (1960), he alludes to Georg Büchner’s short story 
                    Lenz, which also describes a passage through the mountains. Büchner’s text starts with the sentence, ‘The 20th of January, Lenz walked through the mountains’. In 
                    Der Meridian, Celan’s acceptance speech for the Georg Büchner Prize (Germany’s most prestigious literary accolade), he stresses that Lenz’s hike through the mountains takes place on a 20th of January and extends the temporal frame by referring to another 20th of January, the one of 1942, when the Wannsee Conference took place in Berlin. Celan concludes, ‘Perhaps one may say that every poem has its “20th of January” inscribed?’ (cf. Sieber, 2007, 114).
                
                The automatic extraction of date expressions from large corpora makes such simultaneities visible and enables their systematic exploration.
            
            
                Development of an Android App to Facilitate the Exploration of Date Expressions in World Literature
                To get an idea of the seasonal cycle of literature, we developed an Android application that works like a calendar and, for each day of the year, presents passages from canonised texts of world literature that take place on that very day. Screenshots are shown in Figure 1.
                It is well known that James Joyce’s 
                    Ulysses takes place on 16 June 1904. But there is just one inconspicuous mentioning of the day in the novel (the secretary Ms Dunne types it in on the keyboard); it is made visible in the app. Other examples for such passages are 12 June in Günter Grass’ novel 
                    The Tin Drum (birth of Oskar Matzerath’s declared son Kurt), 29 February in Thomas Mann’s 
                    Magic Mountain (where the date is of importance as a special variant of the Walpurgisnacht; see Figure 1), and 27 July in Stefan Zweig’s 
                    Chess Story (on that day, imprisoned protagonist Dr. B. gets hold of the chess book).
                
                Our app thus represents a database of fictional dates that will be available for further research. To be able to map the entire ‘literary year’, though, we will also have to take approximate temporal expressions into account, which we will be attempting in the next section.
                The Seasonal Cycle of Literature
                We already mentioned the very specific ratio between exact and approximate dates. In the search for anomalies in the works of individual 19th-century authors, we came across Theodor Fontane and Theodor Storm. A collection of just the month specifications in the fictional works of both authors yielded the results shown in Table 1.
                In conformity with the popularity of the first of May, the whole month is strongly represented in the narratives of both authors. However, the summer months (of the Northern Hemisphere) are not. Fontane’s narratives seem to especially take place between September and January, Storm’s works between August and November. Given that every month name has a specific tonal-associative character and creates a stylistic effect, both authors seem to favour autumnal/wintry settings and moods.
                
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                In this abstract, we presented a method to find date accumulations in large literary corpora. We described the relation between approximate and exact dates and introduced a growing database of exact date specifications in world literature. Furthermore, we approached the seasonal cycle of literature and certain authors to try to answer the question, ‘When does [German] literature take place?’ in a macro-analytic fashion. The results obtained to date already show the potential of the ongoing research.
            
            
                Notes
                1. http://www.textgridrep.de/.
                
                    2. http://projekt.gutenberg.de/.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Jockers, M. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press, Chicago.
                    
                    
                        Pustejovsky, J., Castano, J. M., Ingria, R., Sauri, R., Gaizauskas, R. J., Setzer, A., Katz, G. and Radev, D. R. (2003). TimeML: Robust Specification of Event and Temporal Expressions in Text. In 
                        New Directions in Question Answering. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 28–34.
                    
                    
                        Sieber, M. (2007). Paul Celans ‘Gespräch im Gebirg’. Erinnerung an eine versäumte Begegnung. Tübingen: Niemeyer, http://books.google.de/books?id=KbfF2oIHrjwC&amp;pg=PA114.
                    
                    
                        Strötgen, J. and Gertz, M. (2012). Temporal Tagging on Different Domains: Challenges, Strategies, and Gold Standards. In 
                        Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language. Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), pp. 3746–53.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                When Is Coding Scholarship And When Is It Not?
                
                    
                        Van Zundert
                        Joris Job
                    
                    Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands - Royal Dutch Academy of Arts and Sciences, Netherlands, The
                    joris.van.zundert@huygens.knaw.nl
                
                
                    
                        Haentjens-Dekker
                        Ronald
                    
                    Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands - Royal Dutch Academy of Arts and Sciences, Netherlands, The
                    ronald.dekker@huygens.knaw.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    scholarship
                    code
                    code as scholarship
                    code evaluation
                    humanities methodology
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    software design and development
                    programming
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            We argue that the humanities and digital humanities need to consider certain forms of code as scholarly object and certain types of code authorship as a scholarly activity. It will be essential, therefore, to develop a scholarly mode of evaluating and criticizing these scholarly contributions in code. We argue this position from a theoretical perspective, and we present a case study to consider the boundaries of scholarship in code and coding, and how this scholarship in code may be evaluated.
            Software, code, and algorithms are becoming an inherent part of the humanities, and not just because they are tools within digital humanities. Rather, code and software have resulted in the softwarization of society as a whole (Berry, 2014). The process of the digital becoming ubiquitous—of code and algorithms permeating culture and society in a radical manner—is not a new phenomenon (cf., e.g., Coyne, 1995; Capurro, 2010). However, in the last decade the emergence of digital technology in every aspect of culture and society, and in every associated workflow, seems to have accelerated vastly with the advent of mobile computing and social media—so much so that Steve E. Jones (2014) in his recent history of the digital humanities compares this development with the ‘eversion’ envisioned in the 2007 novel 
                Spook Country by William Gibson: a turning inside out of digital technology intertwining with the physical world and real life to the point of complete and indistinguishable mergence. Inter alia, David M. Berry (2014) concludes that society as a whole has therefore moved into a post-digital era. For the unsuspecting or impartial user, this means that a perfectly transparent layer of omnipresent digital technology sits between digital resources, data, and information and the uses or experiences generated from these data and resources. The invisibility or—if one prefers—covertness of this transparent layer creates an illusion of neutrality of this very layer, arguably reinforced by code and software being grounded in logic and mathematics that lend digital technology an aura of impartiality and not seldom even infallibility. However, code and software are non-neutral and fallible (cf., e.g., Coyne [1995] and Berry [2014]). Being manipulable, being engineered, and being authored by people, code has meaning, intent, assertions of truth, and performative aspects of and by itself.
            
            Given the radical ubiquitousness of a digitality that is seemingly transparent but potentially non-neutral, transformative in virtually every aspect of culture and society as well as in scholarship, one would expect the humanities on principle to be heavily involved in research towards the properties and effects of the innards of this digitality. In other words, one would expect the humanities to be interested in the scholarly methodological merits and effects of code and code engineering. Until now, however, code and code engineering have hardly been researched as to their scholarly significance and impact. Code as scholarly object and code authoring as scholarship have been less a point of attention of the humanities than the application of resulting software. This focusing away from code is also rather mainstream within the digital humanities. The debate on code literacy—does one need to be able to code to call oneself a digital humanist?—is undecided but leaning mostly towards asserting that code skills are not a necessity for digital humanists (Ramsay, 2011). The propensity to foreground the results of applying digital or computational analysis and to discuss especially those results on a scholarly level, rather than making algorithms or code the object of scholarly discussion, is also apparent in the writings of practitioners of code in the humanities: mostly what has been done with software and what the results might mean are highlighted, far more than the problematizing of the very digitality of method (cf., e.g., Ramsay and Rockwell, 2012). Because of the argued increase in prominence of digital technology, however, neither the humanities nor the digital humanities can forgo finding a genuine scholarly mode to disclose code and coding objects, and to develop scholarly critical mechanisms for such objects.
            Thus, because of the ubiquitous role of digital technology both in society and scholarship, we argue that humanities cannot evade taking code and code authorship into its domain as objects of study and criticism. Often in answer to this problematic issue, one hears a hand-waving argument made that one does not need to know how a combustion engine works to drive a car. We argue that this is a false and, worse, dangerous metaphor. Ian Hacking (1981) uses the same metaphor when arguing that one needs no deep theoretical understanding of optics and the physical laws that predict the refraction of light or the behaving of electrons when operating an optic or electron microscope. In the case of microscopy this is valid, as these laws of physics have been widely theorized and heavily empirically supported. Given our scientific consensus expectation that our theory of optics will thus hold, the technology of a microscope can be blackboxed in a true Latourian sense (Latour, 1988). Software code, however, is not governed by laws of physics. Although code has to answer to certain logic to be executable, it need itself not even be logical or mathematically precise in effect, reasoning, or operation. Certainly, as long as code applications in the (digital) humanities remain a ‘parade of prototypes’ (Wouters and Beaulieu, 2007), code engineering will hardly be ruled by generic laws. Even if the mathematics of underlying analytic software may be profoundly formally tested, one is hard-pressed to find software applications in the humanities that are accompanied with formal test suites guaranteeing the correct integration of these mathematical components. Especially the heuristics of purpose-built software should be subject to rigorous automated testing, and to scholarly scrutiny and review. We argue that to improve the situation it is essential to develop a techno-scholarly mode of evaluating and criticizing scholarly contributions in code. Some work has been done in this area, most notably by Montfort et al. (2012) and, e.g., Mark Marino (2006). The literature so far, however, considers code as object external to the humanities. But how do we respond to Jean Bauer’s (2011) echoing of the call that ‘the database is the theory!’? Confirming code as a scholarly object, evaluating its functions, and acknowledging its production as scholarly activity require a theory and critical framework that have yet to be formulated. 
            Such a framework should be built on the basis of practical approaches to the criticism and the evaluation of code as scholarly object. The remainder of our paper will therefore underpin our theoretical exposé with a concrete case study of the development and the code base of 
                CollateX. 
                CollateX is a successful text collation engine developed in a digital humanities context (Haentjens Dekker et al., 2014). The development, algorithm, and logic of 
                CollateX marries code engineering skills with mathematical methods, computational algorithm design, and decidedly scholarly heuristics. We demonstrate how certain scholarly decisions of collation can be expressed as mathematical problems and logically programmable code, but that in other cases it is essential to hand off decisions to scholarly interpretation. Determining the precise cutoff point between the application of mathematics or logic and the application of scholarly expertise is, as we demonstrate, a skill that is informed by both high-level computational as well as high-level scholarly expertise. We thus also demonstrate from practice that code has intrinsic scholarly purport and intent. Lastly we consider how this purport can be systematically scrutinized by applying both automated testing and a scholarly critical approach. 
            
            We then return to the overarching concern of evaluating the scholarship in code, and we argue that ignoring the scholarly nature of code renders humanities willfully illiterate of a technology that is re-inscribing scholarly content and practice.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bauer, J. (2011). Who You Calling Untheoretical? 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities,
                        1(1), http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/who-you-calling-untheoretical-by-jean-bauer/.
                    
                    
                        Berry, D. (2014). 
                        Critical Theory and the Digital. Critical Theory and Contemporary Society. Bloomsbury Academic, New York.
                    
                    
                        Borgman, C. L. (2007). 
                        Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Capurro, R. (2010). Digital Hermeneutics: An Outline. 
                        AI &amp; Society,
                        35(1): 35–42.
                    
                    
                        Coyne, R. (1995). 
                        Designing Information Technology in the Postmodern Age: From Method to Metaphor. Leonardo Book Series. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2003). Designing Ivanhoe. 
                        Text Technology,
                        12(2): 19–41.
                    
                    
                        Hacking, I. (1981). Do We See through a Microscope? 
                        Pacific Philosophical Quarterly,
                        62(4): 305–22.
                    
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker, R., Van Hulle, D., Middell, G., Neyt, V. and Van Zundert, J. (2014). Computer Supported Collation of Modern Manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, March, doi:10.1093/llc/fqu007.
                    
                    
                        Jones, S. E. (2014). 
                        The Emergence of the Digital Humanities. Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Latour, B. (1988). 
                        Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
                    
                    
                        Marino, M. C. (2006). Critical Code Studies. 
                        Electronic Book Review, http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/electropoetics/codology.
                    
                    
                        Montfort, N., et al. (2012). 
                        10 PRINT CHR$(205.5+RND(1)); : GOTO 10. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, http://10print.org/. 
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2011). On Building. 11 January, http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/
                        .
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. and Rockwell, G. (2012). Developing Things: Notes toward an Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. K. (ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 75–84, http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/11.
                    
                    
                        Wouters, P. and Beaulieu, A. (2007). Critical Accountability: Dilemmas for Interventionist Studies of e-Science. 
                        Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, special issue, 
                        12(2): 583–99. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                World-View from Poetic Structure: An “Anti-Social” Network Analysis of Robert Southey’s and Eramus Darwin’s Epic Poems
                
                    
                        Beshero-Bondar
                        Elisa
                    
                    University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg, United States of America
                    ebb8@pitt.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    network analysis
                    epic
                    paratext
                    place network
                    TEI and structural markup
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    information retrieval
                    literary studies
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    virtual and augmented reality
                    knowledge representation
                    xml
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    english studies
                    visualisation
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    spatio-temporal modeling
                    analysis and visualisation
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This paper applies network analysis to study literal and analogical relationships in literary texts, exemplified in annotated epic poems. The method is dubbed ‘anti-social’ because it screens out information about characters in order to study how texts reference places, because human readers tend to screen out complex information about places while attending to characters and their social interactions. Rather than plot a geospatial spread of places, the network analysis plots ‘closeness’ and ‘distance’ through closeness centrality measures, and studying which places are most frequently correlated in lines and stanzas of poetry and their footnotes. The network illuminates a text’s worldview by correlating its mythical and geographical places, and by distinguishing between literal and analogical place references. Network graphs will be plotted from Robert Southey’s ‘Thalaba the Destroyer’ (1801) and Erasmus Darwin’s ‘The Temple of Nature’ (1803), both encyclopedic and planetary in their scope, to compare the imagined world-view projected in each.
            Revised Proposal
            The sociological roots of network analysis from the 1920s to the 1950s strongly assert themselves in contemporary digital humanities projects, which often deploy network graphs as a way to view human beings as aggregate particles based on broadly defined parameters of shared context.
                1 We in humanities fields have not tended so frequently to apply network analysis in the ways that biologists do, to illuminate interactions across small-scale structural units of a complex system, as, for example, the plotting of molecular interactions in protein synthesis.
                2 Nevertheless, digital humanities has welcomed borrowings from the biological sciences, such as Matthew Jockers’ ‘19th-Century Literary Genome’, designed to chart networks of literary influence from about 3,600 novels on the basis of topic modelling and stylometric measures, though as Jockers observes, the patterns of influence he models are ‘impossible’ to prove, despite the quantitative basis of his analysis (Jockers, 2012). Jockers’ work with prose corpora of thousands of texts must necessarily screen out formal complexities and microhistorical contexts in order to build a basis for comparison on a macro scale. By contrast, Franco Moretti’s intratextual network graphs of Shakespeare’s plays in 
                Distant Reading (2013) have prioritized human interactions or the interactions of fictional characters, evoking in literary microcosm the macro-analytical scale of social network theory. Both approaches—macro and micro—are risky in literary studies: Either we strip network theory of its statistical significance to plot character dynamics in small scale, or we potentially overstate statistical significance in our plotting of literary graphs based on social network theory. By contrast, biologists who apply network statistics to study information exchanged between distinct molecular units work closely with cellular structures in a finely tuned model of close reading and locational analysis that might benefit a structurally grounded literary scholarship. 
            
            Inspired by the methods and tools of biological network analysis, I propose an alternative, pointedly ‘anti-social’ approach to networking spatial references in complex poetic forms. Unlike Moretti’s approach to literary networks, my investigation screens out characters and concentrates on the proliferation of place references connected by analogy and juxtaposition in annotated epic poetry. Though literary forms are not, of course, as complicated as biological structures, they nevertheless benefit from the combination of both micro- and macro-analysis built from XML markup and statistically processed to measure patterns of distance and proximity of prolific references that are difficult for human readers to trace without assistance. This paper’s ‘anti-social’ network analysis treats poems as structures designed to network concepts together, so that analogy and metaphor constitute a kind of edge that links nodes together in correlations and juxtapositions that give poetic language a distinctive conceptual structure. 
            My networks are drawn from scholarly encyclopedic long works of late 18th- and early 19th-century poetry by Erasmus Darwin and Robert Southey, poems that responded to an Enlightenment ‘Information Age’ to compile from voyage publications and travel narratives a knowledge base of the world’s places, cultures, species of life, and properties of nature. Southey’s ‘Thalaba the Destroyer’ (1801) and Darwin’s ‘The Temple of Nature: Or, the Origin of Society’ (1803) represent a poetics that modelled world-systems in layers, studying plant physiology in context with human belief systems, and incorporating empirical observations and experiments with speculative juxtapositions of ideas from the microcosmic to the macrocosmic, from the pollination of plants to the evolution of species.
                3 The complicated structural machinery of Southey’s and Darwin’s epics challenges readers now perhaps even more than readers at the turn of the nineteenth century. Without systematic computational assistance, our efforts to ‘read’ these poems might well expose us in our twenty-first-century weakness: we cannot easily assess their elaborate interplay of contexts, their investigative reading of a centuries-old archive of records on cultural encounters, their blending of ancient and contemporary sources from voyage logs and travel narratives. To examine such poems as a kind of relational database, considering their structural components—books, stanzas, prose notes, and scholarly apparatus—benefits from the methods and measurements of network analysis.
            
            The hybrid or composite constructions of poetry with frequent prose appendages (or extensive footnotes) was especially marked by the late 18th century in the elaborate scientific poems of Erasmus Darwin and the historical-cultural-mythopoetic syntheses of Robert Southey. Gerard Genette has theorized the paratext as transactional with readers, a boundary of exchange, and as such in the complicated long poems of the early 19th century—with their complex formal verse patterns bordering on prose discourses of authority—the paratext interface is especially challenging to the processing powers of an unassisted human reader (Genette, 1997). As Clare Kinney observes, the formal structures of poetry with embedded prose generate patterns of meaning through ‘cross-referencing of motifs over the spread of a narrative’, but the multiplying reference points of such poems from levels of analogy to annotations are very difficult to follow systematically, and scholarship has tended to flatten discussion of such poems to a discussion of main plots and salient ideas without the benefit of systematic study (Kinney, 1992, 13). If we apply network analysis tools to the structure of these complex texts, we might study them as systems of information exchange in a way related to the network plots of cell biologists, and we may thus be able to observe systematically how references to the world’s geographic and mythical places are held together within an ornate literary structure. 
            The long poems of Darwin and Southey synthesize world-views—visions of the earth as a planetary system—based on comparisons and contrasts between and among places referenced in poetic language and prose annotation. Places are not always referenced for geospatial accuracy, but more significantly are layered together by analogy. In long poems that elaborate upon non-European cultural contexts through place references to Arabia, Persia, Malaysia, Polynesia, China, and Peru in both main text and paratext, we can examine how these places are patterned by relation to each other in the British global and imperial consciousness of these poems. We can plot with network graphs which analogies—which locations—are most frequently referenced together as measure of ‘closeness centrality’. We can also see which locations are plotted remotely, many path steps removed from centrally plotted locations and with few comparative reference points, and thus mark what places are outlying and remote on the imagined horizons of a world of locational and cultural associations. 
            To produce an ‘anti-social’ network of locations in these long poems, I have begun with structural and contextual markup in TEI, to collect place references and their positioning within main text line groups and within paratext notes. After extracting this place data and its precise structural position within the poems systematically using XSLT and XQuery, I work with Cytoscape’s tools for network visualization and statistical analysis, originally designed for microbiology, to produce network graphs and tables of statistical information that indicate patterns of relatedness across complex structural units of texts. My project investigates the following questions:
             a. How can we study the way complex literary texts layer and cross-reference places by analogy with each other?
             b. Can the TEI’s (and XML’s) structural and contextual markup be productively deployed in literary studies to study networks of correlated concepts?
             c. In correlating concepts of place in a long scholarly epic, what patterns can we see in networking geographical with mythical places—that is, place connections that cannot be literally mapped with latitude and longitude coordinates but that nevertheless help to construct an imagined topography for readers of poetry?
             d. Can we apply the statistical measurement tools of network analysis—stepwise distance between nodes and closeness centrality—to understand how geographic and mythic places are linked by ‘closeness’ and ‘distance’ conceptually, not just geographically? 
            At the time of drafting this proposal I have begun an ‘anti-social’ networking study of Southey’s ‘Thalaba the Destroyer’, a 12-book epic poem with especially prolific annotations and complex place-time referentiality. To survey the work in progress, please see my project site http://ebeshero.github.io/thalaba/. An early record of the project, designed to introduce students and literary scholars to network analysis, appears on my blog, http://digitalromanticist.wordpress.com/2013/08/23/spectacular-intersections-of-place-in-southeys-thalaba-the-destroyer/.
            Notes
            1. For example, see the Six Degrees of Francis Bacon (http://sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/) and the Kindred Britain (http://kindred.stanford.edu/#) projects, drawn from the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography to map human relationships spanning centuries.
            2. See, for example, the network visualizations used to predict probable locations of proteins produced by the Washburn Lab and Proteomics Center: http://research.stowers.org/proteomics/ProtNetAnal.html.
            3. On the scientific bases and the layering and juxtapositioning of worldviews in these poems, see Fara (2012) and Smith (2010). On Southey, see Majeed (1992). See also Porter (2011), which addresses how Southey’s commonplace book documents a systematic use of Enlightenment scientific methods to collect evidence of cultural patterns that he would apply in his long poems. Without using computational methods, however, neither Majeed nor Porter can study how those patterns were plotted in the long poems within the space of a chapter or an article. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Fara, P. (2012). 
                        Erasmus Darwin: Sex, Science, and Serendipity. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Genette, G. (1997). 
                        Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation. Jane E. Lewin (trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 284–88. 
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. (2012). Computing and Visualizing the 19th-Century Literary Genome. 
                        ADHO Digital Humanities 2012 Conference, http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/computing-and-visualizing-the-19th-century-literary-genome/.
                    
                    
                        Kinney, C. R. (1992). 
                        Strategies of Poetic Narrative: Chaucer, Spenser, Milton, Eliot. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                    
                    
                        Majeed, J. (1992). 
                        Ungoverned Imaginings: James Mill’s The History of British India and Orientalism. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Porter, D. (2011). Poetics of the Commonplace: Composing Robert Southey. 
                        Wordsworth Circle, 
                        42(1): 27–33.
                    
                    
                        Smith, C. (2010). Like Grandfather, Like Grandson: Erasmus and Charles Darwin on Evolution. 
                        Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
                        53(2) (Spring): 186–99.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                You can leave your hat on-line: Multiple Context-Dependent Identities on Social Networking Sites
                
                    
                        Angelopoulos
                        Spyros
                    
                    Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    Spyros.Angelopoulos@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Brown
                        Michael
                    
                    Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    Michael.Brown@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Price
                        Dominic
                    
                    Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    Dominic.Price@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Mortier
                        Richard
                    
                    Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    Richard.Mortier@nottingham.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        McAuley
                        Derek
                    
                    Horizon Digital Economy Research Institute, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
                    Derek.Mcauley@nottingham.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Long Paper
                
                
                    Computer-Mediated Communication
                    Multiple Identities
                    Empirical Methods
                    Quantitative Prototyping User-Centered Design / Human-Centered Design
                
                
                    software design and development
                    user studies / user needs
                    internet / world wide web
                    social media
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            In this paper we seek to elucidate understandings of the self-management of multiple context-dependent identities of Social Networking Sites (SNS) users. Online social networking is now in its second decade and has become a central activity to a large proportion of the global population. This shift is not surprising, as humans are social animals with a need to connect and communicate with each other. SNS augment our existing offline networks, allowing us to keep in touch with people over great distances, share our experiences and associated content, organize our social lives, and discover new contacts beyond physical reach. As previous researchers have noted, many users maintain multiple online identities through which they actively manage their social interactions on the various SNS (Golbeck and Rothstein, 2008). 
            Most SNS, however, suffer from a common problem that prevents them from capturing the true richness of our offline social networks. As social beings, we tend to participate in different, overlapping social groups, and we adjust our identities to match the contexts, as well as our use to match the constraints imposed by the various SNS. The reasons why people choose to explicitly manage the overlap among social networks, even keeping some networks completely distinct from others, are commonplace and usually not clandestine—for example, teenagers wishing to discuss sensitive health matters in online forums (van der Velden and El Emam, 2013), employees complaining about treatment at work (O’Brien, 2014), or those engaged in political commentary in uncomfortable or dangerous situations (Attia et al., 2011). 
            The self-management of multiple context-dependent identities represents a topic that deserves greater attention within digital humanities and needs to be further explored and elucidated, since it incorporates the entanglement of online and offline interactivity within and around computer mediated environments (Angelopoulos and Merali, 2013) which can have significant implications for the overall sociability of SNS users (Angelopoulos and Merali, 2015). The self-management of multiple context-dependent identities implies a process in which the users control how the other users with whom they are socially connected perceive them (Baumeister and Leary, 1995; Leary et al., 1995). The extant computer-mediated communication literature highlights the needs of a diverse range of groups to incorporate and maintain multiple identities on a plethora of media, such as hobbyists like cigar smokers (Angelopoulos and Merali, 2013; 2015) and bodybuilders (Ploderer et al., 2008), as well as professionals who need to separate their professional from personal lives (Peluchette et al., 2013). Although the need for users’ multiple context-dependent identities to be further explored and elucidated is highlighted in the literature (Karl and Peluchette, 2011; Peluchette et al., 2013; Talamo and Ligorio, 2001), to date there are very few studies exploring the issue directly (Talamo and Ligorio, 2001). 
            We adopt a quantitative approach and explore the concept through a survey. We designed the questionnaire based on extensive literature analysis on online/offline identities as well as the environment analysis and the survey planning (Duffy et al., 2000; Karl and Peluchette, 2011; Kodjamanis and Angelopoulos, 2013; Koh and Kim, 2003; Kuhn and McPartland, 1954; Peluchette et al., 2013), and our findings are drawn from a sample of 
                n=272 participants and guided by a previous pilot study of 60 participants. 
            
            Our findings demonstrate that, compared to other SNS, use of multiple accounts is more common within Facebook and Twitter, and considerably less common within LinkedIn. This finding is surprising given the fact that both Facebook and Twitter provide the users with features to manage multiple groups of contacts within a single account, unlike LinkedIn. 
            Moreover, our findings reveal that behavior between the use of different SNS suggest that different SNS are used to manage different aspects of people’s lives despite the fact that most SNS provide tools for this, yet such tools to manage groups of contacts within SNS are rarely used, as reported by the participants of our study. Such a finding reveals that the tools that are already available and provided by the SNS for the management of multiple context-dependent identities are insufficient and neglected by the users, and thus there is a need for better tools to be implemented by either the SNS or by third parties that take into account the real needs of the users. Exploring the differences between users of multiple accounts and users of single accounts has revealed that those who use more than one account on one or more SNS generally share more personal information with those accounts and tend to engage in more audience management behavior both online and offline. These findings suggest that users of multiple accounts use both control of information and targeted sharing of personal information to manage their identities, highlighting the need for networking activities that can support both behaviors. The combination of these two tendencies also highlights the importance of security and privacy between SNS for these individuals as they reveal a lot of personal information online but want strict control of what information is revealed to whom (boyd, 2010; Edwards and McAuley, 2013; Livingstone, 2008). Practically, the findings of our survey demonstrate the need of users for better tools for the self-management of multiple context-dependent identities, as the current tools provided especially from Facebook and Twitter are insufficient. 
            The self-management of multiple context-dependent identities is still an issue to be pursued by the organizations behind SNS platforms, and there is a profound need for better tools to be implemented either by them or by third parties. We call, thus, for future research to focus on applied approaches trying to solve this real and practical problem. Our findings are drawn from a sample, which, although adequate for the needs of the study, remains too small to enable us to reflect on a larger scale. Whilst the following step in our future research plans is to expand our scope and explore the concept further, we suggest that future studies should explore the issue on online communities in general, as well as on online communities of hard-to-reach populations (Angelopoulos and Merali, 2013; 2015; Ploderer et al., 2008).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Angelopoulos, S. and Merali, Y. (2013). Offline Interactions on Online Communities: The Entanglement of Social and Material. 29th 
                        European Group for Organizational Studies, Montreal, Canada, 4–6 July 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Angelopoulos, S. and Merali, Y. (2015). Bridging the Divide between Virtual and Embodied Spaces: Exploring the Effect of Offline Interactions on the Sociability of Participants of Topic-Specific Online Communities. 48th 
                        Hawaii International Conference on System Studies, Kauai, HI, USA, 5–8 January 2015. 
                    
                    
                        Attia, A. M., Aziz, N., Friedman, B. and Elhusseiny, M. F. (2011). Commentary: The Impact of Social Networking Tools on Political Change in Egypt’s ‘Revolution 2.0’. 
                        Electronic Commerce Research and Applications,
                        10(4): 369–74. 
                    
                    
                        Baumeister, R. F. and Leary, M. R. (1995). The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation. 
                        Psychological Bulletin,
                        117(3): 497. 
                    
                    
                        boyd, d. (2010). Social Network Sites as Networked Publics: Affordances, Dynamics, and Implications. In Papacharissi, Z. (ed.), 
                        Networked Self: Identity, Community, and Culture on Social Network Sites. New York: Routledge, pp. 39–58. 
                    
                    
                        Duffy, M. K., Shaw, J. D. and Stark, E. M. (2000). Performance and Satisfaction in Conﬂicted Interdependent Groups: When and How Does Self-Esteem Make a Difference? 
                        Academy of Management Journal,
                        43(4): 722–83. 
                    
                    
                        Edwards, L. and McAuley, D. (2013). What’s in a Name? Real Name Policies and Social Networks. 
                        Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on Internet Science and Web Science Synergies, Paris, 1 May 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Golbeck, J. and Rothstein, M. (2008). Linking Social Networks on the Web with FOAF: A Semantic Web Case Study. 
                        AAAI,
                        8: 1138–43. 
                    
                    
                        Karl, K. A. and Peluchette, J. V. E. (2011). Friending Professors, Parents and Bosses: A Facebook Connection Conundrum. 
                        Journal of Education for Business,
                        86(4): 214–22. 
                    
                    
                        Kodjamanis, A. and Angelopoulos, S. (2013). Consumer Perception and Attitude Towards Advertising on Social Networking Sites: The Case of Facebook. 
                        International Conference of Communication, Media Studies and Design, Famagusta, North Cyprus, 2–4 May 2013. 
                    
                    
                        Koh, J. and Kim. Y. G. (2003). Sense of Virtual Community: Determinants and the Moderating Role of the Virtual Community Origin. 
                        International Journal of Electronic Commerce,
                        8(2): 75–93. 
                    
                    
                        Kuhn, M. H. and McPartland, T. S. (1954). An Empirical Investigation of Self-Attitudes. 
                        American Sociological Review,
                        19(1): 68–76. 
                    
                    
                        Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K. and Downs, D. L. (1995). Self-Esteem as an Interpersonal Monitor: The Sociometer Hypothesis. 
                        Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
                        68(3): 518. 
                    
                    
                        Livingstone, S. (2008). Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful Content Creation: Teenagers' Use of Social Networking Sites for Intimacy, Privacy and Self-Expression. 
                        New Media &amp; Society,
                        10(3): 393–411. 
                    
                    
                        O’Brien, C. N. (2014). The Top Ten NLRB Cases on Facebook Firings and Employer Social Media Policies. 
                        Oregon Law Review,
                        92(2). 
                    
                    
                        Peluchette, J. V. E., Karl, K. and Fertig, J. (2013). A Facebook ‘Friend’ Request from the Boss: Too Close for Comfort? 
                        Business Horizons,
                        56: 291–300. 
                    
                    
                        Ploderer, B., Howard, S., Thomas, P. and Reitberger, W. (2008). ‘Hey World, Take a Look at Me!’: Appreciating the Human Body on Social Network Sites. In 
                        Persuasive Technology. Berlin: Springer, pp. 245–48. 
                    
                    
                        Talamo, A. and Ligorio, B. (2001). Strategic Identities in Cyberspace. 
                        CyberPsychology and Behavior, 
                        4(1): 109–22. 
                    
                    
                        van der Velden, M. and El Emam, K. (2013). ‘Not All My Friends Need to Know’: A Qualitative Study of Teenage Patients, Privacy, and Social Media. 
                        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
                        20(1): 16–24. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Zebrapedia: Collective Explication of Philip K. Dick’s Exegesis
                
                    
                        Doyle
                        Richard
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University, United States of America
                    mobius@psu.edu
                
                
                    
                        O'Sullivan
                        James
                    
                    Pennsylvania State University, United States of America
                    josullivan@psu.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Poster
                
                
                    Philip K. Dick
                    The Exegesis
                    Transcription
                
                
                    literary studies
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Philip K. Dick’s 
                Exegesis is possibly the largest archive of unreleased and unpublished material written by any major 20th-century author. At over 8,000 pages, this massive, mostly handwritten text by America’s ‘homegrown Borges’, is arguably Dick’s magnum opus, yet it remains largely unexplored. In its daily entries, diagrams, and sketches, Dick documents his eight-year attempt to fathom what he called ‘2-3-74’, a postmodern visionary experience of the entire universe ‘transformed into information’. Dick’s experiences in February and March 1974 with what he variously called VALIS, Firebright, Sophia, and Zebra sent him on a classic visionary quest through the esoteric literatures and sciences of the planet as he focused his polymath sensibility, wide-ranging erudition, and Zen-like humor on a cosmic whodunnit: Who—or what—was VALIS? Dick pursued this problem for the rest of his life, and the 
                Exegesis stands as a unique record, not only of a profound spiritual quest, but of the writer at work: reflective, self-questioning, and as always, prodigiously inventive.
            
            Zebrapedia
            Having secured a digital copy of the 
                Exegesis, researchers at the Pennsylvania State University developed a portal to serve as a focal point for the ongoing transcription, annotation, analysis, discussion, editing, and exploration of the text:
                 http://zebrapedia.psu.edu/. In essence, the project’s primary goals are to provide an opening for and elucidate the terra incognita of Philip K. Dick’s 
                Exegesis, using collaborative scholarship and networking tools to explore this mammoth digital text. While part of the 
                Exegesis has already been published as a print edition (Dick, 2011), this project presents the complete manuscript—the first time that the thousands of notes, letters, and explorations contained within have been made publicly available. The manuscript offers a pandemonium of ideas, so much so that, as project lead, Richard Doyle, notes, ‘When you begin reading the “Exegesis”, you undertake a quest with no shortcuts or cheat codes’ (Platt, 2011). Founded on Ben Brumfield’s free and open-source FromThePage transcription software, we hope to use this project to draw upon the collective knowledge and expertise of Dick scholars so that we might classify and elucidate the mass of metaphysical, comical, and theosophical musings contained throughout. Publicly accessible but still under development, a selection of the project’s features worth highlighting at this particular juncture are workset overviews, as well as category and automatic subject indexing, that allow users to easily view every instance of a particular subject as it is mentioned in the text. 
            
            
                Future Directions
            
            Our intention is to use digital humanities to present the current iteration of the project, as well as gather feedback on future directions. In particular, we are currently exploring the potential for conducting a series of analyses using computational methods, but first feel that we need to refine our group-sourcing strategy, to align with practices adopted by digital humanities projects availing of similar technologies and platforms. Collaborating with international colleagues, our intention is to conduct focus groups that will inform future development of the FromThePage platform. To this end, we will be early adopters of the system’s forthcoming major upgrade, which supports, in addition to an upgrade to the Ruby on Rails framework,
             1. TEI-XML export.
             2. Parallel translation in addition to transcription (funded by Fordham University’s Center for Medieval Studies).
             3. OCR correction emphasizing OCR-to-TEI conversion.
             4. CSV export of subject occurrences for network analysis (driven by the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology).
             5. UTF-8 support (driven by Universidad de Buenos Aires).
            The new release will also include features under active development, like Omeka integration, improvements to the full-text search, and an overhaul of the user interface. Pennsylvania State University is currently investigating digital editions (both of the annotated and scholarly variety) in the context of educational platforms like FromThePage and rich text archives like Philip K. Dick’s 
                Exegesis in its incarnation as Zebrapedia. Having implemented new feature-sets, we will host a focus group and conduct a heuristic analysis, allowing us to customise the platform for our intended audience, allowing us to inform improvements to the Zebrapedia and base FromThePage platform in tandem. From here, we will look to implement federated wikis and continue to develop crowdsourced webinars.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dick, P. K. (2011). 
                        The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick. Jackson, P. and Lethem, J. (eds). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Boston.
                    
                    
                        Platt, C. (2011). ‘The Voices in Philip K. Dick’s Head’. 
                        New York Times Sunday Book Review,
                         http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/18/books/review/the-exegesis-of-philip-k-dick-edited-by-pamela-jackson-jonathan-lethem-and-erik-davis-book-review.html?pagewanted=all&amp;_r=0.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
          
                1. Introduction
            The basis of historical study or historical understanding consists of collecting historical materials (mainly literature materials such as old documents, old diaries, …), precise reading of the materials, and source criticism. In order to perform them, an identification of a personal name is one of important methods or works, and the researchers of history cannot avoid it. The personal name identification is not simple issue, because there is a diversity in the name representations in the materials. The main representing patterns of the diversity are the follows:
            a) Written real or original name
            b) Written first name only
            c) Written nickname, epithet, or alias 
            d) Written omitted name
            e) Written role name 
            f) Written using different characters
            g) Described Kao (which is a stylized signature or a mark.) 
            Examples of the representations of “伊集院忠棟 (Ijuin Tadamune)”, who is a senior statesman of “島津家 (Shimazu family)” and the relatives of the family and is in the 15th century in Japan, there are “伊集院” (which is his family name), “忠棟” (which is his first name), “幸侃” (which is a nick name, is often appeared in the old documents), “伊右衛門大夫” (which is a nick name), “伊右”, “右衛門”, “伊大夫” (which are his nick names called by familiar persons), “忠金” (which is his original name). Here is a difficult problem that the various represented names should be identified. In the above example, if you understand the various alternate names can be identified with “伊集院忠棟”, the problem is not hard. However, in practice, there are no persons (including researchers of the history) who know and understand all historical persons. For the solution of the problem, we consider that the results of personal name identifications which can be performed by researchers of history should be managed. Furthermore, in the search against historical materials, if the results can be available, the performance of the search can be surely improved compared to simply full-text search. 
            In the paper we introduce a management method of personal names and the alternate names of the persons and a search method using the managed names. In (Ho, 2015) and (Bol et al., 2015), personal names can be extracted and tagged automated against target documents based on China Biographical Database (CBCB; http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword=k16229) as a biographical dictionary. Unfortunately, there are no exhaustive the encyclopedias or dictionaries for the names of Japanese historical persons. Moreover, methods introduced in (Ho, 2015) and (Bol et al., 2015) can be performed better if you can treat a document which is a secondary source like a "地方志 (difangzhi)" in which almost personal names indicates its real name. Most of documents which we treated in the work is primary source and hardly have real names of the person. 
          
          
          2. Extraction of personal names and alternate names
            At first, in order to collecting personal names, we used “上井覚兼日記 (Uwaikakken nikki)” which is a diary of Japanese medieval period (from 1574 until 1586) written by “上井覚兼 (Uwai kakken)” who is a senior statesman of “島津家” of Japan. For the historical study in Kyushu (which is a local area of Japan) or “島津家” in medieval period, the diary is one of important historical materials and Japanese national treasure. The text of the diary has been stored in “The Full-text Database of the Old Japanese Diaries” which has been published by Historiographical Institute, The University of Tokyo. In the text the number of characters is about 1.4 million (for 1777 days; note that there are days which he was not written in the diary). The format of the text is very simply, because the text is just plain text and does not have tags such as XML, TEI. The sample is as follows:
            …一、此朝、入来院（重豊）殿太刀を、東郷（重尚）殿次に拳可有之由被申候、御老中よりハ、東郷・祁答院・入来之事ハ同家にて候間、東郷之次に者根占殿（禰寝重長）太刀を可被召成之由、…
            This is a part of the text in the diary of “天正2年8月１日” (which indicates A.D. 1574-08-17)”. There are three persons (“入来院 (Irikiin)”, “東郷(Togo)”, “根占(Nejime)”) in the part. If an alternate name against written name could be solved, the alternate name was added using parenthesis. 
            The representation can be understood by human (who can read and understand the sentence), but machine can not be solved if the machine doesn’t know or understand the pattern. Due to machine usable, we extracted a written name, an alternate name of the name and the date and we managed the result as a set. As shown in the example, a real name or well-known name is hardly written in the Japanese historical materials, and alternate name added by researcher what indicates real name in most cases. The added name can be used for personal name identification, because this is controlled by the researchers who added the alternate names, and the notation is consistent if the same person. We performed the identification method and could obtain a name pair of 520 sets. In the process of the method, a method of a personal name extraction was needed. We could extract personal names using Machine Leaning method (which consists of an appearance patterns of the names and SVM (Support Vector Machine)). Figure 1 shows examples of the appearance pattern, which an expression of a sequence, an extraction pattern and an extracted result. We used SVM to judge whether the extracted results indicate personal name or not. The SVM results were fed back to the appearance patterns, and we performed the extraction based on appearance patterns and judgment with SVN again. The feedback was preformed several time in the work. 
            
                
             Figure 1 Name extraction patterns
            
            We prototyped text search system which supports alternate names using the above constructed personal pairs rather than simple text matching. In the search, for example you queries “忠棟”, then you can obtain the results including “忠棟” as a string, “伊集院忠棟” which is controlled name (well-known name or real name), and alternate names such as “幸侃”, “伊右衛門大夫”, “伊右”, “右衛門”, “伊大夫”, “忠金” (which are mentioned above). 
          
          
          3. Conclusion
            Personal name extraction method which we introduced above is useful only target document is “上井覚兼日記 (Uwaikakken nikki)”. In order to extract more generalization, preparing a pattern suitable to each historical material is necessary. We constructed a database which can be stored the personal name pairs. Currently we also have been collecting personal names from other texts and databases, and storing it in the database. The data in the database indicates the results as an identification of personal name. The data can assist to identify personal names in a material which reading comprehension has been not yet done. We expect that the method can be useful to progress of the study of Japanese history.
          
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Ho, H. I. (2015). MARKUS – A Fundamental Semi-automatic Markup Platform for Classical Chinese. Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Digital Humanities. 
                    Bol, P., Liu, Ch.-L., and Wang, H. (2015). Mining and Discovering Biographical Information in Difangzhi with a Language-Model-based Approach. Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Digital Humanities.
                
            
        
    


        
            In this poster we present the web application “CBook” (or “Crunched Book”), i.e. a DH tool for collaborative reading, annotation and exploration of literary works. The web app can be found here: https://cbook.it/ . It was used in learning contexts during the research projects 
                Librare (in high schools) and 
                Pinocchio: la comunità dei balocchi (in middle schools). Other teachers are using it in complete autonomy in their classrooms.
            
            Students and teachers can annotate portions of text, explore novel’s settings through interactive maps, add and share images and other contents related to a literary work, search for terms into the text (e.g. in the quoted speeches of a particular character), explore connections between characters in their social networks.
            The CBook is used by italian students and their teachers, as an innovative digital tool for reading and studying literature, in primary and secondary schools. The list of schools involved in 
                Librare project, for example, can be found here:
            
            Some Italian and English classics are already present in the web app, the full work or a portion: 
                I promessi sposi (complete), 
                Le avventure di Pinocchio (complete), 
                Decameron (3 novels), 
                Odissea (book VI, italian translation), 
                Romeo and Juliet (complete), 
                The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (chapters 1­5). Other works requested by teachers (e.g. Dante’s 
                Purgatorio), will be added to the web app in the next months.
            
            We can say that CBook is, in some sense, a collaborative anthology (or an Anthology 2.0), i.e. a collection of literary works selected by the users that are reading, annotating and exploring the works, using some DH tools and methodologies (collaborative annotation, interactive maps, SNA of characters, text mining, etc).
            The web app was designed and tested in collaboration with high school teachers, students and DH scholars. It is used on tablets, PCs, interactive whiteboards, and smartphones (with less functionalities).
            An important feature of CBook is interoperability between models and tools for TEI XML annotation and models and tools for semantic annotation. A significant difference between the CBook and other annotation tools is its emphasis on user-centered design (for students and teachers).
            The annotation system of CBook is based on Annotator (
                http://annotatorjs.org/) , “an open­source JavaScript library to easily add annotation functionality to any webpage”, following annotation standards for digital documents developed by the W3C Web Annotation Working Group. The User Interface is written in HTML5, CSS and Javascript. The texts were annotated in XML, using a simplified version of TEI. On the server side, we use a graph Database and Java. 
            
            The actions of cbook’s users (sign in, sign out, comment) can be monitored in a public dashboard accessible here: http:/sensori.librare.org/librare/. In this dashboard you can see the events concerning both cbooks (digital) and paper books that users were working on in this project.
            The first version of “The digital lab of crunched books" was the Second Runner Up of Digital Humanities Awards 2014 in the Best DH Tool or Suite of Tools section (3 march 2015): 
                http://dhawards.org/dhawards2014/results/
            
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                     Bolioli, A. and Tasso R. (2014). Enjoying classic literature, in 
                        Interactive e-Books for Children IBooC2014 (Denmark), 2nd Workshop at IDC Interaction Design and Children.
                    
                     Bolioli, A., Casu M., Lana M. and Roda R. (2013). Exploring the Betrothed Lovers, in M. Finlayson, B. Fisseni, B. Lowe and J. C. Meister (eds.), 
                        2013 Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, OASIC, vol. 32.
                    
                    Pierazzo, E. (2015). Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
                
            
        
    


        
            In the last few years, several of the bodies that govern higher education and research in Switzerland – the swissuniversities council, the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF), and the Swiss Academy of Humanities and Social Sciences (SAGW) – have placed an increasing focus on the importance of appropriate and sustainable handling research data, and in particular research data in the humanities. As ever more research in the humanities includes collections of digital data, these Swiss bodies are putting a significant investment into building an infrastructure capable of maintaining it. Against this background, the SNF has begun to focus in particular on the scholarly text edition; beginning in 2017, all SNF-funded edition projects are expected to be digital and to contain some strategy for long-term preservation (Swiss National Science Foundation, 2015). One of the purposes of the SNF-funded project “The Chronicle of Matthew of Edessa Online” is to experiment with forms of digital critical edition of texts that can be preserved and maintained in the long term.
            The Chronicle is an Armenian-language historical work, written in the early 12
                th century, covering nearly two centuries’ worth of the history of the medieval Near East, up to and including the establishment of the Crusader County of Edessa. The text survives in at least 35 manuscript copies, all from 1590 or later. Digital methods have been used since the beginning of the edition work in 2008; this includes full transcriptions of the individual manuscripts in a TEI-compatible markup system, automatic collation of the textual variants, computer-assisted stemmatic analysis, and systematic editorial analysis of the variant texts (Andrews, 2009). Since the work began, however, there has been significant progress in thought about how to represent textual variants in digital space, most particularly with the adoption of the variant graph (Andrews, 2014; Dekker, Hulle, Middell, Neyt, and Zundert, 2014; Jänicke, Geßner, Büchler, and Scheuermann, 2014; Schmidt and Colomb, 2009).
            
            In this poster session we will demonstrate the ways in which, beginning with the variant graph concept, we are implementing all aspects of the edition in a graph database model – the textual collation itself, analysis of the manuscripts and stemmata, the identification of events, timelines, persons, and places that normally occupies much of the commentary of the edition, and the annotations that together with these identifications will comprise the full commentary. Since it is a graph, the data becomes straightforward to transform directly into the Resource Description Framework (RDF) required for compatibility with the SALSAH database provided by the SAGW-funded Data and Service Centre for the Humanities, which is the nascent repository for all humanities research data within Switzerland and guarantees long-term API-addressable accessibility to the data itself (Rosenthaler, Fornaro, and Clivaz, 2014). Moreover, in the construction of the graph model we draw upon relevant sets of standards and tools, such as the TEI Guidelines (http://www.tei-c.org/) for description of the textual features, CIDOC-CRM (http://www.cidoc-crm.org/) to express information about the documents as objects and for notations of time and place in a manner suitable to use with tools such as Topotime (Grossner and Meeks, 2014). We are also participating in the DARIAH-DE Working Group on Digital Annotations in order to ensure that our working methods are methodologically and practically compatible with best practice in humanities research.
            The result of the project will be a digital edition whose constructed text, scholarly commentary, and individual manuscript witnesses will be fully accessible through a machine-queryable API. The web user interface will be built entirely on this API; in that way, no intellectual content will be embedded in the interface, only to be eventually lost when or if the interface disappears. The manuscript texts and a version of the edition itself will be available to download in TEI and ePub formats, for print consumption, archiving, or further offline analysis.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L. (2009). Prolegomena to a Critical Edition of the Chronicle of Matthew of Edessa, with a Discussion of Computer-Aided Methods Used to Edit the Text. University of Oxford, http://ora.ouls.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid%3A67ea947c-e3fc-4363-a289-c345e61eb2eb.
                    
                    
                        Andrews, T. L. (2014). Analysis of Variation Significance in Artificial Traditions Using Stemmaweb. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, doi: 10.1093/llc/fqu072.
                    
                    
                        Dekker, R. H., Hulle, D. van, Middell, G. et al. (2014). Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project. Literary and Linguistic Computing, fqu007. 10.1093/llc/fqu007.
                    
                    
                        Grossner, K. and Meeks, E. (2014). Topotime: Representing historical temporality. Proceedings of DH2014, Lusanne.
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S., Geßner, A., Büchler, M. et al. (2014). 5 Design Rules for Visualizing Text Variant Graphs. Presented at the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-652.xml (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Rosenthaler, L., Fornaro, P. and Clivaz, C. (2014). Long term preservation of digital information. Presented at the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-68.xml (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. and Colomb, R. (2009). A data structure for representing multi-version texts online. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 67: 497–514.
                    
                    
                        Swiss National Science Foundation. (2014), Call für Editionsprojekte mit Blick auf die Finanzierungsperiode 2017–2010, http://www.snf.ch/SiteCollectionDocuments/call_editionen_phase2_d.pdf (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                One of the key problems in historical political research is that many relevant research questions can only be answered by means of a prolonged and painstaking analysis of large archival series. Questions like: “How did the relationship between the government, the parliament and the political elites change over time?”, “What role did political traditions and rituals play?”, and “In what ways did the information economy influence the political process?”, still require scholars to systematically work through vast bodies of archival material. Only a few scholars, who appeared not to be intimidated by such a daunting task, have come up with long-term analyses of political patterns. This paper proposes a new, digital approach to avoid these time-consuming activities and to open up major archival series for automated text analysis, by applying various tools for text recognition and automated structuring, as well as by using reference data and re-using metadata. 
                The case study selected to 
                    demonstrate the potential of this approach is the opening up of the Resolutions of the Dutch States-General from 1576 to 1795. This archival series of the central assembly of the seven Provinces forming the Dutch Republic is an excellent example of the type of source suitable to answer the above mentioned research questions. Editing the Resolutions has been a task of the Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands and its predecessors since 1915 (Japikse and Rijperman, 1915-1970, Van Deursen et al., 1971-1994).
                    
                        http://resources.huygens.knaw.nl/besluitenstatengeneraal1576-1630/index_html_en (accessed 3 March 2016)
                     This task is hindered, though, by the vast size of the resolutions, which approximately consists of 200,000 pages. The classic edition process, not even aimed at providing a full transcription of the resolutions but only abstracts, reached the year 1625 in 1994. After that, a project was carried out to edit the resolutions from 1626 to 1630 only in digital form, with the help of xml-coding (Nijenhuis, 2006; Nijenhuis et al., 2007). This project ended in 2007 and was not pursued further, because it was clear that this method also was too time and money consuming.
                
                 In 2015 we started a totally different approach as an alternative to editing this vast collection of documents. Our goal is to make this important collection accessible, searchable, and analyzable for historical research by applying various advanced digital humanities tools. We will do this by using the metadata of the already printed edited Resolutions, and by enriching and linking the data to other relevant research data. The advantage of this approach is that the Resolutions will be made accessible for researchers in a far quicker way in comparison to the classic way of editing. Also, this approach is to provide insights which will be useful for comparable projects dealing with important archival series in the future, and may provide an alternative to full scale editing of large historical sources in the digital era.
            
            
                Reusing metadata
                On the basis of experience with digital editing, we know that performing a small scale experiment is the best way of establishing best practices and avoiding huge costs. Therefore, we have chosen to apply a multilevel approach with several pilot projects, using various tools which may be applicable for exploring the content of some 200,000 pages of resolutions for historical research. These projects depart from the principle of using what is already there. This means, in practice, that we will construct a framework consisting of the metadata added by the previous editors, like indexes; mark-ups of names, places and institutions; and classification of subjects, as well as contemporary indexes and marginal subject-notes in the resolutions. This framework will serve as a reference to make the resolutions corpus accessible.
            
            
                Automated Handwritten Text Recognition
                Secondly, we experiment with tools for Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR). The software developed by researchers from the Universitat Politècnica de València, which is integrated in the 
                    Transkribus platform, offers the most valuable results (Sanchez et al., 2013).
                    
                        https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/ (accessed 3 March 2016)
                     For the HTR-experiment we manually transcribed 40 pages of handwritten resolutions. Of these pages, 30 were used for training and 10 for testing. The resulting Word Error Rate for this experiment was 40%. We realize that using an only partly correct transcription does not deliver the results one can expect from a traditional edition. The automated transcriptions generated by the HTR-tool should be seen as an alternative that enables researchers to search the text. Of course with a Word Error Rate of 40% this will not deliver perfect results. The HTR may be improved by expanding the training set and by the use of reference data, which is discussed below. In case our approach will be financed for the whole series of resolutions, we intend to use crowdsourcing to improve the HTR results on the handwritten resolutions via the 
                    Transkribus platform. As has been demonstrated by the developers from Valencia, manual correction of incorrect transcriptions of the HTR-software leads to a recalculation diminishing the mistakes the software made in the rest of the text. This will speed up the work towards an accurate transcription for the whole series. Nevertheless, with the limited number of people able to read 17
                    th-century Dutch handwriting taken into account, we cannot expect crowdsourcing to provide us with a perfect transcription of the whole series of resolutions within a few years. 
                
            
            
                Automated annotation
                Finally, we investigated the use of tools for enriching the resolutions with annotations that will improve exploring the digitized material. For this purpose we used contemporary printed resolutions, of which a series exists from 1703 to 1796. We selected a set of 100 pages from the year 1725, containing 366 resolutions. The text of the resolutions was transcribed and marked up manually using TEI. The printed material consists of blocks of text that can be categorized as follows: “session”, consisting of the date of the meeting, the name of the chairman, and the attendees representing each of the seven provinces; “resumption”, the summary of the previous meeting; “resolution”, the body of the resolutions themselves; and “insertion”, mostly incoming letters. We used a standard machine learning approach. The text blocks were marked up with their type manually. Part of the material was used for training the automated categorizer, the other part for testing. The categorizer was trained using as features fixed expressions the successive clerks of the States-General used in their account of the meetings. The comparison of the results with the manual categorization turned out to be promising. We were able to categorize the different types of text blocks with a 98,6% precision. 
                The next step was to extract information from the text blocks. Building on software of the 
                    Stanford Natural Language Processing Group we developed a rule-based tool for recognizing dates with a 99,1% precision. The dates in the “session” text blocks could be identified easily, for they have a fixed structure; this allows us to annotate each resolution with its date. Software for identifying more complex dates in the text blocks (for example “the resolution taken yesterday”) is yet to be written; it will be used to annotate resolutions with references to other resolutions.
                
                Furthermore, we developed a tool using a Naïve Bayes Classifier for categorizing the attendance list. The manuscript and printed resolutions list the attendants according to the province they represented; the provinces were mentioned in a fixed order. However, at some meetings a province was not represented. With the tool we are able to identify the provinces the attendants as well as the chairman represented in these cases also.
                Finally, we took some steps in interpreting the content of the resolutions. Again using fixed phrases and a Naïve Bayes Classifier, it turns out to be possible to recognize in most cases whether or not a decision was taken in a resolution (96,9% precision) and whether the States-General asked a person or a body for advice (99,3%). The results for analyzing to whom the States-General asked advice; and whether and to whom they asked for a report, are yet inconclusive because of the limited amount of training material.
                Apart from improving the results for this last mentioned analysis, our future work will be dedicated to several issues. Firstly, applying Named Entity Recognition to the resolutions in combination with the use of reference data. The Huygens ING owns and hosts several relevant data collections, for instance the
                     Biography Portal of the Netherlands
                    
                        http://www.biografischportaal.nl/en/ (accessed 3 March 2016)
                     and the 
                    Compendium of Office-Holders and Civil Servants 1428-1861
                    
                        http://resources.huygens.knaw.nl/repertoriumambtsdragersambtenaren1428-1861/index_html_en (accessed 3 March 2016)
                    with which we will be able to identify persons and institutions mentioned in the resolutions. Secondly, we aim at improving the OCR for the printed resolutions, for the benefit of the automated annotation. Thirdly, we will investigate whether the tools for automated structuring can be applied also to the automated transcription of the handwritten resolutions.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Deursen, A. T. van, Smit, J. G. and Roelevink, J. (Eds.) (1971-1994). 
                        Resolutiën der Staten-Generaal: Nieuwe reeks, 1610-1670. Vol 7, Gravenhage.
                    
                    
                        Nijenhuis, I. (2006). Besluiten ontsloten. Resolutiën Staten-Generaal digitaal (1626-1630). 
                        De Zeventiende Eeuw, 22: 272-82.
                    
                    
                        Nijenhuis, I. J. A., De Cauwer, P. L. R., Gijsbers, W. M., Hell, M., Meij, C. O. van der and Schooneveld-Oosterling, J. E. (Eds.) (2007, update 2011). 
                        Resolutiën Staten-Generaal 1626-1630. Den Haag.
                    
                    
                        Japikse N. and Rijperman, H. H. P. (1915-1970). 
                        Resolutiën der Staten-Generaal van 1576 tot 1609. Vol. 14. Den Haag.
                    
                    
                        Sánchez, J. A., Mühlberger, G., Gatos, B., Schofield, P., Depuydt, K., Davis, R. M., Vidal, E. and Does, J. de (2013). tranScriptorium: a European Project on Handwritten Text Recognition. 
                        Proceedings of the 2013 ACM symposium on Document engineering. New York: ACM Press, pp. 227-28.
                    
                    
                        Thomassen, T. (2015). Instrumenten van de macht. De Staten-Generaal en hun archieven 1576-1796. Den Haag: Huygens ING.
                    
                    
                        Wittek, P. and Ravenek, W. (2011). Supporting the Exploration of a Corpus of 17th-Century Scholarly Correspondences by Topic Modeling. In Maegaard, B. (Ed.), Supporting Digital Humanities 2011: Answering the unaskable. Copenhagen.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Abstract
                Over the past several years, we have worked to develop a human-interpretable computational method for quantifying “style” in literary texts. In projects focused on modernist texts, we have demonstrated the usefulness of this approach for studying dialogism (or multi-voicedness) in literature. Now we propose to extend our method to the “big data” scale by using a tool we have created, GutenTag (http://www.projectgutentag.org/). Our research promises insights into the historical evolution of dialogism in English-language fiction.
            
            
                Aims and Approach
                Dialogism — the literary practice of allowing characters to speak in their own distinctive manners, without altering their speech to suit the particular linguistic practices and prejudices of the author — has been recognized as an ethically and politically significant aspect of fiction since the early twentieth century. Russian critic Mikhail Bakhtin, who coined the term “dialogism,” has been particularly influential in arguing that the dialogic novel could support pluralistic modes of thought that model democratic social systems. Yet despite the widely recognized importance of dialogism as an analytic category in literary studies, it is one that has proven difficult to study computationally, particularly at the “big data” scale. While style has proven a tractable aspect for computational literary study, and while excellent work has been produced on distinguishing character voices within literary texts using style-based methods (Burrows, 1987; McKenna and Antonia, 1996; Rybicki, 2006), existing approaches present two significant drawbacks. First, their reliance on Burrow’s PCA-based methodology means that while this work often produces reliable and insightful results, its computational outputs are generally not human-interpretable; they may be able to show 
                    that an author distinguishes characters based on linguistic style, but not to tell us 
                    how they are differentiated. Further, these methods tend not to be suitable to expansion to the “big data” level, since they require significant manual annotation of character speech in the texts under investigation. Our method — a human-interpretable quantitative method for analyzing literary style — and our tool — which performs automatic structural tagging of plain text — make such research possible, and thus open the way for the first large-scale investigation of dialogism in literary fiction.
                
            
            
                Background
                Since 2011, we have been laying the foundations for a computational history of dialogism in English-language fiction. The first step was developing and refining our six-dimensional approach to quantifying literary style. Our method is based on six discrete aspects of style: objectivity (words that project a sense of disinterested authority); abstractness (words denoting concepts that cannot be described in purely physical terms); literariness; colloquialness; concreteness (words referring to events, objects, or properties in the physical word); and subjectivity (words that are strongly personal or reflect a personal opinion). To build our stylistic lexicons, we produce a relatively small set of words carefully selected for their stylistic diversity, which human annotators evaluate in terms of the six stylistic aspects listed above. Next, we use an automatic procedure to collect information on how these words are employed in all English texts in the 2010 image of 
                    Project Gutenberg (Brooke et. al., 2016). Using this information, we are able to derive stylistic information for any word in our target text, and to build stylistic profiles for any character or speaking voice within a text. 
                
                We have demonstrated the usefulness of our six-style approach to literary problems in two projects. One project focused on free indirect discourse (FID) in Woolf’s 
                    To the Lighthouse and Joyce’s “The Dead” (Brooke et. al., 2016). Our intention was to employ our method to test the long-held hypothesis that FID represents a stylistic middle ground between the neutral style of an objective narrator and the more extreme styles of personalized characters as rendered in direct discourse. Our method confirmed this assumption and, because it produces human-interpretable results, shed some new light on Woolf’s text in particular, finding that while Woolf’s upper-class characters exhibit a conventional power dynamic (they are more authoritative, more literary, more concrete, less objective, and less colloquial than characters of other classes) her female characters reverse these conventional dynamics: they are more objective, more abstract, less colloquial, and less subjective. The other project undertook a quantitative investigation of the problem of voice in T. S. Eliot’s 
                    The Waste Land (Brooke et. al., 2015b). While it is generally agreed that 
                    The Waste Land is composed of many speaking voices, these voices are not explicitly identified, nor are their points of transition provided. Our work explored methods of automatically segmenting and clustering voices in the text; we used the human-interpretable results of our six-style approach to evaluate the performance of various approaches and arrive at a blended human/machine interpretation.
                
                The other key foundation for our work is GutenTag, an open-source software tool released in October 2015 (Brooke et al., 2015a). Two aspects of GutenTag are particularly relevant to the present project. First, it allows users to quickly create large, customized literary corpora. Working from the 2010 image of Project Gutenberg (PG), metadata provided by PG and derived automatically from other sources, and our automatic decision-tree genre classifier, one can, for example, easily assemble a large corpus of nineteenth-century novels in English. Second, it uses our sophisticated rule-based method to automatically generate reliable, genre-specific structural tags in standard TEI XML. Crucially, our tagging system is able to distinguish character speech from narration and identify individual characters in novels; and to separate character speech from stage directions and setting descriptions in plays, associating each speech with a character in the dramatis personae. 
            
            
                Developing a Metric for Dialogism
                With the major pieces in place to conduct our research into the history of dialogism, our main task is to develop a reliable quantitative metric for the dialogism of a given literary text. We will proceed by calculating stylistic profiles for each character using methods already established in previous work. We will include a minimum word cutoff to exclude characters for which the stylistic profile is likely to be too noisy due to lack of data. Next, assuming multiple characters, for each style we will treat each character as a datapoint and calculate a weighted variance, where weights are applied based on the relative proportion of speech by each character, to produce a number that indicates overall stylistic variation across characters for that stylistic dimension in the given text. We can average across styles to produce a single metric. 
                We will experiment with calculating dialogism based on stylistic variance between (a) individual characters, (b) groupings of characters (based on gender, social background, age, etc.), and (c) social networks. This will allow us to track (a) texts in which the speech of individual characters is highly varied, (b) texts in which, for example, male characters speak in a highly distinct manner from female characters, and (c) texts in which members of distant branches of a derived social network speak in their own differentiated styles. To carry out this analysis, certain modifications will be necessary to the GutenTag system; namely, methods to detect social networks in texts and to automatically identify character groupings (a method for identifying character gender is already in place; methods for identifying other groups will be more difficult, but we will explore them). 
            
            
                Research Questions
                With these technical foundations in place, we will be ready to present our answers to some of the following questions. Our aim is not to cover all of them, but to offer detailed investigations of those that yield the most interesting results.
                
                    Which texts in PG are the most stylistically diverse, according to our quantitative definition? Are they texts by authors traditionally celebrated as dialogic (Austen, Woolf, Joyce, translations of Dostoevsky) or are they non-canonical texts? If the latter, do these texts register qualitatively as “dialogic” to a human reader? What does a close reading of these texts reveal about the viability of our automatic method?
                    How does stylistic diversity map onto historical time? Do periods of political turmoil (wars, revolutions, natural disasters, strikes, etc.) correspond to changes in the average stylistic diversity of fiction? What can we learn about the social role of fiction by studying this relationship?
                    How is stylistic diversity distributed geographically? Which regions produce the most stylistically varied writing? 
                    How is stylistic diversity distributed among genres? Does our method support or refute Bakhtin’s claim that the novel is the most dialogic of the genres, and poetry the least dialogic? Can dialogism be meaningfully compared across genres? 
                    Are authors of different ages, classes, and genders more or less likely to produce dialogic fiction?
                    How does the stylistic diversity of fiction track against that of non-fiction? Does non-fiction become more or less dialogic over time, and does it follow a similar curve to that of fiction? Do changes in the dialogism of fiction anticipate changes in non-fiction, or are the two unrelated?
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Hirst, G. (2016). Using Models of Lexical Style to Quantify Free Indirect Discourse in Modernist Fiction. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 2(2): 1–17.
                    
                    
                        Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Hirst, G. (2015a). GutenTag: an NLP-driven Tool for Digital Humanities Research in the Project Gutenberg Corpus. 
                        Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature. Denver: NAACL, pp. 1–6.
                    
                    
                        Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Hirst, G. (2015b). Distinguishing Voices in 
                        The Waste Land Using Computational Stylistics. 
                        Linguistic Issues in Language Technology, 12(2): 1–43.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J .F. (1987). 
                        Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an Experiment in Method. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                    
                    
                        McKenna, C. W. F., and Antonia, A.  (1996). ‘A Few Simple Words’ of Interior Monologue in 
                        Ulysses: Reconfiguring the Evidence. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 11(2): 55–66.
                    
                    
                        Rybicki, J. (2006). Burrowing into Translation: Character Idiolects in Henryk Sienkiewicz’s Trilogy and Its Two English Translations. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21(1): 91–103. 
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                Starting from Manovich’s (2007) statement that “a prototype is a theory”, Galey and Ruecker (2010: 406-07) argue that design can become “a process of critical enquiry itself”, a “thinking through making” pursuit allowing the combination of digital prototyping with critical analysis. Furthermore, Pierazzo (2011: 466) brings into discussion the theoretical assumptions that may underpin the decision making process in building an edition as an “interpretative scholarly product” based on the “selection of features transcribed from a specific primary source”. 
                The present proposal focuses on the construction of a visualisation framework allowing transformation and visualisation in the browser of XML-TEI encoded documents on European integration history. The tool developed for this purpose, the Transviewer, uses a combination of XML, HTML, XSLT, CSS and JavaScript technologies. The addressed research questions are related to the analysis of this prototyping case, viewed as a dynamic and iterative process of evaluation, adjustment, decision making, adaptation and in-house development. Our standpoint, inspired by the above mentioned studies, is that such type of analysis can shed light on the theoretical and practical questions, at the crossroad of tradition and new ground, involved in the creation of scholarly digital tools.
            
            
                The Transviewer prototype
                The Transviewer concept consists of building a framework for the publication of European history documents on the CVCE’s Website, from treaties, official declarations and meeting reports to letters and interview transcriptions. In a first phase, a pilot testing set for the prototype (Figure 1) has been encoded in XML-TEI P5, including a selection of 55 documents on armament issues within Western European Union (WEU), from 1950’s to 1980’s.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 1. Transviewer. Side-by-side view digital facsimile (left) and transcription (right) (WEU sample)
                
                In line with Booth et al. (2008), Galey and Ruecker (2010: 412-13) consider that a prototype can be the embodiment of an argument (or more), with all the key components of a “good thesis topic”: to be “contestable”, “defensible”, and “substantive”. This refers to how a prototype includes old affordances in a new way or proposes something new, to its potential of convincing people to accept it, or finally, to its intellectual and practical value. 
                Our idea in designing the Transviewer has been based on the following “arguments”:
                
                    The historians or researchers in European integration studies (the CVCE’s main category of readers) are always interested in comparing a transcription with the original (when available).
                    The architecture of the visualisation framework should be multi-project-oriented and support multiple types of historical documents (primary/secondary sources - text/image/audio/video). 
                
                A number of features to be encoded and rendered via the interface have been considered after consultations with the users (CVCE's researchers): 
                
                    Table 1. “Grid of features” (Pierazzo, 2011: 467) encoded in the transcription (WEU sample)
                    
                        
                        Transcription
                    
                    
                        Feature type
                        Encoded
                        Ignored
                    
                    
                        Documentary
                        Ink colour of stamps (red, black)
                        Ink colour of handwritten text
                    
                    
                        Topology
                        Document layout (position and alignment of headers/footers/ headings)
                        
                    
                    
                        Writing
                        Capitalisation and punctuation
                        Empty lines and exact vertical spacing on the page
                    
                    
                        Handwriting
                        Handwritten elements from header/headings
                        Handwritten fragments, sometimes not legible, from the body of the text
                    
                    
                        Textuality
                        Paragraphs and structural divisions
                        
                    
                    
                        Semantics
                        Named entities (e.g. names of persons/ organisations/places/functions/events/ products, dates)
                        
                    
                
                The current version of the prototype supports functionalities such as side-by-side view of digital facsimile and transcription, page-by-page navigation, zoom-in/out, vertical scrolling, search (by names of persons/places/organisations, dates).
            
            
                Decision points
                The initial Transviewer concept was inspired by the EVT (Edition Visualization Technology) model which proposes a “client-only architecture” based on XSLT transformation, HTML, CSS and JavaScript, and allows side-by-side view of manuscript images and related text (Rosselli Del Turco et al., 2014-2015).
                
                
                    
                    Figure 2. EVT. Fragment (Vercelli Book)
                
                Although the direct adaptation of EVT was considered from the beginning, different requirements for EVT and Transviewer project have been identified. 
                
                    Table 2. EVT/Transviewer differences
                    
                        Characteristics
                        EVT
                        Transviewer
                    
                    
                        General architecture
                        Project-oriented (Vercelli Book manuscript)
                        Multi-project-oriented (documents/collections in European integration history)
                    
                    
                        XML-HTML transformation granularity
                        Page-oriented (one HTML file per page/manuscript image)
                        Document-oriented (one HTML file per XML document)
                    
                    
                        XML-HTML transformation process
                        HTML generation
                        XML transformation on the fly, in the browser, and XHTML generation 
                    
                    
                        Transcription
                        Line-oriented
                        Structure-oriented (divisions, paragraphs) with semantic annotations (named entities).
                    
                    
                        Navigation
                        Page-by-page (supported by a single HTML file per page implementation)
                        Page-by-page and vertical scrolling (applied to a whole document)
                    
                    
                        Image management/loading
                        One by one
                        Images for a whole document
                    
                
                Therefore, the EVT concept of side-by-side view of digital facsimile/transcription has been combined with the integration of third-party libraries (BookReader, Saxon-CE) and in-house development. The first one has been chosen for enabling on the fly loading of images, the second for supporting XSLT 2.0 transformations in the browser. 
                
                
                    
                    Figure 3. BookReader. Fragment (Don Quixote de la Mancha)
                
                The in-house development mainly comprised modules for the implementation of a core/project specific architecture including elements of configuration, frames and buttons layout/actions, XSLT transformation and transcription rendering.
                A simplified diagram of the decisions points in the first development cycle of the Transviewer is shown in Figure 4. 
                
                    
                    Figure 4. Transviewer. Decision points (diamonds) in the first prototyping cycle
                
                As illustrated, the prototyping process can imply multiple iterations. Once a functional prototype is built, the decisions on further development may reiterate similar phases of conceptualisation, search for solutions, implementation, evaluation and decision making. In this respect, our theoretical approach could be framed at the crossroad of “iterative prototyping” (Buxton and Sniderman, 1980; Buchenau and Suri, 2000; Lucena and Astua, 2012), “user-centered design” (Shneiderman and Plaisant, 2009; Warwick et al., 2009; Gibbs and Owens, 2012), and scholarly digital editions (Pierazzo, 2011; Rosselli Del Turco, 2011).
            
            
                Evaluation
                Although partial evaluation had been carried out throughout the prototyping cycle, a more formal testing and evaluation phase has been conducted on the first functional version of the Transviewer. Several facets of assessment have been taken into account:
                
                    Table 3. Transviewer evaluation facets
                    
                        Facet
                        Short description
                        User group/stakeholders
                    
                    
                        Technology
                        Technical issues have been identified and worked upon (e.g. non-uniform support for Saxon-CE in different browsers and the use in BookReader of an older version of the jQuery library). Another evaluation aspect, related to argument 2, consisted of proving the scalability of the framework by testing it with different projects samples.
                        CVCE's development team
                    
                    
                        User
                        The prototype functionalities and argument 1 have been evaluated via usability tests (Nielsen, 2000; Lund, 2001) mainly enquiring on the ease of use, ease of learning, usefulness and user satisfaction (on a scale from 1 to 5), and on suggestions for potential improvement.
                        Internal/external researchers as end-users of the Transviewer 
                    
                    
                        Impact
                        Beside the impact on the final product (e.g. how many/in what proportion the functionalities/features/arguments of the prototype are reflected in the final product), another point of interest concerns its impact on other products, in particular, the initial models having inspired it.
                        Cooperation partners, research infrastructures
                    
                
            
            
                Discussion
                As an outcome of the analysis on the first prototype cycle, a new iteration and development reassessment is currently ongoing. The analysis helped us to: (1) identify and amend technical (see Table 3) and design issues (e.g. functionalities not quickly accessible or requiring extra-effort, unclear terminology or functionalities hierarchy, simplification); (2) adapt the encoding to support a larger variety of objects to be visualised (e.g. transcription only, facsimile only, transcription and audio/video); (3) better understand the needs of the users while dealing with historical documents (e.g. “trust” and “contextualisation” seem to play an important role). 
                Moreover, the development of new technical tools poses not only challenges to the process itself and the methods it introduces or refines but it also raises the question of sustainability: project based funding stimulates the development of new tools between different entities but far too often, this development stops once funding runs out. In the context of the informal and not project-funded cooperation between the CVCE and the EVT team, we therefore want to explore the trials and tribulations of building and maintaining a shared codebase that would be beneficial for both entities even though our specific use cases differ. As a result of the experiences made in this ongoing process of building the new version of the EVT framework, we will take the opportunity to discuss the practical challenges, opportunities and limitations of open-source development models for digital humanities projects as an approach to achieve sustainability. 
                In other words, we are not just testing an application but a development framework which implies considering complex theoretical-practical elements: Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) aspects, Information Technology (IT) methods and tools, specific types of documents to be published, projected audience, collaborative strategies and sustainability, etc.
            
            
                Conclusion
                The article proposes an analytical approach to the prototyping of a visualisation framework for historical documents. Its main assumption is that a critical perspective can be applied not only to a finished digital artefact but also to the process of its creation. In line with more traditional methods of criticism from the Humanities, a "thinking through making" viewpoint may bring into light theoretical and practical aspects related to the construction of digital tools and to the mechanisms of the "laboratory". A prospect that, by its nature, positions itself at the crossroad of the old and the new, of the past and the future.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        BookReader. 
                        https://openlibrary.org/dev/docs/bookreader (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Booth, W. C., Colomb, G. G., Williams, J. M. (2008). 
                        The Craft of Research. Chicago & London: The University of Chicago Press.
                    
                    
                        Buchenau, M., Suri, J. F. (2000). Experience Prototyping. New York: 
                        DIS ’2000. 
                        https://www.ideo.com/images/uploads/news/pdfs/FultonSuriBuchenau-Experience_PrototypingACM_8-00.pdf (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Buxton, W., Sniderman, R. (1980). Iteration in the Design of the Human-Computer Interface. 
                        Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting, Human Factors Association of Canada, pp. 72-81. 
                        http://echo.iat.sfu.ca/library/buxton_80_Iteration.pdf (accessed 29 February 2016). 
                    
                    
                        CVCE (Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l’Europe). 
                        http://www.cvce.eu/ (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        EVT (Edition Visualization Technology). 
                        http://sourceforge.net/projects/evt-project/ (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Galey, A., Ruecker, S. (2010). How a prototype argues. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, (25)4: 405-24.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F., Owens, T. (2012). Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward broader audiences and user-centered designs, 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, (6)2. 
                        http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000136/000136.html (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Lucena, B., Astua, F. (2012). Iterative prototyping and rapid service design user evaluation. 
                        Participatory Innovation Conference 2012, Melbourne, Australia. 
                        www.pin-c2012.org/, 
                        http://www.academia.edu/4074261/Iterative_prototyping_and_rapid_service_design_user_evaluation (accessed 29 February 2016). 
                    
                    
                        Lund, A. M. (2001). Measuring Usability with the USE Questionnaire. 
                        STC Usability SIG Newsletter, (8):2. 
                        http://garyperlman.com/quest/quest.cgi?form=USE
                         (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (2007). Q and A Session at the 
                        Digital Humanities (DH) 2007 Conference, Urbana-Champaign, IL, (cited in Galey and Ruecker, 2010).
                    
                    
                        Nielsen, J. (2000). Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users, 
                        Nielsen Norman Group, March 19, 2000. 
                        https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/ (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2011). A rationale of digital documentary editions. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, (26)4: 463-77.
                    
                    
                        Rosselli Del Turco, R. (2011). After the editing is done: Designing a Graphic User Interface for digital editions. 
                        Digital Medievalist, 7. ISSN: 1715-0736. 
                        http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/7/rosselliDelTurco/ (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Rosselli Del Turco, R., Buomprisco, G., Di Pietro, C., Kenny, J., Masotti, R., Pugliese, J. (2014-2015). Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-based Digital Editions. In 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 8 - PREVIEW | 2014-2015: Selected
                         Papers from the 2013 TEI Conference ,
                        https://jtei.revues.org/1077v(accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Saxon-CE, 
                        http://www.saxonica.com/ce/user-doc/1.1/index.html (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C. (2009). 
                        Designing The User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, Addison Wesley Pub Co Inc.
                    
                    
                        - TEI (Text Encoding Initiative). 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml (accessed 29 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C., Fisher, C., Terras, M., Baker, M., Clarke, A., Fulford, M., Grove, M., O’Riordan, E., Rains, M. (2009). iTrench: A study of user reactions to the use of information technology in field archaeology, 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, (24)2: 211-23.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                As Susan Schreibman (2014) points out, a digital edition, as opposed to a printed one, is never really complete as several layers of annotation may always be added to represent and enrich the original content. TEI (Burnard, 2014) allows for several types of information - textual, linguistic and semantic - to be layered and made explicit and retrievable by a machine. Such is the case for instance with what is commonly known as semantic tagging. 
                In this paper, we focus on Named Entities (NE), in particular names of Persons and Geographical Places. Adding NE mentions is supported by TEI with appropriate tags (such as  and ), whose addition in a digital critical edition has somewhat the same function that indexes of places and persons have in a printed one. As mentions may be ambiguous (same string for different people, same place with different names,....) some referencing and disambiguating identifiers are required. But digital editions allow for much more than simple internal referencing. By pointing to external sources, structured information contained in the form of linked data in the semantic web becomes available to scholarly research. 
                In this work we present REDEN ONLINE, a system that enables scholars to automatically add external references to annotations of persons and places. The system is a web interface taking TEI as input, where mentions are already marked up, and automatically disambiguates and links such entities to an appropriate linked data set using a graph based algorithm for disambiguation. Moreover, our system provides data aggregation and visualization facilities by using the information found in the reference sources.
            
            
                Previous work and general context
                Semantic tagging is a hot topic in the digital humanities. Tools for semantic enrichment are, such as 
                    Pundit (Grassi et al., 2012, 2013), already available and allow for the interactive and intuitive annotation of portions of text. Automatic Named Entity Recognition and Linking techniques may be implemented to detect mentions and to suggest links to external knowledge bases.
                
                Input formats to such systems may vary from plain text to html, but ideally a tool should process available standard formats, such as TEI-XML for text and RDF/OWL for information. Using linked data sources for disambiguation and enrichment is thus strongly recommended. By doing this, external sources of structured and regularly updated information can be made available to the scholar without having to be directly incorporated into the inline annotation, that can be left as simple as possible. This in turn allows for several customizable views, as linked data sources may be queried with the SPARQL query language to retrieve only the amount of external information that is necessary for a given task. 
                The treatment of spatial and temporal information is a typical task for which this approach is particularly effective; the availability of geographical databases and the complexity of the information are best accessed by pointing from within the digital edition to an external link. But also other types of semantic information seem to be particularly apt for connection to rich linked databases. So for instance bibliometric sources can be used to enrich texts with additional information on authors. 
                Typical targets for references are DBpedia and Geonames, that, for their genericity and connection to other sources, are at the heart of the linked data cloud. But they may be supplemented by more domain specific sources of information. For instance, Pleiades provides geo-historical information for ancient places.
            
            
                Our project
                REDEN ONLINE is set against the background of work carried out at LABEX OBVIL in Paris, where quality digital editions for French literary texts and criticism are produced and used in research and higher education. Recently a series of projects were carried out to semi-automatically annotate and reference places, organizations and authors. Gold standards were also produced, in close contact with researchers in French literature, so as to establish guidelines of annotation that best suit their ongoing research. 
                The general purpose is to provide tools for both:
                
                    augmented close reading, to enable researchers to access more information on a specific text portion
                    distant reading and data aggregation, so as to be able to detect trends in large portions of texts (Moretti, 2007)
                
                OBVIL literary scholars are interested in plotting the distribution of the mentions of given authors over time in French literary criticism, in order to study the appreciation of Molière over the centuries, or in producing charts representing the distributions of professions in authors mentioned in given periods, to trace the influence of scientists and their ideas on art and literature in the age of positivism (Riguet, 2015). Other visualizations captured the emerging influence of foreign countries in the French literary panorama over time by combining the date of the publication of the essays with the detected toponyms.
                NLP technologies are used to facilitate various aspects of the semantic enrichment of TEI editions, in an annotation echosystem where texts are first processed and then manually checked. The detection of mentions of places, authors (and also organizations) was tackled by using a Named Entity Recognizer and Classifier (UNERD, Mosallam et al., 2014).
                Once the entities are correctly detected and classified, external references need to be added to disambiguate mentions and to connect them to additional information. To this purpose we developed REDEN
                    
                         REDEN is open source; you can find the code at https://github.com/cvbrandoe/REDEN.
                    , a Named Entity Linker that uses a graph-based algorithm and linked data sets to identify the correct referent for each mention (Brando et al., 2015, Frontini et al., 2015a, Frontini et al., 2015b for the technical details). 
                
                REDEN's input consists of a TEI text with detected mentions and several parameters specifying among others the class of entities to be detected, the reference base to use and a set of pre-compiled indexes. REDEN is applied for each class of entities separately, and works at best when several mentions are disambiguated at the same time. It retrieves all candidate referents for each mention of a context (say a paragraph) and then all the available information from the semantic web. It builds a sub-graph of all candidates and chooses the correct referents for each mention with the help of the formal relations between them. From Figure 1 you can get an intuition of how REDEN works.
                
                    
                    Figure 1 The graph based algorithm disambiguates between different possible referents for the mentions of "Victor Hugo" (unambiguous in this example), "Lamartine" and "Vigny" (both having several candidate referents) based on information found in DBpedia. Correct referents (in grey) are chosen based on how well connected they are within the context Here the crucial node is clearly that of yago:RomanticPoets.
                
                So far our efforts have concentrated on the production of a text annotation and referencing pipeline for the production of such enriched TEIs with annotated and referenced mentions. Their exploitation for data aggregation and visualization was carried out offline and with ad hoc processing tools. With REDEN ONLINE we now want to make linking technology available online while at the same time providing users with some generic visualization of the results. 
                In what follows, we present the REDEN ONLINE interface with some screenshots from an example where two texts of the Labex OBVIL
                    
                         Find more information on OBVIL and ist digital library at http://obvil.paris-sorbonne.fr/.
                     digital library have been automatically linked to external sources, namely:
                
                - 
                    L’Hérésiarque et cie, a collection of short stories by Guillaume Apollinaire, published in 1910 - place mentions linked to DBpedia entries. 
                
                - 
                    Réflexions sur la littérature a series of essays on French literary criticism by Albert Thibaudet, published in 1936 - author's mentions linked to entries in the linked data base of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (BnF). 
                
                The user (Figure 2) loads a TEI text with annotated  or  tags, chooses which class of entities to process (places or nouns) and the system runs the disambiguation and linking algorithm against the given linked data base - here French DBpedia and/or BnF. Then external information is extracted from the source and used for generating a particular view of the text. The result is a summing up of the disambiguated locations (some place names may be non resolvable because they are absent from the linked data base) and a visualization.
                For locations the visualization consists in an interactive map that also takes frequency of mention into account. Coordinates are retrieved from DBpedia when available and the map can be zoomed in, up to the level of streets (see Figure 3 where some places in Paris have been identified in the text by Apollinaire), when relevant. 
                For persons (see Figure 4), portraits of authors are automatically downloaded and visualized. 
            
            
                Conclusion
                The conference presentation will demonstrate REDEN ONLINE, a web based tool that enables researchers to connect place names and person names in their texts to existing linked data sources. The underlying technology will also be explained, in particular its use of standard formats, such as TEI and RDF for the linking algorithm, and GeoJSON for the creation of the map. We will also argue in favour of our economicity approach, namely the choice of not embedding semantic information in the TEI, which enables the use of different databases and the production of ad hoc "views" of the document.
                It is well known that aggregation and visualizations techniques may "assist the critic in the unfolding of interpretive possibilities" (Ramsay, 2008) when analysing texts. This tool has been particularly designed for the study of literature and literary criticism; in the presentation examples of use will be given using ongoing research on Apollinaire, highlighting how the visual representation of the itineraries contained in the stories may be considered as a form of novel "digital reading" of the text.
                
                    
                    Figure 2 The REDEN ONLINE interface, with a sample text from Apollinaire. Place names results are visible as a map visualization. 
                
                
                    
                    Figure 3 The REDEN ONLINE interface, with a sample text from Apollinaire. Zoom on Paris of place name results.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 4 A visualization of authors mentioned in Thibaudet’s “Réflexions sur la littérature”, frequencies are displayed in parenthesis. 
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brando, C., Frontini, F. and Ganascia, J. G. (2015). Disambiguation of Named Entities in Cultural Heritage Texts Using Linked Data Sets. In Morzy, T., Valduriez, P. and Bellatreche, L. (Eds.), 
                        New Trends in Databases and Information Systems. (Communications in Computer and Information Science 539). Springer International Publishing, pp. 505–14.
                    
                    
                        Burnard, L. (2014). 
                        What Is the Text Encoding Initiative? How to Add Intelligent Markup to Digital Resources. (Encyclopédie Numérique). Marseille: OpenEdition Press.
                    
                    
                        Elliott, T. and Gillies, S. (2009). Digital geography and classics. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(1).
                    
                    
                        Frontini, F., Brando, C. and Ganascia, J. G. (2015a). Domain-adapted named-entity linker using Linked Data. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on NLP Applications: Completing the Puzzle, vol. 1386, Aachen: M. Jeusfeld c/o Redaktion Sun SITE, Informatik V, RWTH Aachen. 
                        http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1386/named_entity.pdf. (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Frontini, F., Brando, C. and Ganascia, J. G. (2015b). Semantic Web based Named Entity Linking for Digital Humanities and Heritage Texts. 
                        SW4SH 2015 Semantic Web for Scientific Heritage 2015, vol. 1364, Aachen: M. Jeusfeld c/o Redaktion Sun SITE, Informatik V, RWTH Aachen, pp. 77–88, http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1364/paper9.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Grassi, M., et al. (2012). Pundit: Semantically Structured Annotations for Web Contents and Digital Libraries. 
                        Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Semantic Digital Archives, Paphos, Cyprus, pp. 49–60.
                    
                    
                        Grassi, M., et al. (2013). Pundit: Augmenting Web Contents with Semantics. 
                        Literary and Linguisting Computing, 
                        28(4): 640–59.
                    
                    
                        Grossner, K., Janowicz, K. and Keßler, C. (2016). Place, Period, and Setting for Linked Data Gazetteers. In Mostern, Ruth, Berman, Lex and Southall, H. (Eds.), 
                        Placing Names: Enriching and Integrating Gazetteers. Bloomington, Indiana University Press http://geog.ucsb.edu/~jano/GrossnerJanowiczKessler_submitted_draft.pdf (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Janowicz, K. (2009). The Role of Place for the Spatial Referencing of Heritage Data. 
                        The Cultural Heritage of Historic European Cities and Public Participatory GIS Workshop. The University of York, UK.
                    
                    
                        Jones, C. B., et al. (2008). Modelling vague places with knowledge from the Web. 
                        International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
                        22(10): 1045–65. doi:10.1080/13658810701850547.
                    
                    
                        Montuschi, P. and Benso, A. (2014). Augmented Reading: The Present and Future of Electronic Scientific Publications. 
                        Computer, 
                        47(1): 64–74 doi:10.1109/MC.2013.256.
                    
                    
                        Morbidoni, C., et al. (2013). Semantic Augmentation and Externalization in the Humanities: a Demonstrative Use Case. 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2013, Lincoln, Nebraska.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2007). 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. London: Verso Books.
                    
                    
                        Mosallam, Y., Abi-Haidar, A. and Ganascia, J. G. (2014). Unsupervised Named Entity Recognition and Disambiguation: An Application to Old French Journals. 
                        Advances in Data Mining. Applications and Theoretical Aspects. Springer, pp. 12–23. http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-08976-8_2 (accessed 27 July 2015).
                    
                    
                        Murrieta-Flores, P. and Gregory, I. (2015). Further Frontiers in GIS: Extending Spatial Analysis to Textual Sources in Archaeology. 
                        Open Archaeology, 
                        1(1). doi:10.1515/opar-2015-0010. http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/opar.2014.1.issue-1/opar-2015-0010/opar-2015-0010.xml (accessed 27 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2008). Algorithmic Criticism. 
                        Companion to Digital Literary Studies. (Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Professional http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companionDLS/ (accessed 24 February 2010).
                    
                    
                        Riguet, M. (in press). L’impact de la physiologie dans la critique littéraire de la fin du XIXe siècle : l’exemple de Claude Bernard, actes du colloque Littérature et Science au xixe siècle, dirigée par Elsa Courant et Romain Enriquez, ENS Ulm, avril 2015, Épistémocritique.
                    
                    
                        Schreibman, S. Digital Scholarly Editing. In Price, K. M. and Siemens, R. (eds), 
                        Literary Studies in the Digital Age. Modern Language Association of America http://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/digital-scholarly-editing/ (accessed 5 March 2014).
                    
                    
                        Nadeau, D. and Sekine, S. (2007). A survey of named entity recognition and classification. 
                        Lingvisticae Investigationes, 
                        30(1): 3–26 doi:10.1075/li.30.1.03nad.
                    
                    
                        Stadler, C., et al. (2012). LinkedGeoData: A Core for a Web of Spatial Open Data. 
                        Semantic Web Journal, 
                        3(4): 333–54.
                    
                    
                        Hooland, S., et al. (2013). Exploring entity recognition and disambiguation for cultural heritage collections. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities doi:10.1093/llc/fqt067. http://dsh.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/12/02/llc.fqt067.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Abstract
                In 1827/28 Alexander von Humboldt presented the scientific knowledge of his time in lectures which became famous in their own right as a milestone in the popularization of science as well as due to their apparent connection to Humboldt’s most important work “Kosmos. Entwurf einer physischen Weltbeschreibung” (1845–62).
                The project “Hidden Kosmos—Reconstructing Alexander von Humboldt’s ‘Kosmos-Lectures’”
                     www.culture.hu-berlin.de/hidden-kosmos. is located at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Within two years (ending in August, 2016) the project digitizes and virtually brings together eleven attendee’s lecture notes (all that are known at the moment) of the “Vorlesungen über physikalische Geographie”, the so-called “Kosmos-Lectures”, coming from libraries, archives as well as private collections in Germany, Poland (Kraków) and Turkey.
                
                The TEI-encoded transcripts of about 3500 manuscript pages will be published as a standard-compliant, deeply annotated and highly integrated corpus under CC by-sa.
                     https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/de/.
                
                While the project’s goal is to enable an intensive exploration of Humboldt’s lectures, our poster will abstract a little from the impressive range of topics of Humboldt’s lectures and focus on technical solutions applied in the project to make the corpus likewise fruitful to Humboldt researchers, the general public and Dhists.
            
            
                Starter
                On March 13, 1828 Alexander von Humboldt gave his 14th talk of the Kosmos-Lectures at Berlin’s Singakademie.
                     Singakademie is todays Maxim-Gorki-Theater. After its opening on April 8th, 1827 it has been the biggest event hall in Berlin. At the end of his talk he told his audience:
                
                ... für den technischen Gebrauch hat man von diesen neueren Entdeckungen eine Anwendung gemacht, durch die Einrichtung eines 
                    Ariometers, od. Wollmessers. Ein Lichtstrahl welcher bei einem feinen Faden Wolle vorbei geht, erleidet eine Beugung u. bildet farbige Frangen oder Ringe, die um so breiter erscheinen als der Faden zarter od. dünner ist.
                    
                        . 
                    
                
                The topic of this lecture is fairly clear: Optical interference and the diffraction of light. The main instrument mentioned is an “Ariometer” for measuring the thickness of woolen threads. This at least is the conclusion from what the anonymous writer of this text tells us.
            
            
                Formal setting
                The project’s tag set strictly follows the DTABf-M (cf. Haaf/Thomas, 2015)
                     More information at http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat_manuskripte. which is a specific DTA “Base Format” (DTABf) for 
                    manuscripts. This strict subset of the TEI P5 tag set provides “a balance between expressiveness and precision as well as an interoperable annotation scheme for a large variety of text types in historical corpora [...].” (Cf. Haaf et al., 2014)
                
                The tag set and corresponding RNG-schema are the basis for a homogeneous TEI-encoding of all documents by different encoders, i. e. typists from the (external) vendor—providing transcription and TEI-conformant annotation of the easier legible manuscripts—as well as our project team.
                The linguistic analysis of texts at the DTA (incl. lemmatization and fully automatized normalization of historical forms) and their search engine enable an ideal exploitation of the attendee’s lecture notes in the context of the DTA corpora, where hundreds of other texts from Humboldt himself as well as his contemporaries, predecessors and successors can be accessed and linked to the Kosmos-Lectures.
                Obviously, as we are dealing with different notes by several attendees of Humboldt’s lectures—i. e. still referring to the same oral presentation—a collation of the witnesses is one essential way of access. The similarities and differences between the witnesses call for collation tools. CollateX or juXta, for instance, are well known and established DH tools for completely automatized detections and visualizations of comparisons of two or more texts. They are of great value for our project (cf. Thomas, 2014/15) and we will illustrate this by making accessible collation sets during our poster demo.
                Due to our TEI-encoding more options for evaluations are given:
                
                    Humboldt’s course is segmented chronologically into single lectures.
                         A contentual segmentation is in preparation. This is thoroughly done via . This approach enhances the possibilities of accessing parallel reading of the transcripts.
                    
                    A systematic access to the sources is enabled due to referencing persons within the TEI documents () as a basis for an encompassing index of all postscripts linked to authority records.
                    A third way of accessing the Kosmos-Lectures will be a complete bibliography of all mentioned sources tagged with .
                
            
            
                Contentwise Resumption
                Starting point was the “Ariometer” and the diffraction of light in the one manuscript quoted above. A use case would be to see what the other listeners noted. For example, one other attendee wrote:
                … durch die Beugung der Lichtstralen, indem sie durch einen engen Raum gehn, entstehn farbige Franzen, die man am besten erhalten kann, wenn man einen Lichtstral durch das Fenster bei einem dünnen Faden vorbei in ein dunkles Zimmer auf eine helle Wand leitet…
                     http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/parthey_msgermqu1711_1828/126.
                
                Similarities between the two texts are obvious: light beams, diffraction, a woolen thread and coloured stripes of light. But while the first extract gives the impression of Humboldt being interested in measuring woolen threads, these clearly function as instruments for illustrating a physical phenomenon in the later passage.
                The natural attempt to search for “Ariometer” in our corpus gives no results.
                     If you give google search a try, this leads you to 
                        Aräometer, which is a totally different instrument. The reason for this is easy to tell: It's an OCR-mistake due to the “latin superscript small letter e”.
                     We can derive from the context given in the quote above that Humboldt is talking about physical phenomena, but it would be helpful to have a protagonist. So let's refine our search:
                     This and the following DDC searches are documented in detail here: http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/DDC-suche_hilfe. In brief: We are looking for sentences including “Lichstrahlen” and “Interferenz” where there are no more than 20 tokens in between. And the search is restricted to our Kosmos-Lecture corpus (avhkv). If you want to give it a try, go to: http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/search/ddc.
                
                near(Lichtstrahlen,Interferenz,20) #has[corpus,/avhkv/i]
                Looking at the results (see fig. 1) leads us to Thomas Young as well as Jung
                     Jung is not to be seen on the screenshot only because a little more context would be necessary. Just add \#cntxt2 to your search and choose the HTML-view., which obviously only is a German version of the first. Next attempt:
                
                near(*meter,/[JY]o?ung$/,20) #has[corpus,/avhkv/i]
                And this leads to another 
                    meter, the “Circometer”. Maybe we couldn’t find the “Ariometer” since it doesn’t exist? To shorten the track here: A “Circometer” doesn’t exist either. What we are in fact looking for is the so-called 
                    eriometer.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 1: Result of the DDC-Search
                    What we are facing here is an inherent difficulty of our text type: attendee’s lecture notes. It’s always possible that the listeners misheard something. This is why 1) the deeply granulated TEI encoding of the project, 2) the technical solutions provided by the DTA and 3) text-comparison visualizations (being developed for our project’s) are absolutely necessary.
                
            
            
                Summary
                The following DDC-search leads to the third volume of the Kosmos (1850), where Humboldt is talking about the above mentioned physical phenomena:
                near("$p=ADJA /Fran[szg]en/",/(Wolle|Interferenz)/,20) #has[corpus,/(avhkv|kosmos)/i]
                About 30 years after his lectures the eriometer and the wool are no issue any more. The reason for this is not inherent, but a little research on the basis of other digitized sources reveals it: Whereas the real eriometer—the apparatus for measuring the fineness of woolen threads—, which Young used to demonstrate the diffraction of light in his famous 
                    Lectures on Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution, became forgotten,
                     For “it seems hitherto to have been found much too delicate to be employed by the hard hands of peasants, with any advantage.” (Cf. George/Guarino 1973, p. 392). the 
                    idea of combining the craft and the theory (or the engineer and the scientist) succeeded:
                
                … das ähnliche Instrument dient dazu die Güte der Wolle zu messen, und die Natur der Weltkörper zu bestimmen.
                     http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/nn_msgermqu2124_1827/147.
                
                Apart from the implementation of means for collation it is obvious that linking to more (external) data-sets, as shown here, will add even further value to the project.
                     The »ariometer« obviously is just one trace to follow. For an extended list of (the approx. 120 different) instruments mentioned please grab https://github.com/haoess/hidden-kosmos/blob/master/lists/Liste_Instrumente.txt.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        N. N. (1828). 
                        Physikalische Geographie. Vorgetragen von Alexander von Humboldt. In Deutsches Textarchiv, Berlin.
                        (accessed 12 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        CollateX, 
                        ; CollateX Console, 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Erdmann, D. and Thomas, C. (2014). … zu den wunderlichsten Schlangen der Gelehrsamkeit zusammengegliedert. Neue Materialien zu den ,Kosmos-Vorträgen‘ Alexander von Humboldts, nebst Vorüberlegungen zu deren digitaler Edition. 
                        HiN – Humboldt im Netz. Internationale Zeitschrift für Humboldt-Studien, 
                        15(28): 34–45, 
                         (accessed 12 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        George, S. and Guarino, M. (1973). Young’s Eriometer: History and Modern Teaching Use. 
                        Physics Education, 
                        8(6): 392–96.
                    
                    
                        Haaf, S., Geyken, A. and Wiegand, F. (2014/15). The DTA "Base Format": A TEI Subset for the Compilation of a Large Reference Corpus of Printed Text from Multiple Sources. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (jTEI), 
                        8, 
                         (accessed 12 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Haaf, S. and Thomas, C. (2015). 
                        DTABf-M: A TEI-conformant Base Format for Manuscripts. Presentation at the TEI Converence and Members Meeting 2015, Lyon. 
                         (accessed 12 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Humboldt, A. V. (1845–62). 
                        Kosmos. Entwurf einer physischen Weltbeschreibung. 5 Bände. Stuttgart (u.a.): Cotta.
                    
                    
                        Juxta Collation Software, For Scholars, 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Parthey, G. (1828/28). 
                        Alexander von Humboldt[:] Vorlesungen über physikalische Geographie. Novmbr. 1827 bis April,[!] 1828. Nachgeschrieben von G. Partheÿ. Berlin, In Deutsches Textarchiv, 
                         (accessed 12 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        textloop Martina Gödel, 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Thomas, C. (2015). 
                        Hidden Kosmos – Humboldts ‚Kosmos-Vorträge‘ als Probe der Digital Humanities. Vortrag auf der DHd-Jahrestagung 2015 „Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen: Digitale Geisteswissenschaften als Mittler zwischen Information und Interpretation“, 23.–27.2.2015, Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung – Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities an der Universität Graz. Book of Abstracts, http://gams.uni-graz.at/o:dhd2015.abstracts-vortraege: [193]ff.
                    
                    
                        Young, T. (1807). 
                        A Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the Mechanical Arts. Johnson.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The character network of a given narrative (novel, play, film, graphic novel, etc.) models the structure formed by the relations in its character-system (Woloch, 2003). A relation between two characters symbolises their co-presence in parts of the narrative; the entire set of relations between all characters constitutes a formal model of this character-system and lends itself to display and analysis. For example, Moretti (2011) used network modelling to compare the importance of protagonists from Shakespeare’s 
                    Hamlet, while Trilcke 
                    et al. (2015) created character networks for 465 German plays and used them to initiate a wider study of German Theatre.
                
                Most applications of character network analysis have disregarded temporality, possibly because of its representational complexity. Consequently, all relations in the system are considered as happening at the same time: one cannot distinguish if a given edge symbolises a relation at the start, at the end, or in several parts of the work under study. Furthermore, because temporality is not being accounted for, there is usually no way of relating the network visualisation with the unfolding of the source narrative. While prototypes such as those discussed in Roberts-Smith 
                    et al. (2013) offer sophisticate ways of dynamically visualising the text of theatre plays, they do so in a way that is unrelated to character network modelling.
                
                Based on these observations, we set out to develop an open source web application which models the character-system of theatre plays as a sequence of network states synchronised with the actual narrative content (
                    https://github.com/maladesimaginaires/intnetviz). This paper proposes a high-level overview of our application , successively focusing on the underlying structure extraction process, the conception of the graphical interface, and the range of uses envisioned for it. In the conclusion, we evoke the ways in which we intend to develop it and reflect on the potential significance of this development at a more epistemological level.
                
            
            
                Tool overview
                The underlying workflow has been divided into two parts. First, the text of a play is processed using 
                    Orange Textable (, Xanthos 2014), an open source text analysis add-on for the 
                    Orange Canvas (http://orange.biolab.si/) visual programming environment: in particular, the play is divided into its component parts (acts, scenes, lines) and the characters present in each scene are identified and associated with each line. These data are then imported into a web interface based on the open source 
                    D3 JavaScript library (, Bostock et al., 2011), which allows the user (author, researcher, teacher, etc.) to manipulate the character network without prerequisite installation.
                
            
            
                Structure extraction
                The workflow is designed to facilitate the later inclusion of new data. The play used in the initial development phase was Molière’s 
                    L’Ecole des femmes, as found in raw text format on the Project Gutenberg website (
                    http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43535/43535-0.txt). Theatre plays constitute a privileged input for the automatic extraction of structural information: such information is in general explicitly encoded in these data, as illustrated by the excerpt of Molière’s play reproduced on Figure 1. It is worth noting that the extraction phase can be readily adapted to take advantage of cases where structural information has been formally encoded using TEI-XML annotation for instance, such as the “Théâtre classique” database used by Karsdorp 
                    et al. (2015). We are currently investigating the possibility of extending our approach to a large body of plays in this way.
                
                            
                                
                                Figure 1. Excerpt of L’Ecole des femmes illustrating the explicit structuration of the data 
                            
                Structure extraction is performed by a mostly linear chaining of segmentation and recoding operations based on regular expressions which gradually transform the raw text of the play into the tables that will be later used for controlling the web interface. Each table has the same number of rows, corresponding to the extracted lines of the play. The first table gives the text of each line (lightly annotated in XML) along with the associated character and stage directions (Table 1). The second table indicates the presence or absence of each character when each line is spoken (see Table 2).
                            
                                
                                Table 1. First rows of the table containing the extracted text and stage directions
                            
                            
                                
                                Table 2. First rows of the table indicating the presence or absence of each character when each line is spoken (the first four columns are identical to Table 1 and have been omitted, along with the last few character columns)
                            
                Applied to 
                    L’Ecole des femmes, the process was found to give fairly reliable results: about 98% of the lines were correctly extracted. Most errors could be fixed by determining 
                    a priori the set of acceptable character names in a given play. An unexpected source of errors was the assumption that characters could be consistently identified by a single string; even without taking into account situations where a character is explicitly “renamed” as part of a surprise effect, linguistic processes such as the succession of indefinite and definite articles in French discourse lead to formal variations in the designation of characters.
                
            
            
                Interface
                Data files are then imported into a browser and D3 is used to build an interactive visualisation of the character-system (a demo is available at 
                    http://bit.ly/network-demo) where the state of the network is synchronised with the current line (Figure 2). Character nodes are positioned using a force-based layout. Browsing the text simultaneously updates the network, line, and position indicator (act, scene, line). At each step, the weight of edges (expressed by their width) increases with the number of co-presences between the characters up to this point. Similarly, the weight of nodes (their radius) increases with the number of lines spoken by this character.
                
                            
                                
                                Figure 2. User interface. [Above] Agnès is speaking in presence of Horace and Arnolphe; all characters have already intervened except Oronte and Enrique, who will appear in the final scenes. [Below] Three moments of the unfolding character network (lines 41, 359 and 536)
                            
                A character node can be in one of four states. It is: 
                
                    “active” when the character is speaking.
                    “activated” when it is present in the scene but not active.
                    “previously activated” if it was present in the play but is not currently active nor activated.
                    “not yet activated” if its first appearance is in a later scene.
                
                The latter state makes it possible to offer a view of the final network state, highlighting absences as well as presences in the earlier stages.
            
            
                Uses
                We display each line in front of the matching network state for a reason: the network does not exhaust the richness of the play. Since co-presence analysis does not consider the actual content of lines, it cannot–nor aims to–account for discursive references to characters. However, by extracting an actantial model from speech turns, the tool provides a concise and dynamic representation of the enunciative structure of the play. Paired with background knowledge about theatrical narration, such a visualisation offers new ways of reading.
                From a philological perspective, relating sociological variables (gender, age, social status) with structural properties of the network (dynamical statistics, centrality measures, word and line counts) helps clarifying which profiles lead the interactions, which ones merely react to them, and which ones are excluded from them, revealing potential social stigma. By expliciting not only the presence but also the absence of links between certain characters, the proposed visualisation may contribute to a visual and interactive deconstruction of the plays (Derrida, 1967).
                By allowing the user to browse through successive pictures of the interactions, the interface provides a unique opportunity to "play" the play and visualise the flow of speech between characters. We believe that this playful dimension is particularly interesting for pedagogic uses, especially when discovering a new narrative work with students.
                Last but not least, our method can also be applied to any text in the course of the writing process. In this context, disposing of a visualisation of existing interactions at each moment of the text may help the writer distance herself from an impressionistic representation. 
            
            
                Perspectives and conclusion
                One of the most significant benefits of a digital humanities approach is the dialectic relation created between the development of a prototype and the verification of scientific hypotheses. Discussing seemingly trivial design issues like the number of colors requested to map the network relations has frequently led us to expliciting and fruitfully questioning differences in our epistemological backgrounds. Thus we consider the following perspectives not only as potential improvements to our tool but also, more importantly, as opportunities to challenge our own theoretical preconceptions:
                
                    Further enriching the visualisation (e.g. by adding line count histograms or highlighting of the first intervention of a character) would benefit the back-and-forth movement between the content and the structure of a given play.
                    The dynamical nature of the interface would enable us to compare the distinctive features of different plays not only in terms of the final state of character networks, but also and more importantly, of their evolution; this should help bring out "interactional styles" and discover 
                        Familienähnlichkeit (Wittgenstein, 1953) by author or period.
                    
                    Other kinds of texts will benefit from such a dynamical analysis: other fictional texts such as screenplays, but also linguistic transcriptions as used in conversation analysis. 
                
                By allowing the user to browse the content of a narrative and manipulate an interactive character network, our motivation is ultimately to contribute to a better integration of distant and close reading practices.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V. and Heer, J. (2011). D3: Data-Driven Documents. 
                        IEEE Trans. Visualization and Comp. Graphics (Proc. InfoVis). 
                        http://vis.stanford.edu/papers/d3 (accessed Oct. 28, 2015.)
                    
                    Derrida, J. (1967). 
                        Of Grammatology. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
                    
                    Karsdorp, F., Kestemont, M. Schöch, C. and Van Den Bosch, A. (2015). The love equation: Computational modeling of romantic relationships in French classical drama. In 
                        Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative (CMN-2015), pp. 89–107.
                    
                    Moretti, F. (2011). Network theory, plot analysis. 
                        New Left Review, 68: 80–102.
                    
                    Roberts-Smith, J., DeSouza-Coelho, S., Dobson, T., Gabriele, S., Rodriguez-Arenas, O., Ruecker, S., Sinclair, S., Akong, A., Bouchard, M., Hong, M., Jakacki, D., Lam, D., Kovacs, A., Northam, L. and So, D. (2013). Visualizing theatrical text: from Watching the Script to the Simulated Environment for Theatre (SET).
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7(3).
                    
                    Trilcke, P., Fischer, F. and Kampkaspar, D. (2015). Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities 2015. 
                        http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_Analysis_of_Dramati/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_Analysis_of_Dramatic_Text.html (accessed Oct. 28, 2015).
                    
                    Wittgenstein, L. (1953). 
                        Philosophical Investigations. Blackwell Publishing.
                    
                    Woloch, A. (2003). 
                        The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the Protagonist in the Novel. Princeton University Press.
                    
                    Xanthos, A. (2014). Textable: programmation visuelle pour l’analyse de données textuelles. 
                        Actes des 12èmes Journées internationales d’analyse statistique des données textuelles (JADT 2014), pp. 691–703.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    The 
                        Lokalbericht project (2013-2016)
                        
                             Cf. the preliminary project website at http://lokalbericht.unibe.ch.
                        
                        
                         aims to deliver a scholarly digital edition of Swiss author Hermann Burger’s first novel 
                        Lokalbericht. Accompanied by a reading edition in print (fall 2016), the digital edition will include all extant precursory stages of the novel as well as Burger’s final revision of the text, written between 1970 and 1972 (Wieland et al., 2012). The project relies on document oriented encoding, as supported by the TEI guidelines since P5 
                        v. 2.0 (cf. Burnard et al., 2012), in order to aptly capture the materiality and the genetic dimension of the work.
                    
                    Macrogenetic Challenges
                    Whereas the recommendations of other textgenetic edition projects as well as the tradition of genetic editions in print were very helpful for the encoding of local, microgenetic phenomenons (i.e. intradocumental) and their presentation to the reader, much less information was available on how to document interdocumental textgenetic relations in a structured manner. In order to better understand the challenges and needs of what we dubbed macrogenetic editing, a workshop was convened in Bern in 2014.
                        
                             Cf. http://lokalbericht.unibe.ch/hermann_burger/workshops.html
                         As Hans Walter Gabler concluded, 
                        ‘a digital genetic edition will only tap its full potential by capturing and visualizing “macrogenetic” aspects’ (Gabler, 2014).
                    
                    Incited by the outcomes of the workshop we investigated ways that offer immediate insight into Burger’s way of writing – the novel was crafted as a mosaic consisting of numerous tesserae that were worked over repeatedly. This writing technique results in an f
                        avant texte consisting of many segmented and related texts, of which at times more than a dozen copies are extant. Taking a bird’s eye view of the corpus, the reader should get a clear understanding of the writing process and be able to follow the development of specific segments or chapters and their integration into the final typescript, before swooping down to the text level to discover the textgenetic minutiae.
                    
                    A Visual Approach to Macrogenetic Relationships
                    In printed and early digital genetic editions, macrogenetic relations are often visualized as a stemma. Such stemmata leave much to be desired – they often abstract on a high level (e.g. witnesses or versions of a text) as opposed to smaller textual entities such as paragraphs or sentences, require considerable intellectual and manual effort, and remain comparatively static, perhaps linking to representations of related documents, but lacking in precision. Yet their genealogical tree structure serves still as a powerful basis to represent editorial changes. 
                    Taking the underlying idea to represent temporal development on the vertical axis and introducing finer levels of granularity in a stemma tree on one hand threatens to lead to over-complexity and problems of positioning. Resorting to force directed plotting as it is often used to display and investigate graph data on the other hand does not satisfy the sequentiality inherent in written text. For the manageable amount of typescript pages and drafts of the novel at hand, we found that a prearranged layout that entails a temporal dimension (y-axis) and material evidence of the texts (x-axis) works best (cf. figure 1).
                        
                             The actual technical implementation makes use of the D3.js JavaScript library (cf. http://d3js.org) for manipulating documents based on data, but similar outcomes might be realized using other tools.
                         Genetic relations between the typescript pages, the smallest units of display,
                        
                        
                             More complex genetic corpora and different choices of granularity would however require more sophisticated zooming and panning mechanisms or ways of three-dimensional stacking and it remains to be seen whether the chosen approach would serve them well.
                         are highlighted on mouse actions. Interacting with this visualization, the user of the digital edition can trace the development of the early and final drafts of the novel.
                    
                    
                        Figure 1: Display of two genetically related sheets: genetic relations (r.) and navigational component (top l.)
                    
                    Accessing Data through Visual Navigation
                    Good textgenetic visualizations should not be mere by-products of digital editions, but closely tie in with the structure of the digital edition, i.e. serve as a subsidiary navigation to its contents. By way of two panels that yield lists of related typescript pages the user can access detail views in the main interface of the edition (single or synoptical views) directly from the visualization. Vice versa, the visualization initially highlights the current selection of the main interface in order to provide specific views of the 
                        dossier génétique. 
                    
                    Outlook
                    While the 
                        analytical approach based on genetic paths defined by the editors (on sheet level) should provide the most valuable knowledge about the production of the novel, it would be desirable to complement the visualization by an 
                        explorative mode based on relations encoded on more granular levels.
                        
                             The development of an explorative visualization of the entire 
                                Lokalbericht corpus as initially planned will presumably only be implemented for selected texts due to limited resources. 
                            
                         A visualization of this kind would be less useful to pursue particular authorial changes, but it would help to identify patterns that deserve closer attention and facilitate the isolation and display of the least interpretation-ridden relations and consequently better suit a reader-centered concept of a digital edition. 
                    
                    The wish for visualizations that abstract from the detailed genesis of a text to a more approachable overview is shared by a number of genetic edition projects.
                        
                             Examples are the 
                                digital historical critical edition of Arthur Schnitzler’s works (1905–1931), the 
                                digital edition of Goethe's Faust, or the 
                                Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project.
                            
                         After all, imparting his or her knowledge and insight to the readership lies at the core of a scholarly editor’s role. We hope to contribute to the debate by sharing our approach to this problem at DH 2016 and finally by launching the digital 
                        Lokalbericht edition in October 2016.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burnard, L., Jannidis, F., Pierazzo, E., Rehbein, M. (2012). An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html (accessed 1 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Gabler, H. W. (2014). Personal report. In Schweizerisches Literaturarchiv, 
                        Resümees zum internationalen Workshop Digitale genetische Editionen (in der Praxis) vom 4./5. September 2014 im Schweizerischen Literaturarchiv (SLA), 6. 
                        http://lokalbericht.unibe.ch/hermann_burger/pdf/Resuemees.pdf (accessed 1 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Wieland, M. and Zumsteg, S. (2012). Lokalbericht. Von der Archivfiktion zur Archivedition. 
                        Germanistik in der Schweiz, 
                        9: 91-109.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            This paper introduces a digital humanities project at the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science (Max-Planck-Institut für Wissenschaftsgeschichte, MPIWG) that aims to unlock the treasure chest of local knowledge written in the genre of Chinese local gazetteers for computer assisted analyses. 
            In the past two decades, a great amount of historical documents have been digitized and put on the Web to enable easy access for scholars around the globe. In parallel, the amount of searchable full-text versions of historical texts has increased, which opens the possibility of text mining the contents for large scaled analyses. Many works in this direction have been proposed and got recognition, while they are also criticized for drawing conclusions from seemingly imprecise results due to the restriction that their algorithms have no knowledge about the meanings of the different pieces in a text (Jockers, 2013; Google Ngram Viewer; Chen et al., 2007).
            An alternative approach is thus to first “teach” computers what each pieces of a text means before asking computers to run automatic analyses. Such “teaching” is done by tagging, or called markup. Many digital humanities projects have been using TEI, a standard for text encoding based on XML, to tag their research materials (TEI; Flanders).
            In the Local Gazetteers Project, since the genre organizes knowledge in a very structural way, we are also using tagging to teach computers the meanings of texts in order to turn them into data tables to enable computer assisted analyses including GIS mapping. However, since the amount of texts is huge, we also propose a research data repository for scholars to collaborate in this project and to aggregate their results. 
        
        What are the Chinese Local Gazetteers?
            The Chinese local gazetteers is a genre of texts that has been produced in China consistently from the 10
                th century on to even today. Most of them are compiled by local officials as a major means to collect and aggregate historical, social, and geographical knowledge of an administrative region for governing purposes. There are at least 8,000 titles of pre-1949 local gazetteers still extant today. They cover almost every well-populated region in historical China. 
            
            Despite being compiled by different officials for different regions, the local gazetteers have developed a pretty consistent structure of “describing” local knowledge. Most gazetteers contain the following chapters: history, geography, local government, infrastructure (buildings, schools, temples, bridges), local products (grains, plants, animals, drugs, commodities), people (local officials and celebrities), and literature. The vast number, the longue durée, the width in geographical coverage, together with the extensive and consistent selection of topics have made the local gazetteers major sources for knowledge about regions for scholars from later periods. To date, several digitization projects on the local gazetteers have been conducted by either commercial vendors or public institutions, and thousands of titles have been made available in searchable full texts for scholarly access. 
                
                     To name just a few of such digital local gazetteers project, there is first the 
                        Chinese Local Gazetteers Database (Zhongguo Fangzhii Ku) by a commercial vendor Erudition, second open access projects such as CTEXT.org with OCR-ed full texts of the gazetteers, and third national projects in China such as the Electronic Local Gazetteers by the Beijing National Library. 
                    
                
            
        
                   
        The Project’s Goal
            Local gazetteers are well studied, but the vast amount of information contained within also makes scholars struggled to study them analytically. We noticed that the local gazetteers often organize knowledge by listing the items: list of temples, lists of flora and fauna, lists of local officials, etc. (See Figure 1 for an example.) This characteristic makes the local gazetteers a database by nature. 
            The goal of this project is to transform this genre into a scholarly enhanced database in order to enable new forms of digital historical analyses. By turning texts (of lists of things) into data (tables), it will be much easier to aggregate the rich knowledge written in all the extant local gazetteers to compile a database for historical China on local knowledge across geographical regions and time periods. Research-oriented queries, visualization of query results, and further large scaled analyses will then be more easily realized with such a database. 
            
                
                Figure 1 Two pages from the chapter of “local products” from Fujian tongzhi (Qing, 1737). The pages list items according to categories. The bigger fonts represent the names of the items, while the smaller fonts are descriptions of the items. (Image source: 
                    http://ctext.org/library.pl?if=en&file=50305&page=80.)
                
            
        
        
        Our approach
            We have identified and developed a set of digital tools to help this process. They are: (1) an 
                extraction interface that helps historians to tag and to transform digital texts and their built-in structures into 
                data tables; (2) a 
                research data repository where historians can 
                share and publish their data collected via the extraction interface; (3) a set of 
                digital analytical, visualization, and analysis tools that can be applied on the collected data for posing research questions. 
            
          
          I. An extraction interface for transforming digital texts into data            
            Due to the well-formatted organization of the local gazetteers, some scholars have tried to write computer programs to parse the digital texts in order to collect data for their own research (Mitchell, 2015; Chang, 2015). However, due to the fact that each of the local gazetteers has slightly different formats, it is difficult to write generic computer programs that can work on all the gazetteers. The China Biographical Database project (CBDB) tackled this problem by building an interactive user interface that allows scholars to describe observable writing patterns of the text in regular expressions (Wikipedia, 2015) – The Smart Regex Tool. The compiled regular expressions can be saved, run against other texts, and modified to fit slightly different writing patterns. CBDB used this interface and efficiently collected 250,000 records on local officials from 290 local gazetteers using only 420 man-hours (Pang et al., 2014).
            We inherited this interface from CBDB and further improved it so that scholars can define different tag sets and regular expressions to capture information relevant to topics they are interested in. Figure 2 to Figure 6 are the step-by-step screenshots of how we use this interface to tag a text on local product and to export the result into a table. The resulting table contains not only the names, categories, descriptions, alternative names, and usages of the products, but also the source gazetteer, the chapter name, and page number as well as geographical coordinates for mapping purpose.
            
                
                Figure 2 A sample digital texts for “local products” for Figure 1. The categories are circled in blue color, while the names of products are circled in pink. 
            
            
                
                Figure 3 Step 1 of turning texts into data: Break the text into records (rows) via the help of the Smart Regex tool. 
            
            
                
                Figure 4 Step 2: Adding shared categorical information to each row.
            
            
                
                Figure 5 Step 3: Tag further information that you want to capture.
            
            
                
                Figure 6 Step 4: Export the tagging result as a table.
            
          
          
          II. Compiling a global database from local records: A research data repository
            Our extraction interface provides a semi-automatic way of transforming texts into data tables. Nevertheless, compiling a global database through this interface will still take a lot of time. We envision it to be a collaborative work among scholars with different research interests and specialties, and we eagerly need to be a way to give credits to scholars who contribute the data in the academic world. We found that the philosophy behind the open source software Dataverse, developed by Institute for Quantitative Social Sciences at Harvard University with the philosophy of “dedicated to sharing, archiving, and citing research data” (IQSS, 2015), matches our needs and will allow our project to meet the open access policy of the Max Planck Society and the “Berlin declaration”.
                
                     Please see the declaration at http://openaccess.mpg.de/Berliner-Erklaerung.
                
            
            After a text is tagged in our extraction interface, a user can publish the data to LGDataverse, a Dataverse instance we set up for this project. A citation link to the data along with the contributors will be shown on the LGDataverse page, urging any scholar who wishes to use the data to cite it in their publications (Figure 7).
            We are still working on a way to aggregate the produced tables into one database in order to enable joint queries on records drawn from different gazetteers. 
            
                
                Figure 7 A screenshot of LGDataverse.
            
          
          
          III. Computer assisted analyses on large scales
            By transforming texts into data tables with predefined shared schema, it enables computers to easily process and analyze the data on large scales with better accuracy. We envision there can be multiple tools connected to our data, and scholars can choose which tools to use based on their research needs. 
            At the moment we are using the open source software PLATIN GeoBrowser (http://platin.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/) to create geospatial visualization for our data with one click away. PLATIN doesn’t just display the geospatial distribution of the data on a map but also provides an animated timeline and user-defined pie charts, which we found very helpful for historians for preliminary analysis (Figure 8 and Figure 9). 
            
                
                Figure 8 LGMap service (based on PLATIN) with Pie Chart function for analyzing categorical data.
            
            
                
                Figure 9 LGMap service with Timeline function showing temporal distribution of two datasets.
            
        
        
        
        Concluding Remarks
            This is an ongoing project. As a history of science study, we are collecting data from the chapter of local products in order to understand how local identities were constructed through the compilation of local products. In 2016, MPIWG will invite visiting scholars to use our digital tools to collect and analyze data of other topics from local gazetteers. This will also be a chance to further examine the model we proposed: from data collection from digital texts, aggregation of data in a research data repository, to digital tools for analysis and visualization. 
        
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Chang, S. (2015). Data Extraction and Analysis: The Taxonomy of Fauna and Flora of Taiwan Local Gazetteers in the Qing Dynasty. Unpublished paper presentation at: 
                        Chinese Local Gazetteers workshop: Historical Methods and Computerized Data Collection and Analysis, Berlin, Germany.
                    
                    Chen, S.-P., Hsiang, J., Tu, H.-C. and Wu, M.-C. (2007). On Building a Full-Text Digital Library of Historical Documents. In Goh, D., Cao, T., Sølvberg, I. and Rasmussen, E. (eds.) 
                        Asian Digital Libraries. Looking Back 10 Years and Forging New Frontiers. Berlin: Springer, pp. 49-60.
                    
                    Flanders, J. (n.d.). Women Writers Project. Retrieved November 1, 2015, from http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/
                    Google Ngram Viewer. (n.d.). Retrieved November 1, 2015, from https://books.google.com/ngrams/
                    Institute for Quantitative Social Science (IQSS), Harvard University. 
                        Dataverse Project [Online]. Available at: http://dataverse.org/ (Accessed: November 1, 2015).
                    
                    Jockers, M. L. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital methods and literary history. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    Mitchell, A. (2015). Encoding China’s Past: Computational Methods of Historical Analysis. In Unpublished paper presentation 
                        Chinese Local Gazetteers workshop: Historical Methods and Computerized Data Collection and Analysis, Berlin, Germany. 
                    
                    Pang, W.H., Cheng, H. and Chen, S.-P. (2014). From Text to Data: Extracting Posting Data from Chinese Local Gazetteers. In 
                        the 5th
                         International Conference of Digital Archives and Digital Humanities: Crossover and Transformation, Taipei: National Taiwan University, pp. 93-116. 
                    
                    TEI: Text Encoding Initiative [Online]. Available at: http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml (accessed: November 1, 2015).
                    Wikipedia. 
                        Regular expression [Online]. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression (accessed: November 1, 2015). 
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                The development of applications in the field of Digital Humanities (DH) does not adequately take into account domain modelling, software design principles and software engineering methodologies (Bozzi, 2013; D'Iorio, 2015; McCarty, 2008; Terras and Crane, 2010). In fact, many systems developed in the context of DH-related projects have not been conceived to be modular, extensible, and scalable: they only tend to solve specific problems such as data-driven and project-oriented tools (Boschetti and Del Grosso, 2015). In addition, most projects focus on the requirements of humanists (as end users), but leave out the needs of software developers.
                This research was motivated by a number of issues emerged from the projects we worked on 
                     (Abrate et al., 2014a; Albanesi et al., 2015; Bellandi et al., 2014; Bozzi, 2015; Del Grosso, 2013; Ruimy et al., 2012) and it fits into an ongoing discussion about textual modelling and research infrastructures (Moulin et al., 2011; Pierazzo, 2015; Schmidt, 2014). In particular, this work aims at providing methodological guidelines for the definition of the core entities of a digital scholarly environment. We chose to adopt an object-oriented approach since it can bring benefits in the definition of efficient and effective digital tools (Boschetti et al., 2014; Del Grosso and Nahli, 2014). To give an analogy, the environment we propose can help developers and scholars as CMS (e.g. Wordpress) can help Web designers and publishers.
                
                The development of the environment follows three criteria: i) adopting an agile process (Ashmore and Runyan, 2014) to define the nature and behavior of the environment through both functional (e.g. user stories) and non-functional requirements (e.g. data model, system architecture) (Cohn, 2004; Collins-Cope et al., 2005); ii) providing well-defined Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) among components (Grill et al., 2012; Tulach, 2008); iii) applying analysis, architectural and design patterns for the sake of abstraction, generalization and flexibility (Ackerman and Gonzalez, 2011; Buschmann et al., 2007; Gamma et al., 1995).
                Following the agile methodology, we are developing a modular environment by starting from the design and implementation of a 
                    microkernel (Buschmann et al., 1996) as the manager of the different components. In addition, the microkernel provides all the operations needed to manipulate the domain basic entities which are described in the section “Domain entities and design patterns”.
                
                
                    Related works
                    Digital humanists have access to several tools for literary studies. TextGrid, for example, provides integrated tools for analyzing texts and gives computer support for digital editing purposes (Hedges et al., 2013). The NINES project offers an environment to support scholars in the creation of long-term digital research materials. It includes three main tools: Collex (Nowviskie, 2007), Juxta, and Ivanhoe. Annotation Studio is a collaborative system to annotate texts and add links to multimedia objects (Paradis et al., 2013). The CULTURA project aims at developing a “corpus agnostic research environment” providing customizable services for a wide range of users (Steiner et al., 2014). The development of an online workspace which helps scholars in the production of critical editions is the main objective of the Workspace for Collaborative Editing framework (Houghton et al., 2014). It uses existing standards and open-source solutions to create an architecture of reusable components. Other platforms worth mentioning are TUSTEP/TXSTEP (Ott, 2000; Ott and Ott, 2014), WebLicht (Hinrichs et al., 2010), Perseids (Almas and Beaulieu, 2013), Muruca/Pundit (Grassi et al., 2013), Textual Communities (Bordalejo and Robinson, 2015), SAWS (Jordanous et al., 2012), Voyant Tools (Sinclair and Rockwell, 2012), Transcribe Bentham (Causer and Terras, 2014) and Alcide (Moretti et al., 2014). However, the aforementioned initiatives allow digital scholars to meet specific needs, but none of them seems to provide, simultaneously, all the following characteristics: i) reusability and extensibility, ii) ease of use and configuration, iii) continuous availability of the services and development over time, iv) a well-grounded software data model.
                
            
            
                Domain entities and design patterns
                One of the main challenges of the DH community is to provide suitable software models and tools (Ciotti, 2014). To model the literary domain and the relative user requirements, we chose to follow the engineering principles of 
                    object-oriented analysis and design (Ackerman and Gonzalez, 2011). The digital representation of a textual resource is a challenge as it involves several theoretical and epistemological issues in semiotics, paleography, philology, linguistics, engineering, and computer science (McCarty, 2005; Meister, 2012; Moretti, 2013; Robinson, 2013; Sahle, 2013).
                
                In this work, we define each textual element by means of four properties: i) the 
                    version allows to select a specific textual element among those available in its history of changes; ii) the 
                    granularity represents a level of a hierarchical structure (e.g. a page composed of lines); iii) the 
                    position provides the location of a textual element within the hierarchical representation (e.g. the second page of a book); iv) the 
                    layer indicates the set of homogeneous information the textual element belongs to (e.g. morphological layer). As pointed outby (Buzzetti, 2002; McGann, 2004; Pierazzo, 2015), the information conveyed by a textual resource is logically organized through multiple layers (also called 
                    dimensions) of information.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 1: Class diagram of the domain entities
                    On these four properties we have designed and implemented a set of core entities as the fundamental data types shared among all the components of the environment (Fig. 1)
                     The ongoing implementation of the environment is available at: https://github.com/literarycomputinglab. The 
                    Source class is in charge of managing the low-level data: it is composed of a 
                    Payload representing the information conveyed by the textual resource and a
                    SourceType which indicates the nature of the Source (e.g. text, image, audio, etc.). Payload objects (as used in networking) have the only purpose of encapsulating the information. The 
                    Locus and the 
                    P
                    lace
                    OfInterest (POI) classes identify, through a 
                    composition pattern, specific data fragments of the source content, and they are used to establish the boundaries of an 
                    Annotation. A chunk of text, for example, can be addressed to by a locus having a POI (of type Sequence of Interest) representing its start and end coordinates. Similarly, a region of an image can be identified by a locus having a POI (of type Region of Interest) composed of a sequence of coordinates. The Locus and POI provide a stand-off text annotation technique able to tackle, for example, the overlapping hierarchies problem, which cannot be handled easily with inline markup techniques (Schmidt, 2010). As a matter of fact, it is possible, simultaneously, to manipulate a resource on the basis of its documental and textual structure (Renear et al., 1996; Robinson, 2013) (see the example in the following section). However, since stand-off models are affected by the issue of the indexing updating, a dedicated component must be in charge of automatically maintaining the coherence of the annotations each time the underlying text is edited.
                
                An Annotation represents an information associated to a locus and is defined by an 
                    AnnotationType (e.g. a token, a lemma, a named entity, etc.). Since the hierarchical structure of the source may evolve over time, the changes to the relative tree must be managed. For example, a tree structure having tokens as leaves could need to be updated with a finer-grained layer of characters (e.g. to assign annotations to specific letters). In this case, the tokens should become intermediate nodes and the characters would become the leaf nodes. Typically, this kind of editing is unpredictable and it often implies heavy adaptations if the software is not flexible enough to manage changes in the underlying text representation schema. Consequently, we decided to exploit the flexibility of the Object Oriented model by adopting the Role Design Pattern (Fowler, 1997) to switch between leaf and intermediate nodes dynamically. This pattern has been implemented by the 
                    AnnotationRole, 
                    AnnotationRoleElement and 
                    AnnotationRoleStructure classes. Moreover, an annotation is a source in itself (see the inheritance relationship between the Annotation and the Source classes in Fig. 1) and, thus, it can be annotated recursively.
                
            
            
                An Example
                We here introduce an example showing a representation of a snippet of text with annotations. The chosen text is an excerpt of a letter, written in Latin, belonging to the epistolary corpus of the Clavius on the Web project
                     Clavius on the Web is a project funded by Registro.it and partecipated by the Institute of Informatics and Telematics (IIT-CNR), the Institute of Computational Linguistics “A. Zampolli” (ILC-CNR), and the Historical Archives of the Pontifical Gregorian University (APUG). Website: http://claviusontheweb.it/ (Abrate et al., 2014b). Fig. 2 shows a typical way of encoding sentences and lines with a markup language as TEI (Burnard, 2014): the resulting XML hierarchical structure has been broken by the addition of the line anchors () mixing up the textual and documental structure of the text. Indeed, to preserve the integrity of the word “Dinostrati” (spanning across lines 4 and 5), it is necessary to encapsulate it with the element .
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2: A standard way of encoding a text with TEI-XML
                    
                    
                        
                        Fig. 3: Multi-layered stand-off annotation of text
                    The model we propose solves this problem with the stand-off annotations: as shown in Fig. 3 the document (made of lines) and the textual structure (made of sentences and words) are logically separated. Lines, sentences and words do not overlap and they are structured in separate hierarchies.
                
            
            
                Next Steps
                We plan, in future works, to release a first version of a web environment, called 
                    Omega, built around the core entities that we here described. The environment will allow to load, index, annotate, and query a textual collection. Furthermore, we’ll carry on the development of modules for text analysis and textual scholarship with the related APIs.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Abrate, M., 
                        Del 
                        Grosso, A. M., Giovannetti, E., 
                        Lo 
                        Duca, A., Luzzi, D., Mancini, L., Marchetti, A., Pedretti, I. and Piccini, S. (2014a). Sharing Cultural Heritage: the Clavius on the Web Project. In Calzolari, N., Choukri, K., Declerck, T., Loftsson, H., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Moreno, A., Odijk, J. and Piperidis, S. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Reykjavik. European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 627–34.
                    
                    
                        Abrate, M., 
                        Del 
                        Grosso,
                         
                        A. M., Giovannetti, E., 
                        Lo 
                        Duca, A., Marchetti, A., Mancini, L., Pedretti, I. and Piccini, S. (2014b). Il Progetto Clavius on the Web: tecnologie linguistico-semantiche al servizio del patrimonio documentale e degli archivi storici. In Rossi, F. and Tomasi, F. (eds), 
                        Book of Abstracts of 3
                        o
                         AIUCD Conference, Bologna.
                    
                    
                        Ackerman, L. and Gonzalez, C. (2011). 
                        Patterns-Based Engineering: Successfully Delivering Solutions Via Patterns. Addison-Wesley.
                    
                    
                        Albanesi, D., Bellandi, A., Benotto, G., 
                        Di 
                        Segni, G. and Giovannetti, E. (2015). When Translation Requires Interpretation: Collaborative Computer–Assisted Translation of Ancient Texts. 
                        LaTeCH 2015: 84–88.
                    
                    
                        Almas, B. and Beaulieu, M.-C. (2013). Developing a New Integrated Editing Platform for Source Documents in Classics. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        28(4): 493–503 doi:10.1093/llc/fqt046.
                    
                    
                        Ashmore, S. and Runyan, K. (2014). 
                        Introduction to Agile Methods. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley Professional, Pearson Education.
                    
                    
                        Bellandi, A., Albanesi, D., Bellusci, A., Bozzi, A. and Giovannetti, E. (2014). The Talmud System: a Collaborative web Application for the Translation of the Babylonian Talmud Into Italian. 
                        The First Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics CLiC-It 2014, pp. 53–57.
                    
                    
                        Bordalejo, B. and Robinson, P. (2015). A new system for collaborative online creation of Scholarly Editions in digital form. 
                        1st Dixit Convension on Technology, Software, Standards for the Digital Scholarly Edition Workshop. The Hague.
                    
                    
                        Boschetti, F. and 
                        Del 
                        Grosso, A. M. (2015). TeiCoPhiLib: A Library of Components for the Domain of Collaborative Philology. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(8). doi:10.4000/jtei.1285. http://jtei.revues.org/1285 (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Boschetti, F., 
                        Del 
                        Grosso, A. M., Khan, A. F., Lamé, M. and Nahli, O. (2014). A top-down approach to the design of components for the philological domain. 
                        Book of Abstract of Digital Humanities Conference (DH), Lausanne, Switzerland. Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations, pp. 109–11.
                    
                    
                        Bozzi, A. (2013). G2A: A Web application to study, annotate and scholarly edit ancient texts and their aligned translations. (Ed.) ERC Ideas 249431 
                        Studia Graeco-Arabica, 
                        3: 159–71.
                    
                    
                        Bozzi, A. (2015). Greek into Arabic, a research Infrascructure based on computational modules to annotate and query historical and philosophical digital texts. Part I: Methodological aspects. In Bozzi, A. (ed), 
                        Digital Texts, Translations, Lexicons in a Multi-Modular Web Application: Methods and Samples. Firenze: Leo S. Olschki editore, pp. 27–42.
                    
                    
                        Burnard, L. (2014). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.9.1. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/index.xml (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Buschmann, F., Henney, K. and Schmidt, D. C. (2007). 
                        Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture, On Patterns and Pattern Languages. (Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture). Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons.
                    
                    
                        Buschmann, F., Meunier, R., Rohnert, H., Sommerlad, P. and Stal, M. (1996). Pattern-oriented Software Architecture - A System of Patterns. J. Wiley and Sons Ltd., pp. 171–92.
                    
                    
                        Buzzetti, D. (2002). Digital Representation and the Text Model. 
                        New Literary History, 
                        33(1): 61–88.
                    
                    
                        Causer, T. and Terras, M. (2014). “Many hands make light work. Many hands together make merry work”: Transcribe Bentham and crowdsourcing manuscript collections.
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F. (2014). Digital Literary and Cultural Studies: State of the Art and Perspectives. 
                        Between, 
                        4(8). doi:10.13125/2039-6597/1392. http://dx.doi.org/10.13125/2039-6597/1392 (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Cohn, M. (2004). 
                        User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development. Redwood City, CA, USA: Addison Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.
                    
                    
                        Collins-Cope, M., Rosenberg, D. and Stephens, M. (2005). 
                        Agile Development with ICONIX Process: People, Process, and Pragmatism. Berkely, CA, USA: Apress.
                    
                    
                        Fowler, M. (1997). Dealing with roles. 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Pattern Languages of Programs, vol. 97, pp. 13–37.
                    
                    
                        Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R. and Vlissides, J. (1995). 
                        Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.
                    
                    
                        Grassi, M., Morbidoni, C., Nucci, M., Fonda, S. and Piazza, F. (2013). Pundit: augmenting web contents with semantics. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        28(4): 640–59.
                    
                    
                        Grill, T., Polacek, O. and Tscheligi, M. (October 29-312012). Methods Towards API Usability: A Structural Analysis of Usability Problem Categories. 
                        Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Human-Centered Software Engineering, Toulouse, France. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 164–80. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-34347-6_10.
                    
                    
                        Del 
                        Grosso, A. M. (2013). Indexing techniques and variant readings management. (Ed.) D'Ancona, C. 
                        Studia Graeco-Arabica, 
                        3: 209–30.
                    
                    
                        Del 
                        Grosso, A. M. and Nahli, O. (2014). Towards a flexible open-source software library for multi-layered scholarly textual studies: An Arabic case study dealing with semi-automatic language processing. 
                        Proceedings of 3rd IEEE International Colloquium, Information Science and Technology (CIST), Tetouan, Marocco. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE, pp. 285–90. doi:10.1109/CIST.2014.7016633.
                    
                    
                        Hedges, M., Neuroth, H., Smith, K. M., Blanke, T., Romary, L., Küster, M. and Illingworth, M. (2013). TextGrid, TEXTvre, and DARIAH: Sustainability of Infrastructures for Textual Scholarship. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(5). doi:10.4000/jtei.774 (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Hinrichs, E., Hinrichs, M. and Zastrow, T. (2010). WebLicht: Web-based LRT services for German. 
                        Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 25–29.
                    
                    
                        Houghton, H., Sievers, M. and Smith, Catherine (2014). The Workspace for Collaborative Editing. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014. Laussanne: Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations, pp. 204–05.
                    
                    
                        D'
                        Iorio, P.  (2015). On the scholarly use of the Internet, a conceptual model. In Bozzi, A. (ed), 
                        Digital Texts, Translations, Lexicons in a Multi-Modular Web Application: Methods and Samples. Firenze: Leo S. Olschki editore, pp. 1–25.
                    
                    
                        Jordanous, A., Lawrence, K. F., Hedges, M. and Tupman, C. (June 13-152012). Exploring Manuscripts: Sharing Ancient Wisdoms Across the Semantic Web. 
                        Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics (WIMS), Craiova, Romania. New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 44:1–44:12. doi:10.1145/2254129.2254184.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2005). 
                        Humanities Computing. Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2008). Signs of times present and future. 
                        Human Discussion Group, 
                        22(218).
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. (2004). Marking Texts of Many Dimensions. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. (Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture). Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp. 198–217.
                    
                    
                        Meister, J. C. (2012). DH is us or on the unbearable lightness of a shared methodology. 
                        Historical Social Research, 
                        37(3): 77–85.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). 
                        Distant Reading. Verso Books.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, G., Tonelli, S., Menini, S. and Sprugnoli, R. (2014). ALCIDE: An online platform for the Analysis of Language and Content In a Digital Environment. 
                        Proceedings of the First Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics (CLIC-2014). Pisa, Italy.
                    
                    
                        Moulin, C., Nyhan, J., Ciula, A., Kelleher, M., Mittler, E., Tadić, M., Ågren, M., Bozzi, A. and Kuutma, K. (2011). 
                        Research Infrastructures in the Digital Humanities. http://www.esf.org/hosting-experts/scientific-review-groups/humanities-hum/strategic-activities/research-infrastructures-in-the-humanities.html.
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2007). Collex: Facets, Folksonomy, and Fashioning the Remixable web. 
                        Book of Abstract of Digital Humanities Conference (DH), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations.
                    
                    
                        Ott, W. (2000). Strategies and tools for textual scholarship: the Tübingen system of text processing programs (TUSTEP). 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        15(1): 93–108. doi:10.1093/llc/15.1.93. http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/15/1/93.abstract.
                    
                    
                        Ott, W. and Ott, T. (2014). Critical Editing with TXSTEP. In Terras, M. (ed), 
                        Book of Abstracts of the Digital Humanities Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland. Alliance of Digital Humanities Organisations, pp. 509–13.
                    
                    
                        Paradis, J., Fendt, K., Kelley, W., Folsom, J., Pankow, J., Graham, E. and Subbaraj, L. (2013). Annotation Studio: Bringing a Time-Honored Learning Practice into the Digital Age. 
                        Whitepaper. http://cmsw.mit.edu/annotation-studio-whitepaper/ (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing : Theories, Models and Methods. Farnham Surrey: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Renear, A. H., Mylonas, E. and Durand, D. (1996). Refining our notion of what text really is: The problem of overlapping hierarchies. (Ed.) Hockey, S. M. 
                        Research in Humanities Computing, 
                        4: 263–80.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2013). Towards a theory of digital editions. (Ed.) Mierlo, W. V. and Fachard, A. 
                        Variants, (10): 105–31.
                    
                    
                        Ruimy, N., Piccini, S. and Giovannetti, E. (2012). Defining and Structuring Saussure’s Terminology. In Fjeld, R. V. and Torjusen, J. M. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of 15th EURALEX International Congress. Oslo, Norway, Department of Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies, University of Oslo, Reprosentralen: UiO press, pp. 828–33.
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P. (2013). 
                        Digitale Editionsformen: Teil 3: Textbegriffe Und Recodierung; Zum Umgang Mit Der Überlieferung Unter Den Bedingungen Des Medienwandels. Vol. 3. BoD–Books on Demand.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2010). The inadequacy of embedded markup for cultural heritage texts. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        25(3): 337–56. doi:10.1093/llc/fqq007.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2014). Towards an Interoperable Digital Scholarly Edition. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(7). doi:10.4000/jtei.979.
                    
                    
                        Sinclair, S. and Rockwell, G. (2012). the Voyant Tools Team (web application) 
                        Voyant Tools. http://voyant-tools.org (accessed 3 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Steiner, C., Agosti, M., Sweetnam, M., Hillemann, E.-C., Orio, N., Ponchia, C., Hampson, C., et al. (2014). Evaluating a digital humanities research environment: the CULTURA approach. 
                        International Journal on Digital Libraries, 
                        15(1): 53–70. doi:10.1007/s00799-014-0127-x.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. and Crane, G. (eds). (2010). 
                        Changing the Center of Gravity: Transforming Classical Studies through Cyberinfrastructure. Piscataway: Gorgias Press.
                    
                    
                        Tulach, J. (2008). 
                        Practical API Design: Confessions of a Java Framework Architect. 1st ed. Berkely, CA, USA: Apress.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Le portail d'édition numérique de sources, 
                
                    http://xml-portal.symogih.org/
                
                , que nous présentons aux DH2016 au travers de deux projets d’édition numérique n'est pas un outil de visualisation d'images ou de textes comme pourraient l'être des systèmes de type Omeka ou Drupal. Il s’agit de mettre à disposition de manière dynamique à la fois le texte d'une source mais aussi les données d’une base relationnelle qui constituent son apparat critique. Il faut concevoir ce portail d'édition davantage comme une brique de développement du projet symogih.org. 
            
            Le 
                
                    projet symogih.org
                 (Système Modulaire de Gestion de l'Information Historique) a développé un modèle générique de stockage des données historiques permettant leur interopérabilité et leur publication [
                http://symogih.org/, tous les sites web ont été consultés le 30 octobre 2015]. À partir de ce modèle a été mis en place un système d'information collaboratif pour la recherche en histoire qui est aujourd'hui utilisé par 15 projets de recherche et environ 50 utilisateurs individuels. La plateforme du projet symogih.org offre un outillage numérique accessible et pérenne pour le stockage et la publication de données extraites de l'étude de documents archivistiques et bibliographiques. Il est possible d'intégrer des données de nature variée qui décrivent l'activité humaine, sociale, économique ou intellectuelle rassemblant, autour d'événements datés et sourcés, des acteurs individuels ou collectifs, des concepts ou des objets géographiques. Le système autorise également l'
                
                    articulation de ces données avec des textes codés en XML
                 – traités selon les recommandations de la Text Encoding Initiative [
                
                    https://groupes.renater.fr/wiki/symogih/symogih_manuel/edition_de_textes_en_xml-tei
                ] – ou encore la mise en relation avec des images et leurs métadonnées. La réalisation d'un 
                
                    système d'information géographique
                 (SIG) [
                http://geo-larhra.org/] joue un rôle essentiel dans ce modèle afin d'associer à ces différents objets leur “empreinte spatiale” et ainsi permettre des analyses spatiales diachroniques.
            
            L'un des derniers développements du projet symogih.org a été la mise en ligne d'un 
                
                    portail de publication des éditions numériques
                 élaborées au sein du LARHRA. Si symogih.org permettait aux chercheurs de mettre à disposition les données structurées issues de leur travail analytique, le portail d'édition rend désormais possible la contextualisation d'une source écrite grâce à ces mêmes données. Les textes encodés en XML/TEI sont stockés sur un serveur eXist-db à partir duquel sont développés différents services (visualisations du texte et des données, géolocalisation, possibilité d'export, moteur de recherche). Le point de jonction entre le texte numérique et la base de données se situe à l'intérieur même des balises TEI où sont intégrés les identifiants du système d'information qui font le lien avec les données structurées. Des fonctionnalités de visualisation peuvent être développées à partir des textes encodés stockés dans une base de données native XML, offrant davantage d'interactivité avec les données et augmentant l'expérience de lecture. De plus, grâce aux technologies web, via les langages XQuery + HTML/Javascript, le portail d'édition numérique permet de collecter des données au-delà du référentiel commun de symogih.org directement à partir du web de données (DBpedia, IdRef, ...). 
            
            À ce jour, la partie publique du portail recueille deux projets, l'un d'édition de sources (les 
                Mémoires de Léonard Michon), l'autre d'annotation sémantique et de contextualisation de documents concernant l'histoire des savoirs scientifiques à l'époque moderne (Society religion science) [
                
                    http://xml-portal.symogih.org/web-publications.html
                ]. Un troisième projet d'édition de documents est en cours d'élaboration et verra bientôt le jour : l'édition des Actes des synodes des églises réformées de Bourgogne.
            
            L'édition numérique des 
                Mémoires de Léonard Michon fait partie d'une recherche doctorale [Letricot, Rosemonde. 
                Édition critique numérique des Mémoires
                 de Léonard Michon (1715-1746). Sous la direction de Hours, Bernard. Université Jean Moulin Lyon 3, LARHRA UMR5190] qui vise à mettre à disposition du public et de la communauté scientifique l'édition critique du Journal historique d'un notable lyonnais relatant la vie des élites bourgeoises de la ville de Lyon de la première moitié du XVIIIe siècle. Le travail d'encodage XML/TEI s'est principalement centré sur l'identification des segments d'information et des entités nommées (personnes, institutions, lieux, etc.) ce qui permettra de recourir à des analyses quantitatives sur les pratiques d'écriture (fréquence, récurrence de noms, etc.) et sur la nature des informations données dans l'ouvrage, que nous pourrons ensuite traduire en parcours de lecture pour le public (parcours thématique, biographique, chronologique, etc.).
            
            Quant aux Actes des synodes des églises réformées, ils représentent une source essentielle pour la connaissance du protestantisme français sous l’Ancien Régime. Ces assemblées réunissent régulièrement des représentants de toutes les églises d’une province pour traiter des affaires qui leur sont communes : questions financières, disciplinaires, doctrinales, etc. Si les sources sur le protestantisme français font l’objet d’une édition chez Droz dans une sous-série de la collection “Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance” intitulée “Archives des Églises réformées de France”, il n’y avait pas de projet en Humanités numériques sur le sujet [Une édition “papier” des Actes des Synodes Provinciaux des Églises Réformées est en cours chez Droz, le premier volume édité par Didier Boisson a été publié en 2012 et concerne l’Anjou-Touraine-Maine (1594-1683). Le second volume proposera les actes des églises de Bourgogne et sera édité par Yves Krumenacker]. Ce sera bientôt le cas avec l'édition sur le portail XML du projet symogih.org des Actes des synodes des églises réformées de Bourgogne au XVIIe siècle, réalisée sous la direction de Yves Krumenacker de l'Université Jean Moulin Lyon 3.
            Ces deux projets d'édition ne se limitent pas à la seule publication de sources mais proposent une édition enrichie par des renseignements récoltés dans des sources complémentaires, saisis dans la base collaborative du projet symogih.org et utilisés non seulement pour préciser l'un ou l'autre renseignement fourni par le texte, selon la démarche d'annotation classique d’une édition papier, mais en proposant également une explication contextuelle dynamique – que permet l'édition numérique – en croisant toute sorte de données et tout en conservant leur traçabilité, par l'enregistrement des sources et de la bibliographie pour chaque information. Il est ainsi possible de reconstituer, par exemple, la généalogie et la carrière d’un pasteur, ou sa bibliographie [L’utilisation d’une base de données collaborative et cumulative permettant de multiplier les sources : journal de pasteur (Bernus, Auguste (1888). Le ministre Antoine de Chandieu d'après son journal autographe inédit 1534-1591. 
                Bulletin historique et littéraire publié par la Société de l'histoire du protestantisme français, Tome XXXVII), sources régionales (Papillon, Philibert (1742). 
                Bibliothèque des auteurs de Bourgogne. Dijon: Philippe Marteret), 
                Registres de la Compagnie des pasteurs de Genève, édités chez Droz].
            
            Les lieux mentionnés dans les écrits et dans la documentation annexe, sont renseignés et géolocalisés dans le 
                
                    gazeteer du projet symogih.org
                . À partir des données spatiales encodées dans le texte XML, on pourra ainsi réaliser des cartes interactives illustrant différents aspects du codage : villes organisatrices des synodes, lieux d'origine des pasteurs, carte des églises absentes, parcours professionnels des pasteurs. Des fonctions interactives permettront de rebondir de la carte vers les textes ou les informations respectives.
            
            Nous soulignerons lors de la présentation l'apport de la visualisation dynamique des documents pour les deux éditions, chacune avec ces spécificités. En particulier, l'intégration directe des données de la recherche permet une plus grande interactivité : l’apparat critique peut être à tout moment complété au fil des découvertes des chercheurs par la mobilisation simultanée de données provenant d'un silo d'information commun. De plus, les interfaces de visualisation spatiale, ou les graphes mettant en évidence les relations entre les textes et leurs contenus, facilitent l'accès aux documents édités. Les nombreuses possibilités d'enrichissement et d'exploitation des textes amènent les chercheurs en histoire, mais aussi le public, à une découverte sous d'autres angles et avec de nouvelles perspectives du contenu des textes édités. 
            Nous souhaitons montrer l’apport pour la recherche historique d’un portail d'édition numérique de sources, en insistant sur les bénéfices d'une utilisation croisée de textes encodés en XML/TEI et d'une base de données collaborative. Les projets présentés permettent de retracer le processus de traitement de l'information, de la source à son édition numérique dynamique. 
        
    


        
            
                Context
                The 
                    Baedeker Corpus, a digital collection of early German travel guides that is currently being developed in the 
                    travel!digital project
                    
                         The project “travel!digital. Exploring 
                            People and 
                            Monuments in Baedeker Guidebooks (1875–1914)” is funded by the platform 
                            Digital Humanities Austria.
                        
                    , brings together a valuable but rarely investigated part of cultural heritage in an up-to-date and sustainable digital form. A combination of source oriented approaches and Semantic Web formats (Meroño-Peñuela et al, 2014) allows for enhanced access to both the TEI-based digital edition and the rich domain-specific knowledge. As complex inter-texts (Wierlacher, 1997; Koshar, 2000) and significant discourse-historical artefacts (Maingueneau, 2014) travel guides represent codified and authorized versions of local culture and history (Pritchard et al, 2005). Reflecting dominant discourses, (re)producing and (re)constructing them, the genre plays a central role in shaping the tourist experience and directing the tourist gaze (Thurlow et al, 2007; Urry, 1990). Giving insight into various readings of history, tradition and culture, the new language resource is meant to foster cross-disciplinary research in cultural representation and identity constructing discourses.
                
                The 
                    Baedeker Corpus comprises 
                    all first editions of German travel guides on non-European countries which were brought out by the Baedeker publishing house before World War I. It contains more than 1.5 million running words and covers various regions, offering a balanced picture of different cultural areas.
                    
                         Palestine and Syria (1875), Lower (1877) and Upper Egypt (1891), North America and Mexico (1893), Asia Minor (1905), the Mediterranean Coastline of Africa (1909), India and Ceylon (1914). 
                     Along with the basic layers of linguistic annotation, controlled vocabularies and content contextualization by 
                    Linked Open Data resources will assist in exploring cultural narratives from the turn of the 19th century.
                
            
            
                bdk:ConceptScheme(s)
                Focusing on 
                    people and 
                    monuments, two essential components of the guidebook genre and of cultural discourse itself, the extensive lexical inventory is represented by means of the 
                    Simple Knowledge Organization System SKOS. Besides personal names, people are addressed in a variety of different forms in the guidebooks. References to classes are frequently used in making generalizations about groups and individuals as well (cf. Schmidt-Brücken, 2015). Each of these generic expressions is represented by a 
                    bdk:Descriptor, which is defined as a subclass of 
                    skos:Concept. Individual terms are encoded as 
                    skosxl:prefLabel(s) and 
                    skosxl:altLabel(s). Variants and translations are designated on term-level by the properties 
                    hasVariant/isVariantOf and 
                    hasTranslation/isTranslationOf. Modelled in this way, the vocabulary identified in the guidebooks forms the basis of the concept scheme. Seven categories indicated by 
                    skos:topConceptOf improve structuring of the 
                    bdk:ConceptSchemeGroups: 
                
                
                    1. Collective terms: 
                    population, tribes, natives;
                    2. ethnic/national communities: 
                    Englishmen, Wedda;
                    3. geographical concepts: 
                    Europeans, Orientals;
                    4. names of languages and scripts, language affiliation: 
                    Arabic, Cyrillic;
                    5. professions, including political, religious, economic roles, and styles of living: 
                    merchants, government officials, priests, peasants, nomads;
                    6. religious communities: 
                    brotherhood, pilgrims; Buddhists, Sikhs; and 
                    7. social classes: 
                    castes, workers. Concepts and labels include both nouns and adjectives, indicating associations among them by means of the property 
                    skos:related. Figure 1 lists definitions of 
                    skos:topConcept(s) and shows selected examples of concepts and labels.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 1: bdk:ConceptSchemeGroups.
                
                The picture is similarly varied for monuments and notable sights. Since assessments and classifications of cultural heritage objects are integral parts of cultural representation, they are included in a separate concept scheme. The 
                    bdk:ConceptSchemeMonuments is organized by 
                    skos:topConcept(s) which indicate topical spheres the objects belong to, ranging from architecture and artworks, to accommodations, landscapes, and breath-taking views.
                
            
            
                Prospects
                By the end of the project, a web application based on the 
                    corpus_shell framework
                    
                         Cf. 
                            https://clarin.oeaw.ac.at/corpus_shell [accessed 2015-12-22].
                        
                     will make the digital texts available along with their facsimiles, exposing them via FCS/SRU protocol
                    
                         Cf. 
                            https://www.clarin.eu/content/federated-content-search-clarin-fcs [accessed 2015-12-22].
                        
                     that is part of the CLARIN infrastructure. This online edition will offer querying capabilities inside of both the text and the linguistic annotation layers. It will provide indexes of word classes, lemmas and the semantic entities defined by the SKOS-vocabularies presented in this abstract. Transforming names of 
                    people/s and 
                    monuments in the texts into links to the LOD cloud
                    
                         LOD datasets: VIAF Virtual International Authority File, GESIS Thesaurus for the Social Sciences, AAT Art & Architecture Thesaurus, UNESCO Thesaurus, DBpedia.
                    , the vocabularies will connect occurrences in the 
                    Baedeker Corpus to other online resources, providing enhanced access to the corpus and additional information via the guidebooks’ main actors. The presented data model aims at supporting fine-grained examinations of semantic components that have a lasting influence on cultural perceptions of “Other” and “Self”. It is expected that semantic technologies do have the potential to reveal much about a discourse that goes far beyond travel literature.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clarin E. (n.d.). Federated Content Search (CLARIN-FCS). 
                        https://www.clarin.eu/content/federated-content-search-clarin-fcs (accessed 22 December 2015).
                    
                    
                        Ďurčo, M. and Mörth, K., et al. (n.d.). corpus-shell. 
                        https://clarin.oeaw.ac.at/corpus_shell (accessed 22 December 2015).
                    
                    
                        Jaworski, A. and Pritchard, A. (eds.) (2005). 
                        Discourse, communication and tourism. Clevedon: Channel View Press.
                    
                    
                        Koshar, R. (2000). 
                        German Travel Cultures. Oxford: Berg.
                    
                    
                        Maingueneau, D. (2014). Diskurs und Äußerungsszene. Zur gattungsspezifischen Kontextualisierung eines Zeitungsartikels zum unternehmerischen Bildungsdiskurs. In Angermuller, J. and Nonhoff, M. et al. (eds.) 
                        Diskursforschung. Ein interdisziplinäres Handbuch (2 Bde.). Bielefeld: transcript Verlag, pp. 433-53.
                    
                    
                        Meroño-Peñuela, A. and Ashkpour, A., et al. (2014). Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey. 
                        Semantic Web, IOS Press, pp. 1-27. 
                        http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/sites/default/files/swj301.pdf (accessed 22 December 2015).
                    
                    
                        Schmidt-Brücken, D. (2015). 
                        Verallgemeinerung im Diskurs. Generische Wissensindizierung in kolonialem Sprachgebrauch. Berlin/München/Boston: Walter de Gruyter GmbH.
                    
                    
                        Stehouwer, H. and Durco, M., et al. (2012). Federated Search: Towards a Common Search Infrastructure. In 
                        Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012). ELRA, pp. 3255–59.
                    
                    
                        Urry, J. (2002 [1990]). 
                        The Tourist Gaze. Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. London: SAGE Publications.
                    
                    
                        Wierlacher, A. (1997). Verfehlte Alterität. Zum Diskurs deutschsprachiger Reiseführer über fremde Speisen. In Teuteberg, H. J. and Neumann, G. et al. (Hrsg.). 
                        Essen und kulturelle Identität. Europäische Perspektiven. Berlin: Akademie Verlag GmbH, pp. 498-509.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Initiated in 2007, the project Corpus Coranicum of the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities aims at building a comprehensive digital information system by providing access to relevant materials for the history of the Qur’an such as digitized versions of the oldest qur'anic manuscripts and their transliterations, comparisons of variant readings for each verse, texts from the environment of the Qur’an as well as providing commentaries for each sura, taking all the aforementioned elements into account. Both, manuscript evidence and variant readings, can be seen as the foundation for a future critical edition of the Qur'an. Following the German philological approaches to the history of the Qur'an before World War II such as the “Wissenschaft des Judentums” – a reform movement founded by Abraham Geiger (1810-1874) – and Gotthelf Bergsträßer's (1886-1933) “Korankomission” of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences, the Qur'an project in Potsdam is working on implementing a sustainable solution for exploring the history of the Qur’an, this time digitally.  
            This information system does not confine itself to the digital reproduction of the holy text but utilizes international standards like XML, Unicode and TEI to ensure the long-term readability and archivability of the conducted research, text analyses and editorial efforts. The print edition of the Qur'an produced in Cairo in 1924 is used as a reference for the documentation of the material for the textual history, since that print had a tremendous influence on following prints during the 20
                th century. following the analytical approach of Theodor Nöldeke (1836-1930), the project produces rich philological commentaries for each sura, exposing their chronological order and putting emphasis of the development of their literary forms across the 22 years of the prophet's proclamation.  
            
            Viewing the Qur’an as a text proclaimed in Arabia in Late Antiquity, the Corpus Coranicum project provides access to a collection of testimonies labeled as “Texte aus der Umwelt des Korans” (“Texts from the Environment of the Qur'an”). There, texts in Hebrew, Syriac, Greekt, Arabic, Ancient South Arabian, Ethiopian and others are being gathered, transcribed and translated, in order to highlight intersections and point out differences between and other documents from Late Antique culture, religions and traditions: Thus, the messages of the Qur'an can be viewed and understood in their respective contexts and in a new light. 
            Furthermore, the project gathers archeological evidence and conducts radiocarbon datings of qur’anic parchments in an ongoing German-French cooperation (2011-2014 Coranica, from 2015-2018 Paleocoran) to contribute substantially to the understanding of the Qur'an's history and the emergence of Islam. A joint goal of Corpus Coranicum and Paleocoran is to bring together all manuscripts that were originally kept in old Cairo and are now scattered around the world in a digital format for presenting them in their original form and order. On top of mere digitizations of the manuscripts, the Corpus Coranicum provides modernized transliterations of the original Arabic scripture. These transliterations are being shown in a self-developed font “Coranica” since other Arabic fonts like MS Typesetting or Amiri fail to display all the necessary characters occurring in the relevant texts of the project.  
            Next to commentaries, contextualization and analyzing manuscripts, the Corpus Coranicum project is building a corpus of variant readings on a word-level. Since the earliest time, the various readers of the Qur’an have recited the text in their own way. For each sura, each verse and word-coordinate in the Qur’an, the project compares the variant readings according to the written source with each other in order to show the varying tradition and interpretation of the holy text. 
            With the variant data accumulated so far the variances cannot only be analyzed on a word-to-word basis, but they can also be utilized to compute a general similarity measure between readers of the Qur’an by mapping the variant readings into a vector space which can be represented as a multi-dimensional matrix.  For each word occurring in Qur’an, the Qur’an matrix is being assigned a dedicated row. Each variant reading of that word at this particular sura-verse-word-coordinate creates a column in that row, assigning the variant reading as its value. The same procedure is then applied to create matrices for each reader of the Qur’an. Whereas the Qur’an matrix can have multiple non-empty values in a row, a reader matrix can only have one: the corresponding coordinate of the variant reading the reader uses at that particular sura, vers and word position. Since the cutting angle between two vectors or matrices represents the similarity to each other, the Euclidian distance (see below) is being utilized to compute that similarity measure.  
            All the aforementioned branches of the Corpus Coranicum project, the history of the text, the manuscripts, analyses of variant readings, the literary and chronological commentary as well as the texts surrounding and having influenced the Qur’an are bundled together to develop a new perspective on the text. The website of the Corpus Coranicum goes beyond a traditional digital edition of the Qur’an and can better be described as a digital framework or digital information system for the Qur’an, as a variety of tools and different texts are present.  
            The project tries to pick up and go digitally beyond where German Qur’anic science tradition has left off. On top of the content created and functionalities implemented thus far, the projects aims at extending its range of features by providing internationalized versions of the website (English, French, Turkish) as well as integrating the Rafi Talmon (1948-2004, Arabist, University of Haifa) concordance to offer chrono-morphological and statistical analyses of the holy text.  
            The talk will give an overview about the current state of the project, will portray philological approaches and their technical applications as well as present results of the similarity computations mentioned above.  
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        http://www.corpuscoranicum.de
                    
                    http://cl.haifa.ac.il/projects/quran/index.shtml
                
            
        
    


        
            For the last five years I’ve taught a course on “computer science for historians” at University Lyon3 Jean Moulin. The course includes 20 hours in ten sessions and has attracted twenty to forty students each year. It addresses history students during the first semester of their master studies: they start at this stage with information collection in archival sources and bibliography, which they can later exploit to write their master's thesis. Thus, the aim is to provide them with methods and digital tools for modeling and storing information, and then for subjecting it to interrogation, visualization and analysis. This is a great challenge because many students still use paper for taking notes when they analyze historical sources and are not used to working with software that is not completely self-installing. Furthermore, students will receive from their tutors all kinds of research subjects, from Ancient to Modern history, and they often want to analyze quite complex information which one cannot store in a simple spreadsheet. For this reason, the pedagogical challenge is also a challenge for the digital humanist: how can the students be provided with a generic and flexible information system of ready use for their research but sophisticated enough to store any sort of data?
            In this paper I will treat some theoretical and practical aspects of the digital information system I devised to cope with this problem, and will present some issues raised by recourse to the information system that concern both students and teacher. The manuscript of the course is publicly available on a 
                dedicated website
                
                    (all websites were accessed on 30 October 2015).
                : anyone interested can download the tools I developed and test the methods proposed to the students, or employ them for their own teaching. As I teach in French the documentation, interfaces, etc. are written in this language. The information system I propose in the course combines the experience acquired in developing the 
                symogih.org project
                 Documentation about the project and links to its the different components are provided on the project main website : 
                     .
                , a collaborative platform for storing and sharing structured historical data, with the method of semantic annotation of texts adopted in our 
                platform for digital editions
                
                     .
                 in accordance to the
                Text encoding initiative's
                 guidelines (TEI). These data production practices, both as structured data and encoded texts, must be radically simplified to cope with the pedagogical need exposed above and this requires working on a high level of abstraction.
            
            
                
                    
                    Figure 1
                
            
            The first component of the information system provided to the students is a relational database designed using a generic data model
                 Cf. 
                    . Databases are used in historical research both at individual and project level. See, e.g., Gast, Leugers and Leugers-Scherzberg, 2010; Alerini and Lamassé, 2011; Cellier and Cocaud, 2001; Erickson, 2013. The novelty of the method proposed by the symogih.org project, and in my course, is the abstraction level allowing to treat any kind of historical information.
                . In the center of the model (Figure 1), the object class, having the same sense as the "Endurant" class in DOLCE
                
                    DOLCE : a Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering: 
                    .
                , or the "Persistent Item (E77)" class in CIDOC-CRM
                
                    CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM): 
                    .
                , comprises individual actors, institutions, places, concepts, etc. about which students will be collecting information. The function of this class is to provide an identifier for each individual, in turn characterized by one or more names, a time span of existence, a type and an accurate textual definition. The database also allows treatment of some basic associations between objects defined in a class "system parameter" – a typical component of a generic data model – whose instances are predefined by the teacher. This simplifies the use of the database by students and guides them in their first steps of data production, but if needed parameters can be extended to other kinds of relationships. A simple PHP interface is added to facilitate data capture.
            
            The database is implemented using PostgreSQL because this open-source database provides extended features in datatype treatment (namely XML) and comes along with a procedural language (PL/pgSQL) allowing data treatment in a SQL context without having to learn a different programming language
                
                    .
                . The teacher can thus write predefined functions to help the student prepare, transform and code the data before further treatment. A spatial extension is also available (PostGIS) which permits working with geo-referenced data if needed
                
                    .
                . PostgreSQL is therefore a kind of "Swiss Army knife" for historical data storage and treatment.
            
            If the "Objects" ("Endurants" or "Persistent items") are identified in the database, where then is collected information about them? According to the 
                symogih.org semantic data model
                
                     .
                , a "Knowledge Unit" is an atomized portion of information that expresses a relationship among objects situated in space and time, established on critical analysis of documents. The class "Knowledge Unit" is therefore equivalent to the "Temporal entity (E2)" class in CIDOC-CRM or "Perdurant" class in DOLCE: “An endurant lives in time by 
                participating in some perdurant(s). For exemple, a person, which is an endurant, may participate in a discussion, which is a perdurant”
                 Cf. Masolo et al., 2003: 14.. 
            
            In former years, "knowledge units" were also stored in the database, as the "objects" are presently
                
                     .
                . Pedagogical experience has shown that the degree of abstraction required for modeling information in form of structured data is generally too steep for training digital historians, although some students used this method with ease. The newly proposed information system comprises therefore a second component which consists in a text encoding method using some specific TEI tags and attributes. These allow semantic text encoding: "knowledge units" can be directly annotated into the text, thus marking up named entities with the database identifiers of the related objects and then encoding their properties and relationships in the text with specific tags and attributes
                
                     Some pages of the symogih.org project's user manual provide the encoding specification for XML/TEI semantic annotated texts using the symogih.org ontology:
                        .
                    
                    This method was presented at the TEI 2015 conference in Lyon, cf. Beretta 2015. The Special Interest Group Ontologies in the TEI Consortium is devoted to this approach. See the GIS Ontologies wiki : 
                         and Eide, 2014-2015. A similar approach is represented by Jordanous, Stanley and Tupman, 2012.
                    
                .
            
            But this method raises the question of the XML editor to adopt for text semantic encoding, meaning the addition of a further software component to the workflow of data production providing XML schema validation and also tools for querying the encoded text. XML text encoding is more suitable and I prefer it for PhD student and researcher training, but this demands a supplementary specific instruction that it impossible to provide in the limited master's course time. I therefore conceived a way of semantically tagging the text in a simple text editor or word processing program using curly brackets instead of angle brackets and replacing XML-attributes by predefined codes. This method is described on the 
                course wiki that also furnishes instructions for using regular expressions for proper encoding
                
                    .
                . Regular expressions are then used in a PL/pgSQL script in the database to transform the curly brackets and their content into real XML tags and attributes: the encoded tag “{en2ai_10}Johannes Kepler{/en}” becomes “Johannes Kepler” (belonging to a course-specific namespace). This transformation allows storage of the encoded text in a PostgreSQL XML field and consequently benefit of the full power of the XPath and SQL queries, and programming capabilities of PL/pgSQL, to extract information from the texts.
            
            The workflow of data production and treatment ends with the phase of data analysis and visualization. For this purpose I adopted the R software that can be directly connected to a PostgreSQL database and provides many useful libraries. For instance, a former student produced data about relationship between persons attested by medieval charters that can be used for network analysis (Figure 2). 
            
                
                    
                    Figure 2
                
            
            The students can send the teacher a dump of their database and formulate the research questions that the latter will transcribe into SQL, XPath or procedure language queries for extracting data, before sending this back to the students. Building upon these examples the students can themselves adapt the queries and scripts to new research questions. A wiki dedicated to each student's project can be created to document the specific workflow of each research project: it is not public but it is accessible to all other students participating in the process of data production and analysis. The students can use the results of data analysis and visualization to formulate new research hypotheses or they can integrate them into their master's thesis.
            In this paper I will present the essential conceptual and technical aspects of the whole workflow and consider three major advantages of this pedagogical approach for the disciplinary domain of digital history. First, students gain the experience of managing a workflow going from installation and personal practice on a solid community maintained open-source software, to reflection on data modeling concerning their own research agenda, to collaborative data and project management through a wiki, to an introduction in data mining and visualization techniques. Secondly, the abstraction level of the data model and text encoding practice proposed to the students implicitly introduces them to knowledge management and data production according to present-day standards like CIDOC-CRM and 
                Text encoding initiative: from this perspective historical knowledge is modeled as a graph of objects situated in time and space and linked to the texts from which they derive. Thus —and this is the third advantage— the course acquaints students with the basic principles of linked data and of semantic text encoding, introducing them to the concepts and practice of resource sharing and data curation: the datasets I use for the exercises come from the French national library (BNF) SPARQL endpoint and DBPedia, and the texts from Wikipedia. In a final part, I will discuss the issues that this pedagogical approach raises for master's students in history.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alerini, J. 
                        and
                         Lamassé, S.  (2011). Données et statistiques. L'avenir du travail en ligne de l'historien. In: Genet, J.-P. and Zorzi, A. (eds), 
                        Les historiens et l'informatique. Un métier à réinventer. Rome: Ecole française de Rome, pp. 171-187.
                    
                    
                        Beretta, 
                        F
                        . (2015). The symogih.org project and TEI : encoding structured historical data in XML texts. In: 
                        Text Encoding Initiative Conference and Members’ Meeting 2015. Connect, Animate, Innovate, Lyon, France: 
                         .
                    
                    
                        Cellier, J. 
                        and
                         Cocaud, M. (2001). 
                        Traiter des données historiques : méthodes statistiques, techniques informatiques. Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes. 
                    
                    
                        Eide, Ø. (2014-2015). Ontologies, Data Modeling, and TEI. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative,
                        8: Selected Papers from the 2013 TEI Conference. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Erickson, A. T. (2013). Historical Research and the Problem of Categories. In: Dougherty, J. and Nawrotzki, K. (eds), 
                        Writing History in the Digital Age. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 133-145.
                    
                    
                        Gast, H., Leugers, A. 
                        and
                         Leugers-Scherzberg, A. H. (2010). 
                        Optimierung historischer Forschung durch Datenbanken. Die exemplarische Datenbank "Missionsschulen 1887-1940". Bad Heilbrunn: Verlag Julius Klinkhardt.
                    
                    
                        Jordanous, A., Stanley, A. 
                        and 
                        Tupman, C. (2012). Contemporary transformation of ancient documents for recording and retrieving maximum information: when one form of markup is not enough. Proceedings of Balisage, 
                        8: The Markup Conference 2012, 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Masolo, C., Borgo, S., Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., 
                        and
                         Oltramari, A. (2003). 
                        WonderWeb Deliverable D18 Ontology Library (final). Trento: Laboratory For Applied Ontology. PDF version: 
                         .
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Over half a century ago Briet (1951) famously asked "Qu'est-ce que la documentation?" She proposed a definition much more fluid than the scraps of writing on paper we usually associate with the term: any object, even an uninscribed stone, becomes a document as soon as it is used to communicate some fact (e.g. in a museum’s geological collection). In a similar vein we argue in this paper for a renewed consideration of the nature of text in the digital realm, or rather the nature that has been imposed upon it both by information-technological and methodological constraints.
            Text is by its nature both discrete and continuous. The glyphs of a writing system are combined into words, which are arranged into phrases, sentences, paragraphs, quotations, and so on; these discrete formations can be arbitrarily complex, but they are communicated through the atom of the glyph. On the other hand, very many elements of the meaning of a text—e.g. narratological elements such as the theme of isolation in 
                Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, intertextual references and referents (Miola 2000), the concept of 
                writerly text (Barthes, 1974), or even the visual presentations of individual glyphs, defy discrete boundaries. Yet the technologies we have used overwhelmingly for the large-scale production of text—from the printing press to signal transmissions and thence to digital models—treat text as a code of discrete characters; moreover, once text moves from “print” to “signal” (Petzold, 2000) it becomes specifically a single stream of these discrete characters. This can already present some problems to scholars who wish to remediate texts not coded by machine, e.g. manuscripts, to the digital domain for humanistic enquiry. To date scholars who encounter these problems generally consider them an acceptable trade-off for the benefits of access, exchange, and computational tractability that the digital medium offers. 
            
            If we want our digital model of a text to extend beyond the semiotic registration of a single stream of characters, however, problems emerge. McGann (2004) summarizes this well: "Print and manuscript technology represent efforts to mark natural language so that it can be preserved and transmitted. It is a technology that constrains the shapeshiftings of language, which is itself a special-purpose system for coding human communication. Exactly the same can be said of electronic encoding systems. In each case constraints are installed in order to facilitate operations that would otherwise be difficult or impossible.” Everyone who has ever worked on the remediation of a physically-inscribed text into the digital medium has implicitly conceptualized it at some point as a single stream of discrete characters, simply because this is how we have always known text, ultimately, to be represented digitally. Transcription is thus exactly the sort of constraint to which McGann refers: there is a single stream of text, and only once it exists can it be subdivided and classified as having certain descriptive, structural, or logical characteristics, or even relationships to other portions of text.
            The model of text as a single stream of discrete characters also informs the concept of XML markup. While this is not stated explicitly anywhere of which we are aware, the underlying assumption is plain in, e.g., Goldfarb’s discussion of the roots of SGML (1996) or Renear’s definition of text encoding (2004). As Pierazzo (2011) notes, “The editor will first transcribe a primary source, thereby creating a transcription; this transcription will be corrected, proofread, annotated, and then prepared for publication.” The predominant model for the process of annotation to which Pierazzo refers is TEI-XML, that is, embedded markup within the hierarchical structure required by XML. Conceptually a tree structure expressed in XML can be perfectly reorderable, and so not bound to a single valid serialization. With text encoding, however, the ordering constraint remains and must be preserved, however marked up it is and subdivided into branches. Standoff markup schemes similarly assert a single stream—each scheme relies on the stability of the range notation it uses for the underlying text stream—but the markup itself is reorderable. This reorderable property of standoff markup takes us a small step closer to our goal: to recast and represent digital text as something more than a single stream of discrete tokens. 
            
            Standoff markup essentially applies a graph model. This is the feature of standoff that makes it so valuable to its proponents—in a graph, unlike a tree, overlapping ranges of markup are easily handled. Some of these standoff markup elements might even include alternative readings to a given text range, or a reference to a different text that elucidates the contextual meaning of the range in question. From there it is only a small step to the conception of a text that is itself more complex than a single stream. Such conceptions emerge already with the different implementations of variant graphs for collations of “multi-version documents” (Schmidt and Colomb, 2009; see also Dekker et al., 2015; Andrews and Macé, 2013; Jänicke et al., 2014). While so far the variant graph has been used only for word-by-word comparisons of text versions, the concept can be extended radically farther. We will demonstrate this, building on prior work in this direction (e.g. Marcoux, Sperberg-McQueen, and Huitfeldt, 2013). We will show in our paper, for instance, how a graph-based digital text can model collections of stories preserved in manuscripts, without giving primacy to any one ordering of the story sequence; that is, it can contain both the collated text of each story and the variety of story order within the tradition. Likewise the same narrative element, inserted into multiple stories, can be represented as such. 
            The representation of information as entities with relationships between them—in other words: as a graph—is not a new idea. RDF works exactly this way, and the theoretical ideas behind hypertext are not dissimilar (cf. Nelson, 1993). The ease with which complex graphs can be modelled in software, however, has massively increased in the last five years. Moreover, it is now reasonably straightforward to create an initial graph representation from a TEI-encoded XML file, and nearly as straightforward to produce multiple “flavors” of TEI XML from a single graph—for example, a document-oriented representation alongside a logical-text-oriented representation, such as those created in the Faust edition project (Brüning et al., 2012).
            Graph representation does not relieve us from the constraint that digital text must be formed from discrete atomic units (characters) and discrete compound digital units. What it does allow us to do, however, is to digitally model the shades of meaning, ambiguity, and uncertainty of text—the aspects of a text’s meaning or interpretation that are not by their nature discrete at all. So far, uncertainty of interpretation has been all but explicitly avoided in the scholarly digital space. McGann (2004) observes: “In the case of a system like the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), the system is designed to ‘disambiguate’ entirely the materials to be encoded.” The 1700+ pages of the TEI guidelines bear witness to the difficulty of this task; element names and their intended usages are defined as precisely as possible, with illustrative examples. 
            The use of tags and attributes in a TEI-encoded file is itself an act of interpretation—it is precisely in the labelling of the elements of an encoding and of the relationships between those elements that much of the scholar’s interpretation of the encoded text lies. This is equally true of a graph encoding. The prolixity of the Guidelines is in fact a result of the attempt to constrain the scholar’s interpretation of a given tag to a disambiguated, and thereby discrete, set of meanings. Rather than shrinking from uncertainty of meaning, however, rather than resolving it in an occasionally misleading or (paradoxically) unhelpful attempt to ease computational analysis, how much better if the uncertainty can be retained in the model, in a manner that is nonetheless machine-parseable? Interpretation remains inherent in the labels that are chosen for the properties in a graph model; these may be taken from the TEI, or they may reflect another interest of the scholar. Either way, a graph-based text model by its nature includes computationally tractable information about how these properties relate to each other. 
            In representing “fuzziness” or ambiguity of interpretation, we can perhaps follow the lead of those who have struggled with similar problems of representation of time. If text can be represented as a graph, mostly-sequential but with scope for fluidity, then interpretative elements—say, picking out the theme of isolation within the text—can be represented as spanning a continuous or disjoint range of text sequences, beginning not before word A but certainly by word B, and continuing at least as far as word C but certainly not beyond word D. And so on. If scholars disagree on the correct identification of a person in a historical text, both hypotheses can be represented without innate primacy being given to one over the other, because a graph does not enforce a single ordering of its elements.
            The text model we are advocating, then, amounts to a form of knowledge representation; in representing “the text”, we are actually representing a collection of our knowledge, understanding, and interpretation of that text, in a form that can be analyzed and processed by a machine. The more we can encode texts as computable knowledge, the greater the power computational methods will have in textual scholarship of all forms.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T.L., Macé, C., 2013. “Beyond the tree of texts: Building an empirical model of scribal variation through graph analysis of texts and stemmata.” 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 28 (4): 504–521.
                    
                    
                        Barthes, Roland.
                        S/Z. Trans. Richard Miller. London: Cape, 1975.
                    
                    
                        Briet, S., 1951.
                        Qu’est-ce que la Documentation?, Paris: Édit. Translated as S. Briet, 
                        What is Documentation?: English Translation of the Classic French Text, Lanham, Md: Scarecrow Press. Available at: http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~roday/briet.htm [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Brüning, G., et al., 2012. “On the dual nature of written texts and its implications for the encoding of genetic manuscripts”. Presented at the Digital Humanities 2012, Hamburg.
                    
                    
                        Dekker, R.H., van Hulle, D., Middell, G., Neyt, V., van Zundert, J., 2014. “Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project.” 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 30 (3): 452-470.
                    
                    
                        Goldfarb, C.F., The Roots of SGML -- A Personal Recollection. Available at: http://www.sgmlsource.com/history/roots.htm [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Grossner, K. and Meeks, E., 2014. “Topotime: Representing Historical Temporality.” Presented at the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne
                        . 
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S., Geßner, A., Büchler, M., Scheuermann, G., 2014. “5 Design Rules for Visualizing Text Variant Graphs.” Presented at the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne.
                    
                    
                        Marcoux, Y., Sperberg-McQueen, M.C. & Huitfeldt, C., 2013. Modeling overlapping structures: Graphs and serializability. In 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2013. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies. Balisage: The Markup Conference 2013. Montréal, Canada. Available at: http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol10/html/Marcoux01/BalisageVol10-Marcoux01.html [Accessed 1 November, 2015].
                    
                    
                        McGann, J., 2004. Marking Texts of Many Dimensions. In S. Schreibman, R. Siemens, & J. Unsworth, eds. 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell. Available as chapter 16 at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/ [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Miola, R.S., 2000. Seven Types of Intertextuality. In M. Marrapodi, ed. 
                        Shakespeare, Italy, and Intertextuality. Rome: Bulzoni Editore, pp. 23–38.
                    
                    
                        Nelson, T.H., 1993. 
                        Literary Machines. The report on, and of, Project Xanadu concerning word processing, electronic publishing, hypertext, thinkertoys, tomorrow’s intellectual revolution, and certain other topics including knowledge, education and freedom. First published 1981., Mindfull Press.
                    
                    
                        Petzold, C., 2000.
                        Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software. Redmond: Microsoft Press.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E., 2011. “A rationale of digital documentary editions”. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 26 (4): 463–77.
                    
                    
                        Renear, A., 2004. Text Encoding. In S. Schreibman, R. Siemens, & J. Unsworth, eds. 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell. Available as chapter 17 at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/ [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D., Colomb, R., 2009. “A data structure for representing multi-version texts online.” 
                        International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 67: 497–514.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Launched in 2013, the project  The School of Salamanca. A Digital Collection of Sources and a Dictionary of its Juridical-political Language is establishing a collection of more than a hundred sources from Iberian theologians and jurists of the 16th and 17th century. These texts deal with political and juridical topics and the collection of sources is supplemented by a dictionary that comprises, next to biographical information on the authors of the sources, the development of central terms and ideas of the Western history of political and legal ideas, as it is reflected in the source texts.
            Both parts, the sources and the dictionary, will be published under Open Access conditions. In the beginning of 2016, the project’s web application will be launched online with the first batch of sources and dictionary entries as TEI-XML texts plus corresponding facsimile images. At the moment, we are running a proof-of-concept mechanism and some experiments, which at the time of release will be constituting a Linked Open Data interface to our data along with a SPARQL-Endpoint.
            At the beginning of the presentation the project’s rationale and web application will be introduced shortly. But the focus of the presentation will be on giving insights in the workflow, the decision making process and the implementation of the LOD mechanisms, that have been realized:
            1. The first aspect accentuated in the presentation is the modelling of the information contained in our TEI-XML data within a Linked-Data-environment: Which TEI elements or attributes are assigned to which objects and predicates of which ontology? How are these assignments processed in order to offer the data as semantic data? Problems that we are dealing with are the questions of how to record the temporal dimension of much biographical information (see Ramos, 2009; Mynarz, 2013), and how to cope with alternative values like e.g. conflicting data about the date of birth of a person? Do considerations such as these affect our main objectives, e.g. the TEI-scheme or the collection of data?
            Here is what has been settled up to now: We will offer semantic data about the sources and about the authors of the collection. The ontologies we use are mainly the foaf-, bio-, relationship-, and SPAR-ontologies (see, among others, Peroni, 2014). The TEI-data will be transformed into RDF by the xtriples webservice (Schrade, 2015).
            2. The second highlighted aspect concerns the very networking of the data itself and its utilization in the project’s infrastructure. This concerns technical issues, such as the questions of which services and resources should be – directly or indirectly – provided in order to offer our data for external reuse? It concerns issues of academic strategies such as negotiations with favored partner projects and data providers over the data they expose and the interfaces they provide. But it also concerns scholarly questions, such as eventual opportunities to handle new research questions, or to handle questions in new ways, opened up by the integration of our data with the data of other LOD-providers. In which form could or should such expanded possibilities be provided on the publicly accessible website? What stance are we taking on rights management and quality insurance of federated queries/data?
            Again, here is the current status: We have mechanisms for the resolution of resource URIs, for content negotiation and for dumping the complete triple store as well as a SPARQL endpoint in place. We are elaborating federated queries responding to specific, concrete research questions. And we are still in the process of evaluating the Linked Data Fragments (Verborgh, 2014) mechanism. We are in contact with several projects the data of which would nicely complement our own (Schmutz, 2008; Sytsma, 2010; Bullón, 2012; Mrozik, 2016). And we are probing possibilities of offering a configurable interface to (federated) querying to our users and of rendering network information visually in our web application. Except most likely for the last point (due to time constraints), the talk will present the state of affairs we will have achieved in summer 2016.
            The presentation will thus point out conceptions and their implementations of linking TEI resources into the semantic web, difficulties encountered and needs still left open by scholarly research questions.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bullón, Xavier Agenjo (2012). Introducción: la Biblioteca Virtual de la Escuela de Salamanca y Linked Open Data. http://dx.doi.org/10.18558/FIL (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, Fabio et al. (2014). TEI, Ontologies, Linked Open Data: Geolat and Beyond. https://jtei.revues.org/1365 (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Eide, Øyvind (2015). Ontologies, Data Modeling, and TEI. https://jtei.revues.org/1191 (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Meroño-Peñuela, Albert et al. (2014). Semantic Technologies for Historical Research. A Survey. http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/system/files/swj588_0.pdf (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Mrozik, Dagmar (2016). The Jesuit Science Network (Wuppertal/Berlin, being established in 2016). http://jesuitscience.net/ (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Mynarz, Jindřich (2013). Capturing temporal dimension of linked data. http://blog.mynarz.net/2013/07/capturing-temporal-dimension-of-linked.html (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Pattuelli, Cristina M. (2012). FOAF in the Archive: Linking Networks of Information with Networks of People. Final Report to OCLC. http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/grants/reports/2012/pattuelli2012.pdf (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Peroni, Silvio (2014). The Semantic Publishing and Referencing Ontologies: 10.1007/978-3-319-04777-5_5.
                    
                    
                        Ramos, Michele R. (2009). Biography Light Ontology. An Open Vocabulary For Encoding Biographic Texts. http://metadata.berkeley.edu/BiographyLightOntology.pdf (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Romanello, Matteo and Pasin, Michele (2013). HuCit. https://bitbucket.org/56k/hucit/ (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Ruiz-Iniesta, Almudena 
                        and
                         Corcho, Oscar (2014). A review of ontologies for describing scholarly and scientific documents. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1155/paper-07.pdf (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Sch
                        mutz, Jacob (2008). Scholasticon. Ressources en ligne pour l'étude de la scolastique moderne (1500-1800): auteurs, sources, institutions. http://scholasticon.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr/Presentation/index_fr.php (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Sytsma, David (2010). Post-Reformation Digital Library. http://www.prdl.org/ (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                    
                        Verborgh, Ruben et al. (2014). Querying Datasets on the Web with High Availability. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Semantic Web Conference: 10.1007/978-3-319-11964-9_12.
                    
                    
                        Wettlaufer, Jörg et al. (2015). Semantic Blumenbach: Exploration of Text-Object Relationships with Semantic Web Technology in the History of Science: 10.1093/llc/fqv047.
                    
                    
                        Schrade, Torsten (2015). xTriples. A generic webservice to extract RDF statements from XML resources. http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/index.html (accessed 8 April 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Since its foundation, the Homer Multitext project has been creating digital diplomatic editions of manuscripts of the Iliad, editions which record every intentional mark on the manuscript, in order to create a resource to explore larger Homeric questions. Our poster presents one aspect of Homer Multitext research. The authors’ original research involves analyzing the Venetus A to look for multiforms, that is, substitutions for Homeric text that fit both metrically and contextually. The Venetus A, a tenth-century manuscript currently housed in Venice, is the oldest complete manuscript of the Iliad existing today. In addition to the intact poem, the Venetus A includes an abundance of scholia, scholarly notes which comment on the poem. It is in these scholia that we find the evidence for multiforms. Our use of the term "multiform" intentionally follows Albert Lord’s of the Iliad as an orally composed and transmitted poem: "the word multiform is more accurate than variant, because it does not give preference or precedence to any one word or set of words to express an idea; instead it acknowledges that the idea may exist in several forms."  (Lord, 2000). Ultimately, in looking for multiforms, we found a definitive correlation between the appearance of multiforms in the scholia and the reference to one of three Homeric textual editors, all of whom served as the head of the library at Alexandria at various times from the third to second centuries BCE. While it has been previously hypothesized that the work of these three Alexandrian editors, preserved in the Iliadic scholia, is responsible for the current standard canon of available multiforms, the research represents our first steps in using statistics to better understand the transition from an oral tradition to today’s critical print editions.
            The first task in our research was to analyze how many multiforms existed in a select portion of the Iliad. Books 18 and 19 of the Iliad served as our sample, and we accessed the manuscript through openly-licensed digital photography. From these photographs we created digital diplomatic editions of the poem and its corresponding scholia using an XML editor and following TEI guidelines. Within our editions we used the TEI element “quote” to identify every instance of text reuse found in the scholia, and then generated a separate table in which we classified the types of text reuse.The following is the link to a table which shows our classification of the instances of text reuse. (https://github.com/hmteditors/hc-il18/blob/master/venA/collections/reuse_18_19.csv) Our classification was modelled on work by Monica Berti who defines “text reuse” as “the meaningful reiteration of text, usually beyond the simple repetition of common language” https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Text_Reuse). By assigning distinct URNs to the different types of text reuse in the table and not in our XML mark-up, we applied a unique approach that kept our external analysis separate from our digital edition.
            We automatically generated a table displaying the occurrence of multiforms in relation to references to Alexandrian editors in preparation for a chi-square test for independence.The following is the link to data tables showing the correlating frequencies of appearances of multiforms and Alexandrian editors. (https://github.com/hmteditors/hc-il18/blob/master/venA/stats/Table%20of%20multiforms.md)
            This table shows 34 instances of overlap, in which one of the scholars was named with a multiform. For the chi-square test, we compared these two sets of data, beginning with the null hypothesis that they were independent. Then, having set a significance level of 0.01, we obtained a p-value of 1.2 *10-42. This p-value shows that the probability of randomly obtaining the results we did is negligibly low. Thus, we were able to reject our null hypothesis and conclude that there is a correlation between the occurrence of a multiform and references to one of the Alexandrian grammarians.
            Given the correlation between Alexandrian editors and multiforms attested to in the Venetus A, we conclude that the Alexandrian editors were responsible for setting the canon of multiforms which has been transmitted in this manuscript, and from there to the modern world. In respect to further avenues of research, the strength of this correlation remains to be tested.  Additionally, we have not yet attempted text reuse analysis with the majority of the Venetus A; drastically increasing the sample size will likely yield more insights into the nature of the poem’s transmission and production. The ability to statistically support this conclusion exemplifies the great promise statistical, analytical methods hold for the field of Homeric studies, as well as wider areas in other fields of the humanities.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Lord, A. (2000). 
                        Singer of Tales (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            The Transylvania Digital Humanities Centre (DigiHUBB) is an emerging Digital Humanities Centre based in the Babes-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania. The Centre was officially established in April 2014 within the Faculty of Letters. As is evidenced in other cases, DigiHUBB exists because of the commitment of scholars experienced in various fields related to Digital Humanities.
                
                     Some of the DigiHUBB’s members were directly involved in Digital Humanities, like text editing or mapping, others expressed their interest in Digital Humanities as a discipline and an object of study. The DigiHUBB members come from different fields, like linguistics, geography, literature, computer science, art history, etc.
                    
                        http://centre.ubbcluj.ro/digihubb/. 
                    
                 The primary goal of DigiHUBB was to create a collaborative network connecting DH activities within the University and beyond, that first took into account the importance of communicating the vast global impact that DH research and practices have today. The centre defined itself as impact-oriented, with an emphasis on innovation related to research, teaching and creative activities. While following the path of other prestigious DH Centres around the world, DigiHUBB aims to develop its own expertise coming from the distinctive regional specificity of Transylvania that benefits from a multicultural and multilingual cultural heritage, which has not been sufficiently explored with modern tools till now.
                
                     There is a lack of collaborative projects concerning big historical events important for Transylvania and Romania, as the “1918 Centenary” where DigiHUBB could evidently have an important contribution.
                
            
            The importance of analysing the different ways in which a DH centre is built was stressed by Claire Warwick in her seminal essay “Institutional models for digital humanities” published in the 
                Digital Humanties in Practice (Warwick, C., Terras, M., Nyhan, J., 2014). The cases analysed in the chapter - the creating of the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the Digital Humanities in Mexico - were considered representative for the way they illustrated the institutional environment and the particularities of diverse “particular academic, political, cultural and economic realities” (
                http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/dh-in-practice/chapter-9/).
            
            This paper is a commentary on the manner in which a DH Centre is established in an Eastern-European country
                
                     Romania is, at the moment of this proposal, one of the last East-European country that entered the Digital Humanities circuit.
                 and the challenges that exist within the traditional structures and mentalities at different levels -- the academia, the policy-makers and the society in the larger sense. The poster will focus on the strategies that 
                DigiHUBB has, at different levels – education, research and innovation, collaboration with the IT industry. It will also point out similarities between other post-revolutionary experiences and learn if there could be a kind of specificity that could give our centre a uniqueness that will make it relevant internationally. We will compare this challenge with other interdisciplinary endeavours in Romania. The argument in this paper strongly resonates with the thematic implications addressed in this conference – the “social, institutional and multicultural aspects of digital humanities” (
                http://dh2016.adho.org/cfp/).
            
            In approaching this report we have observed several paradoxes that could easily exemplify the challenges that an innovative approach faced in both the institutional environment and the investment in the research framework in Romania. In the first place, the rapidity with which DigiHUBB gained international support and assistance
                
                     Immediately after its creation DigiHUBB was put on the “Around DH” map (courtesy to Alex Gill from Columbia University Libraries), 
                        http://www.arounddh.org/. The response of the Digital Humanities Community to the first call for assistance launched on Humanist Discussion Group was impressive. 
                    
                 was tempered by the resistance of the existing research structure, although it is well-known that Romanian research in general is less internationalized and under performing in all major university rankings.
                
                     As reported in http://ec.europa.eu/research/horizon2020/pdf/country-profiles/ro_country_profile_and_featured_projects.pdf#view=fit&pagemode=none.
                 In the second instance, although the IT industry in Romania, and especially in Transylvania, is productive and lucrative, it addresses the quotidian aspects of digital work and not the innovative part. Moreover, there is a visible mismatch between the skills needed by the knowledge market and the qualifications provided by the academia. 
            
            The challenges that DigiHUBB faces are complex and they target, as our paper will show, several important issues that go from the generic ones ( the misunderstanding of the concept, the lack of confidence in its epistemological value, the supremacy of the published paper book over electronic publications, the absence of systemised pedagogy in Digital Humanities, the minimal funding from the University or governmental institutions) to more specific ones, which are more challenging to engage with. 
            DigiHUBB has been involved in a variety of activities related to the Digital Humanities since its inception: in January 2014 the keynote speaker for the inaugural conference was professor Susan Schreibman from Maynooth University; this was followed by a conference held by doctor Julyanne Nyhan, from UCL, in March and many informal meetings with other key members of the Digital Humanities community. The lobbying and promoting Digital Humanities also included participation to national academic events, publishing articles on the theme
                
                     See Corina Moldovan, 
                        A discipline of reference in present days research digital humanities
                        , in “Globalization, Intercultural Dialogue and National Identity”, Iulian Boldea ed., Arhipeleag Press XXI, 2014, pp.286-294.
                    
                    Corina Moldovan, 
                        Les humanités numériques, une provocation, in “Debates on Globalization. Approaching National Identity through Intercultural Dialogue”, Iulian Boldea ed., Arhipeleag Press XXI, 2015, pp.99-108.
                    
                ; the following step was to set up a training event, so in April-May 2015 DigiHUBB organized a one week workshop on TEI and data visualisation financed by NeDIMAH and the European Science Foundation, and co-organized a symposium on textual digital analysis within the Babes-Bolyai University.
                
                    „Editing texts in a digital world:text encoding and data visualization”, workshop, Cluj-Napoca, 27 april-3 may 2015 and „Explorations in textual digital analysis for the humanities and social-sciences”, symposium, Cluj-Napoca, 14-15 may 2015.
                 There was a strong involvement in networking and studying the activities of other DH centres in Europe. We also succeeded to introduce an MA module on scholarly edition that will start in 2016.
            
            In the process of setting up our centre we had to fight a very specific way of relatedness that still characterizes post-revolutionary Romanian society, which we can be characterized as “non-digital humanist”, as it is, in most cases, individualistic, speculative, traditional, and change-resisting, in comparison with the collaborative, hands-on, innovative and co-creative features of Digital Humanities
                
                     „The digital humanities, therefore, not only widens the scope and processes of disciplines within the university, but contributes to national innovation agendas, creating new possibilities for the traditional scholar within an increasingly competitive academic and economic context. As such, the collaborative nature of digital humanities research contributes to the innovation ecosystem, understood as the productive interaction between people, ideas, flows, processes and outputs.” (Byrne, T and Schreibman, S (2015)
                . 
            
            Understood as a HUB, our centre has multiple possibilities of offering innovation, at all levels of the research-economic-social chain. We also consider it as a new cultural model, a real co-working space opened to all the actors of our multicultural and multilingual region.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Byrne, T. and Schreibman, S. (2015). 
                        ‘Digital Humanities and the Innovation Ecosystem: A DARIAH-Ireland Report.’ Maynooth University.
                    
                    Schreibman, S., Siemens R. and Unsworth J. (eds). (2014). 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Hoboken: Blackwell Publishing.
                    
                    Terras, M., Nyhan, J. and Vanhoutte, E. (eds). (2013). 
                        
                            Defining Digital Humanities: a Reader
                        . UK: Ashgate.
                    
                    Ridge, M. (2014). 
                        Crowdsourcing our Cultural Heritage. UK: The Open University.
                    
                    Warwick, C., Terras, M. and Nyhan, J. (eds). (2012). 
                        
                            Digital Humanities in Practice
                        . Facet.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                This paper presents first empirical analyses and visualizations of a large corpus of graphic novels – an increasingly popular form of book-length comics aimed at adults – that is currently in the process of being assembled and digitized. We introduce an XML vocabulary and visual editor that we have developed for the annotation of our corpus, and reflect on the challenges presented by a cultural form that is characterized by the complex interaction of text and images. Analyzing the specific narrativity of this and other multimodal cultural forms (including illustrated books and magazines, theater, film, television and computer games), we argue, calls for a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods drawn from such diverse fields as narratology, digital art history, and cognitive science. In contrast to corpus analyses of literary texts, which have made great strides in recent years, comparable work on visual narrative still remains in its infancy and at the periphery of the digital humanities. While this can be traced, in part, to copyright issues, such scholarship also faces a number of crucial technical and methodological hurdles – from image description, classification, and object recognition to the operationalization of narratological concepts. Given the dominance of visual storytelling in modern and contemporary culture, overcoming these hurdles will represent an important contribution to the further development of DH research.
                The introduction presents our corpus and the wider research questions of our interdisciplinary group. This is followed by a brief overview over the “Graphic Narrative Markup Language” (GNML), which builds on TEI, and the visual editor developed for the annotation of graphic novels, but which is also applicable to other multimodal forms. A version of this editor will be available as open-acess software by the time of the conference. Part two introduces a number of analyses and visualizations combining the study of text and images that make up graphic novels. The final part moves to the quantitative and qualitative analysis of graphic novels with the help of eye-tracking. This approach allows us to study the construction of storyworlds by empirical readers, and thus opens up an aspect of narrative that remains severely underrepresented in DH, and the humanities at large.
            
            
                1. GNML-Editor: Tools for (Semi-)Automatic Annotation
                Whereas the automatic analysis of text corpora has become feasible in many instances, such automation currently remains a pipe dream for multimodal narratives. In the case of comics and similarly hand-drawn, or otherwise non-perspectival, images, object identification depends on lengthy training efforts and registers a relatively high error rate. Similarly, standard OCR programs fail at recognizing the (quasi) hand writing that dominates comics. As a consequence, our corpus study presently depends on manual and semi-automatic annotation. For this purpose, we have developed the XML-language GNML, which builds on TEI and previous efforts by John Walsh (2012), to describe all textual and visual properties of graphic novels. To minimize errors during the annotation process, our visual GNML-editor supports annotators with integrated spell checking and auto-completion mechanisms. An automatic recognition of panels is complemented by a function that recognizes the borders of individual captions, speech bubbles, and characters to accelerate annotation. Further automations, such as an in-built OCR for narrative text that conforms to standard fonts, are currently under development. As the conceptual basis of the editor (visual objects with graphic and textual characteristics) is not limited to comics but can be applied to other text-image combinations in visual culture (from illustrated manuscripts to film and TV), the editor will be generalized for the annotation of such formats.
            
            
                2. Quantitative Analyses and Visualizations of Graphic Novels
                Part two presents approaches that combine image and text analysis for a number of structural features of graphic novels. Methods developed for digital literary studies, such as topic modeling, are of limited value for the analysis of visual culture given the dominance of images. In contrast, studies of large-scale image sets have so far shown little interest in narrative analysis. To complicate matters further, most narratological concepts are drawn from the study of literary texts, and it remains questionable to what extent they can be successfully applied to visual narrative.
                In a first analysis of the corpus, which is still in the process of being digitized and annotated, we look at the historical development of the visual and textual elements of about 150 book covers of graphic novels. This includes a grammatical and semantic analysis of their titles with the help of a statistical language parser, as well as the stylistic and visual attributes of their design and cover images. In a second step, we move to more detailed studies of a first sub-corpus that consists of the ten most-cited titles within our larger set of graphic novels. Such a small sub-set does not allow for genre comparisons or for studying historical developments within the form. However, we can consider the narrative features of representative texts within our corpus. In order to do so, we compare a network analysis of characters with their visual prominence and respective share of text, and complement this with a stylistic analysis of the latter. 
            
            
                3. Eyetracking Analysis of Multimodal Narrative
                The experimental observation of eye movements has proven a reliable measure of the human processing of text and images, and allows us to form hypotheses about the construction of storyworlds by empirical readers. The final part of the paper aims to show the value of this method by considering excerpts from a first, explorative corpus of canonical graphic novels. In contrast to theoretical scholarship on comics, which has emphasized the primacy of images (Groensteen, 2009), our experiments demonstrate that readers focus most of their attention on the text. Not only is it usually read first, but many images are either not focused on at all, or analyzed purely in peripheral vision. Whether images are viewed depends, among other variables, on their informational content: if either visual aspects or the storyline continue from one panel to the next, it is much more likely that a panel will be skipped by the reader than if they are distinguished more clearly from its immediate predecessor. We also look at the interaction between visual and textual levels: do reading habits differ if text and images refer to distinct storylines? Finally, we report on experiments that focus on comic reading expertise, for which we propose a new empirical measure. In sharp contrast to the reading of text alone, where experience and reading speed are positively correlated, experienced comics readers focus on the visual aspects of the panels for an extended amount of time. This time appears to be invested wisely, since they are able to better understand the story, as shown by an empirical content test. Taken together, these results suggest that the text and image work together to transmit the narrativity of graphic novels, and that a specific type of expertise is required to understand multimodal narratives. This maps well onto the hypothesis that comics and other forms of sequential art use a particular kind of visual language (McCloud, 1993), which has been analyzed in psycholinguistic terms by Cohn (2013).
            
            
                4. Summary and Conclusions
                We present a new DH project aiming at collecting and analyzing a corpus of graphic literature, enriched by human annotations as well as by a corpus of eye-movement recordings to measure the momentary distribution of readers’ attention. First example analyses on both global and local levels demonstrate the potential of this approach. A toolchain for description, annotation, and analysis of these data is being developed, and is of potential use for a wider field of studies in cultural analytics of image-related and multimodal material. In perspective, the corpus will be further enhanced by automated description, using features developed in the field of computer vision (Farabet et al., 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Rigaud et al., 2015; Serre et al., 2007).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cohn, N. (2013). 
                        The Visual Language of Comics. Introduction to the Structure and Cognition of Sequential Images. London: Bloomsbury.
                    
                    
                        Farabet, C., Couprie, C., Najman, L. and LeCun, Y. (2013). Learning Hierarchical Features for Scene Labeling. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35: 1915–29.
                    
                    
                        Groensteen, T. (2007). 
                        The System of Comics. Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi Press.
                    
                    
                        Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. and Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 25: 1097–1105.
                    
                    
                        Lowe, D. G. (2004). Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. 
                        International Journal of Computer Vision, 60: 91–110.
                    
                    
                        McCloud, S. (1993). 
                        Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
                    
                    
                        Rigaud, C., Guérin, C., Karatzas, D., Burie, J.-C. and Ogier, J.-M. (2015). Knowledge-driven understanding of images in comic books. 
                        International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition, 18: 199–221.
                    
                    
                        Serre, T., Wolf, L., Bileschi, S., Riesenhuber, M. and Poggio, T. (2007). Robust Object Recognition with Cortex-like Mechanisms. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 29: 411–26.
                    
                    
                        Walsh, J. (2012). Comic Book Markup Language: An Introduction and Rationale. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, (6–1).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Ioannes Dantiscus (1485–1548) was a humanist, author of neo-Latin poems, outstanding diplomat in the service of Polish King Sigismund I Jagiellon and Queen Bona Sforza, and then the Senator of the Polish Kingdom as the Bishop of Kulm (1530/33–1537) and Ermland (1537–1548). The final office was also connected with the post of president of the Royal Prussian Council.
            Dantiscus’ correspondence forms the largest collection of letters (over 6,000) in Central-Eastern Europe, related to the Polish royal court and its partners across the world during that period. Among Dantiscus’ 656 correspondents we find rulers, politicians, knights, banquers, humanists and scholars, including especially Nicolaus Copernicus and Erasmus of Rotterdam.
            The project “Registration and Publication of the Correspondence of Ioannes Dantiscus”, carried out over nearly thirty years at the University of Warsaw (Laboratory for Editing Sources, Faculty of “Artes Liberales”), currently includes two elements:
            
                Traditional print publication of the series 
                    Corpus Epistularum Ioannis Dantisci (appearing in print since 2004 in editorial collaboration between the University of Warsaw and the Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cracow; seven volumes have appeared to date, including three volumes of source texts, two volumes of inventories, and two volumes of studies and commentaries.)
                
                Web publication entitled 
                    Corpus of Ioannes Dantiscus Texts and Correspondence (letters, poems, diplomatic memorials, envoy’s speeches and records), 
                    dantiscus.al.uw.edu.pl, first published in July 1, 2010.
                
            
            The “Corpus of Ioannes Dantiscus Texts and Correspondence”, with an interface in English and Polish, presents in extenso transcriptions of the primary sources enriched with elaborate critical apparatus. It also contains detailed inventory data on the entirety of Dantiscus’ correspondence (sender, addressee, incipit, dating, data on the original source, data on publication in print) and all the Latin texts written by Dantiscus (778 letters, 107 poems, 7 speeches, 15 memorials, 36 records, 1 other text) collected in the “Corpus of Ioannes Dantiscus’ Latin Texts”, as well as a selection of other correspondence texts (letters to Dantiscus, Dantiscus’ letters in German). The selection of texts edited so far was based on the research needs of the program as a whole. Plans for the future envisage publication of the complete “Corpus of Ioannes Dantiscus’ German Texts” (letters and documents). The web publication also serves as a first draft for the print publication of the Corpus Epistularum Ioannis Dantisci.
            In order to present the source texts online, a custom-designed system of digital registration and annotation for Renaissance correspondence was created, combining transcriptions encoded in accordance with TEI Guidelines, and a relational database that stores a rich set of metadata. All this meticulously collected data offers great potential for further research along many diverse lines. As an example, encoding of references to places and individuals mentioned in this large body of texts allows us to map areas of interest and influence for correspondents or to track their itineraries. Focusing only on people, it is possible to reconstruct parts of social networks of the time, analyzing not only obvious links between correspondents but also references to people co-occurring across the documents. Other areas of scientific investigation have been opened thanks to encoding of variance across extant sources, regularized and original orthography, and other transcriptional features.
            The adopted TEI-based approach allows for single source publishing workflow for both the printed series and the web resource, helping to achieve high standards of quality and consistency across publications. As the project and its predecessors span over two decades, technological choices have to be revisited from time to time. The current relational-database-based publishing system, with roots in the early nineties, is planned to be replaced with a native XML database and publishing solution, better suited to satisfying needs for flexible querying of the existing data. Future plans also encompass the integration of visualizations, both to assist research carried out by project collaborators and to provide different ways of engagement with this rich resource, thus broadening its potential audience.
        
    


        
            The project “Repository of Styrian Cultural Heritage” aims to build a digital archive of cultural heritage objects to make digitized and scholarly annotated collections from various institutions (archives, museums or universities) available for the public. To implement accurate retrieval functionalities and special visualizations a consistent data pool is indispensable. Furthermore, to guarantee data longevity and the possibility to analyse, re-use or add to the collected data, a well-documented management plan is of great importance. Contrary to possible assumptions that the increasing number of similar portals means that comparable documentations already exist in abundance, most portals either do not have any kind of documentation (e.g. Kulturerbeportal-Niedersachsen, BLO, DG-Kulturerbe) or strongly focus on details (e.g. metadata and mapping guidelines or specify controlled lists for comparability) (e.g. bavarikon, DDB, Europeana, museum-digital, MIMO). They do not offer extensive guidelines, especially for the creation of digital collections from scratch. At the Centre for Information Modelling in Graz we designed a management plan for this project according to the OAIS reference model and taking into account aspects concerning research data management (e.g. Puhl et al., 2015), for all partners involved.
            Because we gather data from more than one preservation infrastructure (e.g. FEDORA-based repository GAMS) and deal with a variety of resources, from text-centred materials and images to museum objects and artefacts from various contexts (e.g. criminology or archaeology), the designed strategy is generic and expandable. The poster will show systematic strategies regarding different aspects ranging from evaluation to content curation and data re-use. The steps include: 
            Analysis & Evaluation: The starting-point is to evaluate and analyse the structure of the diverse sources. It involves a discussion about the goal and scope of the project in general as well as possible publication scenarios and functionalities for the collected data. At this stage, communication between technically skilled humanists and specialists for the respective collections is crucial. This collaboration saves time and effort in later stages of the project. Based on this foundation, workflows and data models exactly suited to the needs of the specific institution, including legal aspects, can be established.
            Modelling & Metadata Generation: After these evaluations, a data model, including obligatory object descriptions as a minimum requirement for all object types along with rules for metadata creation, has to be developed. Furthermore the depth of the annotation and the use of controlled vocabularies for semantic enrichment have to be defined.
            Quality Control & Preserving Data: Quality control of data is an integral part and takes place at various stages, during data collection or digitization. Already existing digital data has to be reviewed and if necessary revised according to the defined rulesets. In this respect, the documentation of data provenance (origins of data, revision agreements and transformation scenarios) is an essential step. Gathered and harvested data has to be transformed from proprietary file formats to suitable storage formats. Internationally recognized standards like DC for basic descriptive metadata, TEI for manuscripts or LIDO for museum objects are recommended to maximize possible re-use and interoperability of the data. For the web portal, all objects are going to be mapped to EDM. The model forms the common ground for the general object description and semantic enrichment.
            For long-term preservation, platform-independent systems and open-source software like a Fedora-based repository should be used (e.g. Stigler, Steiner 2015). All objects need persistent identification, which ensures its availability and citability.
            Access & Dissemination: Based on consistent data, various search options (filter, facet or advanced) can be implemented. Next to a general representation for all artefacts, elaborate object-specific functionalities and visualizations, like the possibility to thumb through manuscripts or view postal routes of correspondence on a historic map, can be offered.
            Adding & Re-use: The possible re-use of data and the addition of new objects or scientific findings as well as the further enrichment of metadata also have to be considered. Adding information according to the defined guidelines guarantees the same quality for re-use, whether for follow-up research, teaching or browsing.
            The poster will generally introduce the approaches to a common web portal for a variety of digital resources. It will present a best practice model for an interdisciplinary, cross-institutional cultural heritage project, based on experiences concerning data preservation, consistent metadata description and enrichment. In this respect it also provides guidance to implement a long-lasting expandable digital archive.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bavarikon. 
                        http://www.bavarikon.de/object/bav:BSB-CMS-0000000000000605, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        BLO - Bayerische Landesbibliothek Online. 
                        http://www.bayerische-landesbibliothek-online.de, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        CCSDS - Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (2012). OAIS-MAGENTA BOOK (2012). 
                        http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/650x0m2.pdf, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        DC - Dublin Core. 
                        http://dublincore.org/specifications, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        DDB – Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek. 
                        https://api.deutsche-digitale-bibliothek.de/doku/display/ADD, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        DG-Kulturerbe. 
                        http://www.dgkulturerbe.be, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        EDM - Europeana Data Model. 
                        http://pro.europeana.eu/page/edm-documentation, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Europeana: 
                        http://pro.europeana.eu/, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    Kulturerbeportal-Niedersachsen. 
                        http://kulturerbe.niedersachsen.de/viewer/start/, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        LIDO - Lightweight Information Descriping Objects. 
                        http://www.lido-schema.org/schema/v1.0/lido-v1.0-specification.pdf, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        MIMO – Musical Instrument Museums Online. 
                        http://www.mimo-international.com/MIMO/how-to-join.aspx, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Museum-digital: 
                        http://www.museum-digital.de/index.php?t=einmaleins, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        Puhl, J. et al. (2015). Diskussion und Definition eines Research Data LifeCycle für die digitalen Geisteswissenschaften, PURL. 
                        http://resolver.sub.uni-goettingen.de/purl/?dariah-2015-4, (accessed 30 October 2015). 
                    
                    
                        Repository of Styrian Cultural Heritage. 
                        http://wissenschaftserbe.uni-graz.at/en, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Stigler J. and Steiner E. (2015). GAMS and Cirilo Client Policies, documentation and tutorial. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/doku, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Stigler J. Cirilo Client. 
                        https://github.com/acdh/cirilo, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        TEI - Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org, (accessed 30 October 2015).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Today, it is imperative that we develop an ideological infrastructure that 
                both supports and facilitates feminist interventions within connective, 
                networked elements of the contemporary world. [...] We want to 
                cultivate the exercise of positive freedom – freedom-to rather than simply 
                freedom-from – and urge feminists to equip themselves with the skills to 
                redeploy existing technologies and invent novel cognitive and material tools 
                in the service of common ends.
            
            Laboria Cubonix, 
                Xenofeminism: A Politics for Alienation
            
            
                Introduction
                This panel considers how gender and digital infrastructures shape each other. Infrastructure can be described as that which creates the conditions of possibility for certain kinds of activities. In the context of digital humanities, infrastructure can refer to physical infrastructure such as servers, software infrastructure in the form of code or a software stack, organizational infrastructure such as a scholarly society, institutional infrastructure such as a DH centre, or methodological infrastructure such as a standard. 
                As is often observed, infrastructure tends to be transparent or invisible until broken (see Bowker and Starr), rather in the manner that ideological structures can blind us to systemic discrimination and gender bias. Rather than view infrastructure as a transparent mediation, feminist thinking invites broader questions around how we might address the social or relational aspects of infrastructure: 
                
                    How can digital infrastructure, as technologies of connection, support complex, non-binary understanding?
                    How does a systemic approach to information infrastructure offer opportunities for a more systemic political critique within the digital humanities?
                    How can we address the ways in which standards (such as the TEI encoding of sex [Terras]) and procedures (‘organizing logic’ [Posner]) embed values?
                    What would an explicitly ‘ideological infrastructure’ look like? Is it desirable?
                    To what extent can existing infrastructure be adapted for feminist ends and/or do we need to create new forms and instances of infrastructure to redress inequity?
                
                The panel will be a hybrid of the panel- and multiple-paper session. Within each of its three sectioned themes, the panelists specified for a particular subtopic will have the responsibility to open up discussion with short statements of up to 7 minutes, followed by pithy responses from other panel members (who will have read the statements in advance) of up to 5 minutes in total, followed by an invitation to the audience to continue the discussion jointly with us. What is proposed, therefore, is not a series of 5 papers, but a set of interweaving engagements with each other and our audience that will make clear the connections between the component topics.
            
            
                Training and pedagogical traditions 
                
                    DH Training (Tanya Clement) Project-based research is often heralded as the site of work that defines DH. Indeed, in Willard McCarty’s DH paradigm, the DH practitioner alone possesses ‘an outsider’s objectivity’ and the ‘performative ability to move in and out of disciplines, back and forth between duck and rabbit... while carrying its own intellectual load on its back’ (136). Except, a feminist perspective based on situated knowledges (Haraway, 1998) teaches us that what liberates us from obstacles often blinds us to the opportunities that difficulties illuminate.
                
                This rhetoric of ‘mastery’ over technology threatens an advancement of knowledge production from other perspectives, adopting what Haraway would call ‘the standpoint of the Man, the One God, whose Eye produces, appropriates and orders all difference’ (Haraway, 1988: 587). Further, training in project-related work arguably produces skills- rather than knowledge-based programs, and digital humanists professionals rather than researchers (Clement, 2012; Kraus, 2013; Mahony and Pierazzo, 2012). The debate about whether designing and building tools provides indispensable knowledge about information infrastructures is inflected by the concern that the ability to bridge the ‘building’ gap) largely reflects social privilege.
                Clement will posit a contradiction between the presumed goals behind DH work, and the everyday practices of DH scholars and major DH education and training programs. In short, while scholars claim a keen desire to frame infrastructure development in the context of theories such as cultural criticism, feminist inquiry, and post-colonial critique, her investigation indicates that many training programs are not framed in these ways. 
                
                    Community-based Training and Research Networks (Jacque Wernimont): 
                    
                        FemTechNet
                    
                     is an activated network of scholars, artists, and students working on, with, and at the borders of technology, science, and feminism in many fields including Science and Technology Studies, Digital Humanities, Media and Visual Studies, Art, Gender, Queer, and Ethnic Studies. This networked structure works asynchronously and across local and international interventions. A major feature of our work is the series of Distributed Open Collaborative Courses (DOCCs) that recognize the complexities of the learning situation by designing platforms both locally and collectively. They represent new models from which many stakeholders will learn. The DOCCs are alternatives to the ‘reform’ efforts represented by the Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), which actually do little to change the status quo and can even be counterproductive when promoters oversimplify questions of access, underestimate investments of labor in instructional technology, deny the importance of infrastructure and its human and discursive aspects, and reinforce ideologies about technology being values-neutral. 
                
                In addition to curricular work, FemTechNet members collaborate on the design and creation of feminist technological innovations and in so doing extend our networked training into both traditional curriculum, apprenticeship, and non-hierarchical collaboration. Consequently, FemTechNet is a model of research and training infrastructure that foregrounds transparent and locally responsive structures, affords the ability to move up and back as time, expertise, and desire allow, and places feminist principles of equity, justice, and engagement at the fore. It is also a case study in understanding the labor, care, and resources necessary to maintain international cooperation and collaboration. We believe that our infrastructure is as expressive of our intellectual and ethical commitments as any content that we might produce, making the challenges of distributed online work around digital technologies not simply innovative, but also absolutely necessary. 
            
            
                Examples of feminist technical infrastructure
                To give a sense of the array and complexity of infrastructural concerns, we will frame three quite different technical infrastructure initiatives in relation to feminism.
                
                    HuNI (Deb Verhoeven): 
                    HuNI, Humanities Networked Infrastructure, is a service that aggregates data from a broad range of humanities disciplines and institutional sources and makes them available to researchers and any members of the public with access to a browser (Verhoeven and Burrows, 2015). HuNI provides users the opportunity to build collections and propose a graph of relationships between records which in turn contribute to a HuNI network graph. As researchers themselves create the links between data, they also produce a kind of ‘vernacular ontology’ which, rather than providing an ‘authoritative’ model of the data, instead allows for diversity, complexity, interpretation and contestability. In this way, HuNI acknowledges ‘difference’ in the representation and organisation of knowledge and underlines the way in which gender (and other ‘differences’) are socially produced rather than empirical givens.
                
                
                    ARC (Laura Mandell): ARC, the 
                    Advanced Research Consortium, is the parent group overseeing and supporting 
                    NINES, 
                    18thConnect, 
                    MESA, and the forthcoming ReKN and ModNets. These period-specific, online finding aids and scholarly communities work with traditional scholars to encourage digital production: they provide peer review for digital projects, and guidance along the way. ARC supports that work by hosting the web interfaces for these groups, the SOLR server feeding them metadata, providing the Lucene search engine that powers the online finding aids. ARC also coordinates with proprietary companies to import their data into these online finding aids in order to make them into comprehensive research environments. Finally, ARC is attempting to build a sustainability plan for the group by selling BigDIVA, the Big Data Infrastructure Visualization Application (
                    
                        http://www.bigdiva.org
                    ). 
                
                ARC is not explicitly a feminist infrastructure, but it is noteworthy that it was originally designed by a feminist, Bethany Nowviskie, and is currently directed by a feminist, Laura Mandell. It is possible, however, that the ethic of service and care is a form of stealth feminist infrastructure (Brown, 2008), channeling technological and social structures toward serving and educating the academy. Indeed, this infrastructure has a service focus: the period-specific groups attempt to serve scholars, to educate them about best practices in the peer-review procedure, to work with them in building up projects and creating metadata about those projects. ARC serves the period-specific communities so that they can focus on outreach to traditional scholars. At a recent two-day ARC meeting, including one or two directors from each period-specific group, we spent a full fifth of our meeting time discussing sexism and its impact on our work: the ARC board is made up of feminist men and women attempting to intervene in the way that the academy does its normal business.
                
                    CWRC (Susan Brown): The 
                    Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory is a feminist project in drag: built on a feminist recovery initiative (Brown et al 2006-15), it was a bid to gain infrastructure funding for several projects in women’s writing, but its scope was strategically broadened and generalized to ‘writing in and about Canada’. At least in 2009 in Canada, focusing on ostensibly neutral infrastructure was apparently a better strategy for gaining funding than a research grant application focused on women’s writing. Hence ‘drag’: we weren’t disguising who we were, but dressing ourselves up in infrastructural (read male) clothing, performing the ‘neutral’. As a virtual research environment, CWRC tried to take on board the insights of scholars such as Lucy Suchman that we needed to design for situated, embodied, that is sexed and gendered, subjects. Nevertheless, the project struggled throughout with the divide between form and content, technical and subject expertise, that has largely characterized the division between the digital humanities and feminist scholarship, even as CWRC supports projects that investigate gender, race, nationality, and sexuality in diverse ways.
                
            
            
                Infrastructure, collaboration, and credit
                We will conclude by tackling the thorny question of credit, awkward though it is to articulate. Infrastructure development’s implicit relation to service means that the development of research infrastructure is not considered research 
                    per se but rather is consigned to the role of research ‘support’ and is therefore not ‘accountable’ as a specific research outcome in a range of contexts. To materialize research infrastructure is a process that is clearly distinguished from the reality produced: a covert operation, not a recognized result. And yet the devising and development of new systems might equally be seen as the devising and development of their standards, measures, and meanings and the principles of their provenance in which the restless, transformative, and connective work of infrastructure can be understood as a form of inventiveness and interpretive resourcefulness too. 
                
                Collaboration is both highly prized in the digital humanities as a privileged, indeed essential (Price, 2011: 9) form of scholarly practice. Yet, we would contend on the basis of a number of stories arising from our own experience and knowledge of others’, it is also fraught for women to the extent that their contributions are more prone than men’s to be overlooked or misattributed. We will provide a few largely anonymized examples of having work misattributed, credit or authorship erased (or absorbed into a project identity), and contributions to fields ignored, followed by discussion of how to combat such tendencies.
                The panel, we hope, will help to improve understanding of 1) the extent to which even something as apparently neutral or apolitical as infrastructure is imbued with gender and other socio-political considerations; 2) the impact of systemic gender and racial discrimination in a range of infrastructural contexts, notwithstanding the extent to which so many DH practitioners work hard to overcome the biases embedded in our cultures and our discourses; and 3) current and prospective strategies for countering those biases. We will seek to engage the audience throughout this session to include in the panel’s discussions a broad range of perspectives on and positions in relation to infrastructure. 
                Successful infrastructure has the capacity to transform the world in which we already (co‑)exist. Digital humanities infrastructure can open up new visions of the world in which we live, and invite contemplation of the different ways in which we might live, and work, in it.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bowker, G. C. and Starr, S. L. (2000). 
                        Sorting Things Out: Classification and its Consequences. Cambridge, MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Brown, S. (2008). ‘Delivery/Service.’ In Smith, M. N., et al., 
                        Agora.Techno.Phobia.Philia2: feminist critical inquiry, knowledge building, digital humanities. Panel at Digital Humanities 2008. Oulu Finland. 
                        
                            http://www.rch.uky.edu/docs/DigitalHumanities2008BookOfAbstracts.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        Brown, S, Clements, P and Grundy, I.  (2006-2015). 
                        Orlando: Women’s Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to the Present. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
                        http://orlando.cambridge.org
                    
                    
                        Clement, T. (2012). Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills, Principles, and Habits of Mind.’ In Hirsch, B. D. (Ed.)
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge, Open Book Publishers. 
                        
                            http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161#page/1/mode/2up
                        
                    
                    
                        Haraway, D. (1988). Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective.
                        Feminist Studies, 
                        14(3): 575–99.
                    
                    
                        Harding, S. G. (1986).
                        The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca, Cornell University Press.
                    
                    
                        Kraus, K. (2013). Alt-Research for Humanities PhDs. Kari Kraus. 
                        
                            http://www.karikraus.com/?p=234
                        
                    
                    
                        Laboria Cubonix Collective.
                        Xenofeminism: A Politics for Alienation. 
                        
                            http://www.laboriacuboniks.net/
                        
                    
                    
                        Mahony, S. and Pierazzo, E. (2015). 8. Teaching Skills or Teaching Methodology?, Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics Cambridge, Open Book Publishers, pp. 215–25.
                        
                            http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161#page/1/mode/2up
                        
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2005). 
                        Humanities Computing.
                         New York, Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        Posner, M.
                         (2015). 
                        
                            The Radical Potential of the Digital Humanities: The Most Challenging Computing Problem is the Interrogation of Power
                        
                        .’ 
                        The Impact Blog
                        , London School of Economics. First appeared August 12, 2015. 
                        
                            http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/08/12/the-radical-unrealized-potential-of-digital-humanities/
                        
                    
                    
                        Price, K. M. (2011). Collaborative work and the conditions for American literary scholarship in a digital age. In Earhart, A. E. and Jewell, A. (Ed.)
                        The American Literature Scholar in the Digital Age. Ann Arbor, University of Michgan Presss, pp. 9-27.
                        
                            http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/etlc.9362034.0001.001
                        
                    
                    
                        Suchman, L. A. (1987). 
                        Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2015). On Changing the Rules of the Digital Humanities. Melissa Terras’ Blog.
                        
                        http://melissaterras.blogspot.com/2013/05/on-changing-rules-of-digital-humanities.html
                        
                    
                    
                        Verhoeven, D. and Burrows, T. (2015). Aggregating Cultural Heritage Data for Research Use: The Humanities Networked Infrastructure (HuNI). In Garoufallou, E. and Hartley, R. J. (Eds.)
                        Metadata and Semantics Research, Proceedings of the 9th Research Conference. Springer, Cham, Computer and Information Science 544, pp. 417-423.
                        
                        http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24129-6_36
                        
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Motivation
                “Citation is the core of scholarship” Neel Smith and Chris Blackwell state in their paper on the CTS/CITE Architecture (Smith et al., 2012). A citation like “Athenaeus, 
                    Deipnosophists, edition of Kaibel (1887), book 1, chapter 3” can refer to only one string of Greek words and it is valid for every printed copy of Kaibel’s edition. Such a citation identifies an object of study uniquely, and it is “independent of any implementing technology”. But such a citation scheme is hardly machine readable, and the digital processing of citations becomes more and more important in the humanities. To support this task, the CITE Architecture
                    1 was designed. Adopting the international standard of URNs
                    2, unique, complete and machine readable scholarly citations, so called CTS URNs can be generated.
                
                Although the CITE Architecture is a substantial basis, it does not provide an interface to intuitively make this capability accessible to humanities scholars. This paper aims to fill this gap. We designed the web-based application 
                    CTRaCE that first of all allows the browsing and reading of texts provided in the corresponding canonical format. With basic interaction functionality, 
                    CTRaCE supports easy creation of a digital citation of an arbitrary text passage as a CTS URN. As it can also be used to resolve existent CTS URNs, 
                    CTRaCE fulfills the major requirements for the processing of manually generated digital citations necessary for digital scholarship.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Screenshot of 
                            CTRaCE showing the CTS URN greekLit:tlg0008.tlg001.perseus_grc3:1.3:
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Technical Basis
                
                    CTRaCE is based on Canonical Text Services (CTS), which – part of the CITE architecture – addresses two fundamental needs in digital scholarship: (1) the citation of textual units, and (2) their retrieval. To accomplish the transition between classical and digital citations, CTS use Uniform Resource Names (URNs). The top-level structure of a CTS URN
                    3 has the following format:
                
                cts:urn:namespace:work:passage
                As URNs are organized hierarchically from left to right, each component increases the precision of the corresponding reference. The 
                    namespace component is the top level division of the system. As we use the Perseus Digital Library
                    4 as demonstration corpus, one of the namespaces is “greekLit”, which identifies works in ancient Greek that are preserved through manuscript tradition (Smith et al., 2012). The 
                    work component specifies the document the URN refers to. It is divided into 
                    textgroup.work.version.exemplar from which the last two parts are optional. For example, the URN
                
                cts:urn:greekLit:tlg0008.tlg001.perseus_grc3:
                refers to Kaibel’s edition of “Deipnosophists” (tlg001), located in the textgroup that contains works by Athenaeus (tlg0008). Generating a URN representation for each text, the CTS architecture organizes the whole corpus in the form of a tree with inner nodes representing the hierarchical structure among the texts, which are the leaf nodes of the tree.
                Each individual text further has a canonical citation scheme assigned. As the hierarchy of texts varies depending on genre – a play might be arranged by acts and scenes while a poem uses verses –, this scheme is flexibly designed. Additionally, the URN can be further refined with the 
                    passage component that specifies a continuous part of the text – even on character granularity if necessary.
                
                cts:urn:greekLit:tlg0008.tlg001.perseus_grc3:1.2@καὶ[2]-1.3@δρ
                refers to the “Deipnosophists” part that ranges from the second occurrence of the string “καὶ” in the second chapter of the first book until the first occurrence of “δρ” in the third chapter. 
                Figure 2 displays an overview of our CTS based architecture. Though the scalable CTS implementation (Tiepmar et al., 2014) we use as server infrastructure supports any text in Unicode, we built our application with the idea to operate with texts in TEI
                    5 format that often include styling markup, which can be used for visualization purposes. 
                    CTRaCE is a client side web application communicating with the CTS server using the CTS protocol
                    6. In the following section, we explain the design and the functionality of 
                    CTRaCE in detail.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 2: Architecture overview
                    
                
            
            
                
                    User Interface 
                
                The CTS architecture is a robust basis for digital citations, but due to its technical nature, tools need to be built upon the architecture to leverage its functionality in an intuitive way to humanities scholars. We present 
                    CTRaCE for that purpose, an example screenshot is shown in Figure 1. It focuses on supporting the following three tasks:
                
                
                    browsing and reading texts in the CTS system
                    creating and exporting citations using CTS URNs
                    resolving CTS URNs by visualizing the cited text and its surrounding context
                
                
                    CTRaCE is designed to display the content of a single URN, always shown as parameter in the address bar of the internet browser. Everything related to the citation this URN points to is drawn with a white background in three view components, which we explain below.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 3: Navigation component
                    
                
                The 
                    navigation component shown in Figure 3 is placed in the header section of the user interface and can be used to browse through all available documents. It is derived from the ontology of the CTS system described above. Each row represents one level of the URN parts that identify a text. If appropriate metadata such as authors or titles are available, we display these labels instead of URN identifiers as fallback. Each text in this tree can be selected via mouse click for close reading.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 4: Distant view component
                    
                
                
                    CTRaCE displays texts as one continuous scrollable block, which for optimal performance is loaded in chunks. To the left of the text, we implemented a 
                    distant view component showing the citation structure in relation to the visible portion of the text. We therefore adopt a visualization method called Icicle Plot (Kruskal et al, 1983) that shows hierarchical relations in a compact way. Figure 4 shows a screenshot of this view. The underlying text uses a three level hierarchy to create a citation: book, chapter and section. Each gray-bordered rectangle in the view represents a node within the citation structure. The leftmost rectangle labeled with the URN of the document represents the root. Inside each node’s rectangle, we provide information about their direct children regarding the citation tree. Since the document contains eight books, the same number of alternating shaded rectangles is drawn inside the root node. We provide quick navigation through the document using mouse clicks on these inner rectangles. Depending on the document position, the corresponding citation nodes are drawn in the remaining columns with the leaf nodes aligned to the text. As the text shown in Figure 4 is only part of the first chapter, there is only one node rectangle in the second column. Additionally, the white rectangles depict which part of a node is defined by the current URN, and the blue rectangles represent the visible portion of a node.
                
                
                    The text of the document is shown in the 
                    text reader component in main area of the screen. As the text chunks are loaded from the server, they are transformed into HTML code. So far we implemented two rendering methods as shown in Figure 5. The XML view mode displays the text including its markup in a syntax highlighted, indented fashion. The Styled view mode only displays the text using the markup information to style it appropriately. For example,  tags will be rendered bold,  tags indented, etc. The user can switch between both modes while viewing the document.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 5: XML (left) and Styled (right) rendering methods
                    When generating a new digital citation with our application, basically the current URN is changed. There are two possibilities to do so. First, the scholar can click on one of the labels of the nodes in the distant view component. This selects the corresponding entire citation node. Second, the user can mark the desired text passage in the text reader component with the mouse, and then click the “Set Citation” button. The updated URN then represents the selected text passage. Finally, a popup dialog helps to export the URN or the text it is referring to. This includes the possibility to generate a link pointing to our web application showing the generated citation.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                The proposed 
                    CTRaCE interface is based on Canonical Text Services in order to provide an online service to generate citations of digital text editions. Such a front-end allows humanities scholars not only to close read texts, but also to identify and retrieve text passages of interest. The interface offers the possibility to generate and export citations of textual works down to the character level. Moreover, 
                    CTRaCE is a service that is capable of resolving existent or with 
                    CTRaCE generated citations by opening the referenced text passage.
                
                As of now, 
                    CTRaCE is a very helpful tool for humanities scholars who want to produce machine readable citations. Future steps in the development of 
                    CTRaCE include visualizations of different kinds of annotations on a CTS passage produced by different scholars to facilitate the collaborative work on a shared text of interest.
                
            
            
                Acknowledgments
                Parts of the work presented here is the result of the project “Die Bibliothek der Milliarden Wörter” funded by the European Social Fund. We additionally want to thank Monica Berti for the valuable input and discussion about use cases for our application.
            
            
                Notes
                1. 
                    
                
                2. 
                    
                
                3. 
                    
                
                4. 
                    
                
                5. 
                    
                
                6. 
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Kruskal, J. B. and Landwehr, J. M. (1983). Icicle plots: Better displays for hierarchical clustering. 
                        The American Statistician, 37(2): 162-68.
                    
                    
                        Smith, D. N. and Blackwell, C. (2012). Four URLs, Limitless Apps: Separation of concerns in the Homer Multitext Architecture. In Muellner, L. (ed.),
                        Donum natalicium digitaliter confectum Gregorio Nagy septuagenario a discipulis collegis familiaribus oblatum, Washington, DC: The Center for Hellenic Studies of Harvard University.
                    
                    
                        Tiepmar, J., Teichmann, C., Heyer, G., Berti, M., and Crane, G. (2014). A New Implementation for Canonical Text Services. In 
                        Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH),
                        Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            EVT (Edition Visualization Technology
                Edition Visualization Technology: 
                    
                ) is a light-weight, open source tool specifically designed to create digital editions from XML-encoded texts, freeing the scholar from the burden of web programming and enabling the final user to browse, explore and study digital editions by means of a user-friendly interface, providing a set of tools (zoom, magnifier and hot-spots for manuscript images, text-image linking and an internal search engine for the edited texts) for research purposes. The starting point of the system is one or more documents in the standard TEI P5 format, which is turned into a web based application – a mix of HTML5, CSS3 and JavaScript – that can be easily shared on the Web. The text can be presented in different levels of edition (e.g. interpretative, diplomatic) and, besides the default visualization layout where text and scans of the original manuscript are linked together and placed side by side, a book reader mode can be activated if double side images are supplied.
            
            Even if it was born in the context of the specific use case the Digital Vercelli Book project, whose first version has been available online for about a year
                Digital Vercelli Book beta edition: 
                    
                , it is able to fit different texts and needs. For example, it is now being used to publish the digital edition of the Codice Pelavicino manuscript
                Codice Pelavicino digital edition: 
                    
                , a medieval codex preserving charters dating back to the XIII century. Moreover, it has been used by the CVCE
                
                    
                 (Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l’Europe) as a starting point to create a publication framework for bilingual (French, English) documents of the W.E.U. (Western European Union). As a first consequence of these collaborations, EVT has been enriched with several new features
                Especially if compared to the first version presented at DH 2014.:
            
            
                thanks to an appropriate encoding, it is now possible to automatically create a list of all the entity names in the text that can be used both to provide a direct access to the page where a particular entity occurs and to present all the additional information considered relevant for that specific entity;
                an internal search engine allows the user to perform textual searches in a specific edition level for the shown text, and a virtual keyboard holding special characters is available if necessary;
                a generalized method to add critical textual notes has been implemented;
                all the information included in the TEI header, in particular the  element, and in the  element, can now be shown to the user in a separate formatted panel;
                the user interface is now more flexible thanks to new configuration options, and it can be localized in different languages.
            
            
                
                    
                    Figure 1: EVT 1.0 - List of named entities
                
            
            
                
                    
                    Figure 2: EVT 1.0 - Search results
                
            
            The continuous development and need to adapt EVT to different types of documents and TEI-encoded texts has shifted the development focus towards creation of a more general tool for the web publication of TEI-based documents, able to cater for multiple use cases. This decision has led to a complete revision of the infrastructure in order to improve flexibility and modularity, to make it easier to implement new features and to adjust the UI layout for different kinds of editions. This is why the development team decided to refactor the whole code of the viewer and base it on AngularJS
                AngularJS: 
                    
                , a Javascript framework which implements the MVC (Model View Controller) pattern to separate presentation, data, and logic component, providing a great modularity of the web application.
            
            Perhaps the most important new feature developed for the next EVT version is the support for critical editions, again encoded according to the TEI XML P5 standard. This new level of edition is based on the current TEI relevant CA module and Guidelines chapter
                
                    
                 and it supports the Parallel Segmentation method. The current implementation, however, is kept as generic and flexible as possible to make it easier to update it when the TEI module will be rewritten and expanded to become more powerful and suitable to philologists
                For more information see: 
                    TEI Wiki. Critical Apparatus Workgroup, 
                    TEI Wiki. TEI Special Interest Group on Manuscripts and 
                    Hugh Cayless. Representing Textual Variation
                . Among the different tools offered, EVT will provide a straight and quick link from the critical apparatus to the textual context of a specific reading; moreover, it will allow to compare witnesses’ texts among each other or with respect to the base text of the edition (or to another specific text); finally, if the digitized images of each manuscript are provided, each variant can be examined in its palaeographic context.
            
            From the point of view of the editor, the new architecture will be as easy to use as the current one: the only technical skill required from the editors will be a general competence in XML editing to configure EVT properly and the care to place each XML-related component of the edition (mainly the schema besides the encoded texts) into the correct area of the directory structure. Moreover, the editor will be able to modify the CSS style sheets to customize all aspects of text visualization, according to his/her needs.
            
                
                    
                    Figure 3: EVT 2.0 - Critical edition. Collation of witnesses
                
            
            The poster that we would like to present at the DH 2016 will show how far EVT has progressed and matured in terms of features, code robustness and UI innovation especially with regard to critical edition support and handling of manuscript variants.
            During the poster session you will be able to try a working demo of the software.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Angular.js. 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        Codice Pelavicino digital edition. 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        CVCE (Centre Virtuel de la Connaissance sur l’Europe).
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        Digital Vercelli Book. 
                        Beta edition. 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        EVT. 
                        Home page,
                        
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        Hugh Cayless.
                         Representing Textual Variation (2nd Draft). 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        TEI Guidelines.
                        Chapter 12 Critical Apparatus.
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        TEI Wiki.
                        Critical Apparatus Workgroup. 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        TEI Wiki.
                        TEI Special Interest Group on Manuscripts (TEI MS SIG). 
                         (accessed 28 February 2016)
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            The proposed paper reports on philological and computational aspects of building and annotating a literary corpus. As part of the ongoing corpus-stylistic project Q-LIMO (Quantitative Analysis of Literary Modernity), the KARREK (Kafka/Referenzkorpus), a corpus that centers on German narrative Literature, is designed to enable comparative quantitative-stylistic analyses of Franz Kafka’s prose. The corpus includes literary as well as non-literary texts and is tagged for part-of-speech (POS) and enriched by selected types of meta-data (e.g., author, title, date of publication, and [narrative] genre). The number of digital German literary text collections has been growing, and there are several repositories, such as the TextGrid Repository, the German Text Archive (DTA), as well as Gutenberg-DE and individual digital collections (e.g., the Central Catalogue of Digitized Prints [zvdd]). However, so far, no digital resource has been specifically tailored to the needs of quantitative Kafka-research. We offer such a resource, KARREK, which covers the entirety of Kafka’s writings (including literary and non-literary ones) as well as a meaningful selection of Newer German Literature, putting a focus on Modernism (ca. 1880 – 1930). What is more, it caters to consistent and high-quality linguistic annotation, text-markup, and metadata. The corpus is hence a unique resource; it will be made publicly available.
            Building and annotating the KARREK poses unique challenges typical for textual analysis in Digital Humanities: The first main task is a philological one, selecting the texts that allow meaningful and hypothesis-driven analyses of Franz Kafka’s writings. Philological standards of corpus construction are especially high in terms of editorial detail and consideration of cultural, societal and philosophical contexts (cf., Engel and Auerochs, 2010) as well as linguistic ones (cf. Blahak, 2015). KARREK is hence balanced for factors such as canonicity, popularity, (narrative) genre, and linguistic variety. It strives for clarity in terms of literary edition. A special feature of the corpus is its representation of Kafka’s reading habits: we assume that a writer’s texts may reflect a dimension of ‘constructive reading’ (‘produktive Rezeption’, cf. Grimm, 1977), resulting in stylistic similarity with particular authors. For corpus compilation, we thus systematically review the available sources to determine which literary and non-literary works may be candidates for having influenced his writings (e.g., Blank 2001; Born 1990; Born et al., 1983), with ensuing data analysis to explore Kafka’s position within a global network of texts and authors. 
            Our aim to form a reference corpus (with some degree of ‘representativeness’ for Newer German Literature, Prague Literature, Modern Literature, etc.) requires transforming a substantial amount of ‘big literary data’ into a consistent corpus. The philological questions transform into computational tasks where retro-digitization (and OCR) is concerned, as well as preprocessing of the data, with consistent metadata (available literature on meta-data (e.g., Alemuh and Brett, 2015; Lazinger, 2001), as well as a uniform textual format, including parameters of textual markup (TEI-5). The entire corpus is going to be published in a flexible stand-off format (TCF) which allows further annotation.
            For our means, the second main task is the reliable and accurate linguistic annotation for POS (with the STTS tag-set for German). Word class is a reliable indicator of register and genre variation (e.g., Biber and Conrad, 2009), with a high degree of accurate automatic annotation. Although there are high-quality POS-taggers available for German (e.g., Unigram, HMM, and Perceptron Taggers), most were trained on late 20th-Century news texts. To ensure accurate tagging of historically prior and literary texts, for training our taggers, we use as a first resource the POS-tagged corpus of the German Text Archive (DTA) which comprises historical and literary data. In addition, a round of manual error management (on a sample of ca. 40,000 words), as well as training of a CRF-tagger (MarMot) are administered to heighten reported accuracy of POS-tagging for our corpus. We are currently establishing a workflow comprising an eXist-database with an annotation interface, as well as a procedure for evaluation of tagger output for different sections of the corpus. Next to the compilation of the corpus, our project will thus offer more insight into POS-tagging of historical German narrative literary texts.
            In DH, tackling representativeness in literary corpus building is an important research task, with theoretical background offered by corpus linguists and computational linguists (e.g., Biber, 1994; Evert, 2006; Lee, 2001). Although methods of ‘big data’ computing (cf. Anderson, 2008; Manovich, 2015) are extremely promising for digital literary studies, we suggest that in our field creating balanced and representative corpora is a vital question. Since there are only few best practice examples (for German, e.g. the DTA), and representativeness is a recurring issue that by no means may be considered ‘once-and-for-all’-solved, the way in which our particular study tackles the issue may be of interest for many similar studies. In the prospective talk, we will thus address ‘representativeness’, reporting on the decisions made on text selection (author, titles, genre, canon/popularity, ‘constructive reading’). We will also provide a description of the linguistic (POS) annotation, including details on our machine-learning procedure and the user interface. Also, the workflow will be presented, elucidating ways of applying it to analogous studies/projects. The talk will give a description of the online publication details. In all, our research shows that building and enriching a particular literary corpus is by far no trivial task, but requires a sound theoretical modeling of the phenomenon constructed and an interdisciplinary method that does justice to philological as well as to computational criteria of high-quality corpus research.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alemuh, G., and Brett, S. (2015). 
                        An Emergent Theory of Digital Library Metadata: Enrich the Filter. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
                    
                    
                        Anderson, C. (2008). The end of theory: The data deluge makes the scientific method obsolete. 
                        Wired. 
                        http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/magazine/16-07/pb_theory (accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Biber, D. (1994). Representativeness in corpus design. In A. Zampolli, N. Calzolari, AND M. Palmer (Eds.), 
                        Current Issues in Computational Linguistics: In Honour of Don Walker, pp. 377–407. Springer Netherlands. 
                        http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-0-585-35958-8_20 (accessed 19 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Biber, D., and Conrad, S. (2009). 
                        Register, Genre, and Style. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Blank, H. (2001). 
                        In Kafkas Bibliothek: Werke der Weltliteratur und Geschichte in der Edition, wie sie Kafka besaß oder kannte; kommentiert mit Zitaten aus seinen Briefen und Tagebüchern. Stuttgart: Blank.
                    
                    
                        Blahak, B. (2015). 
                        Franz Kafkas Literatursprache: Deutsch im Kontext des Prager Multilingualismus. Köln: Böhlau Verlag.
                    
                    
                        Born, J. (1990). 
                        Kafkas Bibliothek: ein beschreibendes Verzeichnis; mit einem Index aller in Kafkas Schriften erwähnten Bücher, Zeitschriften und Zeitschriftenbeiträge. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer.
                    
                    
                        Born, J., and Koch, E. (Eds.) (1983). 
                        Franz Kafka: Kritik und Rezeption, 1924-1938. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer.
                    
                    
                        Engel, M., and Auerochs, B. (Eds.) (2010). 
                        Kafka-Handbuch. Leben, Werk, Wirkung. Stuttgart: Metzler. 
                    
                    
                        Evert, S. (2006). How Random is a Corpus? The Library Metaphor. 
                        Zeitschrift für Anglistik und Amerikanistik, 
                        54(2): 177–90. 
                    
                    
                        Grimm, G. E. (1977). 
                        Rezeptionsgeschichte: Grundlegung einer Theorie. München: Fink.
                    
                    
                        Lazinger, S. S. (2001). 
                        Digital Preservation and Metadata: History, Theory, Practice. Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited.
                    
                    
                        Lee, D. Y. W. (2001). Genres, registers, text types, domains and styles: Clarifying the concepts and navigating through the BNC jungle. 
                        Language Learning and Technology, 
                        5(3): 37–72.
                    
                    
                        Manovich, L. (2015). Data science and digital art history. 
                        International Journal for Digital Art History, (1). 
                        http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:16-dah-216313 (accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Most human communities have produced accounts of various sorts, and scholars have long used accounts as primary sources for economic and social history. MEDEA is a collaborative project that involves participants from three continents and includes projects using primary sources that span several centuries across multiple geographical regions. We recommend that digital editions of accounts—business, governmental, personal—use XML/TEI, the widely accepted stable archival format for digital scholarly editions, as a first step. XML/TEI-based editions of accounts should be further encoded using RDFs/OWL to take advantage of the affordances of the Semantic Web and Linked Open Data. Producing semantically enhanced digital scholarly editions of accounts on this general model will create opportunities to ask new questions about the social and economic lives of people in the past. The session features participants from MEDEA’s first year; we expect the project to continue for several more years, depending on resources.
          
            Accounts: abstract models of human interactions
            Account books share with printed and manuscript texts in prose, poetic, or dramatic forms a problem in data modeling because they are already abstract representations of human interactions. In the case of accounts, although these representations have taken different forms in different times and places, they have an apparent uniformity in that they often consist of lists of people, goods, and services accompanied by numerical values that represent amounts of currency, credit, or in-kind benefits exchanged. Often but not always, these values are totaled or balanced in some way (Tomasek and Bauman, 2013). The development of printed ledgers and spreadsheets illustrates the apparent uniformity of the structure of account books. Contemporary spreadsheet software fails to recognize the conceptual abstractions embedded in the physical format, but these unmarked abstractions are carried into the representations of spreadsheet information in digital form. 
            Accounts contain both numerical and semantic information (Thaller, 2012; Vogeler, 2014). Various types of accounts lend insight into business dealings, institutional, municipal, and state activities as well as personal uses of goods, property, and currency. The numerical information might include prices, wages, payments of customs duties or taxes as well as quantities of time worked and goods exchanged. In its simplest form, such information can be input as comma separated values (csv), and spreadsheet software can be used to perform calculations on the data. Through the emphasis on calculation, spreadsheets privilege the numerical information found in accounts. 
            But financial records include information of historical interest in addition to data expressed in numerical form. Account books often include the names of people with whom an individual or organization exchanged goods and services. Goods, services, and currencies have historically significant values in addition to the numerical data expressed as prices, wages, and quantities of time or goods, and such values have associations that are of historical interest. For example, different grains were staples for bread making in different regions (Allen, 2001). 
            Indeed, the semantic information contained in accounts can provide a rich picture of a community at the local level as well as that community’s relationships to others across space and time. In combination with other kinds of community records well known to social and economic historians—tax lists, church memberships, probate inventories, manuscript census returns—the semantic information embedded in accounts can reveal insights that the pure numerical representation might obscure. And such information might open up new avenues of inquiry or facilitate new insights into the operations of past networks of human relationships. 
          
          
            Historical accounts on the Semantic Web
            If the semantic information is marked in standardized machine-readable ways, digital editions of accounts can be combined with Semantic Web technologies to produce much richer comparative information about the human relationships they represent than has been possible with earlier iterations of social and economic history. In fact, accounts are an example of a problem space in which insights of 
            Digital Humanities can improve longstanding practices in social scientific uses of computers to produce data about past human practices and relationships. 
            Since the Semantic Web offers opportunities to collect and compare data from multiple digital projects, the MEDEA project looks to the potential of developing broad standards for producing semantically enriched digital editions of accounts. Because the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) offer a method for creating stable humanities-oriented data from textual sources, MEDEA explores models for building on them to test ways to publish data on commodities, wages, and prices susceptible to comparative analysis. 
            While the TEI Guidelines provide a standard for markup of manuscript and print sources, some of the elements and attributes most useful for accounts fail to model machine-readable values adequate to the goal of comparability of accounts originally created across broad ranges of time and space. Thus the MEDEA project looks also to CIDOC-CRM and RDF/OWL as sites to begin consideration of the kinds of taxonomies and ontologies that will produce standard machine-readable values to express some of the semantic values found in accounts--especially information about commodities and currencies--that are relevant to humanities scholars. This includes conversion of local measures (Vogeler, 2014). 
            At present, the MEDEA leadership team imagines semantically enriched digital editions as networks of references between several digital representations of original archival account books. Such editions will allow scholars with varied interests to use the data from the accounts in different ways according to their fields and scholarly interests. We consider RDF a good solution to publish the data extracted from accounts in machine-readable format as it facilitates explicit references to other (possible) representations of the accounts. If spreadsheets are employed, their use should be restricted to data input and calculations. 
          
          
            Presentations
            This multi-speaker session reports on results from the first stage of a joint project of historians at the University of Regensburg, the Centre for Information Modeling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities at the University of Graz, and Wheaton College in Massachusetts. Short presentations from participants will highlight historical and technical features central to MEDEA. 
            Kathryn Tomasek will act as chair for the session and offer some brief observations about the advantages of international and cross-institutional collaborations for developing standards for semantically enhanced digital editions of accounts. In North America, the greatest support for producing digital editions of accounts tends to come from a small number of well-established documentary projects and from librarians and archivists who seek to encourage use of their sources. Resistance continues in the form of familiar objections emphasizing the labor-intensive nature of TEI and transcription generally. Both using transcription and markup in undergraduate classrooms and exploring opportunities for carefully curated crowdsourcing offer possible solutions. Graduate advisors in Asia and Europe seem to be more open to encouraging their doctoral students to explore digital edition of accounts than do those in the United States. Developing an international community of practice increases the likelihood that existing projects will seek ways to optimize their own data for the Semantic Web.
            Kathrin Pindl and Anna Paulina Orlowska offer examples of ongoing interest in accounts as primary sources for historical study at the graduate level. Influenced by the work of British economic historian Richard C. Allen, Pindl hopes to develop better serial data through digital edition of accounts (Allen, 2001). Pindl will discuss her MEDEA working groups’ experiences with beginning a digital scholarly edition of granary accounts from the St. Katharinenspitalarchiv in Regensburg. Orlowska will describe challenges to producing a digital edition of the accounts of Hanseatic merchant Johan Pyre, who was active in Danzig from 1421 to 1455. Since Pyre’s bookkeeping methods developed through eight clear stages during those twenty-four years and contained unreliable temporal data, they demand a careful search for proper algorithms for their translation into digital media.
            Oyvind Eide, Cliff Anderson, and Georg Vogeler will speak to some of the technical questions involved with data modeling for the Semantic Web. Eide will describe advantages of event-based modeling like that used in the CIDOC-CRM. Anderson will present observations based on his comparison of XML/TEI and the contemporary business tool XBRL-GL using information extracted from the Dutch periodicals De Heraut (The Herald) and De Standaard (The Standard), which were edited by the scholar, pastor, and prime minister Abraham Kuyper in the late nineteenth century.
            Vogeler will close the presentations with a brief discussion of the value of Semantic Web technologies for historians interested in the “content” layer of accounts. RDFs/OWL allows modeling and encoding of the basic economic facts recorded in historical accounts and economic records. SKOS allows describing taxonomies of commodities, services, and monetary values recorded. They can be aligned into a common vocabulary. SPARQL allows aggregate querying of resources on these common facts together with individual data recorded. Digital editions of registers and accounts that not only publish text but try to express their interpretation of the text in a “content” layer and that publish this interpretation online with the help of semantic web technologies do what scholarly edition is meant to do: publish the critical analysis of the document by a competent scholar.
          
          
            Funding
            The MEDEA project is supported by an award from the Bilateral Digital Humanities program of the National Endowment for the Humanities and the German Research Foundation [grant numbers HG-229349-15]. Any views, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this session do not necessarily reflect those of the National Endowment for the Humanities or the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. 
          
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Allen, R. (2001). The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the Middle Ages to the First World War, Explorations in Economic History,
                         38: 411–47. doi: 10.1006/exeh.2001.0775.
                    
                    
                        Crofts, N., Doerr, M., Gill, T., Stead, S. and Stiff, M. (Eds.). (2011). Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model. ISO: 21127:2014.
                    
                    
                        RDF Working Group. Resource Description Framework (RDF). http://www.w3.org/RDF/. 
                    
                    
                        Sanderson, R. and Albritton, B. Shared Canvas Data Model. 
                        http://iiif.io/model/sharedcanvas/1.0/index.html. 
                    
                    
                        Sarnowsky, J. (lead researcher), Die mittelalterlichen Schuldund Rechnungsbücher des Deutschen Ordens um 1400. 
                        http://www.schuredo.unihamburg.de/content/. 
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium. Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [Last updated on 15th October 2015]. 
                        http://www.teic.org/P5/. 
                    
                    
                        Thaller, M. (2012). What is a text within the Digital Humanities, or some of them, at least? Digital Humanities 2012: Conference Abstracts. Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, July 2012, pp. 143-45. 
                    
                    
                        Tomasek, K. and Bauman, S. (2013). Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research, Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 6. doi: 10.4000/jtei.895. 
                    
                    
                        Vogeler, G. (2014). Modelling digital edition of medieval and early modern accounting documents, Digital Humanities 2014: Conference Abstracts. Lausanne: EPFL and UNIL, July 2012, pp. 398-400.
                    
                    
                        W3C. OWL Web Ontology Language. 
                        http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/owl#w3c_all.
                    
                    
                        W3C. OpenAnnotation Data Model. 
                        http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core.
                    
                    
                        XBRL Global Ledger. https://www.xbrl.org/thestandard/what/globalledger/. 
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Some broad questions require the analysis of huge collections of texts. Other broad questions and many narrower ones require microanalyzing parts of texts. Some microanalyses are unproblematic: narrative structure and its relationship to chapter divisions can be studied simply by dividing texts into chapters. Analyzing narrative or dialogue only, or the relationships between these and chapter divisions, may be much more problematic, as may analyzing a novel that also contains letters, diaries, legends, and poetry. Some or all of these may be more appropriately analyzed separately or ignored. Difficulties multiply for multiple narrators whose narratives contain dialogue and subdivisions.
             One of the most difficult tasks is analyzing the character dialogue in a novel. Burrows showed that the frequencies of the most frequent words in their dialogue can distinguish Jane Austen’s characters from each other (1987), but few scholars have followed his lead, at least partly because of the tedium and difficulty of separating character parts. McKenna and Antonia (1996) were an early exception, but most related work involves epistolary novels or multiple narrators, where the separation of parts is simpler (Stewart 2003; Rybicki 2006; Ramsay 2011; Balossi 2014; Hoover, Culpeper, and O’Halloran 2014; Hoover 2010, and forthcoming).) Consider the case of Sherlock Holmes. Perhaps, as Moretti argues, “Doyle owes his phenomenal success to his greater skill in the handling of clues” (2004, 48), but Holmes and Watson are also extraordinarily fascinating characters. Analyzing their voices for distinctiveness requires comparing them with his other characters. Because reliable results require substantial amounts of text, I focus here on the longest Holmes novel, 
                The Hound of the Baskervilles (
                Hound, below).
            
             Extracting the dialogue computationally still requires the tedious and error-prone manual separation of the character parts and identification of the speakers. Typically characters are too numerous to open separate dialogue files for all of them, and multiple files increase copying and pasting errors. Initial decisions about the handling of dialogue may also change, requiring painstaking re-editing. Instead, I introduce very simple markup that is then processed in “Analyze Textual Divisions,” an Excel spreadsheet with macros. The markup, powerful enough for texts with quite complex structures, is also simple, flexible, and customizable:
             text division 1
             text division 2
             text division 3
             text division 4
            [ ] Letter writer
            { } Letter addressee
            / speaker
            \ speech marker
            > copy without processing
            ^ special character follows
             For Wilkie Collins’s complex novel 
                No Name, with scenes containing chapters, which contain letters and other documents, the four divisions are “Scene”, “Chapter”, “Letter”, and “Document.” (The spreadsheet includes brief excerpts from this novel with mark-up.) Epistolary novels might use “Letter,” and others might use “Volume” and “Book.” For texts with multiple narrators and for plays “Narrator” and “Act” and “Scene” are obvious divisions. The top-level division, like the rest of the markup, can be modified. For 
                No Name, division one is defined as follows: div1name = “Scene”. Novels divided into books could use “div1name = “Book.” Alternatively, after the macro operates, the labels can be changed as desired.
            
             Here is a truncated version of 
                No Name:
            
            
                
            
            A “” has been inserted to mark “THE FIRST SCENE.” as division one, and all lines in the first scene will be so labeled. In line two, “>” indicates that “COMBE-RAVEN, SOMERSETSHIRE.,” which seems like a scene-setting label, not narrative, should not be processed (epigraphs or poems might be treated similarly). In line three, “CHAPTER I.” marks division two. In line six, “/Norah” labels lines 6-8 as hers (the person addressed could, like a letter addressee, be marked with {}). In line seven, “\she said” is a speech marker, categorized separately because they sometimes vary interestingly and because “she said” seems to me neither dialogue nor narration. In line eight, the quotation mark indicates dialogue. The blank ninth line changes the label from dialogue to narrative until marked otherwise. The beginning of chapter thirteen is marked similarly. Later in the novel, embedded letters are marked with “Letter writer” and “Letter addressee.” Finally, “^” must begin any line that would otherwise begin with “+”, “-”, or “=” (reserved characters in Excel). (Line-division can be changed instead, except where required line breaks force special characters to the beginning.)
            With the Analyze Textual Divisions spreadsheet and the marked-up text open in Excel, the macro processes the text line by line, producing the results below (the marked-up text and empty columns have been deleted). Each line gets a scene label, and, beginning in line three, a chapter label, and all the lines are numbered. Lines 4-5 are marked as narration, lines 6 and 8 as Dialogue, and line 7 as Marker, and the speaker is entered for lines 6-8 and 14-16. The processed text appears on the right with all markup removed.
            The text could be marked up in TEI and the character parts extracted with XSLT, but the markup here is much simpler and easier to learn, and the spreadsheet has advantages over XSLT. Excel’s built-in sorting function can handle several levels of sorting, for example, so that the dialogue can be sorted by type, scene, chapter, speaker, and line number, all at once. The unmarked processed text, after sorting, can be divided and analyzed however the analyst desires with plain-text tools. Sorting on the line number restores the original order for further analysis, and errors can be corrected in the original text, and the analysis re-run. (See my Excel Text-Analysis Pages at 
                http://wp.nyu.edu/exceltextanalysis/ for detailed instructions.) This method works especially well for short, simple texts like 
                Hound, with character parts too short to be analyzed by chapter; the dialogue can be marked with just speaker and speech marker characters, and > and ^.
            
            
                
            
             To test the distinctiveness of the character voices in 
                Hound, I selected all character parts at least 1,500 words long, and divided longer parts into 1,500-word sections. Initial testing was disappointing. Although the sections of dialogue by Stapleton, Mortimer, and Watson grouped correctly, those by Baskerville, Barrymore, and Holmes did not, casting doubt on the distinctiveness of their voices. The section of Baskerville’s dialogue that groups with Barrymore’s, however, consists almost entirely of a conversation between the two, so that similarity of topic may skew the results. More significantly, the first six sections of Holmes’s dialogue consistently group correctly. The final two, which consist almost entirely of the final chapter, and which tend to group separately from all others, are Holmes’s explanation of the case to Watson. Nominally dialogue, this chapter is more like narration, a genre difference that is almost certainly responsible for the anomalous clustering. Removing the final chapter and sorting the lines of Baskerville’s dialogue in random order to blunt any topical or thematic effects produces the cluster analysis shown in Fig. 1, based on the 225mfw (most frequent words).
            
             Cluster analysis is an exploratory statistical method that compares the frequencies of a set of words across a set of texts to determine which texts use those words at the most similar frequencies. The nearer to the left that sections join together into a single cluster, the more similarly they use the words. All sections in Fig. 1 group correctly by speaker, and several sections of Holmes’s dialogue are the most similar, and the results are correct across analyses based on the 125-325mfw. Doyle’s use of clues may have helped the Sherlock Holmes stories succeed, but the distinct character voices also seem likely to be a factor. (The analysis here uses Ward Linkage and squared Euclidean distance; the often-used complete linkage gives weaker results.)
             Separating character dialogue can never be easy, but my spreadsheet makes it much easier. It also provides a versatility in comparing multiple kinds of textual divisions that may encourage more in-depth analysis of dialogue and characterization and enhance our understanding of how texts work.
            
                
                Fig. 1: Character Dialogue in Hound (225mfw)
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Balossi, G. (2014). 
                        A Corpus Linguistic Approach to Literary Language and Characterization: Virginia Woolf’s The Waves. Amsterdam: Johns Benjamins.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (1987). 
                        Computation into Criticism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                    
                    
                        Hoover D. (forthcoming). Argument, evidence, and the limits of digital literary studies. In Gold, M. (ed), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities, University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                    
                         Hoover D. (2010). Some approaches to corpus stylistics. In Yu Dongmin (ed), 
                        Stylistics: Past, Present and Future. Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press, pp. 40-63.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D., Culpeper, J., and O’Halloran, K. (2014). 
                        Digital Literary Studies: Corpus Approaches to Poetry, Prose, and Drama. London: Routledge.
                    
                    
                        McKenna, C. W. F., and Antonia, A. (1996). ‘A few simple words’ of interior monologue in “Ulysses”: reconfiguring the evidence. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 11(2): 55-66. 
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2004). Graphs, maps, trees: abstract models for literary history — 3, 
                        New Left Review, 28: 43-63.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S. (2011). 
                        Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    
                        Rybicki, J. (2006). Burrowing into translation: character idiolects in Henryk Sienkiewicz’s trilogy and its two English translations. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21(1): 91-103.
                    
                    
                        Stewart, L. (2003). Charles Brockden Brown: quantitative analysis and literary interpretation. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18(2): 129-38.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            The 
                Letters of 1916 is Ireland’s first public humanities project. It collects, digitises, transcribes, encodes, and makes available through its electronic platform epistolary documents written between 1st November 1915 and 31st October 1916. The year 1916 was one of transition for Ireland: between its involvement in the Great War and the rise of militant nationalism, the country was divided by sentiment, separated by ideals. 2016 sees the centennial commemoration of the Easter Rising
                
                     The Easter Rising was an armed insurrection launched by a minority of Irish nationalists against the British Empire in 1916. The Rising was contained to Dublin and suppressed following a week of fighting. It is seen as the genesis of the later Irish War of Independence. For further reading see, for instance, Max Caulfield’s 
                        The Easter Rebellion (1998).
                    
                 across Ireland. A more complex interpretation of the events that transpired in Easter week 1916 has entered national consciousness and with it the interest in the smaller and more personal accounts of those caught up in the ensuing violence. The rhetoric of the letter presents personal perspectives and individual memory traces; the collected letters provide an insight into those fragmentary stories that, inspected together, constitute a collective consciousness. Letters are shared experiences that connect people across geographical spaces.
                
                     Janet Gurkin Altman, contemplatig about the form of the letter, contends that while letters connect two geographical points they also serve as a bridge between the sender and the receiver. The epistolary author can either choose to emphasisne either the bridge or the distance (1982).
                 The unique personal perspective of the epistolary form challenges the perceptions of established history, questioning the role of memory and the acts of commemoration that this era suggests. 
            
            Since Jeff Howe’s coining of the term ‘crowdsourcing’ in 2006 (Howe 2006), a number of pioneering projects have provided legitimacy and validity to the process.
                
                     Since Howe’s definition of the term there have been several pioneering project based on crowdsourcing. For instance, see 
                        Transcribing Bentham,
                         Papers of the War Department 1874-1800 and 
                        What’s on the Menu?
                    
                 The
                 Letters of 1916 considers crowdsourcing in the widest possible sense of the term; the processes of collection, transcription, and curation are done through public engagement. The focus of this paper rests on the volunteer community associated with the project
                
                     As of October 2015 there are 1159 registered users on the 
                        Letters of 1916 site. These users transcribe, on average, 192,409 characters a month. 
                    
                 and provides an inspection of the levels of its engagement, a study of its interests and motivations, and how future projects can adapt this investigation into community interaction. Sharon Leon, discussing her observations while working on the 
                Papers of the War Department 1784-1800,  identifies and categorises these motivations into six fields: (a) an interest in history, (b) a sense of civic duty, (c) a specific point of scholarly research, (d) engagement based on genealogical and family research questions, (e) educational assignments, and (f) curiosity about how the transcription tool and process works (Leon 2014). This paper extends these assumptions, inspecting specifically the affect of the epistolary form on the transcriber. The topical nature of this project raises questions beyond the ones that Leon raises. 
            
            The investigation in this paper traces the manner in which the community engages with the content, a hundred years since they were written, not merely as historical documents but as individual memory traces that express personal sentiments. The centenary creates a renewed vigour in the study of these documents and the paper questions if the engagement with these letters produce a more nuanced understanding of this conflicted time. As Leon points out, one of the driving forces of community transcription lies in an active interest in scholarly research. This paper attempts to understand this very engagement in the 
                Letters of 1916 project; some of the letters in the resource, particularly those received from personal collections, have been unavailable to the public until this point. Does the possibility of discovering these little stories and personal narratives that are weaved within the politics of the time, create an interest that emphasises the novelty of discovery? As the transcriber actively engages and researches these documents, do her motivations lie in the possibility of unearthing new knowledge? 
            
            A data-driven examination of transcriber-activity, as evidenced in the project, suggests that individual members of the community create self-fashioned roles. The transcriber who reads and re-authors these letters, the encoder who attributes TEI
                
                     The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) is a consortium which develops and maintains a standard for the representation of texts in their electronic forms. For further information see http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml
                 markup to the transcribed text, and the researcher who provides contextual information for the letter are all employed in the production of these electronic documents but their engagement is at different levels. This paper attempts to understand this division of roles based on the modes of engagement that are apparent. Re-authoring of these letters raises another question: as Barthes suggests, the relationship between the reader and the writer is complex and deeply problematic (1977). Does the re-authoring of these letters create a deeper investment in the narrative? This investment is reiterated when we consider the private emails exchanged between members of the 
                Letters of 1916 volunteer network and the project staff where concerns are raised over the urgency, validity, and authority of the initial transcription; the accuracy and the model of the transcription becomes a point of contention between the members of the community.
            
            This paper considers the proposed questions in three stages and at three levels to gain a clearer understanding of the role of the transcriber within the 
                Letters of 1916 project. In the first instance, a statistical inspection of the metadata for the transcribed letters provides an examination of the volume and the rate of transcription over the course of the project. The engagement of the individual transcriber with specific themes
                
                     Letters can belong to one or multiple themes including 
                        The Easter Rising, 
                        World War I, 
                        Family Life, 
                        Love Letters, 
                        Official Documents, 
                        Politics, the 
                        Irish Question and more.
                    
                 within the collection is revealed in the process; this mode of investigation aids in viewing the community, not as a homogenous cluster, but as individuals with specific interests and different points of engagement. The visualizations generated from these analyses illustrate the interests of the community at a macro level. In the second instance, the 
                Letters of 1916 volunteer network is approached with a focused survey. This ongoing survey presents the second phase of coordinated feedback that this project records. The questionnaire is designed to cover a range of topics that both reinforce the results of the statistical analysis and ask questions that lie outside the scope of data-driven inquiry. The focused design of the questionnaire is informed by the preliminary phase and attempts to tease out the motivations that lie at the heart of crowd-sourced projects such as the 
                Letters of 1916. In the third and final instance, the most-prolific transcribers
                
                     Each month the 
                        Letters of 1916 Project generates a list of “top” transcribers. This list is determined by the number of characters a specific individual has transcribed in that time frame.
                    
                 in the project are approached for interviews regarding their role in the process of transcription. These interviews are detailed and provide a closer study of the desires of the community. The methods utilised in this paper move from a macro to a micro level, from the data to the individual, in order to derive a concrete and axiomatic base to study the modes of engagement that the 
                Letters of 1916 project and, perhaps, all crowdsourced projects have. 
            
            The success of a crowdsourced project lies in creating effective engagement between the community and the resource. This paper provides an investigation of the motivations and the desires of individuals that drive these forms of public history projects forward. The topical nature of this research, combined with the affect of epistolary documents, creates a unique opportunity for this study, a model for future projects to further develop their volunteer community, and the critical foundations on which future study of community transcriptions may be based.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Altman, J. G. (1982). 
                        Epistolarity: Approaches to a Form. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
                    
                    Barthes, R. (1977). Death of the Author. In Heath, S (tr.), 
                        Image, Music, Text, New York: Hill and Wang.
                    
                    Caulfield, M. (1995). 
                        The Easter Rebellion: The outstanding narrative history of the 1916 Rising in Ireland. Dublin: Gill & McMillan Ltd.
                    
                    Howe, J. (2006). 
                        The Rise of Crowdsourcing. WIRED. Available at: 
                        http://www.wired.com/2006/06/crowds/ [Accessed on 27 Oct. 2015].
                    
                    Leon, S. M. (2014) Build Analyse and Generalise: Community Transcription of the 
                        Papers of the War Department and the Development of Scripto. In Ridge, M. (ed.), 
                        Crowdsourcing Our Heritage. Dorchester: Ashgate.
                    
                    Papers of the War Department. (2012). Wardepartmentpapers.org. Available at: http://wardepartmentpapers.org/ [Accessed 27 Oct. 2015].
                    
                        TEI: Text Encoding Initiative (2013). tei-c.org. Available at: 
                        http://tei-c.org/index.xml/ [Accessed on 27 Oct. 2015].
                    
                    UCL Transcribe Bentham. (2016). Blogs.ucl.ac.uk. Available at: http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/ [Accessed 27 Oct. 2015].
                    What’s on the menu? (2016). Menus.nypl.org. Available at: http://menus.nypl.org/ [Accessed 27 Oct. 2015].
                
            
        
    


        
            While early English drama has been subject to several DH investigations, because “a quite explicit and rigid system of metadata is part of the genre itself” (Mueller, 2014: par27), French theatre of the 17th and 18th century remains largely underexplored, in spite of demonstrations and case studies presented by authors with large international audiences (Moretti, 2005). This paper presents some results of a project inspired by the explorations of the English corpora, but dedicated to the computer aided identification and analysis of theatrical topoi in the French domain.
            Topoi can be defined as “recurrent configurations of thematic or formal elements” (adapted from Weill and Rodriguez, SATOR, 1996) and they are highly significant for the French plays, which are largely based on a common stock of characters, scenes and themes, and in which novelty often consists in reuse with a shift of former materials. Considering the vast amount of plays produced over the period going from, roughly, 1630 to 1790 (some 12000 plays, even if the text of many of them is lost), the use of computational tools to track the presence of various topoi over the time appears appropriate. Computer aid can help answer in a (more) rigorous way questions concerning the aesthetics of the French theatre of the period, too often reduced to “classicism”, and historical interrogations about moments and reasons when certain meaning units are more in use or relatively abandoned.
            While the results of this endeavour are at a very early phase, for reasons to be detailed in the presentation, the very attempt to clarify some of these literary questions shows that the use of the computer is not neutral and modifies the problems to be solved. After a more detailed presentation of the activities undertaken to date, this paper will reflect upon the way in which the methods and tools used to approach the texts modify the initial research questions.
          Dramacode: an expanding community for French drama
            Identifying topoi using a computer asks in the first place for the existence of digitised texts in a more elaborate format than the pdfs or plain texts offered by Gallica (see http://gallica.bnf.fr). Various initiatives have been taken in this domain in France, either by scholars supported by HEIs and research institutes (see “Molière project” http://obvil.paris-sorbonne.fr/corpus/moliere/moliere) or by individuals with computer skills and a special interest in literature from the 17th and 18th century (see http://www.theatre-classique.fr). Unfortunately, this diversity of initiatives resulted in a great variety of encoding practices, more or less TEI compliant. To reduce this diversity and move towards common standards, an organisation has been created on GitHub. Under the name of “Dramacode”, it hosts some 882 plays written or staged between 1630 and 1810 (roughly, 7,3% of the dramatic production of the period), to be progressively re-tagged and enriched with further mark-up. “Dramacode” allows also to publish the contents with a harmonised style-sheet, and to share work on experiments of visualisation of data extracted from the plays.
          Finding theatrical topoi through linguistic analysis and literary mark-up
            Within this corpus, the plays of Louis de Boissy (1694-1754) have been selected for a pilot study, destined to build strategies for gathering sufficient clues, through various queries, about the existence of a topos in an unknown (i. e., not previously read) play, digitised and encoded in another project. 
            Louis de Boissy was a French play writer who enjoyed a certain success in the 18th century mainly because of two of his plays, Le Français à Londres and L’Homme du jour. Beyond these achievements, what renders his work interesting is precisely its mediocrity. Boissy’s works are a perfect example of the reuse of topoi, sometimes to follow the fashion, sometimes in an attempt to distinguish himself by revitalising conventional themes and dialogues. He has also the particularity of having worked for the three main theatrical spaces of the period, namely the Comédie-Française, Théâtre Italien and Théâtres de la Foire. Therefore, his texts become a privileged observatory of French comedy in the first half of the 18th century.
            Two approaches of topoï identification are developed. The first one consists in developing an ontology for characters and scenes description. Roles and description of roles from the existing plays have been extracted, cleaned, and analysed using an excel spread-sheet. Ten categories appear necessary for describing characters from classical French scenes; five of them were known and formalised since Aristotle, or, at least, since the rediscovery of Aristotle by French authors and thinkers of Renaissance, then 17th century: nationality (“climat” in Marmontel’s words, see entry “Moeurs” in Eléments de littérature, 1787), age, sex, occupation (“état”) and temperament. Five others were deemed of interest, as allowing potential automatic analysis aimed to spot changes in aesthetic principles: the ontological category (human/ nonhuman/ semihuman), the dramatic or actantial role, the social status (“king”, “prince”, “marquis”, “Dom”…: it seemed useful to distinguish these from information about “état”), the family position, and the collective nature of some characters.
            In parallel, types of scenes and other significant recurrences are manually identified and marked-up as “recognition”, “fight”, “complot”, etc. Relevant lines or phrases (labelled with xml:ids) are regrouped as s in the  section of ; if each span receives, for the moment, a literal description, this will progressively feed into another library and will be later referred to using @ana.
            The second approach is based on a linguistic analysis of the speeches, using AntConc to generate concordances and to identify key-words. The initial objective was to spot key-words or linguistic idiosyncrasies of the character of “petit-maître”, whose identification was the primary goal of this research. Indeed, “petit-maître” are not always labelled as such, and therefore their presence in French drama has been underestimated and incorrectly related to a specific period in time (mainly, “decadence comedy” after 1680). If, in time, a complete mark-up of the characters according to the above-mentioned categories (i. e., ) will help identifying as “petits-maîtres” those who are not called as such by roleDesc or other characters in the play, speech identification is for the moment the only option for answering the research question.
          New research vistas
            When observing the trajectory of this study, the digital approach can be said as having significantly modified the initial perspective and research questions. The TEI tagging of characters and scenes revealed the need to refine methods and categories developed by the narratology and the theatrical analysis in 1970 and 1980, preparing the grounds for more accurate description of character building.
            In the meantime, the effort to describe a stylistic specificity of the “petits-maîtres” revealed to be rooted in a larger, two folded research question, concerning the potential differences in speech between characters of the same author. Digital humanities have been, to date, more interested in global stylistic analysis on one side, and in authorship studies, on the other side, while this research project intends to apply the methods of the second approach to fictional speakers. While such an endeavour can be justified by the pretences of French dramatists of the classical centuries to act as kind of “sociolinguists”, the question is as well that of the methods to automatize the analysis of specific speeches when conducted on a large scale (more than 9300 distinct characters presents in the above-mentioned set of plays), and of the explanations to be found for the observed recurrences. Indeed, during the pilot study executed on Boissy plays, it appeared that his characters group, by their speech, less in male and female speakers, but rather in two unexpected classes, one formed by those who tend to speak more about themselves (characters saying “je”), the second by those who address themselves to the the others (characters saying “vous”). The importance of “I” and “You” has already been spotted in theatrical studies (see Craig, 2004), but not the observed repartition, which needs, however, to be checked against the larger corpus, a very time consuming operation for the moment. 
            It is to be expected that further observation of concordancers and n-grams extracted from very large collections of digitised plays will put into light such other unexpected recurrences, triggering a new understanding about what is a classical play, and contributing to the on-going debate about the nature of the theatre.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Marmontel, J. F.  (2005).
                        Eléments de littérature. Édition présentée, établie et annotée par Sophie Le Ménahèze. Paris : Desjonquères.
                    
                    
                        Mueller, M. (2014). Shakespeare His Contemporaries: collaborative curation and exploration of Early Modern drama in a digital environment. 
                        DHQ: Digital Humanities Quaterly, 8(3).
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2005).
                        Graphs, maps and trees: Abstract Models for a Literary Theory. London and New York: Verso.
                    
                    
                        Craig, H.  (2004). Stylistic Analysis and Authorship Studies. In Schreibman, S. Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (Eds.) 
                        A Companion Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell, DOI: 10.1002/9780470999875.ch20.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            “Remapping Leigh Hunt’s Circles” is an ambitious project that explores Leigh Hunt’s central position in the London literary and critical scene of the first half of the nineteenth century, through the lens of digital humanities tools. Hunt is today considered one of the key figures of the Romantic period in England, known for his work as editor, journalist, poet, and facilitator. Numerous articles, essay collections, biographies, and monographs published in the last fifteen years have made this clear. Hunt's contribution to Romantic and Victorian literature was as extensive as it has proven durable, in matters as various as prosodic experimentation and the modernization of the magazine essay. Yet little work (beyond some biographical notes) has been done on the second half of his life, a period that was as productive as the first, and during which Hunt was intimate with many of the finest writers of the time, and continued to contribute to London’s literary circles through the ongoing publication of critical essays in periodicals and anthologies. This project aims to redress this imbalance/oversight and reassert Hunt’s place in the Romantic and Victorian eras, as well as his continuing significance for understanding the London literary scene between 1805 (publication of his first critical essay) and 1859 (date of his death, with his last article published only a few weeks before). 
            “Remapping Leigh Hunt’s Circles” makes a case for Hunt’s position as a key critical voice in London beyond his already established prominence during the 
                Examiner years. It does so through a careful analysis of his critical reviews and essays (with a specific focus on his drama criticism to underscore Hunt’s ongoing engagement with the public sphere) published during his entire career, which spanned the first half of the nineteenth century. Data mining and textual analysis offer exciting opportunities to bring together different sets of data which, when prepared to the highest standard of text encoding, can yield new and innovative results that encourage reconsideration of preconceived notions regarding the transfer of ideas from one author to another, or one literary genre to another. The results of the research undertaken in “Remapping Leigh Hunt’s Circles” will be presented in a collaborative, visual context that reimagines the digital scholarly edition as a transparent workspace in which established primary objects from existing databases can be gathered, organized, correlated, annotated, and augmented by multiple users in a dynamic environment. 
            
            All the texts prepared for inclusion in our project are encoded to the Text-Encoding-Initiative (TEI) standards. The mark-up language and quality controls for improving metadata in all the resources provide more accurate search and discovery, allow for the presentation of well-supported content on multiple devices and develop tools for assembling, archiving and indexing research objects and artifacts. Ongoing work on this platform will enable researchers to undertake world-class research by providing the means to link data-sets to published content, encouraging data reanalysis, replication studies, and data re-purposing, all of which improve research quality and efficiency.
            Our poster will report on the first year of this project, and the implementation of the latest version of the 
                Voyant Tools to examine the dramatic essays written by Hunt between 1805 and 1813 (when he was sentenced to two years in prison for libel against the Prince Regent). We will showcase in particular two aspects of the integration between the Hunt archives and Voyant Tools. First, the ability to identify and visualize named entity connections and their networks across multiple documents (this a refinement of the previous RezoViz tool in Voyant). The Hunt collection presents an ideal corpus for network exploration given the interconnectedness of the people, locations and events that animate the documents. Second, Voyant provides a generic and customizable way of presenting a web-based corpus catalogue with the same kinds of faceted browsing and advanced querying capabilities we have come to expect from library databases and online stores. A further benefit of this functionality is the ability to create dynamic subsets of a corpus to examine more closely (in other words, using a catalogue skin in Voyant to create worksets destined for Voyant’s more conventional analytic skin).
            
            The “Remapping Leigh Hunt’s Circles” is essentially a project of digital text editing and literary criticism whereas Voyant Tools is essentially a software platform for reading, analyzing and visualizing digital texts. These are separate traditions and separate concerns, but this poster will demonstrate the value of symbiotic development: both projects benefit from the collaboration.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    McGann, J. (2014). 
                        A New Republic of Letters. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP. 
                    
                    Sinatra, M., and Sinclair, S. (2015). Special issue “Repenser le numérique au 21
                        ème siècle”. 
                        Sens public (hiver 2015). 
                    
                    Sinatra, M. (2015). “Representing Leigh Hunt’s Autobiography”.
                        Virtual Victorians: Networks, Connections, Technologies. Eds. Stauffer, A. and Alfano, V. R., Palgrave.
                    
                    Sinclair, S., Rucker, S. and Radzikowska, M. (2011). 
                        Visual Interface Design for Digital Cultural Heritage. Ashgate.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Ruthenian (Volhynian) Metrica is a complex of books of acts of ruthenian (from Ruthenia) series of Crown Chancery of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. 29 books in which more than 3,5 thousand acts are entered were a part of the Metrica. The main part of documents is written in the Cyrillic letter of Ruthenian language. Other part of acts is written down by the Latin letter on Latin or Polish. Copies of confirmations (privilea) and the decision of royal court are entered in books (decrees). Therefore Ruthenian Metrica consists of books of two types: blotters and books of decrees. Each act has the original name. All acts are rather precisely dated. Documents of the Metrica can be divided into two categories conditionally: simple and compound. Compound documents usually contain literally entered copies of other acts (vidimus) in the structure. Usually entered as private-law acts (for example, wills or donative), and decisions of local courts.
            For the purpose of ensuring broad access for historians to documents of the Ruthenian Metrica on department of history of the Oles Honchar Dnipropetrovsk National University (Ukraine) the project on creation of the Web publication of such complex of sources is carried out. Implementation of the project assumes creation of an online-resource in which will various opportunities of presentation and the analysis of documents are integrated.
            The concept of the Web version of a complex of acts of this book provides possibility of simultaneous display as the digitized images of pages, and their paginal transliteration in a text format. Access to all acts of the book is provided from the initial page where the general register is placed (fig. 1). The register allows to open its PDF version according to the name of the document or at the choice of number of a leaf to pass to the corresponding Web version (fig. 2). In each case the accompanying information on a place of storage of the original of the act is submitted. It is possible to see documents both in a hand-written form, and in the transcribed (fig. 3). As the cursive writing still kept portable letters, and in the electronic text means of HTML transferred such feature of the letter. It is possible to increase the digitized image of the page of the document in a separate window, having activated the reference (fig. 4). The hypertext structure is comfortable also that regarding the electronic text it is possible to bring later references to the connected documents of other books of Ruthenian, Lithuanian or Crown Metrica, magistrate or territorial government or judicial books both archival, and published. Similar additions can concern a personnel, toponyms or hydronyms, groups of documents, special terminology, etc. For transition between pages of the book the corresponding interactive references in a type of numbers of sheets are provided in the top and lower part of the displayed document. The user can always return to the general register of acts of the book from any looked-through page according to the universal reference "Register". The marking of text part on the basis of the TEI standard allowing to process the free text is in the long term planned.
            At this stage quality of images of pages of the book rather low in connection with a digitizing of a monochrome microfilm on which they were finished shooting as a backup copy of storage more than three decades ago. Respectively esthetic registration of insufficient level. However in this case images carry out rather confirmation function, allowing the user, to get acquainted with paleography of acts and to make sure of correctness of the transcribed text and if necessary to offer the specifications. Replacement of images on better is defined not so much technological, how many by legal and financial factors. 
            This project is interesting also to that it has also didactic value. Such form of submission of documents carries out functions as visual aid in which various samples of paleography of a Ruthenian cursive writing and the corresponding transliteration, and the simulator for creation of the Web version of the case of hand-written sources are presented.
            
                
                Fig. 1. Initial Site for Access to Acts of the Ruthenian metrica
            
            
                
                Fig. 2. Ruthenian Metrica Acts Registry
            
            
                
                Fig. 3. An Example of Act Web Page
            
            
                
                Fig. 4. Increased Act Page
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        TEI P5:
                        Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange by the TEI Consortium. Originally edited by C.M. Sperberg-McQueen and Lou Burnard for the ACH-ALLC-ACL Text Encoding Initiative Now entirely revised and expanded under the supervision of the Technical Council of the TEI Consortium. The TEI Consortium. Version 2.7.0. Last updated on 16th September 2014,revision 13036. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium, 2014.
                    
                    
                        The Ruthenian (Volhynian) Metrica. Registers of Polish Crown Chancery Documents Addressed to Ukrainian Lands (Palatinates of Volhynia, Kyiv, Bratslav, and Chernihiv) 1569-1673 with an Introduction by Patricia Kennedy Grimsted. Kyiv, 2002.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                The HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC) aims to facilitate large-scale computational text analysis of the contents of the HathiTrust Digital Library (HTDL) through data services and analytical tools. We conducted a study of current and potential users of the HTRC to investigate how scholars integrate text analysis into their research. Our study aims to inform the development of HTRC services and also to generate deeper insights into scholarly research practices with large-scale digitized text corpora.
            
            
                Background
                Studies on the use of digital content by humanities scholars, ranging from humanities cyberinfrastructure (ACLS, 2006) and patterns in scholarly practices (Brockman et al., 2001; Palmer and Neumann, 2002; Green and Courtney, 2015), to discipline-specific studies (Zorich, 2012; Babeu, 2011; Rutner and Schonfeld, 2011), reveal that scholars acquire and analyze digital content in multi-faceted ways. Several investigations particularly examine scholarly uses of digital tools (Frischer et al., 2006; Toms and O’Brien, 2008; Gibbs and Owens, 2012). Computational text analysis dates from the beginnings of humanities computing (Hindley, 2013), and the resources of the ARTFL Project (Argamon et al., 2009; Horton et al., 2009), MONK (Unsworth, 2011), Wordseer (Muralidharan and Hearst, 2013), Voyant and TaPOR (Rockwell et al., 2010), and Lexos (LeBlanc et al., 2013), among others, inform the current work of the HTRC to provide a secure computational and data environment for researchers to conduct analyses of content from the HathiTrust Digital Library.
                Our study builds on an earlier user needs assessment conducted for the HTRC and its Mellon Foundation-funded Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis project. That earlier study analyzed interviews and focus groups in order to identify capabilities needed in large text corpora to facilitate scholarly research use (Fenlon et al., 2014). These desired capabilities included the ability to create and manipulate collections as reusable datasets and research products, the ability to work at different units of analysis, and access to highly enriched metadata (Green et al., 2014; Fenlon et al., 2014). 
                Our present study especially builds upon that previous investigation by examining the text analysis research practices of current and potential users of the HTRC.
            
            
                Research Design
                
                    Goals
                    Our study’s primary goals are:
                    
                        To analyze current scholarly research practices with textual corpora to identify user requirements for HTRC services;
                        to develop illustrative use cases of text analysis research for shaping training curricula; and
                        to obtain information for guiding the development of HTRC research services in the University of Illinois Library’s Scholarly Commons and similar digital scholarship centers.
                    
                    While the findings of this study specifically will inform the development of services to meet the needs of HTRC users, it also contributes broader insights into how to develop similar digital resources and research services for computational text analysis.
                
                
                    Methods
                    We conducted fifteen semi-structured interviews with students, faculty, researchers, administrators, and librarians who pursue work that includes text analysis, or have familiarity with text analysis methods. Some participants were recruited at professional conferences for digital humanities and libraries, while others were active in HTRC user group forums. Several of the interviewees had previously interacted with the HTRC, and most had experience with the HTDL. The participants were from various disciplines — including English, Anthropology, History, and Computer Science —and ranged from newcomers to digital humanities to long-time researchers. 
                    We performed an initial analysis of the interview data through open coding and will continue detailed qualitative analysis using ATLAS.ti. Data was independently coded by the authors to ensure inter-coder reliability. While we are still actively analyzing interview data, we identified several preliminary themes discussed here. These themes include strategies for obtaining and managing data, research workflows and results, collaborations, and teaching. 
                
            
            
                Analysis and Discussion
                
                    Data Acquisition and Management
                    Several respondents characterized text analysis research as being time-intensive in spite of the speed of computational tools. One interviewee noted, ‘It’s funny, often people think, “Oh we have it digitized, now it’s useful.” Scholars realize that you have a lot more work to do after that. And that can often slow projects down terribly.’
                    The interviewees indicated that gathering, managing, and manipulating text data comprised a considerable portion of their work. An interviewee explained, ‘I think the biggest challenge is data, getting good data to work with. I think people underestimate the problems and difficulties in doing that.’
                    Interviewees also expressed a desire for improved ways to identify and extract the content they needed, especially when navigating large-scale collections to find the volumes, pages, or passages relevant to a research project. As one interviewee remarked, ‘Even if you had somehow structured your texts, I would be saying, “What was left out? How do I bring it back in?”’ 
                
                
                    Research Workflows and Results
                    Several interviewees described the potential of text analysis to challenge previously held understandings of text, as differences between human and computational readings emerged. One respondent noted, ‘There are many cases in which the computer is at least as good—if not better—a reader than humans are. That’s very difficult for people to accept... sometimes the computer gets it right and it bears looking at that difference. So we kind of want to get that new ground truth on this kind of work.’
                    Many researchers highlighted the importance of interpretive work in understanding how the tools interact with the text, and characterized the interactions as dynamic. One respondent observed, ‘I yearn for workflows where the scholar could actually set their own tokenization rules.... It would be a way that we could create less language-specific [rules] or control the language specificity of the algorithm. I think that is the real need.’ Several respondents highlighted the importance of tools that flexibly fit into various stages of the research process, and also are accessible to users of different skill levels. Interviewees also suggested enhancements specific to the HTRC, which included expanded visualization capabilities, improved generation of statistics about text corpora, and better ability to handle languages other than English. 
                
                
                    Research Collaborations
                    Interviewees repeatedly cited collaboration and research support, both virtual and in-person, as important. Many interviewees worked with digital humanities initiatives, and reported that their local resources ranged from limited technical support to well-resourced research centers. For some interviewees, online support communities— such as Digital Humanities Questions and Answers or Stack Overflow — also were significant.
                    Interdisciplinary collaborations between departments and across institutions emerged as the most prominent kind of partnership, but interviewees also noted the challenges that such collaborations pose. As one interviewee explained, ‘Collaborations between institutions: much more difficult. There’s money, there’s institutional blockages, and then anything over half a dozen people, it gets complicated very quickly. And so the people dynamics get very complicated.’ Some respondents noted that these collaborations affected their research practices and acquisition of research resources. 
                     Interviewees reported that their collaborations with libraries ranged from non-existent to critical partnerships. Many saw the library as a key space because ‘the library is actually the one functioning interdisciplinary space on a university campus.’ Collaborations with the HTRC and digital repositories for working with data also were important to respondents.
                
                
                    Teaching and Training
                    Interviewees mentioned their active efforts and intentions to incorporate computational text analysis into their teaching. Some remarked on institutional constraints that make it difficult to incorporate computational tools into curricula. As one respondent explained: ‘I once imagined teaching a class in which students learn to script and actually run analyses against data, but I was told, basically, that that class isn’t a humanities class anymore—that belongs in computer science.’
                    Some stated that the courses that they currently teach may not require or allow for the incorporation of computational analysis. Yet others noted that there is only a limited amount of technical or scientific skills that a humanities student could realistically master within a short period of time, with one interviewee noting that ‘you can only get people to learn so much about the math; as much as they can learn, they should — at the same time, it’s hard.’
                     Although the demand from students for learning about computational text analysis was, overall, reported to be increasing, some interviewees noted that they are constrained by not only limited resources, but also uncertainty as to how to carry out such activities. One interviewee reported prevailing sentiments that the digital humanities ‘doesn’t even fit anywhere,’ leading to the question of whether ‘there should be a whole separate department that’s digital humanities,’ or to offer training within existing curricula.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                 The immediate aims of this study are to generate an updated framework of user requirements that will guide the development of the HTRC’s educational programming and research support services and also to inform forthcoming Mellon Foundation-funded development of the HTRC Data Capsule. But our preliminary findings also provide insights into scholars’ needs as they increasingly incorporate text analysis in research and teaching. These findings also reveal how digital scholarship centers, information professionals, and providers of digitized content can best support scholarship as digital humanities resources evolve.
            
            
                Acknowledgements
                We thank Megan Senseney, Angela Courtney, Nicholae Cline, and Leanne Mobley for their collaboration in this study. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        American Council of Learned Societies. (2006). 
                        Our Cultural Commonwealth: The report of the ACLS Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and Social Sciences. New York: American Council of Learned Societies. 
                        http://www.acls.org/uploadedFiles/Publications/Programs/Our_Cultural_Commonwealth.pdf (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Argamon, S., et al. (2009). Gender, Race, and Nationality in Black Drama, 1850-2000: Mining Differences in Language Use in Authors and their Characters. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly
                        3(2): http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/2/000043/000043.html 
                    
                    
                        Babeu, A. (2011). 
                        Rome wasn't digitized in a day: Building a cyberinfrastructure for digital classics. CLIR Publication, 150, Washington, DC: Council of Library and Information Resources. 
                        http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub150/reports/pub150/pub150.pdf (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Brockman, W. S., et al. (2001). 
                        Scholarly work in the humanities and the evolving information environment CLIR Publication, 104, Washington, D.C.: Digital Library Federation, Council on Library and Information Resources. 
                        http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub104/pub104.pdf (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Fenlon, K., et al. (2014). Scholar-built collections: A study of user requirements for research in large-scale digital libraries. 
                        Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
                        51(1): 1–10.
                    
                    
                        Frischer, B., et al. (2006). 
                        Summit on digital tools for the humanities: Report on summit accomplishments. Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of Virginia. 
                        http://www.iath.virginia.edu/dtsummit/SummitText.pdf (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. and Owens, T. (2012). Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward broader audiences and user-centered designs. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        6(2).
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000136/000136.html (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Green, H. and Courtney, A. (2015). Beyond the Scanned Image: A Needs Assessment of Scholarly Users of Digital Collections. 
                        College and Research Libraries,
                        76(5): 690-707.
                    
                    
                        Green, H. E., et al., (2014). Using Collections and Worksets in Large-Scale Corpora: Preliminary Findings from the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis Prototyping Project. Poster presented at iConference 2014, Berlin, Germany.
                    
                    
                        Hindley, M. (2013). The Rise of the Machines: NEH and the Digital Humanities: the early years. 
                        Humanities,
                        34(4).
                        http://www.neh.gov/humanities/2013/julyaugust/feature/the-rise-the-machines (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Horton, R., et al. (2009). Mining Eighteenth Century Ontologies: Machine Learning and Knowledge Classification in the Encyclopédie. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        3(2): http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/2/000044/000044.html 
                        
                    
                    
                        LeBlanc, M. D., et al. (2013). Lexomics: Integrating the Research and Teaching Spaces. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013 Conference Abstracts, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, 16-19 July 2013. Lincoln, NE: Association of Digital Humanities Organizations, pp. 274-76. http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-293.html (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Muralidharan, A. and Hearst, M. A. 
                        (2013). Supporting Exploratory Text Analysis in Literature Study.
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing,
                        28(2): 283-95. 10.1093/llc/fqs044.
                    
                    
                        Palmer, C. L. and Neumann, L. J. (2002). The Information Work of Interdisciplinary Humanities Scholars: Exploration and Translation.
                         Library Quarterly
                        7(1): 85-117.
                    
                    
                        Rockwell, G., et al. (2010). Ubiquitous Text Analysis. 
                        Poetess Archive Journal, 1(2).
                        https://journals.tdl.org/paj/index.php/paj/article/view/13 (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Rutner, J. and Schonfeld, R. (2012). 
                        Supporting the Changing Research Practices of Historians. New York: Ithaka S+R. http://sr.ithaka.org/?p=22532
                    
                    
                        Sukovic, S. (2011). E-Texts in Research Projects in the Humanities, A. Woodsworth and W. D. Penniman (eds.), 
                        Advances in Librarianship. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing, pp. 131-202.
                    
                    
                        Toms, E. G. and O’Brien, H. (2008). Understanding the Information and Communication Technology Needs of the E-Humanist. 
                        Journal of Documentation,
                        64(1): 102-30.
                    
                    
                        Unsworth, J. (2011). Computational Work with Very Large Text Collections: Interoperability, Sustainability, and the TEI. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                        1, 10.4000/jtei.215 (accessed 4 March 2016). 
                    
                    
                        Zorich, D. (2012). 
                        Transitioning to a Digital World: Art History, Its Research Centers and Digital Scholarship: A Report to the Samuel H. Kress Foundation and the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media. New York: Samuel H. Kress Foundation. http://www.kressfoundation.org/research/Default.aspx?id=35379 (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            This poster presents the public version of the Textual Communities scholarly editing environment, describing its underlying principles, its innovative structure, and its functionality. It updates the presentation of Textual Communities given as a poster at DH 2013 in Lincoln, Nebraska.
            Study of literary works that exist in many different forms is one of the most important and difficult tasks in the humanities. The number of forms a work may have —eighty-four fifteenth-century manuscripts and printed texts of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, more than eight hundred manuscripts of Dante’s Commedia, and five thousand manuscripts of the Greek New Testament — is both testimony to their significance and a challenge to scholars. In order to understand these texts and how they relate, we have to discover as much as we can of how they came to be written and disseminated. Only then can we seek to establish how they might best be read and prepare texts (in the form of scholarly editions) for scholars to use. The work of building archives of primary materials for this work is daunting and prohibitive in the old lone scholar method. Many large editing projects have opted for a team approach, exploring the possibilities of crowd-sourcing for processing large amounts of textual data. The challenge is to coordinate this work in a way that produces high-quality, useful results. The Textual Communities workspace enables every aspect of the scholarly process: defining, transcribing, and linking textual materials for a digital archive or edition; collating the witnesses and adjusting the collation for optimal scholarly use; analyzing the results of the collation to create an understanding of the relations among the manuscripts; and for marshaling and managing a community of participants with an array of community building tools. 
            There are many editorial tools under development and a few that are already functional. There are two defining features that make Textual Communities different from the rest: its integrated participant and document management systems, and its mapping of fundamental document-entity structure. These features correspond to two underlying principles: that the work of amassing large corpora of textual materials is best accomplished by a well-managed community of interested participants from within, but also potentially from outside the academy; and that for the resulting materials to be useful, their relationships must be clearly articulated. 
             As its name suggests, Textual Communities is designed for gathering and organizing multiple participants around a common editorial project. It supports a wide range of relational structures, from a carefully crafted team to ad hoc community built on crowd-sourcing. Crucially, it enables definition of roles in the project with varying degrees of access to project materials and of authority to do the work of processing these materials, and oversight over other participants. It is also built on an ontology of text, document and communicative act to identify and relate the produced transcriptions (“texts”), the exemplars they derived from (“documents,” usually in the form of a digital image of a particular witness), and the intellectual construct they instantiate (the communicative act or “work”, or our preferred term, “entity”). Thus anyone interested in John Donne’s poem “The Good Morrow” will find various “texts” (transcriptions) of this work as found in the extant “documents” (the poem as it is found in each of the manuscripts and printed books that contain it). 
            Textual Communities itself enables uploading of digital images of primary and linkage of these images with a transcription space. The user supplies information for each document, which defines the text that is to be transcribed and its relationship to the source document and entity. The user also defines the structure of the document, which is rendered behind the visible transcription in TEI conformant XML. The transcription area, which is automatically linked to the source image, can also support any XML markup that is desired or required for intelligent transcription of the source document. The collation area (based on CollateX) offers full regularization and editing facilities, to enable creation of optimal collations for scholarly use.
            This open-source tool is available free of charge for use and adaptation by anyone anywhere. Development of this tool is funded by a generous grant from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation with the support of the Digital Research Centre at the University of Saskatchewan. 
            This poster will be accompanied by a live demonstration of the editorial workspace.
            Figure 1: opening screen of Textual Communities
            
                
            
            Figure 2: transcription interface
            
                
            
        
    


        
            My poster presents a work-in-progress focused on the language of the Polish medieval Latin hagiography. The main subject of my research are the words and expressions denoting the holy and the godless extracted from the corpus. Therefore my poster concentrates on four main topics: 
            1. The Corpus of the Polish Medieval Hagiography itself 
            2. Delimitation of the field of study within the linguistic material in relation to historical circumstances and cultural landscape of the Polish Middle Ages 
            3. Methodology of the research
            4. Questions arising and first results.
            
                1. At present the Corpus consists of three main types of texts – 
                Vitae, Miracula, Translationes - Lives, Miracles and Translations of the bodies of the Saints. It comprises about thirty texts, it is nearly 500 000 words. Firstly, I would like to explain the reasons of such a selection of the components resulting in the expected homogeneity of the whole body of texts (from the linguistic as well as cultural point of view): 
                a. established time frame and limitations concerning authorship and place where a given text was written (Starnawski, 1993), 
                b. the phenomenon of mixing of the literary genres within particular groups of texts, 
                c. last but not least - the preservation of the texts and the existence of critical editions of the majority of them. Secondly, I describe technical parameters of the Corpus (Piotrowski, 2012): XML format, microstructure and typography of the texts encoded according to the TEI Guidelines (P5), morphosyntactic mark-up with TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994). The Corpus is being analyzed using multi-tool platform TXM (Heiden., Magué, Pincemin, 2010).
            
            
                2. The starting point of the investigation is the scheme of the seven virtues and seven vices with their subdivisions, popular in the European Middle Ages, sometimes represented in manuscripts in the form of two seven-branched, multi-leaved trees, each part of which is meticulously subscribed with a respective Latin expressions (Marchese, 2013). This traditional set of vices and virtues is being compared with the list of words of the Corpus. At the same time, apart from the historical and literary data mentioned above, other elements of character description, such as epithets, comparisons and attributes connected strictly with each of the saints and their opponents are searched and analyzed (Sinclair, 2003; Stubbs, 2001). As a result I expect to obtain a huge lexical resource containing the most eminent vocabulary of the subject, which will open the prospect of further research. It should be noted that the antithetic tension between the good and the bad one was particularly emphasized in the tradition about the Bishop Stanislaw murdered by the King Boleslaw II the Generous. Because of the great importance of the Saint himself and of the wide spread narration about the Episcopal/royal conflict, it is very interesting to observe how it is echoed (or ignored) in the histories of other saints. 
            
            
                3. Since the texts considered were written in a very long period - between the end of the 10th and the end of the15th century - the linguistic material is studied mainly in a diachronic perspective, although there are other possible applications, which require dividing the Corpus into parallel sub-corpora. The possible research questions in this case include: 
                a. comparing and contrasting the image of male and female Saints, 
                b. comparing Dominican, Franciscan and other traditions, 
                c. showing the dialogue between the hagiographers of the two Patrons of the Polish Kingdom: St. Stanislaw and St. Adalbert, 
                d. shedding some more light on Polish saints and sinners in the context of the European Middle Ages (in the future). 
            
            
                4. The main question is two-fold: what are the most frequent features and virtues ascribed to the Polish medieval saintly men and women and, on the contrary - features and vices used to describe sinners/bad people? Then, does it change in time and is this change congruent with what we know about the transformation of the models of sanctity and the image of "the Other"? All these problems, as well as other issues mentioned above (point 3) can only be solved by a complex analysis of textual data combining methods of the corpus linguistics and those of the literary and historic studies. The Corpus I present is meant to be a starting point for such complex studies.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gaşpar, C., Miladinov, M. and Wood, I. (2013). 
                        Saints of the Christianization Age of Central Europe: Tenth to Eleventh Centuries. Central European University Press.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S., Magué, J.-P. and Pincemin, B. (2010). TXM : Une plateforme logicielle open-source pour la textométrie - conception et développement. 
                        The 10
                        th
                         International Conference on the Statistical Analysis of Textual Data - JADT 2010. Edizioni Universitarie di Lettere Economia Diritto, pp. 1021–32.
                    
                    
                        Marchese, F. T. (2013). Virtues and Vices: Examples of Medieval Knowledge Visualization. 
                        Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Information Visualization: IV'13. (London, UK, July 16-18, 2013), IEEE Computer Society. Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 359-65.
                    
                    
                        McEnery, T. and Wilson, A. (2001). 
                        Corpus Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh University Press.
                    
                    
                        McEnery, T., Xiao, R. and Tono, Y. (2006). 
                        Corpus-based Language Studies: An Advanced Resource Book. Taylor & Francis.
                    
                    
                        Piotrowski, M. (2012). 
                        Natural Language Processing for Historical Texts. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Plezia, M. (1987). 
                        Średniowieczne żywoty i cuda patronów Polski. Instytut Wydawniczy Pax.
                    
                    
                        Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees. In 
                        Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing. Manchester, pp. 44–49.
                    
                    
                        Sinclair, J. (1991). 
                        Corpus, Concordance, Collocation. Oxford University Press.
                    
                    
                        Sinclair, J. (2003). 
                        Reading concordances : an introduction. New York: Pearson/Longman.
                    
                    
                        Starnawski, J. (1993). 
                        Drogi rozwojowe hagiografii polskiej i łacińskiej w wiekach średnich. Kraków: Polskie Towarzystwo Teologiczne. 
                    
                    
                        Stubbs, M. (2001). 
                        Words and Phrases: Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics. Wiley-Blackwell.
                    
                    
                        Witkowska, A. (1999). 
                        Nasi święci: polski słownik hagiograficzny. Księgarnia Św. Wojciecha.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                The problems at hand
                In the context of the current onslaught cultural artefacts in the Middle East face from the iconoclasts of the Islamic State, from the institutional neglect of states and elites, and from poverty and war, digital preservation efforts promise some relief as well as potential counter narratives. They might also be the only resolve for future education and rebuilding efforts once the wars in Syria, Iraq or Yemen come to an end; and while the digitisation of Archaelogical artefacts has recently received some attention from well-funded international and national organisations, particularly vulnerable collections of texts in libraries, archives, and private homes are destroyed without the world having known about their existence in the first place.
                    
                         For a good example of crowd-sourced conservation efforts targetted at the Armenian communities of the Ottoman Empire see the 
                            Houshamadyan project, which was established by Elke Hartmann and Vahé Tachjian in Berlin in 2010 and launched an “Open Digital Archive” in 2015. Other digitisation projects worth mentioning are the 
                            Yemen Manuscript Digitisation Project (University of Oregon, Princeton University, Freie Universität Berlin) and the recent “Million Image Database Project” of the 
                            Digital Archaeology Institute (UNESCO, University of Oxford, government of the UAE) that aims at delivering 5000 3D cameras to the MENA region in spring 2016.
                        
                    
                
                Early Arabic periodicals, such as Butrus al-Bustānī’s 
                    al-Jinān (Beirut, 1876–86), Yaʿqūb Ṣarrūf, Fāris Nimr, and Shāhīn Makāriyūs’ 
                    al-Muqtaṭaf (Beirut and Cairo, 1876–1952), Muḥammad Kurd ʿAlī’s 
                    al-Muqtabas (Cairo and Damascus, 1906–18/19) or Rashīd Riḍā’s 
                    al-Manār (Cairo, 1898–1941) are at the core of the Arabic renaissance (
                    al-nahḍa), Arab nationalism, and the Islamic reform movement. These better known and—at the time—widely popular journals do not face the ultimate danger of their last copy being destroyed. Yet, copies are distributed throughout libraries and institutions worldwide. This makes it almost impossible to trace discourses across journals and with the demolition and closure of libraries in the Middle East, they are increasingly accessible to the affluent Western researcher only.
                    
                         In many instances libraries hold incomplete collections and only single copies. This, for instance, has caused even scholars working on individual journals to miss the fact that the very journal they were concerned with appeared in at least two different editions (e.g. (Glaß, 2004) see (Grallert, 2013; Grallert, 2014)).
                    
                
                Digitisation seemingly offers an “easy” remedy to the problem of access and some large-scale scanning projects, such as 
                    Hathitrust,
                    
                         It must be noted that the US-based HathiTrust does not provide public or open access to its collections even to material deemed in the public domain under extremely strict US copyright laws to users outside the USA. Citing the absence of editors able to read many of the languages written in non-Latin scripts, HathiTrust tends to be extra cautious with the material of interest to us and restricts access by default to US-IPs. These restrictions can be lifted on a case-by-case basis, which requires at least an English email conversation and prevents access to the collection for many of the communities who produced these cultural artefacts; see 
                            https://www.hathitrust.org/access_use for the access policies.
                        
                     the 
                    British Library’s “Endangered Archives Programme” (EAP), 
                    MenaDoc or 
                    Institut du Monde Arabe produced digital facsimiles of numerous Arabic periodicals. But due to the state of Arabic OCR and the particular difficulties of low-quality fonts, inks, and paper employed at the turn of the twentieth century, these texts can only reliably be digitised by human transcription (c.f. Märgner and El Abed, 2012).
                    
                         For the abominable state of Arabic OCR even for well-funded corporations and projects, try searching inside Arabic works on Google Books or HathiTrust.
                     Funds for transcribing the tens to hundreds of thousands of pages of an average mundane periodical are simply not available, despite of their cultural significance and unlike for valuable manuscripts and high-brow literature. Consequently, we still have not a single digital scholarly edition of any of these journals.
                
                On the other hand, gray online-libraries of Arabic literature, namely 
                    
                        al-Maktaba al-Shāmila
                    , 
                    
                        Mishkāt
                    , 
                    
                        Ṣayd al-Fawāʾid
                     or 
                    
                        al-Waraq
                    , provide access to a vast body of, mostly classical, Arabic texts including transcriptions of unknown provenance, editorial principals, and quality for some of the mentioned periodicals. In addition, these gray “editions” lack information linking the digital representation to material originals, namely bibliographic meta-data and page breaks, which makes them almost impossible to employ for scholarly research.
                
            
            
                Our proposed solution
                With the 
                    GitHub-hosted TEI edition of 
                        Majallat al-Muqtabas
                    
                    
                         For a history of Muḥammad Kurd ʿAlī’s journal 
                            al-Muqtabas (The Digest) see (Seikaly, 1981) and the readme.md of the project’s 
                            GitHub repository.
                        
                     we want to show that through re-purposing well-established open software and by bridging the gap between immensely popular, but non-academic (and, at least under US copyright laws, occasionally illegal) online libraries of volunteers and academic scanning efforts as well as editorial expertise, one can produce scholarly editions that offer solutions for most of the above-mentioned problems—including the absence of expensive infrastructure: We use 
                    digital texts from 
                        shamela.ws
                    , transform them into TEI XML, add light structural mark-up for articles, sections, authors, and bibliographic metadata, and link each page to facsimiles provided through 
                    EAP and 
                    HathiTrust; the latter step, in the process of which we also make first corrections to the transcription, though trivial, is the most labour-intensive, given that page breaks are commonly ignored by 
                    shamela.ws’s anonymous transcribers. The digital edition (TEI, markdown, and a web-display) is then hosted as a GitHub repository with a 
                    CC BY-SA 4.0 licence for reading, contribution, and re-use.
                    
                         The text of 
                            al-Muqtabas itself is in the public domain even under the most restrictive definitions (i.e. in the USA); the anonymous original transcribers at 
                            shamela.ws do not claim copyright; and we only link to publicly accessible facsimile’s without copying or downloading them.
                        
                    
                
                We argue that by linking facsimiles to the digital text, every reader can validate the quality of the transcription against the original we can remove the greatest limitation of crowd-sourced or gray transcriptions and the main source of disciplinary contempt among historians and scholars of the Middle East. Improvements of the transcription and mark-up can be crowd-sourced with clear attribution of authorship and version control using .git and GitHub’s core functionality. Such an approach as proposed by Christian Wittern (2013) has recently seen a number of concurrent practical implementations such as project 
                    GITenberg led by Seth Woodworth, Jonathan Reeve’s 
                    Git-lit, and others.
                
                In addition to the TEI XML files we provide structured bibliographic metadata for every article in 
                    al-Muqtabas (currently as BibTeX). The TEI edition will be referencable down to the word level for scholarly citations, annotation layers, as well as web-applications through a documented and persistent URI scheme.
                
                In order to contribute to the improvement of Arabic OCR algorithms, we will provide corrected transcriptions of the facsimile pages as ground truth to interested research projects starting with 
                    transkribus.eu.
                
                To ease access for human readers (the main projected audience of our edition) and the correction process, we also provide a 
                    basic web-display that adheres to the principles of 
                    GO::DH’s Minimal Computing Working group. This web-display is implemented through an adaptation of the 
                    TEI Boilerplate XSLT stylesheets to the needs of Arabic texts and the parallel display of facsimiles and the transcription. Based solely on XSLT 1 and CSS, it runs in most internet browsers and can be downloaded, distributed and run locally without any internet connection—an absolute necessity for societies outside the global North.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 1: The web-display of 
                        Digital Muqtabas based on TEI Boilerplate.
                    
                
                Finally, by sharing all our code, we hope to facilitate similar projects and digital editions of further periodicals. For this purpose, we successfully tested adapting the code to 
                    ʿAbd al-Qādir al-Iskandarānī’s monthly journal 
                        al-Ḥaqāʾiq (1910–12, Damascus)
                    
                    
                         On the history of 
                            al-Ḥaqāʾiq and some of its quarrels with 
                            al-Muqtabas see (Commins, 1990:118–22).
                        
                     in February 2016.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                The paper will discuss the challenges cultural artefacts, and particularly texts, face in the Middle East. We will propose a solution to some of these problems based on the principles of openness, simplicity, and adherence to scholarly and technical standards. Applying these principles, our edition of 
                    Majallat al-Muqtabas improves already existing digital artefacts and makes them accessible for reading and re-use to the scholarly community as well as the general public. Finally, we will discuss the particular challenges and experiences of this still very young project (since October 2015).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Commins, D. (1990). 
                        Islamic Reform: Politics and Social Change in Late Ottoman Syria. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
                    
                        Glaß, D. (2004). 
                        Der Muqtaṭaf Und Seine Öffentlichkeit. Aufklärung, Räsonnement Und Meinungsstreit in Der Frühen Arabischen Zeitschriftenkommunikation. Würzburg: Ergon Verlag.
                    
                    
                        Grallert, T. (2013). The puzzle continues: al-Muqtaṭaf was printed in two different and unmarked editions,
                        Sitzextase, http://tillgrallert.github.io/blog/2013/08/19/the-puzzle-continues/ (accessed 6 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Grallert, T. (2014). The puzzle continues II: in addition to al-kabīr and al-ṣaghīr, al-Muqtaṭaf published slightly different editions in Beirut and Kairo,
                        Sitzextase, http://tillgrallert.github.io/blog/2014/01/19/the-puzzle-continues-2/ (accessed 6 February 2016).
                    
                    
                        Märgner, V. and El Abed, H.  (Eds) (2012). 
                        Guide to OCR for Arabic Scripts. London: Springer http://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4471-4072-6.
                    
                    
                        Seikaly, S. (1981). Damascene Intellectual Life in the Opening Years of the 20th Century: Muhammad Kurd ʿAli and Al-Muqtabas. In Buheiry, M. R. (ed), 
                        Intellectual Life In The Arab East, 1890-1939. Beirut: American University Of Beirut, pp. 125–53.
                    
                    
                        Wittern, C. (2013). Beyond TEI: Returning the Text to the Reader. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 4: Selected Papers from the 2011 TEI Conference. http://jtei.revues.org/691.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            The poster illustrates the problems arising when attempting to describe the language used by the author flourishing at the turn of the Middle Ages and the modern era. It shows how a corpus-based linguistic analysis can tell us more about author's language and stylethan the traditional stylometric techniques. It also presents an example of the authorship attribution research of an anonymous medieval treaty carried out with the help of digital tools.
            Matthew of Cracow (c. 1345–1410) is considered as one of the greatest theologians of the Eastern Europe Middle Ages as well as one of the most important representatives of the Polish Scholasticism. He was born in Cracow, probably into a family of German ancestry. After completing his initial education in his native city, he went to Prague, where he entered the Charles University and where he became professor of theology. He was involved in the establishment of the University of Heidelberg, University of Chelmno (Poland) and later in the project of bringing to life the Academy of Cracow. He died on March 5, 1410, in Heidelberg. Matthew belonged to the followers of the via moderna trend of Scholasticism and is known as a zealous reformer of the Catholic Church. He is an author of more than 70 treatises, from which the most famous are Rationale operum divinorum, De squaloribus Curiae Romanae and Opuscula Theologica (Nuding, 2007).
            The poster will present the results of the Matthew's idiolect analysis. It will focus on language change between the late Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, as one of the main goals of the study is to trace two technolects used by authors living in this period, namely Scholastic and Humanistic Latin. Scholastic Latin is defined as a variant of late Medieval Latin, the language of science and the university community in use between 12th and 14th century (Herren, 1996: 124). Its main characteristics are excessive formalism, the use of impersonal narrati on and the pursuit of semantic precision to the detriment of aesthetic and literary values. As a result, Scholastic Latin became a highly technical language, employing countless number of theological and philosophical terms (Bourgain and Hubert, 2005: 62). With the raise of the Renaissance the language of the scientific treatises underwent a significant transformation has been transformed. Imitation of the works of Virgil and Cicero made scholars to change their own way of writing. From now on they will be using the idiomatic structure, the lexis and the rhetorical and stylistic techniques characteristic – at least in their opinion – of the Classical authors (Knight and Tilg, 2015: 4; Tunberg, 1996: 130). Many of the features of Matthew's idiolect seem to follow this new tendency and it is very important to establish how big influence it had on the style of his writings.
            The research is based on the corpus of Matthew's works which includes five editions published between 1930-2011 and consists of over 60000 words. It contains both his original treaties, namely De contractibus, De squaloribus Curiae Romanae, Sermones de sanctis, Lectura super Beati Immaculati, Opuscula Theologica, and an anonymous medieval work, often attributed to Matthew – Ars Moriendi. 
            The present study uses the methods developed by the computational stylometry and corpus linguistics and includes among others concordance, collocation and keywords analysis. The software employed for this purpose is the TXM platform – an open-source environment based on CQP and R and providing tools for NLP pre-processing, quantitative analysis together with clear metadata model (Heiden, 2010). Thanks to the TreeTagger coupled with the Latin language model file, TXM makes it possible to annotate Latin text with PoS and lemma tags, and as a result allows to perform advanced queries. In addition to frequency lists for any token property (type, lemma, PoS), the built-in CQP search engine lets generate lists for syntactic constructions specific to Classical and/or Medieval Latin, such as the accusative with infinitive or the possessive dative construction. The R package stylo (Eder et al., 2013), on the other hand, allows to trace similarities between anonymous Ars Moriendi treatise and the original Matthew’s works. 
             In thatthe poster shows how the use of the Digital Humanities methods can support the traditional analysis of a writer's language and style and help to ascertain the authorship of various texts coming from different ages.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bourgain, P. and Hubert, M. C. (2005). 
                        Le latin médiéval. Turnhout: Brepols.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: a suite of tools. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. Lincoln (NE): University of Nebraska-Lincoln, pp. 487-89.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation 2010: Conference Abstracts.Sendai: WU, pp. 389-98.
                    
                    
                        Herren, M. W. (1996). Latin and the vernacular languages. In: Mantello F. A. C., Rigg A. G. (eds.), 
                        Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide. Washington DC: Catholic University of America Press, pp. 122-29.
                    
                    
                        Knight, S. and Tilg, S. (2015). 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Neo-Latin. Oxford University Press.
                    
                    
                        Nuding, M. (2007). 
                        Matthäus von Krakau. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
                    
                        Tunberg, T. O. (1996). Humanistic Latin. In Mantello F. A. C. and Rigg A. G. (eds.), 
                        Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide. Washington DC: Catholic University of America Press, pp. 128-35.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The DigiPal project for palaeography has featured in previous DH conferences (Stokes 2012; Stokes 
                et al. 2014; Stokes 2015). It includes a generalised framework for the description and analysis of handwriting, initially applied to Old English of the eleventh century but subsequently extended to Latin, Hebrew, and decoration (Stokes 
                et al. 2014); it incorporates a novel model for describing handwriting (Stokes 2012); and a recent addition allows the embedding of linked palaeographical images into prose description (Figures 1 and 2; see also Figure 3). The purpose of this poster is to present new developments which form part of two further major grants, one of which is the Models of Authority project (see also Exon 2015). Specifically, the focus here is on the incorporation of textual content into the model for handwriting.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1: Sample of Embedded Annotations in Palaeographical Description (Webber 2015). All images are linked by the framework to their full context in the manuscript page.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2: The Graph of 
                s (fourth across in Fig. 1 above) in its page context.
            
            
                
            
            
                
                Figure 3: Sample forms (graphs) of 
                r in the Models of Authority database. Examples of 2-shaped 
                r are starred.
            
            It is well known that features of handwriting depend not only on the type of manuscript and the social context of production, but also on the text itself, and the absence of this has always been a weakness of DigiPal (Stutzmann 2012; Stutzmann 2013). For Models of Authority, in contrast, a key premise is that the development of government in medieval Scotland is reflected in the choice of visual models behind the layout and handwriting of royal and local documents: this choice probably drew primarily on English counterparts, but elements from papal bulls, among others, are also visible (Broun 2015). It is helpful to note further that the text of these documents is relatively formulaic: this is common of charters in general, as noted in particular by the Charters Encoding Initiative (CEI) and utilised effectively by the Anglo-Saxon Charters project (ASChart), among others. However, connections between diplomatic formulae and script remain largely unexamined, at least in a digital context; certainly digital projects are underway that analyse the relationship between script and document (two examples are PUhMA and MoM-CA), but freely-available online frameworks are still lacking that allow queries like ‘show me images of 
                d that appear in witness-lists of episcopal charters, and let me compare them with those of dispositive clauses’. Hence a key question of Models of Authority is whether matching the palaeography to the diplomatic formulae in this way might reveal new information about how the documents were put together, what models may lie behind them, and therefore how the nascent Scottish government may have seen itself particularly in relation to the English and Papal chanceries.
            
            The DigiPal framework has therefore been extended by adding a generalised textual component, such that arbitrary marked-up texts (transcription, translation, codicological description, and so on) may be associated with palaeographical annotations and images and displayed in parallel with them (Figures 4–6). This allows the exploration of correlations between palaeographical forms and the corresponding text, comparing in this case the different clauses in the documents not just in terms of the text (as done in ASChart and others) but also as images of the corresponding clause in different documents. The integration of this into the DigiPal model for handwriting (described by Stokes 2012) therefore allows detailed palaeographical querying, such as filtering for images of all the letters with ascenders that appear in the address clause of the charter, or looking for variation in letter-forms in the witness lists. The former is of considerable interest because chancery scribes often add decorative elements to ascenders of letters, particularly in the first line of the text (visible in Figure 4), a practice which derives from Papal and ultimately Merovingian diplomatic practice; for the latter query, names of witnesses are normally written by the main scribe at the same time as the rest of the text but in some cases may also have been added later (Broun 2011, 258–65 and 280–7), so identifying differences in writing here can also be very significant. Beyond charters, the digital model generalises to other forms of linking from structured text to structured annotation, for instance at the glyph-by-glyph level advocated by Stutzmann (2013), and is also being applied elsewhere (Exon 2015).
            
                
            
            
                Figure 4: Diplomatic Markup of Text and Image
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5: Example query showing text and image of witness lists in private charters.
            
                
            
            Figure 6: Prototype overview/timeline indicating shapes of 
                d in documents of different type.
            
            This addition of text introduces considerable complexity to the system, since it seeks to connect very different views of the original document: as transcription, translation, image and annotation; as scribal product (a set of interconnected and interacting letters) and diplomatic product (a set of textual formulae); an overview of the current architecture is shown in Figure 7. This integration of different views goes to the heart of an ongoing challenge in Digital Humanities, as perhaps best represented by the competing ‘textual’ and ‘documentary’ views in the TEI (2015; Pierazzo and Stokes 2011; see also Stokes and Noël 2010).
            
                
            
            Figure 7: Overview of the current architecture
            The proposed poster will therefore present the existing framework and integrated model, addressing the complexities described above. Live demonstrations will be available of Models of Authority, and of other instances of the framework such as DigiPal, Exon, and some that are not yet publicly available.
            
                Acknowledgements
                The Models of Authority project is funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) under Grant Reference n° AH/L008041/1.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        ASChart.
                         Anglo-Saxon Charters. London: King’s College. Available at 
                        http://aschart.kcl.ac.uk/. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Broun, D. (2015). Introducing the ‘Models of Authority’ project: Scottish charters c. 1100–c.1250. 
                        Models of Authority: Scottish Charters and the Emergence of Government. London: King’s College. Available at 
                        http://www.modelsofauthority.ac.uk/blog/intro/. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Broun, D. (2011). The presence of witnesses and the writing of charters. In Broun, D. (ed.), 
                        The Reality behind Charter Diplomatic in Anglo-Norman Britain. Glasgow: University of Glasgow, pp. 235–90. Available at 
                        http://paradox.poms.ac.uk/redist/pdf/chapter4.pdf. [Accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                    
                        CEI. 
                        Charters Encoding Initiative. Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians Universität. Available at 
                        http://www.cei.uni-muenchen.de/. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        DigiPal. (2010–14). 
                        Digital Resource and Database of Palaeography, Manuscript Studies and Diplomatic. London: King's College. Available at 
                        http://www.digipal.eu. [Accessed 1 November 2015]. 
                    
                    
                        Exon. (2015–). 
                        The Conqueror’s Commissioners: Unlocking the Domesday Survey of SW England. London: King’s College. Available at 
                        http://www.exondomesday.ac.uk. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        PUhMA. 
                        Papsturkunden des hohen Mittelalters. Erlangen: University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. 
                        https://www5.cs.fau.de/de/papsturkunden-des-hohen-mittelalters/startseite/. [Accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                    
                        MoA (2015–). 
                        Models of Authority: Scottish Charters, c.1100–c.1250. London: King’s College. Available at 
                        http://www.modelsofauthority.ac.uk. [Accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                    
                        MoM-CA. 
                        Source Code of the Monasterium Collaborative Archive. 
                        https://github.com/icaruseu/mom-ca. [Accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. and Stokes, P.A. (2011). Putting the text back into context: A codicological approach to manuscript transcription. In Fischer, F., Fritze, C. and Vogeler, G. (eds), 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im Digitalen Zeitalter 2 - Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age 2. Norderstedt: Books on Demand, pp. 397–430. Available at 
                        http://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/4360/. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A., and Noël, G. (2010). Modelling and system design. 
                        Anglo-Saxon Cluster Project Report. London: King’s College. Available at 
                        http://www.ascluster.org/techinfo/analysis/system_design.html. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A. (2012). Modeling medieval handwriting: A new approach to digital palaeography. In Meister, J.C. 
                        et al. (eds), 
                        DH2012 Book of Abstracts. Hamburg: University of Hamburg, pp. 382–5. Available at 
                        http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/modeling-medieval-handwriting-a-new-approach-to-digital-palaeography. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A., Brookes, S., Noël, G., Buomprisco, G., Marques de Matos, D., and Watson, M. (2014) The DigiPal framework for script and image. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2014 Book of Abstracts. Lausanne: 512–14. Available at 
                        http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Poster-193.xml. Poster available at 
                        http://www.digipal.eu/media/uploads/uploads/images/blog_posts/2014/DH2014%20Poster.pdf. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A. (2015). The problem of digital dating: A model for uncertainty in medieval documents. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2015 Book of Abstracts. Sydney: University of Western Sydney. Available at 
                        http://dh2015.org/abstracts/. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2012). Modélisation des signes graphiques (1). 
                        Écriture médiévale et numérique. Available at 
                        http://oriflamms.hypotheses.org/921. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2013). Ontologie des formes et encodage des textes manuscrits médiévaux: Le projet ORIFLAMMS. 
                        Document númerique 16(3): 81–95.
                    
                    
                        TEI: Text Encoding Initiative (2015). Representation of primary sources. 
                        P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.9.1 revision 46ac023. Available at 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/PH.html. [Accessed 1 November 2015].
                    
                    
                        Webber, T. (2015). The handwriting of Scottish charters 1100–1250 in the National Library of Scotland. 
                        Models of Authority: Scottish Charters and the Emergence of Government 1100–1250. King’s College London. 
                        http://www.modelsofauthority.ac.uk/blog/handwriting/. [Accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                
                    symogih.org, a project in constant evolution
                
                The collaborative platform for historical research developed as part of the 
                    symogih.org project has reached a mature stage
                    
                        SyMoGIH: Système Modulaire de Gestion de l'Information Historique - Modular Historical Information Management System. The project site: 
                        . Cf. Beretta, F., Vernus, P., and Hours, B. (2012).
                    . With an active SPARQL endpoint, the system is now interoperable and interconnected
                    
                        http://
                        www.
                        symogih.org/?q=rdf-publication . Cf. Beretta, F., Ferhod, D., Gedzelman, S. and Vernus, P. (2014).
                    . It is housing 16 ongoing projects, including several on a European scale (France, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium); there are about 50 active users and it contains nearly 1.700.000 data rows. The research projects include, for example, the Siprojuris project
                    
                        
                    , a prosopographic data publishing site interconnected with IdRef, the authority data repository of the French higher education libraries’ catalogue
                    
                        .
                    ; the Historical Atlas of Political Territories
                    
                        .
                         
                        Cf. 
                        Beretta, F. 
                        and
                        Butez, C. 
                        (2014).
                    , a project that is mapping the evolution of world political borders; Society Religion Science (SRS)
                    
                        .
                    , an experimental digital intellectual history website providing documents encoded in XML following the recommendations of the 
                    Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) and annotated using the 
                    symogih.org ontology
                    
                         .
                    .
                
                The institution hosting the project is the 
                    Laboratoire de recherche historique Rhône-Alpes
                    
                         LARHRA CNRS UMR 5190 – Universités de Lyon et Grenoble:
                        .
                    . Its human and material resources being limited, to avoid a growth crisis and with a view to building an international community of users, the evolution of two principle aspects of the architecture of the 
                    symogih.org project needs to be reconsidered and planned for from today: these are,its interface with other information systems, in particular with those put in place by heritage institutions; and the management of a growing community of users.
                
                The purpose of our DH 2016 Conference poster is to share our prospects with other DH projects and to present a proposal for the evolution of the platform and operational information, for both the technological and project management domains, and to call for an international collaboration which could function as a consortium.
            
            
                Towards a distributed and multi-instantiated database
                A possible technological answer to the challenge of the increasing number of projects hosted by the 
                    symogih.org platform, i.e. to provide the expected information centralization without creating a bottleneck and low performance, is to evolve its architecture by distributing the data between a primary node and several secondary nodes of a clustered database.
                
                The primary node would contain all of the shared repositories (object authority records and instances of the collaborative ontology), as well as general-interest data. The secondary nodes, hosted in various research institutions, would contain the information produced by the local projects. To allow the collaborative management of a shared, good-quality ontology to be maintained, avoiding redundant and messy data, a user of any secondary node shoud be able to access all the data, whether it is held in their database instance or not, via a table held in the primary node, which would hold the keys of all the existing knowledge units and their location in the distributed system.
                The whole information system will be interoperable with reference ontologies like CIDOC-CRM or FRBRoo and interlinked with authority files repositories (ISNI, VIAF, BNF, etc.). In addition, a growing portion of the information will be directly accessible in RDF format through a SPARQL endpoint, allowing the data to be queried at the same time as those from other linked data warehouses. The data will be available under a Creative Commons 4.0 international licence. 
            
            
                Establishing an international community of users
                This distributed platform management entails the creation of an international organized community of users in the form of a consortium. This community will need to be built around a governance committee, responsible for ensuring a collaborative approach at all levels, from managing the definitions of ontology instances through to data capture. The primary node could be managed, as at present, by the 
                    Pôle histoire numérique (Digital History Department) of the LARHRA, founding institution of the 
                    symogih.org project; but it could be hosted in the data centre of an institutional structure such as, in France, the TGIR HumaNum
                    Très Grande Infrastructure de Recherche (very large research infrastructure): 
                         .
                    .
                
                The other nodes would be managed by teams made up of researchers and IT technicians, ensuring not only management of the respective databases and software development for the whole project, but also running local scientific projects and training users in data modelling and capture, working closely with the governance committee. The evolution towards the participation of projects using different languages will imply the implementation of a multilingual version of the information system, both at the level of the interface and for drafting instances of the collaborative ontology. 
                By offering access to a collaboratively designed ontology and a robust technological solution, intended for an increasingly wide community of users, the 
                    symogih.org project will contribute to the evolution of practices in the domain of data production and data curation in historical research.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Beretta, F. and Butez, C. (2014). SyMoGIH project and Geo-Larhra: A method and a collaborative platform for a digital historical atlas.
                        Digital Humaities 2014 Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland.
                        .
                    
                    Beretta, F., Ferhod, D., Gedzelman, S. and Vernus, P. (2014). The SyMoGIH project: publishing and sharing historical data on the semantic web. 
                        Digital Humanities 2014 Conference. Lausanne, Switzerland, 
                         ; 
                         .
                    
                    Beretta, F., Vernus, P. and Hours, B. (2012). The Système Modulaire de Gestion de l'Information Historique (SyMoGIH): a collaborative and cumulative platform for storage and use of geo-historical information. 
                        Digital Humanities 2012 Conference. Hamburg, Germany, 
                        
                         .
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Approach
                Decades ago, alongside more traditional structuralist paradigms that were largely based on linguistic theorems (Lotman 1972, Titzmann 1977), literary studies began to undertake structural analyses based on empirical sociology, in particular the social network analysis. Structure was no longer solely defined by semantic relations (such as opposition or equivalence), but by social interactions, too (Marcus 1973; Stiller, Nettle and Dunbar 2003; de Nooy 2005; Stiller and Hudson 2005; Elson, Dames and McKeown 2010; Agarwal et al., 2012). In the context of the Digital Humanities, this kind of approaches has gained a new dynamic in shape of a dedicated literary network analysis (Moretti 2011; Rydberg-Cox 2011; Park, Kim and Cho 2013; Trilcke 2013). This method is based on the analysis of bigger literary corpora (i.e., quantitative data) and promises insights into the history of literature as well as generic characteristics of literary texts. In our project, "dlina. Digital LIterary Network Analysis", we already developed a workflow for the extraction, analysis and visualisation of network data from dramatic texts built on basic TEI markup (Fischer, Kampkaspar, Göbel, Trilcke, 2015). This paper will present results of our analysis of the network data gathered so far and discuss them in the light of current theories in the field of social network analysis.
            
            
                Data Collection and Analysis
                Our current corpus comprises 465 German-language dramas (from 1730 to 1930), the better part of the Digitale Bibliothek corpus contained in the TextGrid repository (
                    ). The structural data crucial for the network analysis of these dramas (segmentation, character identification, etc.) was revised manually in a rule-based process to straighten out issues with the OCR and TEI tagging. We also had to level out philological peculiarities that would otherwise distort our results (such as different names for identical figures or groups of characters like 'Both' or 'All'). All the structural data is stored in an XML format we especially developed for that purpose (DLINA format). Network visualisation and network-value calculation has been automated (via Python and, alternatively, JavaScript to facilitate a direct embedding of our results into webpages). The scripts are fed with the data stored in DLINA files. In addition to graphs and simple network values that globally describe networks (like network size, density, average degree, average path length, clustering coefficent), we also calculate centrality values for the characters of each play (like degree, average distance, closeness centrality, betweenness centrality). In addition, we most recently implemented the calculation of random graphs based on the observed drama networks. All data and visualisations are freely available online on the project website (
                     and 
                    ).
                
            
            
                Evaluation, Part I: History of Drama
                The diachronic extension of our corpus over 200 years of German literary history allows the observation of larger developments in the structural composition of dramatic texts (we outlined some reflections on this in a blog post: 
                    ). Values referring to networks as a whole will be broached (incl. network size, density, average degree; as an example, we put average-path-length values by decades in Fig. 1), as will be character-related values for each character of each play (centrality measures, primarily) providing information on the distribution of the personae dramatis or their division into 'central' and 'less central' characters. These values will lay the groundwork for the discussion of some global hypotheses of literary history. We will discuss, firstly, the extent to which we can observe a differentiation of the structural composition of drama at the end of the 18th century on the basis of network analysis values: Such a differentiation is to be expected given the coexistence of 'closed' drama (following the doctrines of French classicism) and 'open' drama (mostly influenced by Shakespeare). Secondly, we will discuss some common literary periodising hypotheses (originating from structuralism, social history, or other directions). We will have a closer look at correlations between our network data and well-established traditional periodisations.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 1: Average path length by decades (mean)
                    
                
            
            
                Evaluation, Part II: Types of Drama
                The data raised so far shows how very differently theatre plays were structured in the focal period. Traditional literary studies have developed various typologies for such different types, the most popular in German studies being Volker Klotz's subdivision into 'open' and 'closed' drama. We want to build on this kind of typological impulse and propose a method as to how certain types of structural composition can be distinguished by means of network analysis (and also placed in their historic context). With this proposal we want to take up reflections from research on so-called small-world networks. This branch of research assumes that the values of empirically collected networks often differ significantly from those of corresponding random networks (e.g., graphs generated with the Erdős–Rényi model). Following the approach of Stiller, Nettle and Dunbar 2003, but relying on a much larger set of texts, we investigate the plays in our corpus with regard to their small-world properties (clustering coefficient, average path length, node degree distribution). The results show that there are just a few plays that meet all the criteria (a total of five plays, i.e., just about one percent of the corpus) – see figs. 2.1 to 2.5.
                These findings will give us a deeper understanding of different types of structural composition. We shall first direct our attention to forms of networks that – unlike dramas with small-world properties – occur much more frequently in our corpus. Eventually, we will discuss structural characteristics of drama networks exhibiting properties exactly opposite to the properties of small-world dramas (e.g., reverse power-law form in the node degree distribution). It will also be discussed in this context whether we can contrast the strong hierarchical type of small-world drama with an anti-hierarchical type.
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2.1: Goethe, “Götz von Berlichingen” (1773): Spring Embedder Layout, Circular Layout, Node Degree Distribution
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2.2: Arnim, “Jerusalem” (1811): Spring Embedder Layout, Circular Layout, Node Degree Distribution
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2.3: Soden, “Doktor Faust” (1797): Spring Embedder Layout, Circular Layout, Node Degree Distribution
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2.4: Nestroy, “Der böse Geist” (1833): Spring Embedder Layout, Circular Layout, Node Degree Distribution
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 2.5: Raimund, “Der Barometermacher” (1823): Spring Embedder Layout, Circular Layout, Node Degree Distribution
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Réka, A. and Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of complex networks. 
                        Reviews of Modern Physics
                        74: 47–97.
                    
                    
                        Agarwal, A. et al. (2012). Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, Montréal: 88–96.
                    
                    
                        de Nooy, Wouter (2006). Stories, Scripts, Roles, and Networks. 
                        Structure and Dynamics 
                        1(2) 
                         (accessed 4 March 2016)
                    
                    
                        Elson, D. K., Dames, N.
                        and
                         McKeown, K. R. (2010). Extracting Social Networks from Literary Fiction. 
                        Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, pp. 138–47.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F., Kampkaspar, D.; Göbel, M. 
                        and 
                        Trilcke, P. (2015). Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts. 
                        DH2015, script: 
                        , slides: 
                         (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Klotz, Volker (1960). 
                        Geschlossene und offene Form im Drama. München.
                    
                    
                        Lotman, Jurij M. (1972).
                        Die Struktur literarischer Texte. München.
                    
                    
                        Marcus, Solomon (1973). 
                        Mathematische Poetik. Frankfurt/M.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, Franco: Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets, 
                        No. 2, 1 May 2011, 
                         (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Park, G.-M., Sung-Hwan, K. 
                        and
                         Cho, H.-G. (2013). Structural Analysis on Social Network Constructed from Characters in Literature Texts. 
                        Journal of Computers
                        8(9): 2442–47, 
                         (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Rydberg-Cox, J. (2011). Social Networks and the Language of Greek Tragedy. 
                        Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science, 
                        1(3), 
                        
                    
                    
                        Stiller, J., Nettle, D. 
                        and 
                        Dunbar, Robin I. M. (2003). The Small World of Shakespeare's Plays. 
                        Human Nature
                        14: 397–408.
                    
                    
                        Stiller, J. 
                        and
                         Hudson, M. (2005). Weak Links and Scene Cliques Within the Small World of Shakespeare. 
                        Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology
                        3: 57–73.
                    
                    
                        Titzmann, M. (1977). 
                        Strukturale Textanalyse. Theorie und Praxis der Interpretation. München.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, P. (2013). Social Network Analysis (SNA) als Methode einer textempirischen Literaturwissenschaft. Ajouri, Philip; Mellmann, Katja and Rauen, Christoph (eds.): 
                        Empirie in der Literaturwissenschaft. Münster, pp. 201–47.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Poetry in the Middle Ages changed as it was recopied, recited and passed along. 
                Mouvance is a term used by late Swiss medievalist Paul Zumthor to designate the high degree of instability in medieval text traditions. Zumthor qualifies this instability as an “interplay between variant readings and reworkings,” balancing both the textual, literary elements of written works with oral, performative ones (Zumthor, 1992; p.44). Twentieth-century text editing came to grips with this instability in large text traditions in different ways. For complex text traditions with a high degree of variance in medieval French, editors sometimes compiled one edition containing all the witnesses in successive chapters, as in the cases of 
                La vie de sainte Marie l’Egyptienne (Dembowski, 1977) and 
                L’Evangile de Nicodème (Ford, 1973) or they arranged them in a synoptic-style parallel edition as in the case of the fabliaux (Rychner, 1960). The alignment of such synoptic editions, although not discussed explicitly by the editors, was no doubt hand-ordered and its page layout was based on rough narrative equivalence of passages.
            
            Cerquiglini has argued that, faced with such variance, the medievalist’s “analysis must be comparative, not archeological” (Cerquiglini, 1999; p.44). Such parallel print editions provide readers with a visual frame for comparative reading of variant texts, inviting exploration and giving insight into processes of textual change. There are a number of problems in text traditions with oral influence. There are not only different kinds of variance (single word/string variance, half-line or hemistich variance, transposition and reorganization of rhyming verse lines or interpolation of entirely new lines), but patterns of variance are also not uniform across a text, making the desired comparative visualization of texts difficult. Alignments can also mix and confuse kinds of variance. What are ways of visualizing textual variation in a digital environment? This is the question our paper intends to explore.
            Visualization strategies for historical text reuse vary according to the scale of the phenomenon and the nature of the texts involved (Franzini et al., 2015). Sophisticated visualizations for alignment exist at the micro-level, that is, at the level of the word such as the graph visualizations of TRAViz (Jänicke et al., 2015). They facilitate comparative readings of word-level variance in manuscript witnesses or translations. The text in such alignments is fully legible. A clean example of this can be found in the TRAViz alignments of English translations of the Bible (Figure 1), a textual use case in which units and sub-units of text are already commonly agreed upon by tradition (e.g. book, chapter, verse). On the other hand, solutions exist for macro-level text reuse, such as fingerprinting techniques (Jänicke and Geßner, 2015), creating distant patterns of textual similarity without showing the text (Figure 2).
            
                
                    
                    Figure 1: Micro-level alignment of 24 English translations of Genesis 1:1 (Jänicke et al., 2015)
                
            
            
                
                    
                    Figure 2: Macro-level fingerprint illustrates similarity between 24 English Bible translations (Jänicke and Geßner, 2015)
                
            
            
                A critical discussion of the description and design of meso-level visualization of complex text traditions is missing. Not only are these text traditions large, but they are highly influenced by orality, that is, in Zumthor's words, they present a combination of textual and performative variance. Textual reworking at multiple scales (whole chunks of text, groups of lines, individual lines, sub-line strings) are challenges for both alignment and visualization. Our design attempts to translate the insights of Zumthor and Cerquiglini into an environment for visual exploration using two medieval text traditions: a tradition of short baudy tales known as the 
                fabliaux
                ,
                 and in versions of the well-known epic the 
                Chanson de Roland
                .
                 
                These two traditions have been chosen for the kinds of complex variance they exhibit. Our paper focuses on so-called meso-level alignments that visualize patterns of textual variance higher than the word and verse line level, and stress both legibility and human interaction in visualizing patterns.
            
            Existing methods for text alignment in digital environments, generally speaking, favor relatively stable texts with small variance. The Versioning Machine accepts texts encoded “according to TEI's Parallel Segmentation method” and “interprets the encoding, parsing out the text into its constituent parts” (Versioning Machine, 2015). The authors of the Versioning Machine offer a sample alignment of a medieval “Prophecy of Merlin” (Figure 3). The line-to-line alignment has been encoded by the textual scholar. Similar lines are visually connected using customary mouse behavior, however, variance within the line or across lines is not visualized.
            
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 3: Two versions of the Prophecy of Merlin visualized in Versioning Machine
                    
                
            
            
                Another environment for the collation of raw text and visualization of textual differences is JuxtaCommons (Wheeles and Jensen, 2013). The example in Figure 4 uses two editions of Chretien de Troyes’ medieval romance 
                Perceval
                ,
                 one based on BnF, ms. français 12576 (Roach, 1959) at left, and the other Bern, Burgerbibliothek ms. 354 (Méla, 1990) at right. There is basic alignment of the verse line and minor lexical or dialectal variance, and mouse over in JuxtaCommons allows basic comparative reading of word- and string-level variants. In their out-of-the-box implementation, both tools allow 
                for easy 
                comparison of two versions of the text, although the Versioning Machine has been implemented for larger comparison sets.
            
            
                    
                        
                        Figure 4: Two editions of Chretien de Troyes’ Perceval visualized in JuxtaCommons
                    
            
            
                When complex text traditions containing more than just variant readings, but also interpolations, extra or missing lines or a significant amount of orthographic variance are collated automatically in JuxtaCommons, their results, however, are nearly illegible. Figure 5 shows two 
                witnesses
                 of 
                the same
                 old French 
                fabliau
                ;
                 the visual alignment, however, does an insufficient job at expressing the performative element of their 
                mouvance
                .
            
            
                    
                        
                        Figure 5: Two versions of a fabliau visualized in JuxtaCommons
                    
            
            
                Our design for a sufficient representation of 
                variance in
                 the
                 
                fabliaux
                 is shown in Figure 6. We use the intuitive quality of stream graphs (Byron et al., 2008) in order to support the analysis of aligned verses and to illustrate the transmission of one 
                fabliau
                 
                in four versions. The text editions are juxtaposed in columns in order to minimize edge crossings, in other words, we order the editions according to their similarity.
            
            
                    
                        
                        Figure 6: Four versions of a fabliau in our design
                    
            
            
                
                The visualization is available at
                
                     
                
                
                . 
                Clicking on a specific verse line produces a TRAViz micro-view of the line-level variance (Jänicke et al., 2015), whereas the larger meso-view of this portion of the 
                fabliau
                 
                allows patterns between and across verse lines to be clearly ascertained. 
                V
                ariance 
                in this genre 
                maintains prosody and avoids hypermeter; 
                mouvance
                 
                is characterized 
                here 
                by the interpolation of larger narrative multi-line fragments of text. The exception to this general rule is manuscript Harley 2253 in the column at far right where the narrative is reconstituted almost completely around sparse line re-use, illustrating what Rychner calls in the subtitle of his book “deteriorization” 
                [dégradation] 
                (Rychner, 1960). 
                Mouvance
                 
                occurs in multi-line “chunks,” visible in 
                highly legible streams of text re-use. This provides much more insight into textual transformation than reading Rychner’s hand-aligned synoptic edition, with the streams 
                here 
                drawing our attention to patterns of re-used text. In his edition, blank spaces and horizontal lines in the page layout effect a more uncertain alignment.
            
            
                Another example of what we are calling meso-level alignment is the visualization of one stanza from the 
                Chanson de Roland
                 
                tradition contained in six manuscripts. 
                Figure 7 illustrates
                 
                laisse
                 
                1 of the Lavergne fragment, absent from Oxford, Bodleian Library manuscript Digby, 23. An interactive version of the alignment is available at
                
                     
                
                
                .
            
            
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 7: Six editions and one fragment of the Chanson de Roland in our design
                    
                
            
            
                
                To indicate how often lines recur across the whole manuscript tradition, we use streams colored 
                with
                 varying saturation. Highly saturated colors indicate frequently repeated passages, whereas less saturated colors indicate less repeated ones. Such a feature allows for a “consensus” visualization of the tradition at this meso scale. It is easy to see the more complex, transpositional variance of lines in the 
                Chanson de
                 Roland
                .
                 This compositional feature of French epic visualized here needs to be studied across the entire corpus of seven manuscripts and three fragments. It is perhaps on this point, however, that a principle of visualization clashes with the visual expectations of a medieval textual scholar. As in the above example, we ordered the 
                editions to reduce the number of crossing streams and to maximize legibility. This is potentially at odds with readers who expect to see temporality of manuscript dating represented in the visualization. More thinking needs to be done about the visual semantics of such a large tradition. In such a case, a perfect order that produces less clutter might be hard to determine, and we will be required to extend our proposed design.
            
            
                We began with the alignment of the 
                fabliaux
                 
                and 
                Chanson de Roland
                 
                since they are traditions where editors have indexed alignment manually, either using page layout or by 
                numerical 
                cross referencing 
                of the stanzas
                .
                 
                As the example shown in Figure 8 illustrates, 
                lin
                es are not identical word for word, but rather our alignment has asserted basic diegetical equivalence.
            
            
                
                
                    
                    Figure 8: Visualization of an aligned verse line in three versions of a fabliau
                
            
            
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 9: Alignment of an aligned verse among seven Chanson de Roland editions
                    
                
            
            
                
                In the example portrayed in Figure 9, performative 
                mouvance
                 
                is reflected in the recombination of words in the line.
            
            In developing our research on this topic, we intend to pursue more granular alignment using computational means, down to the line and perhaps the hemistich. Based on the Relative Edit Distance of strings (Jänicke et al., 2015), we aim to determine spelling variants and rhyme sets automatically. Combined with an n-gram analysis, we will support the discovery and alignment of similar text passages. Due to the high degree of orthographic variance of the medieval French language, a purely computational approach might lead to a high number of false positive alignments. Therefore, we will design a visual analytics system that includes the human in the alignment process in order to configure appropriate settings that maximize the alignment of re-used text passages. This visual analytics process includes the supervised training of a classifier that supplies the parameters steering the alignment. Iteratively, computationally aligned text fragments are scored by the textual scholar according to their relevance. After each scoring session, the alignment will be recomputed taking the scholar's justifications into account.
            
                In contrast to the manual alignment illustrated in the visualizations above (Figures 6-9), such a semi-automated process will potentially yield a very different picture in particular with respect to the degree of difference the human allows in string matching and the presence of shared n-grams required to align certain text passages. A further opportunity of this generic visual analytics approach is its straightforward adaptability to editions in other languages than medieval French. With 
                such a user-centered approach, alignment is not to be understood as a final product, but rather a process, for understanding variant text traditions, exploring their intricacies and supporting generation of hypotheses about textual behavior.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Anonymous (2005).
                         
                        La Chanson de Roland / The Song of Roland: The French Corpus
                        .
                         Ed. J. Duggan. Geneva: Droz.
                    
                    
                        Byron, L., and Wattenberg, M.
                         
                        (2008). Stacked graphs–geometry & aesthetics. In 
                        Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions.
                         
                        14.6 (2008): 1245-1252.
                    
                    
                        Cerquiglini, B.
                         
                        (1999). 
                        In Praise of the Variant: A Critical History of Philology
                        .
                         
                        Baltimore/London: The Johns Hopkins Press.
                    
                    
                        Dembowski, P.
                         
                        (1977). 
                        La vie de sainte Marie l’Egyptienne, versions en ancien et en moyen français
                        .
                         
                        Geneva: Droz.
                    
                    
                        Ford, A.E.
                         
                        (1973). 
                        L’Evangile de Nicodème: les versions courtes en ancien français et en prose
                        .
                         
                        Geneva: Droz.
                    
                    
                        Franzini, G., Franzini, E., Büchler, M.
                         
                        (2015). Historical Text Reuse: What Is It?. Available at: 
                        
                            http://etrap.gcdh.de/?page_id=332
                        
                         
                        [accessed 3 March 2016].
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S. and Geßner, A.
                         
                        (2015). A Distant Reading Visualization for Variant Graphs. In 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2015
                        .
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S., Geßner, A., Franzini, G., Terras, M., Mahony, S. and Scheuermann, G. (2015). TRAViz: A Visualization for Variant Graphs. In 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                        , 30(suppl.1): i83–i99. 
                        Available at:
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        [accessed 27 October 2015]
                    
                    
                        Méla, C. (1990). 
                        Le Roman de Perceval. Édition du ms. 354 de Berne, traduction critique, présentation et notes
                        .
                         By Chrétien de Troyes. Paris, Librairie générale française.
                    
                    
                        Moffat, M. (2014). 
                        The Châteauroux Version of the “Chanson de Roland”: A Fully Annotated Critical Text
                        .
                         
                        Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter.
                    
                    
                        Roach, W.
                         
                        (1959). 
                        Le roman de Perceval ou le Conte du Graal
                         
                        publié d'après le ms. fr. 12576 de la Bibliothèque nationale
                        .
                         By Chrétien de Troyes.
                         
                        Geneva, Droz.
                    
                    
                        Rychner, J.
                         
                        (1960). 
                        Contribution à l’étude des fabliaux: variantes, remaniement, dégradations
                        .
                         
                        Geneva: Droz.
                    
                    
                        Versioning Machine.
                         
                        (2015).
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        [accessed 27 October 2015]
                    
                    
                        Wheeles, D. and Jensen, K.
                         
                        (2013). Juxta Commons. In 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2013
                        .
                    
                    
                        Zumthor, P. (1992). 
                        Toward a Medieval Poetics
                        .
                         
                        Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                
                The Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (TEI) have been used throughout numerous disciplines producing huge numbers of TEI collections. These digital texts are most often transformed for display as websites and camera-ready copies. TEI Simple 
                (Rahtz et al, 2014) 
                project was the first one to propose more prescriptive approach providing the baseline rules of processing TEI into various publication formats, while offering the possibility of building customized processing models within the same infrastructure. For the first time in history of TEI there exists a sound recommendation for default processing scheme, which significantly lowers the barriers for entry-level TEI users and enables better integration with editing and publication tools. The TEI Simple project was a Mellon-funded collaboration between the TEI Consortium, Northwestern University, the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, and the University of Oxford.
            
            
                The new (on track for acceptance by early 2016) TEI method for documenting processing models gives editors and TEI customisers a method for high level recording of processing intentions in a machine-processable but implementation agnostic manner. Nevertheless, the processing model is a new proposal and needs to be extensively tested before announcing it a success. As the TEI Technical Council works to integrate the TEI processing model extensions created by the TEI Simple project, we endeavour to employ it on real world projects, both of which have been running for a significant number of years and have already produced vast collections of material: historical documents of the US Department of State, Office of Historian (
                
                ) and the corpus of Ioannes Dantiscus’ correspondence (
                
                ). The Office of the Historian publishes a large collection of archival documents of state, especially those appartaining to foreign relations. The Dantiscus project spans over ten thousand original sources from the early sixteenth century including correspondence, poetry, and diplomatic documents. This makes it a good test case for implementation of the TEI Processing Model because it is far beyond the scope of the original TEI Simple sample collections. Having the material previously published with custom-built XQuery/XSLT packages means that we are in a position to compare the results of using an approach based on the processing model with the previous one in terms of the quality and consistency of final presentation but also in more quantitative ways like the size of necessary code base, development time and ease of the long-term maintenance.
            
            The first challenge is, obviously, rephrasing the transformations previously formulated in XQuery/XSLT using ODD meta-language extensions proposed by TEI Simple project. Preliminary results are very encouraging even though, as expected, it became necessary to extend the behaviours library to accommodate some specific needs. From the developer’s perspective it is immediately clear that using the TEI processing model brings substantial advantages in development time and results in much leaner and cleaner code to maintain. For the Office of Historian project figures suggest code reduction by at least two-thirds in size. Numbers are even more impressive realizing that the resulting ODD file is not only smaller, but much less dense, consisting mostly of formulaic  expressions that make it easier to read, understand and maintain, even by less skilled developers.
            
                To a lesser extent, but it is still interesting to see if, thanks to the additional layer of abstraction that processing model brings to the table, the editors can become more independent from developers in tweaking the processing rules. This heavily depends on the personal predilections of the editor, but again, in cases where editors are already deeply involved in the decisions about encoding on the level of XML markup and do have some fluency in XPath and/or CSS our results show that it is perfectly reasonable to expect them to tailor the existing high-level processing models to fit their specific needs in a majority of cases. We will also investigate the effect of incorporating the Processing Model into eXist-db
                 
                native database and application framework 
                (Meier et al, 2016)
                 environment in terms of easening the learning curve, for the non-technical users in particular. 
            
            The processing model at the time of writing this paper proposal is not a mature technology yet, in the sense that it still lacks the critical mass of its practitioners as well as formal acceptance by the TEI Technical Council (although this will have been integrated into the TEI infrastructure by the time of DH2016). This presentation aims to present both challenges and open questions as well as already demonstrated advantages of applying this technology. It will draw on the evidence from early adopters available by the time of DH2016. It is not only the quantitative measures of improvements in technical implementations that will be reported on, but the variation in methodologies employed by the test projects and others.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Meier
                        , 
                        W
                        . 
                        and 
                        Turska, M.
                         
                        (2016).
                         TEI 
                        Processing Model Toolbox Documentation
                        ,
                        
                         
                        
                         (accessed 5 March 2015)
                    
                    
                        Rahtz, S., Mueller, M., Pytlik-Zillig, B., Turska, M. and Cummings, J.
                         
                        (2015).
                         TEI Simple 
                        Processing Model Specification
                        ,
                        
                         
                        
                         (accessed 5 March 2015)
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            US Epigraphy (USEP)(Bodel, 2015), directed by John Bodel at Brown University, is a venerable project – its roots are in a printed handbook, which was instantiated as an HTML based website at Rutgers in 1997 (Bodel et al., 1997). In 2003, Prof. Bodel moved to Brown and USEP was converted to a more automated, data-driven site. It has gone through several implementations since that time, following the state of the art in humanities computing/DH and conforming to the practices of our library development team. 
            The project’s goal is to identify, document and create new editions of classical inscriptions in American collections, as well as to teach digital epigraphy. The inscriptions are organized geographically by collection. The project collaborates with international epigraphic consortia such as Eagle (EAGLE, 2015) and will remain conformant with their encoding schemas and vocabularies. In addition, it is one of the active contributors to the Epidoc schema for epigraphy (Elliott et al., 2015)
            The current USEP front end is written in Django, and is powered by a SOLR index. XML transformations occur at two points: when the inscriptions are ingested into SOLR, and when they are displayed - the latter transformation takes advantage of SaxonCE and therefore takes place in the user’s browser. 
            Our choice of Django for a front-end framework was driven by the environments used by our library developers – it means that we need a developer to work on the project, either library staff or a skilled student programmer. Our choice of Saxon CE to generate our display was driven by our need to modify the display easily outside of the development environment and is easily replaced.
            Inscriptions are added to the collection as they are identified, with minimal information (location and a bibliographic reference or “unpublished”) and iteratively enriched. Although major collections are represented, new inscriptions are always being found in small collections or in storerooms. Gradually, all inscriptions in USEP are edited to have detailed metadata, a full transcription, more complete bibliographic information and images. 
            The project has received some funding over the years, but has functioned continuously with basic university support. Staff include 
            
                a faculty director
                technical management and consulting, as well as programming support provided by the library
                a graduate student/postdoc manager in charge of the encoding workflow and proofreading (along with the director) and other improvements
                graduate student encoders and collaborators outside Brown, who either contribute editions or whose students contribute editions.
            
            Almost all USEP encoding is done by newly minted encoders or colleagues who aren’t working on it consistently, it is important to make the process easy and as error-free as possible. The project is also used in digital epigraphy seminars, and the Oxygen forms allow graduate students to focus on their epigraphic work while also engaging with the decisions and activities of text encoding. We also want to make it easy for the manager to add inscriptions to the website and to modify the display and controlled vocabularies. 
            The components we have developed to satisfy these criteria are 
            
                Forms in Oxygen Author mode with controlled vocabularies and proofreading transformations to assist encoders. USEP uses the Epidoc schema and a modified version of its XSL/CSS files.
                An Oxygen framework configured as an add-on to disseminate the forms, to propagate updates automatically, and to be accessible beyond Brown.
                Controlled vocabularies and shared bibliography are stored on the web, so encoders are always using the latest version.
                GitHub to store our working corpus, images, XSLT stylesheets, bibliography and controlled vocabularies. Currently, GitHub functions as our public repository, but we intend to store all USEP sources in the Brown Digital Repository when the editions are more stable. The USEP data repository on github also hosts XSL for our display transformation. 
                Server side Git scripts to automatically initiate the SOLR process when any changes are committed. 
            
            Currently, encoders are trained by the encoding manager and technical manager. Their work is proofread for epigraphic accuracy by the project director and encoding manager and screened for XML validity by the encoding manager and the technical manager. Once initial encoding is done, any further corrections or editing are handled by project members. The encoding manager pushes the finalized inscriptions to GitHub, triggering the SOLR indexing process, which then makes the new inscriptions live on the Usepigraphy website. These last few steps are an iterative process, as it is important to publish inscriptions quickly, and our process makes it easy to correct mistakes. Because the XSLT and CSS are also treated as data, the encoding manager can modify the inscription display as well which makes changes to the display much more nimble than if the project had to rely on the developers.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bodel, J. and Tracy, S. (1997). 
                        Greek and Latin Inscriptions in the USA. A Checklist. NY.
                    
                    
                        Bodel, J. (ed). (2015). 
                        US Epigraphy Project Website. 
                        http://usepigraphy.brown.edu
                         (accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Elliott, T, Bodard, G., Mylonas, E., Stoyanova, S., Tupman, C., Vanderbilt, S., et al. (2007-2015). 
                        EpiDoc Guidelines: Ancient documents in TEI XML (Version 8). 
                        http://www.stoa.org/epidoc/gl/latest/. (accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Europeana Network of Ancient Greek and Latin Epigrapy (EAGLE). 
                        http://eagle-network.eu
                        (accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                With over 85 million print units sold in 2014 for the top 300 comic book titles only, the comics industry is reaching a new high for the first time since 2007 (before the economical crisis). And this doesn’t include the increasingly popular graphic novels or the increasingly more accessible digital comics. The resurgence of comics and the establishment of the graphic novel as a literary genre prompted Humanities scholars to turn their attention on comics as a medium. In this paper, we address the difficulty of creating a digitized corpus by using a crowdsourced approach for annotating comic books. The resulting XML-based encodings could assist not only researchers, but publishers and collection curators equally.
            
            
                Motivation
                Our approach should provide Digital Humanities (DH) scholars with a (currently missing) structured, annotated corpus; this should enable or speed up research related to the comics and sequential art theory: identifying the rhythm of the narration based on the shape, size or number of panels and its relation to the depicted action, investigations about the style of comics authors, historical periods, cultural movements etc.
                Curators and collectors (professional or amateur) of physical or online comics collections would be provided with a structured content which could be more easily integrated within their collections or databases. This may assist them into enlarging public or private databases of characters or comics series and enable the creation of artefacts such as comic books dictionaries, search indices and dictionaries of onomatopoeia. A certain number of projects are already in place and could greatly benefit from the creation of comic books annotations. We mention here the Grand Comics Database
                    
                         http://www.comics.org/
                     (an online database of printed comics), Comic Book Database
                    
                         http://comicbookdb.com/
                    , Digital Comics Museum
                    
                         http://digitalcomicmuseum.com/
                     (a collection of scanned public domain comics from the Golden Age) or the Catalogue of the 
                    Cité Internationale de la Bande Dessinée et de l’Image
                    
                         http://www.citebd.org/
                     from Angoulême.
                
                From a publishing perspective, current standard specifications related to digital comics, such as EPUB’s Region Based Navigation (Conboy et al., 2014) and Metadata Structural Vocabulary for Comics (Ichikawa et al., 2014) are taking care exclusively of the presentation layer (i.e. rendering a publication on a screen device). But the artistic nature of comics and the great potential digital comics have already showcased allow us to go beyond simple content presentation. We believe that the data we are collecting will allow publishers and digital comics authors to create better, enhanced content and in the end a superior reading experience.
            
            
                Crowdsourcing Annotations for Comics
                Participants to our crowdsourcing experiment (Azavea, 2014; Sharma, 2010) are digital comics readers. Previous research has identified expertise sharing, belonging to a community and helping with a research project as strong motivating factors for crowdsourcing participants (Dunn et al., 2012). In addition, our industrial partner will incentivize participants with product vouchers for their platform
                    
                         Actialuna – Sequencity: https://www.sequencity.com
                    .
                
                The tasks we propose are organized around a set of questions regarding a series of comics-related topics (Eisner, 1985; Ichikawa et al., 2014) on which computer algorithms are not performing well enough: complex page layouts, identification of narration elements (characters, places, events, objects), stylistic elements (balloon shapes, onomatopoeia, movement lines).
                
                    
                    Figure 1. The 4 key annotation themes
                
                We aggregate the answers (Feng et al., 2014; Snow et al., 2008) taking into account the reliability of an annotator in a given context (task difficulty, user experience with the task, type of question) and the agreement between the annotators (Nowak et al., 2010). A quality score is thus generated for each annotation, with the best of them being selected as solutions.
                We subsequently are able to generate the ComicsML encodings (Walsh, 2012). This XML derived format is particularly useful since it’s based on the already widespread Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), allowing for declarations of page structure and composition, panels, characters, text (in all the varieties hosted by the comics medium: different types of balloons, diegetic text, onomatopoeia), events and even panel-to-panel transitions.
              
                Page structure
                The annotators are presented with a simple interface (Fig. 2) in which they will have to make a choice between a set of suggested grid layouts. These layouts are the output of applying the automatic frame extraction algorithm developed by (Rigaud et al., 2011). Alternatively, for complex page layouts, they will be asked to draw the page layout themselves.
              
              
                Character identification
                At this step, we ask the “crowd” to simply enumerate all the characters they can identify in the current page. Characters are identified by reading their names in the text, recognising them from experience or simply giving a general statement about the character (e.g., “
                    masked man” may be referring to 
                    Batman). Using state of the art symbolic learning algorithms we fusion generic and specific information (e.g. if 
                    Batman and “masked man” both have high quality scores in the same context, they will both denote the same concept and will be considered as valid annotations).
                
              
              
                Places identification
                We ask the annotators to simply enumerate all the places they can recognise on the current page. We are particularly looking for named places (e.g., 
                    Gotham City, NY, planet Mars), but will also ask the annotator to mark any generic place that he might consider important for the scenes in the page (e.g., “
                    the interior of a bank“ [in case of a robbery], “inside a space ship” [in case of a battle in space]). These are exactly the kind of very specific annotation tasks for which state of the art image recognition algorithms are expected to fail.
                
              
              
                Events identification
                This is yet another highly specific recognition task. Annotators are asked to describe the most important events occurring in the page. The solutions generated at this step, together with the annotations obtained in the previous steps will be used to further build the ComicsML encoding of the page.
                Comics scholar Scott McCloud stresses the role of ellipsis (“the blood in the gutters“ – the space between two panels) as an artistic mean for authors to engage their readers, and describes a typology of these transition spaces (McCloud, 1993). ComicsML allows us to declare such transitions through the #ana attribute of the cbml:panel element, giving us the possibility to investigate their use and their distribution across different cultural spaces (France/Belgium, Japan/Korea, USA).
                
                        
                        
                        Figure 2. Annotation interface (drawing page structure-left, narration elements-right)
                
              
              
                Non-visual cues
                Comics are a special medium, making use of the visual to depict all other non-visual senses, with the help of different drawing “tricks”, such as:
                
                    Smoke coming out of a cigarette may engage the reader’s smelling sense
                    Onomatopoeia form a particular language of their own; comics and especially manga authors have proven great creativity when it comes to expressing different sounds via stylised text (e.g., “
                        POW!” – punch, “
                        BAM!” – gunshot)
                    
                    Horizontal lines around a car suggest the car is moving at high speed, while around a ball, they express the ball’s movement
                
                Researchers could study, for instance, the drawing style of an author and his use of non-visual cues, and go as far as creating onomatopoeia dictionaries for comics (to our knowledge, such dictionaries already exist for manga, but not for American nor European comics).
                At the end of this stage, we should be able to generate a reasonably complete ComicsML encoding of the current page (see Fig. 3).
                
                    
                    Figure 3. A fragment of the ComicsML encoding for the page presented above
                
              
            
            
                Conclusions
                We have presented the outline of our crowdsourced annotation system for comics, as well as details of how we have designed our tasks, having in mind three main aspects: the limits of current digital comic book formats, the specifications behind the ComicsML metadata schema and theoretical principles of comics as a medium (Eisner, 1985). Last, we have presented the way in which the collected results are merged into the final ComicsML encoding and have briefly discussed some potential applications.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Azavea, SciStarter. (2014). 
                        Citizen Science Data Factory, Part 1: Data Collection Platform Evaluation.
                    
                    
                        Dunn, S. and Hedges, M. (2012). Engaging the Crowd with Humanities Research. 
                        Crowd-Sourcing Scoping Study. Centre for e-Research, Dept. of Digital Humanities – King’s College, London.
                    
                    
                        Conboy, G., Duga, B., Gardeur, H., Kanai, T., Kopp, M., Kroupa, B., Lester, J., Garrish, M., Murata, M. and O’Connor E. (2014). 
                        EPUB Region Based Navigation 1.0. 
                        http://www.idpf.org/epub/renditions/region-nav/ (accessed 5 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Eisner, W. (1985).
                        Comics and Sequential Art: Principles and Practices From the Legendary Cartoonist. Norton&Company, USA&U.K.
                    
                    
                        Feng, D., Sveva, B. and Zajac, R. (2009). Acquiring High Quality Non-Expert Knowledge from On-demand Workforce. 
                        People’s Web Meets NLP-2009, ACL (2009), 51-56.
                    
                    
                        Ichikawa, D., Kasdorf, B, Kopp, M. and Kroupa, B. (2014). 
                        EPUB Region Based Navigation Markup Guide 1.0. 
                        http://www.idpf.org/epub/guides/region-nav-markup/ (accessed 5 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        McCloud, S. (1993). 
                        Understanding Comics – The Invisible Art, Harper Collins, USA.
                    
                    
                        Nowak, S. and Ruger, S. (2010) How reliable are annotations via crowdsourcing? A study about inter-annotator agreement for multi-label image annotation. In 
                        Proc. MIR-2010, ACM, 557-566.
                    
                    
                        Rigaud, C., Tsopze, N., Burie, J.-C. and Ogier, J.-M. (2011). Robust text and frame extraction from comic books. 
                        GREC-2011, Springer, 129-138.
                    
                    
                        Sharma, A. (2010). Crowdsourcing Critical Success Factor Model: Strategies to harness the collective intelligence of the crowd. Working paper.
                    
                    
                        Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D. and Ng, A.Y. (2008). Cheap and Fast – But is it Good? Evaluating Non-Expert Annotations for Natural Language Tasks. 
                        EMNLP-2008, ACM, 254-263.
                    
                    
                        Walsh, J.A. (2012). Comic Book Markup Language: an Introduction and Rationale. 
                        DHQ-6, 1. 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000117/000117.html (accessed 5 March 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                This paper presents the results of an effort that our research team has done in order to develop an OWL 2 ontology to formally define the semantics of the Text Encoding Initiative markup language. The preliminary steps of this research project have already been presented at the TEI Conference in 2014 and 2015 (Ciotti and Tomasi 2014, Ciotti et al., 2015). We believe that our work has reached a satisfactory level of development, both on the theoretical side and in the practical implementation.
            
            
                Why an ontology for TEI
                The reasons to have a formal and machine-readable semantics for TEI are manifold. In the first place we can set forth a list of pragmatic and technical benefits that have been already pointed out in many previous works dedicate to this topic, that dates back to the mid-90s (Di Iorio, Peroni and Vitali, 2009; Ciotti and Tomasi, 2014). Here is a brief summary of those arguments:
                
                    enabling parsers to perform both syntactic and semantic validation of document markup;
                    inferring facts from documents automatically by means of inference systems and reasoners; 
                    simplifying the federation, conversion and translation of documents marked up with different markup vocabularies;
                    allowing users to query upon the structure of the document considering its semantics.
                
                The advantages envisioned in this list are not specific to the TEI or aim to facilitate the relationships between different markup languages; but some of the issues have special relevance for TEI and for the usage of TEI inside its reference community.
                Take for instance the query issue: we all know that there are many ways of expressing one and the same textual feature in TEI markup, so that it is very difficult to query heterogeneous TEI corpora and text archives. Having a set of ontological definitions of the conceptual level behind markup, that is, a set of shared formal definitions of the textual features to which any single encoding project could bind idiosyncratic markup usage, could help solve this problem. The same argument could be made for a far more adequate management of interoperability of TEI text collections between different repositories or applications.
                But we believe there is also a deeper theoretical and foundational advantage in the idea of an ontological semantic model for TEI. It is a commonly acknowledged notion that the very core of digital methods application in humanities research is the notion of model/modeling. The pair of terms “model/modeling” is deplorably understood in many different ways in the community. We think that, as far as we are using Turing machine like device for computation, the only workable notion of modeling is a formal one: model we should be interested in are formal models. Where formalization is to be understood as a series of semiotic processes that generates an algorithmically computable representation of one (or more) phenomenon/object.
                It is widely recognized that the TEI is not only a markup facility but first and foremost a conceptual model of textuality. In fact, the Guidelines (TEI Consortium, 2015, chap. 23) explicitly introduce the notion of a TEI Abstract Model. The fact is that the notion of an abstract model is used in many formal procedures but this very notion is not formally defined. This ends up in a lot of problems and circularities. We think that we need to have a formalized account of the quasi-formal notion of TEI abstract model, if it has to be of any use other than a sort of regulatory principle.
                We do not advocate going back to a monist theory of textuality. Our suggestion to adopt contemporary Semantic Web formalisms to build this abstract conceptual model give us the possibility to have a “foundation” of TEI in a well-defined data model that is not dependent on the notion of a single hierarchical “ordered hierarchy of content object” (OHCO, DeRose et al., 1997), and that can accommodate, at least to some extent, the “pluralities” of textuality. 
            
            
                Structure of the ontology
                TEI as a whole is very complex, and its usage is governed by pragmatics and contextual requirements. We acknowledge that it is impossible to reduce to a unique formal semantic definition this fuzzy cloud. Though, we can identify a subset of shared assumptions, a common ground of notions about the meaning of TEI markup and the nature of documents like object: we think that this subset can be the object of an ontological formalization. For various reasons we have adopted the TEI Simple customization (Cummings et al., 2014) as an acceptable approximation of this common ontology. This is not an opportunistic ad hoc choice, as it may seem. TEI Simple in fact has been defined by a group of domain expert that have analyzed the actual usage of TEI markup in some big textual repositories and have selected and organized a set of one hundred or so elements that can describe all the textual features represented by the markup in those documents. This fits perfectly in the definition of a formal ontology development process.
                The main design requirements for building our ontology have been the following:
                
                    the ontology must express at the same time an abstract characterization of TEI Simple elements' semantics and an ontological definition of their structural role;
                    the ontology must define a precise semantics of the elements having a clear characterization in the official TEI documentation (e.g., the element ), while it should relax the semantic constraints if the elements in consideration can be used with different semantic connotations depending on the context (e.g., the element );
                    it must be possible to extend the ontology, reuse it and define alternative characterizations of elements semantics without compromising the consistency of the ontology itself;
                    where possible existing ontologies or meta-ontologies must be reused
                
                In accordance with these overall principles we have decided to implement a complex architecture using some pre-existing meta-ontology frameworks to express the meaning of TEI element set by the way of the classes and properties they define. In particular we have adopted:
                1) LA-Earmark (Di Iorio, Peroni, Poggi, Vitali, 2011; Peroni, Gangemi, Vitali, 2011), a markup metalanguage, that can express both the syntax and the semantics of markup as OWL assertions, and an ontology of markup that make explicit the implicit assumptions of markup languages. LA-EARMARK is an extension of EARMARK with the Linguistic Act module of the Linguistic Meta-Model that allows one to express and assess facts, constraints and rules about the markup structure as well as about the inherent semantics of the markup elements themselves. 
                2) Structural Pattern Ontology (Di Iorio, Peroni, Poggi, Vitali, 2014), whose goal is to identify a small number of patterns that are sufficient to express how the structure of digital documents can be segmented into atomic components.
                The specification of markup semantics for the various TEI Simple elements is done by means of LA-EARMARK class and properties. The general Earmark class for any markup element is earmark:Element. The  element is defined as follows:
                Prefix earmark: 
                Prefix co: 
                Prefix tei: 
                Class: tei:abbr a 
                 earmark:Element that
                 earmark:hasGeneralIdentifier "abbr" and
                 earmark:hasNamespace "http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"
                LA-EARMARK allows us to link particular class of elements with the actual semantics they express. From our point of view there are at least two semantic levels that we explicitly define:
                
                    one concerning the structural behavior of markup that is described by means of the Pattern Ontology (PO);
                    the other regarding the intended semantics of an element (e.g., the fact that an element is a paragraph rather than a section, a personal name reference rather than a geographical reference), that is described by TEI Semantics Ontology or by a combination of already existing ontologies.
                
                TEI Semantics Ontology is the core component that gives the actual semantics of TEI elements. Its definition is based on a categorization of the elements of the TEI Simple, based on a refactoring of the TEI model Classes. 
                The link between the class describing kinds of elements and their related semantic characterization is possible by means of the property “semiotics:expresses”. The associations of semantics to markup elements can be contextualized according to a particular agent's point of view, in order to provide provenance data pointing to the entity that was responsible for such specification. This is possible by means of the Linguistic Act Ontology included in LA-EARMARK that allows one to consider all these markup-to-semantics links as proper linguistic acts done by someone.
            
            
                Conclusions
                The work we have done so far is limited to the Simple subset of TEI. We envision some further development:
                
                    Refine the TEI Semantics Ontology component.
                    Extend to some other areas of TEI that are suitable for formalization.
                
                We think that in the long term this ontological formalization could become the primary formalization of the TEI encoding schema, independently of any serialization format. Today XML is still the better strategy to encode digital texts in real word projects for many practical reasons. But there is no reason for the TEI to be strictly based on it, as it is 
                    de facto now. Technical issues should not determine the choice of a formalization language. In the end, we believe that our effort can give a substantial contribution to the TEI to envision the shape of its own future.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Ciotti F. and Tomasi F. (2014). Formal ontologies, Linked Data and TEI semantics. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 9.
                    
                    Ciotti F., et al. (2015). An ontology for the TEI: one step beyond. TEI Conference and Members Meeting 2015. Lyon. http://tei2015.huma-num.fr/en/papers/#acc-16.
                    DeRose, S. J., Durand, D. G., Mylonas, E. and Renear, A. H. (1997). What is Text, Really?. Journal of Computer Documentation, 21(3): 1–24.
                    Di Iorio, A., Peroni, S. and Vitali, F. (2009). Towards markup support for full GODDAGs and beyond: the EARMARK approach. 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009, Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, Vol. 3, Montreal, Canada.  doi:10.4242/BalisageVol3.Peroni01.
                    
                    TEI Consortium. (2015). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.9.1. Last updated 15th November 2015. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html.
                    
                    Cummings, J. et al. (2015). TEI Simple: Power, economy, and a processing model for encoders and developers. Digital Humanities 2015. http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/CUMMINGS_James_C__TEI_Simple__Power__economy__and/CUMMINGS_James_C__TEI_Simple__Power__economy__and_a_pro.html.
                    Peroni S., Gangemi A. and Vitali F. (2011). Dealing with Markup Semantics. 
                        I-SEMANTICS 2011 Proceedings, 111-118. DOI: 10.1145/2063518.2063533.
                    
                    Di Iorio, A., Peroni, S., Poggi, F. and Vitali, F. (2011). Using semantic web technologies for analysis and validation of structural markup. 
                        Int. J. of Web Engineering and Technology, 6(4): 375-98.
                    
                    Di Iorio, A., Peroni, S., Poggi, F. and Vitali, F. (2014). Dealing with structural patterns of XML documents. 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 65(9): 1884-900. DOI: 10.1002/asi.23088.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Project “Haine du Théâtre”
                This experiment takes place within the “Haine du Théâtre”The directors of this Projet are François Lecercle and Clotilde Thouret.  It is one of the many outstanding projects at the Labex OBVIL (Laboratoire d’Excellence: Observatoire de la Vie Littéraire) in Paris headed by Didier Alexandre and Jean-Gabriel Ganascia. Project, which aims at analysing theatre debates in Europe by using scientific approaches and critical editions of polemical texts. The reflections of the team were primarily focused on the discovery of the circumstances and arguments used in theatre all across Europe, not limited to France, but including England, Spain, Italy, and the Germanic area. The timeframe encompassed the last decades of the 16th century up to the beginning of the 19th century. The purpose of the Project is to explore the grey areas of the controversies in order to outline a global overview of the situations which led to these polemics, discovering where and how they began, their chronological discrepancies in the different countries, and the links between them and their contemporary resurgences.
            
            
                Corpus
                The total collection of the Haine du Théâtre Project related to France made up of 300 texts in the PDF format. The XML/TEI critical edition of 27 texts has been achieved manually (examples of the main titles of this TEI corpus are D'Aubignac (1666), Conti (1666), Pierre Nicole (1667), Voisin (1671), Vincent (1647), cfr. ) and this small corpus is used for the semantic analysis we present here.
                This collection is a homogenous combination of texts in which the different authors express their approval or their condemnation of theatre. Using the ontology we created, our interest was to discover to what extent the personal judgment of each author was celebratory or derogatory about theatre and, also, which arguments were mostly involved in their critiques.
                In this direction, we had two main goals:
                
                    Organizing the knowledge about polemics in theatre and their vocabulary;
                    Use this structured lexicon for the corpus annotation and its analysis.
                
            
            
                Building of the ontology
                An ontology is a good way to automatically analyse many texts together along two parameters: documentary and linguistic. On the one hand, by improving a state of knowledge about 17th century French ; on the other hand, by refining the vocabulary linked to theatre controversy.
                The ontology organizes the knowledge of our domain (polemical texts about theatre) as structured points of view (condemnation, defence, etc.) as well as 44 structured classes (concepts) related to critical controversies.
                These classes report the axiological points of view (the judgment of the authors), their objects (such as 
                    jongleur, 
                    actrice, etc.), and the thematics of the polemics (
                    religion, 
                    emotions, etc.).
                
                To detect the salient terms pertaining to each concept, we realized that in most texts of the modern period, authors' judgements revolve around quoted authorities. The context and the deep knowledge of the corpus together with expertise in 17th century French constitute the cornerstones of our approach. It is very important to fully understand the contextual meaning (in the 17th century) of the selected salient terms.
                The idea we came up was to look at the relative importance of the various semantic fields in each chapter of the collection, then extract a priori the content of a chosen text. We began to use this structured lexicon of outstanding terms related to theatre polemics for the corpus annotation and its analysis.
                To our knowledge no other comparable ontology about theatre polemics exists; therefore, we will present the method we conceived keeping in mind that those classes are not exhaustive and that new questions will require the creation of new classes.
                Despite the high specificity of the domain, this ontology model and the automatic annotator are deployable in other contexts, such as literary criticism and theatre critique in different languages. For this purpose we will translate the model into English (the set of the attributes useful for the annotator).
            
            
                The annotation tool
                We created an annotator in order to markup all the forms of the outstanding terms, recorded as lemmas in the ontology (“horrible”, “horribles”, etc.), except when:
                
                    the exact form matters: the tool annotates only the exact form (“Père” does not match “père”, “pères”);
                    the gender matters: only the feminine forms, singular and plural ("courtisane(s)" which is a linguistic sign of the "Femme" concept in our ontology does not match the masculine forms "courtisan(s)").
                
                The annotation tool enriches automatically the TEI files by setting down some  tags to mark all the forms, but also their lemma and the related semantic field.
                
                    
                    Snapshot of the TEI annotation (François Hédelin d’Aubignac, Dissertation sur la condemnation des théâtres, 1666, “Chapitre I. Que les Spectacles des Anciens ont fait partie de la Religion Païenne")
                
                Following this method we find a high density of salient terms (on average 9,5% of words in each the chapters) in our collection of texts. The combination of these linguistic signs and related semantic fields emerges as a semantic descriptor of the corpus content (e.g. 
                    http://obvil-dev.paris-sorbonne.fr/corpus/haine-theatre/vincent_traite-des-theatres_1647/vincent_traite-des-theatres_1647_6).
                
                
                    
                    Snapshot of the HTML highlighting of the annotation (François Hédelin d’Aubignac, Dissertation sur la condemnation des théâtres, 1666, “Chapitre I. Que les Spectacles des Anciens ont fait partie de la Religion Païenne”). The salient words of the religion thematic, very important in this chapter, are highlighted in dark blue (“Dieux”, “Saint”, “Divinités”, “Démons”, “Sacrifices”, “Païens”, “Dieux”, “Prêtres”, etc.)
                
            
            
                Semantic analysis
                Without preconceived notions and previous knowledge of the corpus, it was possible for us to answer numerous research questions. By examining the intensity of condemnation in the corpus, we discovered that the most derogatory chapters belong to Nicole and Conti.
                
                    
                        chapter_id
                        condemnation_terms
                        defense_terms
                        chapter_length (words)
                        condemnation intensity (‰)
                        
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1667_4
                        6
                        0
                        762
                        7,87
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1675_4
                        6
                        0
                        906
                        6,62
                    
                    
                        conti_traite-de-la-comedie_1666_14
                        21
                        1
                        4536
                        4,63
                    
                
                Examples of the condemnation intensity.
                By virtue of the possibility of making cross queries across multiple classes, we were able to obtain a list of the arguments developed by the authors – which can be confirmed by reading the chapters concerned. For instance, the most derogatory chapters about theatre were written by Nicole and Conti.
                
                    
                        chapter_id
                        “Théâtre” and “Morale Négative” thematics relative scoresThe score is the ratio between the theatre and the condamnation terms over the chapter length (number of words). (‰)
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1667_4
                        66,67
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1675_4
                        56,25
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1675_1
                        41,67
                    
                    
                        conti_traite-de-la-comedie_1666_14
                        41,24
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1675_13
                        40,75
                    
                
                
                    The most derogative chapters.
                
                We can also compare the chapters more concerned with, for instance, condemnation and the thematic of “Women”. We discovered that the chapters more concerned with misogyny belonged to Voisin, Conti and Nicole. The discriminant terms for woman are, in these derogatory chapters: “femme, fille, bouffonne, maîtresse, comédienne”. Those are just examples of the queries we can construct with the annotation tool.
                At this point, the results of the computational analysis reveal some critical conclusions about the textual tradition analysed. Continuing this kind of analysis for every concept present in the ontology, we found that some authors are more concerned with all the elements of theatrical debates, whereas others deal only with some of them.
                In particular, we found a high concentration of annotated terms in Voisin, Conti, Nicole and Aubignac, whose chapters usually occupy the first 20 results for most thematics. On the contrary, authors like Vincent, Guillot-Gorju, Le Marcant and Gaule score high only when relating to economic issues. 
                
                    
                        chapter_id
                        “Economy” thematic relative scoresThe score is the ratio between the economy terms and the chapter length (number of words). (‰)
                    
                    
                        vincent_traite-des-theatres_1647_9
                        3.77
                    
                    
                        vincent_traite-des-theatres_1647_7
                        3.40
                    
                    
                        anonyme_honneur-theatre_1620_1
                        3.1
                    
                    
                        guillot-gorju_apologie_1634_1
                        2.75
                    
                    
                        lemarcant_conduite-du-vrai-chretien_1694_1
                        2.50
                    
                    
                        nicole_traite-de-la-comedie_1667_18
                        2.33
                    
                
                
                    The concentration of the economic thematic. These results show that the economy is at the core of the descriptions by another group of authors: Vincent, Guillot-Gorju, Le Marcant.
                
                For example, some very specific arguments are associated in the controversy, like women, passion and the economy. Moreover, results have shown that some authors of the corpus focus on only few topics of the polemics, whereas others, like Vincent, concentrate all the topics of the theatre polemic in his 11th chapter.
            
            
                 Conclusions 
                The HdT ontology organizes the knowledge about the theatre polemics and their vocabulary. In particular, it presents a hierarchical lexicon of salient terms and it reflects the points of view, objects and thematics of the polemic.
                This ontology enables the exploration the corpus for research questions: the relative frequency of the salient terms (
                    lemma) and of their related class (
                    catégorie d’indexation) is a semantic descriptor of each chapter. Those descriptors can be exploited for the semantic exploration of the corpus, capitalizing on the ontology structure (terms / classes). The researchers can understand the intensity of the concepts they choose to analyse and thus can focus on the most significant chapters of the corpus.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Aubignac, abbé d’. (1666). 
                        Dissertation sur la condemnation des théâtres. Paris: N. Pépingué. 
                    
                    Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P. and Magnini, B. (2005). 
                        Ontology Learning from Text: Methods, Evaluation and Applications. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications Series. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
                    
                    Cimiano, P., Buitelaar, P. and Volker, J. (2010). Ontology construction. 
                        Handbook of Natural Language Processing, Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, pp. 577–604.
                    
                    Conti, Prince de. (1666). 
                        Traité de la Comédie et des spectacles. Paris: L. Billaine.
                    
                    Gaule, André de. (1607). 
                        Conviction. Lyon: A. Cloquemin.
                    
                    Guillot-Gorju, Harduin de Saint-Jacques, Bertrand. (1634).  
                        Apologie de Guillot-Gorju. Addressee à tous les beaux Esprits. Paris: M. Blageart.
                    
                    Le Marcant, J. (1694). 
                        La conduite du vrai chrétien. Paris: E. Couterot.
                    
                    Maedche, A. (2002).  
                        Ontology learning for the Semantic Web. Volume 665. Kluwer Academic Publisher.
                    
                    Nicole, P. (1667).  
                        De la Comédie. Liege: Adolphe Beyers. 
                    
                    Vincent, P. (1647). 
                        Traité des théâtres. La Rochelle: J. Chuppin.
                    
                    Voisin, Joseph de, abbé. (1671). 
                        Défense du traité de Mgr le Prince de Conti touchant la comédie et les spectacles ou la réfutation d'un livre intitulé Dissertation sur la condamnation des théâtres. Paris: Coignard.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            As a community of practice, digital humanists deal with data and metadata not as static artifacts, but rather as complex, multi-dimensional and multi-layered datasets that can be analyzed, annotated and manipulated in order to produce new knowledge. One of the most important challenges facing DH today is how to consolidate and repurpose available tools; how to create reusable but flexible workflows; and, ultimately, how to integrate and disseminate knowledge, instead of merely capturing it and encapsulating it. This technical and intellectual shift can be seen as the “infrastructural turn” in digital humanities (Tasovac et al. 2015).  
            Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) have the potential to be powerful, practical building blocks of digital humanities infrastructures.
                
                    
                        Infrastructures are installations and services that function as “mediating interfaces” or “structures ‘in between’ that allow things, people and signs to travel across space by means of more or less standardized paths and protocols for conversion or translation” (Badenoch and Fickers 2010, 11). Digital research infrastructures are no different: they are a mediating set of technologies for research and resource discovery, collaboration, sharing and dissemination of scholarly output. 
                    
                 On the technical level, they let heterogeneous agents dynamically access and reuse the same sets of data and standardized workflows. On the social level, they help overcome the problem of “shy data”, i.e. data you can “meet in public places but you can’t take home with you”  (Cooper 2010). Some 10 years ago, Dan Cohen started the conversation about APIs in DH by pointing out that, despite their potential, Andreas few humanities projects — in contrast to those in the sciences and commercial realms — were developing APIs for their resources and tools (Cohen 2005). In the decade since, API development in the digital humanities has certainly increased: today, both large-scale, national and international initiatives, such as HathiTrust, DPLA or Europeana, as well as individual projects, such as Canonical Text Services (CTS), Open Siddur, Folger Digital Texts, correspSearch etc., are focusing their attention and resources on developing APIs. It is now time to reflect on this development: have standards or best-practices evolved?  What workflows are most effective and efficient for creating APIs? What are the challenges or stumbling blocks for creating or using APIs? Are APIs being used by DH researchers? What is the future of API development and use in the humanities community? 
            
            This panel will cover both the theory and practice of APIs in the digital humanities today. It will bring together researchers working on major European and North American projects, who will discuss APIs from the perspectives of design, implementation, and use, as well as technical and social challenges. Each group will have 10 minutes for their statement, and 40 minutes will remain for group discussion and questions from the audience. One of the panel members will serve as the moderator. All speakers have confirmed their intention to participate in the panel. 
            
                Toma Tasovac (Belgrade Centre for Digital Humanities) will discuss an API-centric approach to designing and implementing digital editions. Starting with the notion of text-as-service and textual resources as dynamic components in a virtual knowledge space, Tasovac will show how two recent projects — 
                 Raskovnik: A Serbian Dictionary Platform and 
                Izdanak: A Platform for Digital Editions of Serbian Texts — were implemented using API-focused data modeling at the core of the project design process. The API-first approach to creating TEI-encoded digital editions оffers tangible interfaces to textual data that can be used in tailor-made workflows by humanities researchers and other users, well-suited to distant reading techniques, statistical analysis and computer-assisted semantic annotation. The “infrastructural turn” in Digital Humanities does not only have practical implications for the way we build tools and create resources, but also has theoretical ramifications for the way we distinguish highly from loosely structured data: if text is not an object, but a service; and not a static entity, but an interactive method with clearly and uniquely addressable components, a formal distinction between a dictionary and, say, a novel or a poem, is more difficult to maintain. 
            
            
                Clifford Wulfman and 
                Natalia Ermolaev (Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton) will discuss the design and implementation of Blue Mountain Springs, the API for the Blue Mountain Project’s collection of historic avant-garde periodicals.
                
                    
                         http://bluemountain.princeton.edu
                    
                  By modeling magazine data using the FRBRoo ontology and its periodical-oriented extension PRESSoo (PRESSoo, 2014), this RESTful API exposes the Blue Mountain resource in a variety of data formats (structured metadata, full-text, image, linked data). The authors will provide several examples of how Blue Mountain Springs has been used by researchers, drawing especially from the results of the hackathon they will host at Princeton in February 2016, which will bring together approximately twenty periodical studies scholars, technologists, and librarians to work with the API. Creating APIs is part of a trend in DH to move into a post-digital-library phase, when the traditional library functions of discovery and access are no longer sufficient to support research in the humanities. This trend also suggests that DH researchers must reconceptualize their own engagement with material, to think less in terms of monographs and more in terms of resources, and consequently to promulgate their work not as web sites but as web services. 
            
            
                Thibault Clérice (University of Leipzig) will discuss the design of the Canonical Text Services (CTS) and its URN scheme, which make the traditional citation system used by classicists machine-actionable (Blackwell and Smith 2014)
                
                     Traditional scholars have been citing texts the same way for centuries : for example, “Hom. Il. 1.1”, which corresponds to Homer’s Iliad, Book 1 Line 1. However, although the passage identifier does not change from one scholar to another in most cases, the abbreviation used for the author and the work title will diverge among authors, countries, and publications. 
                . The Homer Multitext (HMT) implementation of CTS requires textual data to be extracted out of its original digital representation into RDF triples in order to be served. The Perseus Digital Library (PDL) implementation, on the other hand, uses extended transformations to slice XML files into multiple records, each representing a passage at a certain level. While relational and RDF database approaches have had some success in scalability and speed (Tiepmar 2015), they also have to deal with maintenance and evolution capacity. There is a real need for this type of DH projects to scale not only in terms of data retrieval speeds, but also in terms of allowing  researchers to correct and enhance their data. In addition, projects need to be able to propose other narratives: sliced data doesn’t easily provide access to the full data model. Clérice will discuss why and how, using both a native XML-based system such as eXist and a Python-based implementation, one can achieve scalability while guaranteeing maintenance and evolution.
            
            
                Adrien Barbaresi from the Austrian Academy of Sciences (ICLTT) will discuss the use of APIs in building resources for linguistic studies. The first case deals with lesser-known social networks (Barbaresi 2013) while the second tackles the role of the Twitter API in building the ICLTT’s "tweets made in Austria" corpus
                
                     http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/node/193
                . For computational linguists, short messages published on social networks constitute a "frontier" area due to their dissimilarity with existing corpora (Lui & Baldwin 2014), most notably with reference corpora of written language. Since data are mainly accessed and collected through APIs and not in the form of web pages, Barbaresi argues that social networks are a frontier area for (web) corpus construction. He will point out the challenges of using Twitter’s API, for example how to reveal the implicit decisions and methodology used by API designers, as well as concrete implementation issues, such as the assessment and optimization of data returned by the API. Free APIs may come at no cost, but they also offer no guarantee, so that the use of commercial APIs for research purposes has to be seen with a critical eye in order to turn a data collection process into a proper corpus.
            
            Finally, 
                Jennifer Edmond and 
                Vicky Garnett (Trinity College Dublin), will provide reflections on the place of APIs within European research infrastructures for the humanities. Their contribution to the panel builds on their recent study on the Europeana Cloud project, which found that while access to data is a real and growing area of interest, very few humanities researchers seem to actively and directly use APIs.
                
                     This is a result of the confluence of several factors: that the research data most humanists want to access is seldom available via an API; that many sources that do offer relevant data lack the structure or metadata to make the API useful; and that humanistic researcher generally lack the skill set to experiment directly with APIs.  At the same time, however, one of the key desires expressed by researchers in the current landscape is the federation of high-quality data (Edmond and Garnett 2015). 
                 They will describe two initiatives, one technical, one social, aiming to better harness the potential of the API to meet researcher’s implicit needs. The first is the Collaborative European Digital Archival Research Infrastructure (CENDARI) project, whose platform is structured around an internal API that will allow multiple data sources (local repository, triple store, metasearch engine) to be aligned, enhanced and then served out to a number of environments and tools, including the project’s native note-taking environment. The second example is the genesis and development of the concept of the ‘inside-out’ archive. This framework, which has arisen out of a collaborative venture between several European humanities research infrastructure projects, seeks to encourage collection holding institutions to look beyond their own digitization programs and platforms and recognize the rising importance of machines-as-users (requiring specific access points and formats) rather than the somewhat outdated model of individual institutional web presence serving individual human resource seekers.
            
            The five speakers on this panel will address some of the most pressing issues related to the ongoing development and future of APIs on the DH research infrastructure landscape. The discussion will cover both micro- and macro levels, ranging from methodological implications and technical scalability to the ways in which API-based data access to collections challenges traditional norms of institutional identity and independence. As such, the panel will offer a timely platform for a multifaceted debate on the potentials and pitfalls of building and using APIs in the digital humanities. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Badenoch, A. and Fickers A. (2010). Europe Materializing? Toward a Transnational History of European Infrastructures. In Badenoch, A. and Fickers A. (eds.), Materializing Europe: Transnational Infrastructures and the Project of Europe, 1-26. Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        Barbaresi, A. (2013). Crawling microblogging services to gather language-classified URLs. Workflow and case study. In Proceedings of the 51th Annual Meeting of the ACL, Student Research Workshop, pages 9-15.
                    
                    
                        Blackwell, C. and Smith N. (2014). 
                        Canonical Text Services Protocol Specification. http://folio.furman.edu/projects/citedocs/cts/. Accessed October 23, 2015.
                    
                    
                        Cohen, D. Do APIs Have a Place in the Digital Humanities. http://www.dancohen.org/blog/posts/do_apis_have_a_place_in_the_digital_humanities. Accessed October 24, 2015.
                    
                    
                        Cohen, D. (2006). “From Babel to Knowledge: Data Mining Large Digital Collections.” 
                        D-Lib Magazine 12, no. 3.
                    
                    
                        Cooper, D. (2010). When Nice People Won’t Share: Shy Data, Web APIs, and Beyond, 
                        Second International Conference on Global Interoperability for Language Resources (ICGL 2010), n. pag.
                    
                    
                        Edmond, J, Bulatovic N. and O’Connor, A. “The Taste of ‘Data Soup’ and the Creation of a Pipeline for Transnational Historical Research.” Journal of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities 1, no. 1 (2015): 107–22.
                    
                    
                        Edmond, J. and Garnett V. (2015). APIs and Researchers: The Emperor’s New Clothes, International Journal of Digital Curation, 10(1): 287-97.
                    
                    
                        LeBeuf, Patrick (ed.). PRESSoo. Extension of CIDOC CRM and FRBROO for the modelling of bibliographic information pertaining to continuing resources. Version 0.5, 
                        http://www.ifla.org/files/assets/cataloguing/frbr/pressoo_v0.5.pdf. Accessed, November 1, 2015. 
                    
                    
                        Murdock, J. and Allen C. (2011). InPhO for All: Why APIs Matter, Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science 1(3): 
                        http://www.jamram.net/docs/jdhcs11-paper.pdf. Accessed, October 23, 2015. 
                    
                    
                        Tasovac, T. Rudan S. and Rudan S. (2015). Developing Morpho-SLaWS: An API for the Morphosyntactic Annotation of the Serbian Language. Systems and Frameworks for Computational Morphology, 137-47. Heidelberg: Springer.
                        
                        Tiepmar, J. (2015). Release of the MySQL based implementation of the CTS protocol. In Bański, P., Biber H., Breiteneder E., Kupietz M., Lüngen H. and Witt A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Challenges in the Management of Large Corpora (CMLC-3), 35-43. Mannheim: Institut für Deutsche Sprache.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Biblissima—Bibliotheca bibliothecarum novissima—is a Digital Humanities project that brings together libraries and research institutions, whose goal is to provide a single access point to over 40 databases regarding medieval and Renaissance manuscripts and early printed books by the end of 2016.
            The project began late in 2012 with nine founding partners: the Department of Manuscripts at the BnF (Bibliothèque nationale de France), the Campus Condorcet, the CESR (Centre d'Etudes Supérieures de la Renaissance), the CIHAM (Histoire, Archéologie, Littératures des mondes chrétiens et musulmans médiévaux), the Centre Jean-Mabillon at the ENC (École nationale des chartes), the CRAHAM (Centre de Recherches Archéologiques et Historiques Anciennes et Médiévales. Centre Michel de Boüard), the IRHT (Institut de recherche et d’histoire des textes), the Digital Document Centre at the MRSH de Caen (Maison de la Recherche en Sciences Humaines), and the SAPRAT-EPHE (Savoirs et pratiques du Moyen Âge au XIXe siècle, Ecole pratique des hautes études).
            Funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR: Agence Nationale de la Recherche), Biblissima is concerned with the history of collections and the transmission of texts. In this respect, the project stands somewhat in line with the works of Antoon Sanders, who published his Bibliotheca Belgica Manuscripta in 1641-44, and Bernard de Montfaucon and his Bibliotheca bibliothecarum manuscriptorum nova, published in 1739, both of which are major inventories compiling lists of manuscripts held in many different libraries in Europe.
            In order to create an Online library of historical collections of France for the 21st century, our chosen solution was to develop a semantic web application. We released a prototype (http://demos.biblissima-condorcet.fr/prototype) in summer 2015 that provides unified access to a subset of two major iconographic databases: Initiale (http://initiale.irht.cnrs.fr/accueil/index.php) and Mandragore (http://mandragore.bnf.fr/html/accueil.html). An export of the metadata pertaining to the illuminations that depict geographical locations was used as a starting point for the development of our application. People (author or illuminator), institutions (libraries), work titles and places were aligned with the BnF authority records and, whenever possible, also linked to external vocabularies (GeoNames, VIAF, Pleiades, Getty thesauri).
            The next step involved generating dynamic web pages that describe a person, a work, an expression, a manuscript, a part of a manuscript or an illumination, and which include links to the corresponding descriptions in the source databases. This original data is enriched with longitude and latitude coordinates for geographical names that were acquired by aligning them with the equivalent GeoNames concepts. It is now possible, for example, to show on two different maps the places depicted in illuminations with the images of the corresponding folios, and the illuminations from manuscripts held in a particular institution.
            In addition, a viewer embedded in the page (we currently favour Mirador: https://iiif.github.io/mirador) shows the digitised manuscript or folio when available. The information needed to display these images is structured according to the Shared Canvas data model (http://iiif.io/model/shared-canvas), which is the foundation of IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework: http://iiif.io). This information is passed to the viewer in form of JSON-LD manifests, which are generated from metadata and image files supplied by the partner institutions. The viewer itself is client-based and features a deep-zoom capability for the loaded images, the possibility to display associated metadata, and also the superposition of different layers, such as an image and the corresponding textual transcription.
            The data model behind the application is based on CIDOC-CRM (http://www.cidoc-crm.org) and FRBRoo (http://www.cidoc-crm.org/frbr_inro.html) and our data is already available in RDF format. Beyond taking into account the different levels of work, manifestation and item (using the classes F4 Manifestation Singleton for manuscripts as well as F3 Manifestation Product Type and F5 Item for early printed books), we intend to group manuscripts and early printed books as productions of certain expressions (class F2 Expression). Illuminations are understood as features (class E26 Physical Feature) placed on a folio or page, and provenance marks will be modelled in the same way. Based on the lessons learned through developing our own ontology, we will be able to give feedback about the data.bnf.fr, FRBRoo and SharedCanvas ontologies, as well as other theoretical foundations.
            We are currently working on extending this prototype, which was developed using the semantic web application framework CubicWeb (https://www.cubicweb.org/). In addition to manuscripts, we will be including early printed books, with a strong emphasis on book provenance, by integrating data from the following four sources: Esprit des Livres (database on auction and other sales catalogues, ENC), Bibale (database on historical book collections, IRHT), Europeana Regia (database on three important historical collections of the Middle Ages and Renaissance), as well as CR2I (Catalogues Régionaux des Incunables Informatisés, CESR) and CRIICO (CR2I Centre-Ouest, CESR). Resolved challenges include the creation of ARKs (Archival Resource Keys) for each manuscript (BnF and IRHT) and codicological unit (BnF). At a later stage, digital editions of inventories of manuscripts in TEI XML will be integrated as well.
            This short paper will present the latest version of the semantic web application for Biblissima’s data cluster.
        
    


        
            Many pre-print texts emerge from an authorial context that was collective rather than individual. Pre-print texts may be the result of an accretive process, where portions of the work were added or subtracted to conform to the needs of copyist or audience, and where the surviving versions can reflect the contribution of many different minds (Fisher, 2012). A truly sensitive translator of a text from the past must take into account the historical setting of the written product, what has been called the social logic of the text (Spiegel, 1990) to interpret the words for the reader and convey the meaning for those who wrote them and for their contemporary audiences (Paul, 2008).
            Just so, the job of the translator has become increasingly complex as our notion of text also expands. Ideally, the process of translating pre-modern texts would mirror their progressive creation, incorporating multiple voices and layers of interpretation. With the integration of digital modes of thinking and acting into our daily lives, what some digital theorists have called “eversion” (Jones, 2014), new textual communities in some way mimic those that participated in the collective process of pre-print text creation. Digital tools have made it possible to assemble voices in a virtual community of textual reception, one in which participants need not be in the same physical space to exchange ideas in real time about the meaning of a text. 
            Scholars at Fordham University have embarked upon two different translation projects that are sensitive to elements of pre-print textual creation and that aim to forefront the process in ways understood by digitally-inflected communities. The projects emerge from a pragmatic vision of work-sharing, yet simultaneously co-opt our increasing comfort with virtual communities to recreate the collective context of pre-print texts. These projects come from unrelated disciplines and cultural contexts: the first brings together scholars with linguistic, literary, and art historical expertise to produce a new translation of the Codex Aubin, a manuscript written in Nahuatl created between 1576 and 1609 by indigenous scribes in Mexico City; and the second, led by the French of Outremer Legal Texts Working Group, brings together nine scholars to examine and translate three thirteenth-century legal texts written in a type of Old French from the Holy Land.
            Although digital tool-builders have recognized the power of the collective translation process from the standpoint of a division of labor, most translation platforms are designed to manage work-flow, not to accommodate incertitude, discussion, or to express a plurality of interpretations (Gambier, 2014). Using the norms of crowdsourcing as a point of departure, Fordham scholars have worked with program-developer Ben Brumfield to substantially extend his open-source digital edition tool FromThePage (http://www.fromthepage.org/) to allow groups of scholars to translate selected texts in a communal fashion. For example, since the 1841 editions of the French-language legal texts were digitized by the Internet Archive, the existing FromThePage-Internet Archive integration was extended to ingest the OCR produced by the digitization process as a starting point for page transcripts (Beugnot, 1841). The translation process itself required modifying the data model to support parallel texts for each transcribed page, as well as new user interfaces for editors to toggle between transcript and facsimile while translating.  Since users may be unfamiliar with Old French or Nahuatl, the presentation interface was revised to support a translation-first experience.
            Translation teams working on both Fordham FromThePage projects include language specialists, historians, and content experts who bring their proficiencies to the discussion, but who will nonetheless disagree along the way. The assembled communities are closed and highly selective; our end product will be a curated conversation that reflects the specialization of each team member. Using FromThePage gives us the option to make the deliberations transparent to our end-users in a way that remains epistemologically true by mapping the process of consensus necessary for a final translation. Reaching an agreement on our final versions, for example, may be the result of one scholar arguing for a reading according to his or her own expertise, or of a collective ignorance and the need to choose the most neutral term possible; our final translations will expose this decision-making process and situate our users in the midst of communal textual production.
            Achieving this transparency required a number of unanticipated changes. The first concerned the commenting mechanism: while editors transcribing a manuscript often need to discuss unclear handwriting, translators’ discussions of variant readings need to be surfaced for readers.  In addition, parallel texts required a total re-write of the full-text search mechanism to handle verbatim text of the original, editorial emendations, and English translations. Finally, the nature of the sources revealed fundamental challenges in the representation of text within FromThePage; since the page division of the Assises is an artifact of 19th-century typesetting, semantic divisions had to be de-coupled from the facsimile pages for online readers and consumers of the exported TEI-XML documents. All of these enhancements were re-incorporated into the FromThePage source code, allowing other digital edition projects to benefit from the new translation and OCR correction features. The projects underscore the communally-crafted nature of our chosen texts by marking conflicting opinions, and the results will serve as a test-case for other kinds of collaborative textual projects, particularly those that contain non-standard languages or terminologies.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Legal Texts project: 
                        http://fromthepage.ace.fordham.edu/collection/show?collection_id=1
                    
                    Codex Aubin project: 
                        http://fromthepage.ace.fordham.edu/collection/show?collection_id=2
                    
                    Beugnot, A. (ed). (1841). 
                        Assises de Jérusalem, ou, Recueil des ouvrages de jurisprudence, composées pendant le xiiie siecle dans les royaumes de Jérusalem et de Chypre. Recueil des historiens des Croisades. Lois, Paris: Imprimerie royale, 1-2.
                    
                    Fisher, M. (2012). 
                        Scribal Authorship and the Writing of History in Medieval England. Ohio State University Press.
                    
                    Gambier, Y. (2014). “Changing Landscape in Translation,” 
                        International Journal of Society, Culture and Language. 
                        http://www.ijscl.net/article_4638_848.html.
                        2(2): 1-12. 
                    
                    Paul, G. (ed). (2008). 
                        Translation in Practice: A Symposium by the British Centre for Literary Translation. Dalkey Archive Press.
                        http://www.llvs.lt/img/File/Translation_in_Practice_book.pdf.
                    
                    Jones, S. E. (2014). 
                        The Emergence of the Digital Humanities. Routledge.
                    
                    Spiegel, G. (1990). “History, Historicism, and the Social Logic of the Text in the Middle Ages,” 
                        Speculum, 65(1): 59-86.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                The emergence and growing popularity of Linked Open Data (LOD) offers researchers a new range of possibilities when it comes to publishing datasets online (Hyvönen 2012, Oomen et al 2012); indeed not only does the success of LOD greatly facilitate the process of making scholarly data accessible and to a wider community but it also permits the enrichment of individual datasets by linking them to the other datasets available on the so called Linked Open Data Cloud.   The advantages of Linked Open Data for teachers, academics and students in the humanities are obvious and are indeed manifold. However there is currently a paucity of linked open datasets in fields such as philology and literary studies, and in particular of datasets that deal with classical languages such as ancient Greek, Sanskrit, and Latin. This seems strange given the rich abundance of surviving works, of both a religious and secular character, that exist in those languages. A salient consideration here relates to the fact that even when such works have been digitised and made available in a format such as TEI-XML, a format which renders the structure and content of such texts more amenable to computer processing, the conversion of these resources into the Resource Data Framework (RDF), the standardised data model that underpins the Semantic Web, is not always straightforward.   
                In this article we describe ongoing work in the conversion of an important 19th century Ancient Greek resource the Liddell-Scott-Jones Lexicon, into RDF, part of a wider program of work that has been recently initiated at CNR-ILC in converting historical lexicons in languages such as Greek, Latin and Arabic into Linked Open Data.  
            
            
                Background
                The Liddell-Scott-Jones lexicon (LSJ), or to give it its original title “A Greek-English lexicon”, is a bilingual ancient Greek-English dictionary which since its first edition was published in the mid-nineteenth century has come to be regarded as amongst the most authoritative of modern day lexicographic resources dealing with the ancient Greek language, indeed it has the reputation of a standard in the field. As a result of its popularity the LSJ has been made available in a number of different versions differing in terms of the number of entries and the amount of data which they contain. For the work described in this paper we are using an abridged version of the LSJ which was originally published as “An Intermediate Greek-English lexicon,” but which is more colloquially known as the “Middle Liddell” (ML).  Fig. 1 shows the lexical entry for the adjective ἀληθής  (alēthēs) in the ML. Entries in the ML are structured into different nested (sub-)senses, and each of these senses contain references (usually just the name of an author) attesting the use of the word as described in the sense’s gloss.  
                
                
                    
                        
                        Fig 1. An entry from the “Middle Liddell”
                    
                
                There were a number of motivations for choosing the LSJ as a starting point of our work into converting legacy lexical resources into linked data: aside of course from the question of its historical importance and continuing influence in the field of philology. Firstly we felt that given the lack of ancient Greek lexical resources in linked open data -- at the time of writing the Linguistic Linked Open Data cloud (Chiarcos et al 2011), that part of the LOD cloud that deals with linguistic data, contains no ancient Greek datasets -- there was an obvious necessity to ensure a presence on the cloud for a language that is absolutely foundational to the history of Western civilisation. Additionally there was also the challenge of converting a legacy resource like the LSJ which in its published form, and even in an abridged version like the ML, manages to condense a significant amount of lexical information in a relatively short amount of text, into linked data. In order to represent this information in the RDF model, and to stay close to the spirit of the Linked Open Data movement, a lot of what was implicit in the original text had to be teased out and rendered explicit.
                Finally, one very important practical reason for choosing the ML was the fact that the conversion of the ML into XML using the TEI dictionary guidelines had already been carried out and made freely available under a creative commons license by the Perseus project (Crane et al 2013). This obviously saved us the trouble of digitizing the text ourselves and meant that we could work from a source file that was already annotated for lexical entries, senses, translations, etc.
                In Fig 2 below we present the TEI-XML encoding of the ML entry for ἀληθής from the Perseus XML version of the ML which we used as our source dataset.
                
                    
                        
                        Fig 2. The TEI-XML encoding of the ML entry for ἀληθής.
                    
                
                The TEI-XML encoding for each entry already contains most of the information which we wish to represent in RDF marked up, and so the actual processing of the dataset was fairly straightforward.  The part of the conversion which, however, did call for some thought was the use of the lemon model to structure the RDF translation. 
                
            
            
                Translating the Middle Liddell in RDF using lemon
            
            
                
                For the conversion of the TEI-XML version of the ML we decided to use the lemon model for publishing lexicons in RDF (McCrae et al 2011, McCrae et al 2012). lemon has by now become a de facto standard for converting lexicographic resources into RDF and has been used to convert a number of important lexical resources such as Wordnet (McCrae 2014), UBY (Eckle-Kohler et al 2014), Wiktionary (McCrae et al 2012), and Parole/Simple/Clips (Del Gratta et al 2015).  The Linked Open Data movement emphasises the re-use of general vocabularies and models in order to ensure semantic interoperability between datasets. And so given the widespread use of lemon in converting lexical resources into RDF, and given the lack of a more specific alternative specifically tailored for lexicographic resources like the ML, we decided to use it as the framework for our conversion. However using lemon for the conversion has not been without its challenges. One of the primary difficulties rests in the fact that lemon was originally intended as an onomasiological model, that it is, it was designed with the perspective in mind of enriching an already existing ontological or conceptual resource with linguistic information (Cimiano et al 2013). However in our case we started out with a very rich lexical resource but without any particular pre-ordained ontological or conceptual datasets in mind to which to link it. In fact we are not currently using the lemon:reference relation to link our dataset to others.
                The ML in particular and the LSJ more generally represent lexical resources that have a specific and relatively complex way of encoding information and that contain a lot of philological and historical data alongside or in addition to “pure” semantic information. Therefore in in order to ensure a faithful translation we had to define a number of new classes and relations in addition to those in lemon. In what follows below we will briefly describe (most of) the additional classes and properties which were introduced in order to model the ML and which together make up the lemonLSJ module. Fig. 3 below is a diagram showing classes and properties in the lemonLSJ module and their relation to some of the main classes.
                The new class lemonLSJ:Gloss represents the written text associated with each sense; the object relation lemonLSJ:gloss then links elements of this class to lemon senses. The lemonLSJ:usage relation links a sense to an ontological resource describing where that sense was used, e.g., by linking to an author or work where that sense can be found.We made the decision not to include CTS URNs describing particular works or copora, since this data is usually not included in the LM. This data is however available in the Perseus version of the LSJ (though not the ML) and we plan to include it when we come to convert the LSJ into RDF. We have also added the relations lemonLSJ:senseChild, and lemonLSJ:senseSibling in order to represent the nesting of subsenses in ML entries.
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 3 The lemonLSJ module.
                    
                
                In Fig 4 we present an excerpt of the lemonLSJ RDF-Turtle encoding of the ML entry for ἀληθής with only two of the attached senses represented.  Note that we have linked the second of the word senses in Fig 4 to instances in the VIAF dataset (in this case the entries for Herodotus and Homer).
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 4 Excerpt of the RDF encoding of an ML entry.
                    
                
                The diagram in Fig. 5 shows how the nesting of senses is treated in the RDF encoding.
                
                    
                        
                        Fig. 5 Sense diagram.
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusions and future work
                In this paper we have briefly described ongoing work in the conversion of an ancient Greek-English lexicon into RDF. Currently we are manually checking the RDF triples resulting from our conversion scripts and we also plan to additionally link the senses to Princeton Wordnet synsets by checking similarity of the glosses to synset glosses. The resulting dataset will soon be made available as an RDF dump together with other lexical resources of ILC CNR.
            
            
                Acknowledgments
                First of all we would like to thank Perseus project for converting the data and for making it freely available.  Thanks also to the organisers of the mylider 2015  Summer Datathon, during which some of this work was carried out, for their advice.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bennett, R., Hengel-Dittrich, C., O’Neill, E. T. and Tillett, B. B. (2006). Viaf (virtual international authority file): Linking die deutsche bibliothek and library of congress name authority files. 
                        World Library and Information Congress: 72nd IFLA General Conference and Council. Citeseer http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.150.5328&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Bizzoni, Y., Boschetti, F., Del Gratta, R., Diakoff, H., Monachini, M. and Crane, G. (2014). The Making of Ancient Greek WordNet. 
                        Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, Iceland. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/1071_Paper.pdf (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Chiarcos, C., Hellmann, S. and Nordhoff, S. (2011). Towards a Linguistic Linked Open Data cloud: The Open Linguistics Working Group. 
                        TAL, 
                        52(3): 245–75.
                    
                    
                        Cimiano, P., McCrae, J., Buitelaar, P. and Montiel-Ponsoda, E. (2013). On the Role of Senses in the Ontology-Lexicon. In Oltramari, A., Vossen, P., Qin, L. and Hovy, E. (eds), 
                        New Trends of Research in Ontologies and Lexical Resources. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 43–62. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-31782-8_4 (accessed 31 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Crane, G., Almas, B., Babeu, A., Cerrato, L., Krohn, A., Baumgart, F., Berti, M., Franzini, G. and Stoyanova, S. (2014). Cataloging for a Billion Word Library of Greek and Latin. 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage. (DATeCH ’14). New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 83–88. doi:10.1145/2595188.2595190. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2595188.2595190 (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Del Gratta, R., Frontini, F., Khan, F. and Monachini, M. (2015). Converting the parole simple clips lexicon into rdf with lemon. 
                        Semantic Web Journal, 
                        6(4): 387–92.
                    
                    
                        Eckle-Kohler, J., McCrae, J. and Chiarcos, C. (2014). LemonUby-a large, interlinked, syntactically-rich resource for ontologies. 
                        Semantic Web Journal, Submitted. Special Issue on Multilingual Linked Open Data http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/system/files/swj404.pdf (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Elliott, T. and Gillies, S. (2009). Digital geography and classics. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        3(1).
                    
                    
                        Francopoulo, G. (2013). 
                        LMF Lexical Markup Framework. John Wiley & Sons.
                    
                    
                        Hyvönen, E. (2012). Publishing and Using Cultural Heritage Linked Data on the Semantic Web. 
                        Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic Web: Theory and Technology, 
                        2(1): 1–159. doi:10.2200/S00452ED1V01Y201210WBE003.
                    
                    
                        Janowicz, K. (2009). The Role of Place for the Spatial Referencing of Heritage Data. 
                        The Cultural Heritage of Historic European Cities and Public Participatory GIS Workshop.. The University of York, UK, pp. 17–18.
                    
                    
                        Liddell, H. G. and Scott, R. (1896). 
                        An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon: Founded upon the Seventh Edition of Liddell and Scott’s Greek-English Lexicon. Harper & Brothers.
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J., Aguado-de-Cea, G., Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., Declerck, T., Gómez-Pérez, A., Gracia, J. et al. (2012a). Interchanging lexical resources on the Semantic Web. 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation, 
                        46(4): 701–19.
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J., Fellbaum, C. and Cimiano, P. (2014). Publishing and Linking WordNet using lemon and RDF. 
                        Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics. http://pub.uni-bielefeld.de/download/2732779/2732785 (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J., Montiel-Ponsoda, E. and Cimiano, P. (2012b). Integrating WordNet and Wiktionary with lemon. 
                        Linked Data in Linguistics. Springer, pp. 25–34. http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-28249-2_3 (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J., Spohr, D. and Cimiano, P. (2011). Linking lexical resources and ontologies on the semantic web with lemon. 
                        The Semantic Web: Research and Applications. Springer, pp. 245–59. http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-21034-1_17 (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Minozzi, S. (2009). 
                        The Latin Wordnet Project. http://www.dfll.univr.it/documenti/Iniziativa/dall/dall036637.pdf (accessed 29 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Oomen, J., Baltussen, L. B. and Erp, M. van (2012). Sharing cultural heritage the linked open data way: Why you should sign up. 
                        Museums and the Web.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Letters are an important historical source: First, they may contain comments from contemporaries about the most different events, persons, publications, and issues. Second, letters allow insights about connections and networks between correspondence partners. So, questions occur which can only be answered across the borders of scholarly letter editions due to the fact that these editions are usually focussed on partial correspondences (of a certain person or between two specific persons). But this requires time-consuming searches across various letter editions. This has been a well-known problem for quite some time, now (Bunzel, 2013: 117) and has already evoked work on a few databases dedicated to correspondence, like e.g. “Early Modern Letters Online”.
                
                     Early Modern Letters Online (EMLO), 
                        http://emlo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/, is the one with the largest databases, but also includes data from other databases like “Circulation of Knowledge and Learned Practices in the 17th-century Dutch Republic”, 
                        http://ckcc.huygens.knaw.nl/. Besides this, there also exist more focused databases like “Exilnetz33”, 
                        http://exilnetz33.de.
                    
                 But these databases have some limitations: firstly, they focus on specific research questions, time periods, geographic areas, or certain material.  Secondly, they don’t provide an open, standard-based and well-documented way to provide and update data. Furthermore, the data can be searched and displayed, but only on a simple website. In none of the existing databases dedicated to edited letters it is possible to query and retrieve the data via an Application Programming Interface (API) and under a free license for subsequent use.
            
            The mentioned methodic problem has lead Wolfgang Bunzel, who works in the field of research about the Romanticism, to request:
            ‘the creation of a decentralized, preferably open digital platform, based on HTML/XML and operating with minimal TEI standards, which is extensible in different directions and allows for existing web portals and websites to contribute at the lowest possible cost. This doesn’t request some kind of super structure which covers the entire amount of letters from the Romantic era (which could not be estimated exactly, anyway) but rather an intelligent linking system, which associates existing documents with one another. The creation of such nexus will naturally lead to research options reaching from searches for persons and places to specific keyword-based searches [...]’ (Bunzel, 2013: 123)
                
                     Please note, that this is my own translation into English.
                
            
            With “correspSearch” (
                http://correspSearch.bbaw.de) this paper will present a web service, which takes a step in this direction by aggregating metadata of letters from various (digital or printed) scholarly editions and providing them collectively via open interfaces (Fig. 1). In doing so, it is independent from specific research questions as well as from temporal, geographic, or thematic limits.
            
            The basis of the web service are digital indexes of letters provided by the editions in the “Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format” (CMIF), that has been (and will further be) developed by the Correspondence Special Interest Group of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI).
                
                     The CMIF is maintained in a GitHub repository: 
                        https://github.com/TEI-Correspondence-SIG/CMIF
                    
                 The CMI format is based on the TEI Guidelines and allows to interchange metadata of letters, postcards etc. between scholarly editions by restricting and normalizing the essential elements of a communication act, namely sender, addressee, dates and places of writing and receiving. Besides the consistent TEI XML encoding, interchange will be enabled by usage of ISO dates and authority controlled identifiers. Sender, addressee, sender’s place as well addressee’s place are identified unambiguously using authority IDs, as e.g. provided by the Library of Congress.
                
                     For using authority files in scholarly editions, cf. Stadler 2012
                 When reading the indexes of letters the web service retrieves the most common authority controlled IDs from the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF). This way, IDs from different authority files are mapped onto one another. Up till now, the web service supports VIAF, GND (“Gemeinsame Normdatei” from the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek) as well as the authority files of the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BNF), the Library of Congress (LC), and the National Diet Library (NDL) in Japan. As for place names the web service uses “GeoNames”.
            
            The scholarly editions themselves provide such digital indexes of letters in CMI format, online and under a free license (CC-BY 4.0). For this purpose the CMI format and its creation process is extensively documented on the correspSearch website including a FAQ section.
                
                     See 
                        http://correspsearch.bbaw.de/index.xql?id=participate
                    
                 After providing a CMI file online, it is only necessary to register its URL for the web service. After that the file is automatically retrieved by correspSearch periodically (and in that way updated, if necessary). 
            
            The aggregated letter indexes are searchable on the correspSearch website by correspondent, location, and date. Correspondent and location can be specified according to their role in the communication process. Search results are displayed based on the metadata of the individual letter, together with biographical details. Letters from digital editions are directly linked.
            Apart from the website an API has been implemented which allows for automatic requests to the web service.
                
                     See 
                        http://correspsearch.bbaw.de/index.xql?id=api
                    
                 In this scenario, the results are provided in TEI-XML in the described CMIF under a CC-BY 4.0 license, thus ensuring and facilitating further use and processing of the search results. Furthermore, the web service offers BEACON files as well as an experimental TEI-JSON output.  
            
            Thanks to the API it is possible to automatically refer or even link from one digital letter edition to related letters provided by other editions. This function was already implemented in a prototype for the digital scholarly edition “Schleiermacher in Berlin 1808-1834” (Fig. 2).
                
                     The first version of the scholarly digital edition “Schleiermacher in Berlin” will be published in the next months by the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
                 This feature helps researchers avoid methodological problems when interpreting a piece of correspondence: When analyzing a letter they usually consider the preceding and following letters in the correspondence between the sender and addressee, as well. However, their interpretation often does not include the letters which the correspondents send to or receive from 
                other persons. With this feature the background of historical correspondences can be easily explored.
            
            Via the API scholars can also exploit the data basis by usage of their own innovative technologies as well as of technologies which the web service itself does not yet support technically. Therefore, with a sufficiently extended data basis and the suitable software it will be possible to perform research on e.g. social or correspondence networks based on correspSearch.
                
                    For example: the developers of the visualisation tool “nodegoat” imported the data in their application to visualize a correspondence network: 
                        http://correspsearch-test.nodegoat.net/viewer.p/4/136/scenario/1/geo/fullscreen
                    
                 Furthermore, the correspSearch API was connected with the web service “XTriples”, developed by the Academy of Sciences, Humanities and Literature in Mainz (Germany). Thus the results can be converted into RDF and provided for further analyses with the help of semantic web technologies.
                
                    
                        http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de. One prototype configuration is available under 
                        http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/examples.html  
                    
                
            
            The web service correspSearch and the CMIF are still under development. In the future it should be possible to search also for mentioned persons, events, publications etc. For this purpose the enhancement of the CMI file is currently discussed (Dumont, 2015). Also additional authority files will be supported, e.g. the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names.
                
                    
                        http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/
                    
                
            
            The web service correspSearch was granted the “Berlin Digital Humanities Award 2015” (First Prize, endowed with 1.200 €).
            
                
                Fig 1: Operating principle of the web service correspSearch
            
            
                
                Fig 2: Screenshot of the digital scholarly edition “Schleiermacher in Berlin 1808-1834” (published soon), which presents letters to and from the theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher
            
            The digital scholarly edition queries the correspSearch API for other letters from and to August Boeckh around the date of the letter displayed (10 september 1810). If there is a result, the edition provides links to these letters.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bunzel, W. (2013). Briefnetzwerke der Romantik. Theorie – Praxis – Edition. In Bohnenkamp, A. and Richter, E. (eds.), 
                        Brief-Edition im digitalen Zeitalter (=Beihefte zu editio Bd. 34). Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter 2013. pp. 109-31.
                    
                    
                        Dumont, S. (2015). Perspectives of the further development of the Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (CMIF). 
                        digiversity — Webmagazin für Informationstechnologie in den Geisteswissenschaften.
                        http://digiversity.net/2015/perspectives-of-the-further-development-of-the-correspondence-metadata-interchange-format-cmif/ (accessed 27 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        Stadler, P. (2012). Normdateien in der Edition. Editio, 26: 174-83.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                    Introduction
                    This paper introduces the TEI P5 XML – EpiDoc corpus of inscriptions on stone for ancient Sicily, I.Sicily. The project is one of the first attempts to generate a substantial regional corpus in EpiDoc. The project is confronting a number of challenges that may be of wider interest to the digital epigraphy community, including those of unique identifiers, linked data, museum collections, mapping, and data conversion and integration, and these will be briefly outlined in the paper which will concentrate on the conversion and technical development of the project.
                
            
                    Technical Background of I.Sicily
                    I.Sicily is an online, open access, digital corpus of the inscriptions on stone from ancient Sicily.
                         The corpus will be mounted at 
                             by the time of DH2016, but is currently on a development server.
                         The corpus aims to include all texts inscribed on stone, in any language, between approximately the seventh century BC and the seventh century AD. The corpus currently contains records for over 2,500 texts, and when complete is likely to contain c. 4,000. The corpus is built upon a conversion from a legacy dataset of metadata in MS Access to EpiDoc TEI XML. The XML records are held in an eXist database for xQuery access, and additionally indexed for full-text search using SOLR/Lucene. The corpus and related information (museum list, bibliography) are published as Linked Data, and are manipulated through a RESTful API. The records are queried and viewed through a web interface built with AngularJS and jQuery javascript components. Mapping is provided in the browser by the Google Maps API, and ZPR (Zoom, Pan, Rotate) image- viewing is provided by the IIIP image server.
                    
                     At the time of writing, the main conversion routine is being refined, and the epigraphic texts are being collated for incorporation into the records. An ancillary database of museum collections in Sicily has been constructed and bibliography is held in a Zotero library. Extensive search facilities will be provided, including map-based and bibliographic searching. Individual inscriptions and individual museums will both be provided with URIs, as will personal names and individuals; places will be referenced using Pleiades, epigraphic types, materials, and supports using the EAGLE vocabularies.
                
            
                    The motivations for I.Sicily 
                    The existing epigraphic landscape in Sicily is extremely diverse in two primary regards: on the one hand, the island has a very mixed cultural and linguistic make-up, meaning that the epigraphic material is itself extremely varied, with extensive use throughout antiquity of both Greek and Latin, as well as Oscan, Punic, Sikel, and Hebrew
                         Recent overview of much of the linguistic tradition in Tribulato 2012; and of the epigraphic material in Gulletta 1999.; on the other hand, the publication of this material has a very uneven record and despite an excellent pre-twentieth century tradition, the existing corpora are far from complete and the ability of key journals such as SEG or AE to keep pace with local publication has been limited. A limited number of museum-based corpora have been published in recent decades (for Catania, Palermo, Messina, and Termini Imerese, as well as the material from Lipari), but this has not greatly improved the overall situation. The combination of these two factors already means that locating, identifying, or working with a Sicilian inscription, or its publication record, is extremely challenging for anyone without extensive experience of the material. I.Sicily has been conceived in the hope of improving the situation in all these areas.
                    
                
            
                    Multilingualism 
                    Sicily is traditionally described as a ‘melting pot’, the ‘crossroads of the Mediterranean’. The situation created by basic technologies such as Unicode and TEI P5 EpiDoc XML mean that there is now no reason not to be language agnostic in the inclusion of material. The opportunities and possibilities offered by these technologies are considerable, since, for example, searching can be made language specific or language neutral. One obvious area where Sicilian studies are currently hampered by this disciplinary partitioning is in the study of onomastics. The Lexicon of Greek Personal Names records most instances of Greek names for the island, but Sicily is no less rich in non-Greek names (Latin and others), and at present there is no onomasticon for the island.
                         See 
                            
                         Simply by the marking-up and indexing of all names in the island’s inscriptions, I.Sicily will have generated a powerful tool for future study.
                    
                
            
                    Identification and Bibliography 
                    The PHI database of Greek inscriptions has a rich record of Greek texts, but again is text only and limited in outputs.
                         See 
                            
                         SEG references are available for 733 inscriptions on stone and AE references for 328 (data taken from the I.Sicily database and based upon comprehensive manual trawls of SEG and AE). One major aim of I.Sicily, therefore, is to generate unique identifiers for each inscription - the I.Sicily number, in the form ISic 1234 maintained as URIs, of the form: 
                        . I.Sicily is well placed to do this since its initial dataset is primarily a bibliographic concordance of the lapidary inscriptions of Sicily. One of the associated outputs of the project will therefore be an online bibliography for Sicilian epigraphy, and an online Zotero library has already been created with over 700 records which are referenced in the EpiDoc. A locally cached version of the bibliography will be presented at the I.Sicily site to facilitate detailed bibliographic searching (including the identification of inscriptions by publication) and to allow the generation of customised concordances.
                    
                
            
                    Location, location, location
                    I.Sicily is actively generating rich geo-data for the individual inscriptions, both for the original findspot/provenance and the current location (whether museum-based, on-site, or elsewhere), and we aim to provide map-based searching for inscriptions, as well as text-based searching by ancient and modern place-names. In addition to full listing wherever possible of both ancient and modern place names for epigraphic provenance, we are working to provide detailed location information for each find-spot and current location, through a combination of library and map-based research and the use of autopsy and GIS recording. At present geo-data is being recorded in two forms, both through the use of explicit geographical locations in the form of longitude and latitude records in decimal degree form, and through the use of Pleiades URI references wherever possible.
                         See 
                            
                         We are committed to the long-term use of Pleiades as our primary reference for ancient places, and to that end we aim to update and improve the Pleiades data for Sicilian locations, in particular name data and sub-locations, in conjunction with the editing of the I.Sicily records.
                    
                
            
                    Translations 
                    The creation and availability of translations is a major goal of the EAGLE project and its collaborators, and I.Sicily is no less committed to that ambition.
                         See Orlandi et al. 2014: Part II. Translations are very rarely available for any of the published Sicilian inscriptions. It is obvious that the inclusion of translations will make the material much more accessible to a wider audience both of students and the general public. Equally, provision of translations will add to the value of the database as a resource for museums and others curating the inscriptions recorded in the database. To that end, a long-term ambition of I.Sicily is to include translations wherever possible in both English and Italian. We see this as one obvious area where public contribution (‘crowd-sourcing’) will be invaluable.
                    
                
            
                    Limitations and future ambitions 
                    The scale of the enterprise, and the available resources, mean that in its current form the project has limited itself to inscriptions engraved on stone (the coverage of rupestral inscriptions/graffiti and of inscriptions painted on stone/plaster is regrettably uneven). However, there is no reason in principle not to extend coverage in future to include inscriptions on other materials. Similarly, although the current project does not include a programme to mark up linguistic features of the texts, the commitment to the long-term maintenance of the corpus and the open availability of the underlying XML records means that such a project would be entirely possible in the future. 
                    It is our long-term ambition that I.Sicily might become the default location for the publication and dissemination of Sicilian inscriptions; in the shorter term, we hope that it will serve as valuable portal in the world of Sicilian epigraphy and of ancient world open linked data, greatly improving the accessibility of Sicilian epigraphy and so enriching the study of the ‘crossroads of the Mediterranean’.
                
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gulletta, M. I. (ed.) (1999), 
                        Sicilia Epigraphica. Atti del convegno internazionale, Erice, 15-18 ottobre 1998, 2 vols.
                    
                    
                        Orlandi, S., Santucci, R., Casarosa, V. and Liuzzo, P. M. (eds.) (2014). 
                        Information Technologies for Epigraphy and Cultural Heritage, Proceedings of the First EAGLE International Conference, Rome 2014, Sapienza Università Editrice. Published online at: http://www.eagle-network.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Paris-Conference-Proceedings.pdf (accessed 5 March 2016)
                    
                    
                        Prag, J. R. W. (2002). Epigraphy by numbers: Latin and the epigraphic culture in Sicily. In Cooley, A. E. (ed.), Becoming Roman, Writing Latin?: Literacy And Epigraphy In The Roman West (Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplementary Series), 
                        Journal of Roman Archaeology, pp. 15-31. 
                    
                    
                        Tribulato, O. (ed.) (2012). 
                        Language and linguistic contact in ancient Sicily, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            We propose a strategy for conducting digital humanities teaching and research that prioritizes publishing data above all other project activities. Drawing on our experience working with faculty, librarians, and graduate students on a critical edition in TEI of Charles Baudelaire’s 
                Les Fleurs du Mal, we demonstrate how adopting a data-first strategy fosters research, collaboration, pedagogy and scholarly communications in the digital humanities. 
            
            The 
                Corpus Baudelaire Project began at Vanderbilt University in 2013, when a hybrid group of approximately ten scholars, who had recently learned how to encode literary texts in the TEI, aspired to do something practical with their new skills. The group developed a connection to Vanderbilt University Library’s W. T. Bandy Center for Baudelaire and Modern French Studies;  who exhaustively collects Baudelaire’s works, including 
                Les Fleurs du Mal.  The work itself was published in four editions: 1857, 1861 (containing 35 additional poems, the 
                Tableaux parisiens, and lacking six poems censored by the Second Empire), 1866 (including 
                Les Epauves or 
                The Scraps, and the six poems missing from the 1861 edition), and the posthumous 1886 edition. Participants in the 
                Corpus Baudelaire Project are encoding all the editions using the critical edition apparatus in the TEI.
            
            We describe our data-first approach to 
                Corpus Baudelaire Project, which minimizes otherwise common tasks such as developing databases or coding interfaces, and argue for its advantage over alternative approaches in fostering collaboration, pedagogy, and new forms of publishing. We also suggest that our data-first approach may also productively be generalized to any digital humanities projects developing significant quantities of data.
            
            A data-first approach differs from other forms of digital humanities scholarship by minimizing startup costs and reducing complexity. Whereas digital humanities projects aim above all to produce some form of online digital edition or interactive website, a data-first approach invests primarily in producing and sharing data with others. “It’s the data, stupid!” is our informal slogan.
            A data-first approach to DH involves at least three steps: licensing, curating, and publishing datasets online. The second two steps are likely to be iterative and emergent.
            
                Licensing. A data-first approach begins with the presupposition of making data openly available and reusable by other scholars. This not only implies attaching an open source license to the data, but also making certain that participants in the project understand the license and agree with its terms.
                Curating. A data-first approach implies that discussions about data curation start at the beginning of the project, not its end. How shall information be encoded? How to decide between alternative options? Are there emerging best practices and converging forms of representation? Documenting data and making available any accompanying schemas is also critical when taking a data-first approach.
                Publishing. A data-first approach requires that data be published for comment, criticism and reuse from the onset of the project. What are the best platforms for publishing digital humanities data? How can digital humanists provide access and get credit for their data?
            
            By prioritizing these three activities above other forms of digital humanities, we simultaneously lower the barriers for participants to join our project while offering them the opportunity to publish and begin receive credit for their work almost immediately. Crucially, credit is allocated with respect to contributions, not by seniority or other hierarchical designations; the data bear witness directly to their creators.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Vishwas, Ch. and Penev, L. (2011). The data paper: a mechanism to incentivize data publishing in biodiversity science.
                        BMC bioinformatics, 12.15 (2011): 1.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
          
          Introduction
            Standardization has become an increasingly important process in relation to academic research, as it provides a better way for exchanging information. Humanities and cultural studies have followed, however, a heterogeneous path in which creativity and tradition play an essential role. Comparative studies in literature, and especially poetry, are a clear example of this eclectic situation. There is not a uniform academic approach to analyze, classify or study the different poetic manifestations. Things get even worse when comparing poetry schools from different languages and periods. The result of this uncoordinated evolution is a bunch of varied terminologies that means to explain analogous metrical phenomena through the different poetic systems whose correspondences have been hardly studied (González-Blanco and Sélaf, 2014).
            The existing digital poetic repertoires and databases are a good example of this situation, as they constitute a rich kaleidoscope of multilingual virtual poetry, constituted by lyrical collections in French (Nouveau Naetebus), Italian (BedT), Hungarian (RPHA), Medieval Latin (Corpus Rhythmorum Musicum, Annalecta Hymnica Digitalia, Pedecerto), Gallego-portuguese (Oxford Cantigas de Santa María, MedDB2), Castilian (ReMetCa), Dutch (Dutch Song Database), Occitan (BedT, Poèsie Neotroubadouresque, The last song of the Troubadours), Catalan (Repertori d’obres en vers), Skaldic (Skaldic Project), or German repertoires (Lyrik des Minnesänger), among others.
            Interoperability among these different poetic corpora would be desirable, as having a common search engine to extract information from all of these databases at the same time would have a deep impact for comparative studies in literature, linguistics and other humanities disciplines. We are, however, far from this reality as interoperability is not possible due to a lack of standardization both in technological and philological fields.
          
          
          Philological standardization
            During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the powerful influence of Latin made scholars inherit the terminology of Classical poetry treatises and apply it to Romance languages, regardless of their different linguistic traits and verse structures. When vernacular theories started to arise, each literary school set up its own terminology and classification system. This multiplicity led to complex situations, such as the creation of conceptual genres that only exist in some traditions. 
            Spanish conceptualization models are a good example to illustrate this situation: the classical system of Bello (1955), first published in 1835, divided all the structures into binary and ternary feet (imitating the classical Latin terminology):
            
                
                    Binary 
                    Ternary 
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Trochaic: óo
                            
                            
                                Iambic: oó
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Dactylic: óoo
                            
                            
                                Amphibrachic: oóo
                            
                            
                                Anapestic: ooó
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            Later, the musical analysis system applied by Navarro Tomás (1956) was followed as a valid system through many years, using concepts like anacrusis. In the last years, there have been many different approaches to explain the Spanish panorama, as it is shown by the semantic comparative model designed by the Czech Oldrich Bělič.
            
            The international context is richer, especially in English, with two prominent schools: 1) A traditional approach based on stress and classical feet; and 2) A generative approach based on the terminology and concepts shown through text grids that take into account word boundaries, with a strong impact on poetic theories (Gerber, 2013: 147).
            The models described are just an example of the idiosyncrasy that can be observed in each literary tradition. Although the current ICT infrastructures are prepared to harvest different types of collections and models, it is necessary at a first stage to standardize metadata and map vocabularies and terminology at the philological level in order to build a consistent able to be shared between the different traditions.
          
          
          Technological standardization
            The lack of unified criteria is translated into many different uncoordinated technologies when research data are transformed to build digital projects and do not even follow a standard, in most cases. The multiplicity of technologies used includes SQL databases, TEI and XML markup languages, semantic web technology standards (RDF, OWL, SKOS), natural language processing systems (NLP) and visualization tools. 
            Relational databases have been deeply used by the first digital poetic repertoires combining an ER (Entity-Relationship) model, together with the data model based on records for the logical implementation (Elmasri and Navathe, 2011, 27-ss). The problem of representing ER composition model is that the result shown is data centered, but it is not enough to mark textual items that need to be analyzed from a metrical point of view.
            There are other projects based on XML solutions, as TEI has a specific module for poetry analysis, “Verse”, with a rich set of tags to describe metrical schemas, rhymes, accentual structure and syllabic varieties. However, this model is not widely used by the different projects, and the lack of philological unified criteria makes it difficult to translate literary schemas into XML tags, making researchers create new tags or express nuances with customized attributes for each project. 
            The key for interoperability both in philological and technological fields is a common reference system, for which semantic web technologies are a powerful solution. Building a linked data model by adding a semantic layer of metadata to the existing databases does not alter their internal structure. This solution requires, however, to assume unified criteria on the philological model that serves as a reference.
            Although semantic web technologies have had success in archives libraries and museums (group known as LODLAM http://lodlam.net/), its application to poetic corpora is very different, as there are only a couple of studies dealing with some of the above mentioned aspects (Bootz and Szoniecky, 2008 and Zöllner-Weber, 2009), but there is not a standard conceptual model of ontology referred to metrics and poetry. The closest works related to this topic are probably the conceptual model of CIDOC, the controlled vocabularies of English Broadside Ballad Project http://ebba.english.ucsb.edu/ and the linked data relations offered by the Library of Congress (http://id.loc.gov/), which do not offer enough information on metrics vocabulary. There are also interesting computational approaches which use automated linguistic analysis or text mining, based on the morphological and phonetic structure of each language. Results have been impressive, as one of the greatest advantages is the speed of the analysis of big amounts of text (Gervás, 2000). Nevertheless, the integration of these technologies with the previous models described is not easy, and solutions are often customized for the variation of natural language used, most times standard English. 
          
          
          Our approach
            What we propose in this paper is not a new method for analyzing poetry, but an abstract model based on a working methodology supported by a double standardization system, both at philological and technological levels. In relation to this aspect, it must be highlighted that it needs to be carried out by an interdisciplinary and coordinated team, which requires a careful design of data architecture in different levels. Our proposal aims to set up a procedure to combine philological criteria to map vocabularies and concepts which might have common means and properties in the different traditions and to insert them into an abstract framework in which each of these elements can fit as individuals of an ontology which gathers the main poetics concepts shared by most traditions. We have worked on some first approaches in this sense, building our first ontology prototype, based on our ReMetCa Spanish project: www.purl.org/net/remetca (González-Blanco, and Del Rio, et al., 2014), populated with a controlled vocabulary in SKOS, that can be found in http://vocabularios.caicyt.gov.ar/pmc/. These preliminary results, which served as prototype and a basis to build the current model, have been applied to different poetry projects, such as the edition of Cancionero de Baena: http://sade.textgrid.de/exist/apps/SADE/Dialogo_Medieval/index.html or the description of poetic collections in http://www.poetriae.linhd.es/, but they need to be expanded and improved to analyze other poetic systems.
            This paper has been developed thanks to the research projects funded by MINECO and led by Elena González-Blanco: Acción Europa Investiga EUIN2013-50630: Repertorio Digital de Poesía Europea (DIREPO) and FFI2014-57961-R. Laboratorio de Innovación en Humanidades Digitales: Edición Digital, Datos Enlazados y Entorno Virtual de Investigación para el trabajo en humanidades, and the Starting Grant ERC-2015-STG-679528 POSTDATA.
          
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bělič, O. (2000). 
                        Verso español y verso europeo: introducción a la teoría del verso español en el contexto europeo, Santafé de Bogotá, Instituto Caro y Cuervo.
                    
                    Bello, A. (1955).
                         Estudios filológicos. Principios de la ortología y métrica de la lengua castellana y otros escritos en Obras completas de Andrés Bello, Caracas, Ministerio de Educación. (1st ed. 1835)
                    
                    Bootz, P. and Szoniecky, S. (2008). Towards an ontology of the field of digital poetry, Paper presented at Electronic Literature in Europe. 
                        http://elmcip.net/node/415. Accessed: 30/10/2015.
                    
                    Burnard, L. and  Bauman, S. (Eds.) TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Ver. 2.5.0. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ Accessed 30-10-2015. 
                    
                    Gerber, N. (2013). Stress-Based Metrics Revisited: A Comparative Exercise in Scansion Systems and their Implications for Iambic Pentameter. 
                        Thinking Verse III, pp. 131-68.
                    
                    González-Blanco, E., G. Del Rio, C. Martínez, M. Martos  (2014). When TEI Verse becomes linked data: using TEI tags as a model to build a linked poetry system. Abstract from the paper presented at the TEI Conference 2014, 
                        http://tei.northwestern.edu/files/2014/10/gonzalez-blanco-20wnj3q.pdf
                    
                    González-Blanco, E. and L. Seláf  (2014). Megarep: A comprehensive research tool in medieval and renaissance poetic and metrical repertoires. In Soriano, L. et al. (Eds.),
                        Humanities on the web: the medieval world. Oxford, Peter Lang, pp. 321-32.
                    
                    González-Blanco, E. and J. L. Rodríguez (2013). ReMetCa: a TEI based digital repertory on Medieval Spanish poetry, at The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web, Book of Abstracts - electronic edition. Edited by F. Ciotti and A. Ciula, DIGILAB Sapienza University and TEI Consortium, Rome 2013, pp. 178-85. 
                        http://digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/teiconf2013/abstracts/. Accessed 30-10-2015.
                    
                    Navarro Tomás, T. (1991). Métrica española, Barcelona, Labor. (1st ed., 1956).
                    Zöllner-Weber, A. (2009). Ontologies and Logic Reasoning as Tools in Humanities? Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3(4). 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/000068/000068.html Accessed: 30/10/2015.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                As most of modern and pre-modern western writing systems explicitly represent division of the words in a sentence by spaces or breaks, it has been easy to use computers to analyze texts based on each word and its meanings. However, there are several modern and pre-modern writing systems that do not explicitly indicate word separation in texts; that is, all words in a sentence are contiguous. A major contemporary representative of this kind of writing is seen in the language system of East Asia. Moreover, a popular Japanese pre-modern writing system called kuzushi-ji (cursive style characters) had often been presented with undivided characters even in typesetting until the late nineteenth century (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). As the lack of word-separation has been evoking not only ambiguity but also multiple interpretations, it has formed an aspect of cultural richness in Japanese culture. However, as a result, Japanese texts have intrinsically presented difficulties: not only in the case of textual analysis but also in both manual and automatic transcription in the digital era. This presentation will discuss problems in these writing systems and the current situation of attempts to resolve them through the methods of digital humanities.
                
                    
                    
                        Fig.1: Typesetting printing (
                        Ise-monogatari (Tales in Ise). Saga-bon. 1608. 
                        http://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/ 1287963/6
                         )
                    
                
                
                    
                    
                        Fig. 2: Woodcut printing (Yamamoto Shunsho ed. 
                        Eiri-Genji-Monogatari (Pictorial tales of Genji. 1654. 
                        http://base1.nijl.ac.jp/~anthologyfulltext/ )
                    
                
                
                    Difficulties of transcription 
                    Recent Japanese texts do not have serious problem in case of OCR due not only to the separation of each character but also accuracy and clarify of its printing. However, it is difficult to OCR books printed even ten decades ago because of two points: most of them uses relatively complicated characters for OCR and parallel embedded small-font size texts (called ruby in HTML5) which explain pronunciation of a word, and are too close to the explained word to OCR (Fig. 3), even though they were printed by metal typesetting. More three decades ago characters were sometimes connected, and the writing style of characters were partially cursive (Fig. 4). Recently, some researchers are attempting to develop tools for recognition of kuzushi-ji not based on the shape of individual characters but by continuous shapes of characters. They have not yet reached the stage where they are able to transcribe all characters accurately, for both technical and intrinsic reasons, but the technology can nonetheless assist in reading such texts by showing candidates of characters (Fig. 5)
                        
                             Hashimoto, Yuta, et al. The SMART-GS Project: An Approach to Image-based Digital Humanities. 
                                Digital Humanities 2014:476-477. 2014.
                            
                        . One of reasons why such kind of image recognition of a series of characters by machine is available in many cases is that many resources written by kuzushi-ji are woodcut printing, in which case the continuous cursive characters are more or less normalized within a single book. 
                    
                    
                        
                        
                            Fig. 3: Ruby close to text body (Ohashi Matatarou. 
                            Jituyou-ryouri-hou, A Guidebook to practical cooking). Hakubunkan. 1895. 
                            http://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/849051/19
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                            Fig. 4: Continuous characters (Ryusuitei Tanekiyo ed. 
                            Shiranui-monogatari (Tales of Shiranui). Vol. 68a. Enju-dou. 1885. 
                            http://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/ 884924/8 )
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        
                            Fig. 5: A result of image search in SMART-GS
                        
                    
                    However, there are special difficulties presented when a needed character is not encoded in Unicode. It seems to be similar with the case of Medieval Unicode Font Initiative
                        
                             http://folk.uib.no/hnooh/mufi/
                        , but the number of unencoded characters would be much more in the Japanese case included in East Asia culture. Especially, as Japanese culture has been involved with foreign cultures and developing them in its contexts, several writing systems are preserved in its cultural resources, including Kanji, Hiragana, Katakana, Hentaigana, and Siddham scripts. Siddham scripts were encoded in Unicode 8.0 with its variant characters by efforts of Script Encoding Initiative, international experts, and SAT project
                        
                             Pandey, Anshuman. Proposal to Encode the Siddham Script in ISO/IEC 10646. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2 N4294. 2012. 
                                http://www.unicode.org/L2/L2012/12234r-n4294-siddham.pdf .
                            
                            KAWABATA , Taichi, Toshiya SUZUKI, Kiyonori NAGASAKI and Masahiro SHIMODA. Proposal to Encode Variants for Siddham Script. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2 N4407. 2013. http://std.dkuug.dk/JTC1/SC2/WG2/docs/n4407.pdf .
                            Anderson, Deborah, et al. 2013-11-22 Siddham Script (梵字) Meeting @ Tokyo, JAPAN, Earth. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2 N4523. 2013. 
                                http://std.dkuug.dk/JTC1/SC2/WG2/docs/n4523.pdf .
                            
                        . There are already 80,000 Kanji (CJK unified characters) registered, but thus number will continue to increase. Hentaigana (including over 200 glyph shapes) was proposed to the ISO committee on October 2015
                        
                             ITSCJ SC2 Committee, IPSJ, JAPAN. Proposal of Japanese HENTAIGANA. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2 N4674. 2015. 
                                http://unicode.org/wg2/docs/n4674-Japan_Hentaigana_Proposal-a.zip .
                            
                        . In order to make easy-use digital scholarly edition for Japanese texts, especially classics, this process will be continued. 
                    
                    While efforts of transcription, due to commoditization of digitizing textual materials in hi-resolution, digital image databases have also been grown in Japan. Especially, the National Diet Library in Japan has been addressing the publication of digitized collection including over 300,000 books--since over decades ago and recently stated that most of them are to be released in the public domain
                        
                             http://dl.ndl.go.jp/
                        . And some institutes such as Kyoto Prefectural Library and Archives
                        
                             http://hyakugo.kyoto.jp/
                         and the University of Tokyo Library
                        
                             http://dzkimgs.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/utlib_kakouzou.php
                         are publishing their digitized collections under open license. The Art Research Center in Ritsumeikan University and the National Institute of Japanese Literature
                        
                             http://www.nijl.ac.jp/
                         have released many digitized textual resources under academic license. The latter institute plans to distribute parts of their contents under open license in this year in its new comprehensive digitization project
                        
                             http://www.nijl.ac.jp/pages/cijproject/index_e.html
                        . Needless to say, these are useful to enhance the convenience of humanities research. Especially, in Japanese contexts, many humanities researchers mention that validation of research results has been made much more efficient by the increased use of the digitized images.
                    
                    Crowd sourcing transcription has recently emerged also in Japan. Transcribe JP project has been conducted as a SIG of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities. It provides a Web service
                        
                             Hondigi2014. http://lab.ndl.go.jp/dhii/omk2/
                         for transcription with Omeka and Scripto plugin. Moreover, it started a micro task crowd sourcing project on
                        
                             翻デジ＠JADH×Crowd4U. http://www.jadh.org/transcribejp
                         October 2015 in cooperation with Crowd4U project
                        
                             Crowd4U. http://crowd4u.org/en/
                        . Contributors can determine whether a character is exactly OCRed or not, comparing a candidate character with a piece of an image only by one click. The first experiment was finished in a much shorter time than we expected. Further results will be reported at the DH2016.
                    
                
                
                    Difficulties in Word Separation
                     In spite of the difficulties of transcription, there are many digitized texts in Japanese. Aozora-Bunko
                        
                             http://www.aozora.gr.jp/
                        , a public domain Japanese texts repository similar to the Gutenberg Project, provides over 10,000 texts on its Web site and GitHub. The National Institute of Japanese Language and Linguistics (NINJAL)
                        
                             http://www.ninjal.ac.jp/
                         publishes several encoded historical Japanese texts with POS tags on Web and Web services of textual analysis on modern Japanese texts including 100 million words with POS tags each word in its original format. The SAT project
                        
                             http://21dzk.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SAT/
                         also provides digital texts of Buddhist scriptures consists of 100 million characters mainly in Chinese and Japanese with some philological tags on Web.
                    
                     The texts of NINJAL consists of separated words with POS tags, but most of the others do not use this method. Then, methods for textual analysis are common in Japan: The one is n-gram analysis regarded a character as one “n”. The other is developing tools for automatic separation of words sometimes with POS tagger, such as Mecab
                        
                             http://taku910.github.io/mecab/
                        , Chasen
                        
                             http://chasen.naist.jp/hiki/ChaSen/
                        , and Kuromoji
                        
                             http://www.atilika.com/ja/products/kuromoji.html
                        . These tools realize a high degree of precision, but sometimes produce erros. In this case, one has to manually correct the result of the tools if sharing exactly-processed texts is necessary. Moreover, even if a separation is not mistaken, it might support an interpretation in some cases. Such kinds of cases can also be occurred in word-separated corpora. This type of writing system includes such kinds of issues. 
                    
                
                
                    Rendering of texts
                    In XML-formatted texts, suc has those maintained in TEI, JATS
                        
                             http://jats.nlm.nih.gov/
                        , and so on representation of breaks in source XML files seems to be regarded a space as a separation between words in popular stylesheets. But in the case of non-separated texts, it causes problems such as unnecessary separation. The XSLT-processed Japanese text in fig.7 must exclude spaces between characters in spite of line-breaks in the XML source (fig.6). Conversely, as a Japanese semi-governmental open access journal system adopting JATS ignores line breaks even in English, the words are connected in the case of Fig. 6 and Fig.7. This problem seems to be recognized in ePub with solution in CSS according to the target language
                        
                            
                                http://www.idpf.org/epub/30/spec/epub30-overview.html
                            
                        . While it must already be discussed even in contexts of DH because non-spacing texts have been generated in various time and place, the differences of treatment of the line-breaks in XML source files should be carefully treated regarding not only representation but also analysis of texts. 
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            
                        
                        Fig. 6 An example for contrast of word separation in XML format
                    
                    
                        
                        Fig. 7 An example for a result of XSL Transformation of the Fig. 6
                    
                    In contexts of current DH, huge humanities resources have still been dormant. According to their awakening, these kind of issues should be gradually revealed and needed to be solved from both practical and abstract viewpoints. Through solving them earnestly under global communication, DH will come to better fruition. 
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                We present an easy-to-use web-based user interface which allows scholars working on manuscripts to assess the usefulness of automatic document image analysis (DIA) methods when incorporating automatic processes into their workflows. In contrast to existing web interfaces (Clausner, Pletschacher, and Antonacopoulos, 2011; Embach et al., 2013), this interface allows the user to directly upload images of the manuscript of interest without any registration. Thus, a fast assessment of a variety of algorithms and DIA processes can be performed. DivaServices is not a specialized tool for one specific use-case, but a collection of tools for several tasks in different use cases.
                
                With this web interface we build on our previous initiative (Würsch, Ingold, and Liwicki, 2015) to provide access to a wide range of DIA methods to the research communities in Computer Science and the Humanities. While the existing DivaServices are already useful to integrate state-of-the-art DIA methods into new research applications it is still difficult for researchers with little programming experience to estimate the capabilities of the offered methods. For example, it is not easy to know which binarization, text line segmentation, or OCR method and which parameters would work best on a given manuscript.
                
                In order to overcome this shortcoming, we present a web application that allows interacting with all offered methods. Users are able to upload their own images, perform experiments on them and have the results visualized. With this, researchers in the Humanities should get a better understanding on what the methods developed in the Computer Science community are able to achieve. The other way round, researchers from the Computer Science will have their methods exposed to a much broader range of data and can gather feedback to further improve the methods. This feedback loop should enhance communication between the two communities such that future methods can target the respective needs even better.
                DivaServices-Spotlight is built in a highly modular way, providing Graphical User Interface (GUI) blocks for various kinds of input and output parameters. The web interface is therefore automatically updated when new methods are added without the need of any further ado. Furthermore, based on our continuous open source support, this tool is available under a LGPL v2.1 license and the source code can be downloaded from github.
                    
                         Available at: https://github.com/DIVA-DIA/DIVAServices-Spotlight
                    
                
            
            
                DivaServices-Spotlight
                DivaServices-Spotlight
                    
                         Available at: http://divaservices.unifr.ch/spotlight
                     is a web application that allows user to upload their own image data, perform experiments and investigate the results. This should help in deciding whether an algorithm can help solving a particular problem or not, and which parameters are best for the data at hand. Figure 1 provides an example of such an experiment where the highlighted area (left) is segmented into text lines (right) and visualized for the user.
                
                
                    
                  Figure 1 Example of an executed experiment using DivaServices. The highlighted region (left) is segmented into separate text lines (right) and visualized for the user.
                
                In this part we give an overview of how the different user interface works and provide an example on how to perform a workflow.
                
                     The User Interface
                    From the welcome page the three main parts of DivaServices-Spotlight are available: Images, for uploading and manipulating input images; Algorithms, for executing methods; and Results, for accessing computed results.
                    
                    
                        Images
                        Via the “Images” link the user can view his already uploaded images (Gallery) or upload new images (Upload). In its current version all uploaded images are automatically converted into the PNG format and users can upload a maximum of ten images at the same time.
                        Users get the possibility to apply various pre-processing steps onto their image. It is possible to crop an image to a specific size and values such as 
                            brightness, contrast, and 
                            saturation can be adjusted. Performing these pre-processing steps can lead to better results of varying methods.
                        
                    
                    
                        Algorithms
                        On the “Algorithm” page, all currently available methods are listed (c.f. Figure 2). When selecting “Apply” on a given method, the user is asked to select one of his uploaded images. 
                        
                            
                          Figure 2 The “Algorithms” page provides an overview of all available methods with a short description of what they can be used for. Using the “Apply” button one method can be used. 
                        
                         On the page for a specific algorithm the user then has to specify input for this method. The input elements are created automatically based on the specifications of the method. For certain input elements a method can also specify ranges of possible values. The input of the user is validated and error messages are displayed should the input be not in a valid range. 
                        
                            
                          Figure 3 Different input types and validations. DivaServices-Spotlight offers automatic generation of input blocks for different types of inputs (a) like numbers, strings, and selection. Automatic validation (b) ensures that the user input is within ranges specified by the method. 
                        
                        Figure 3 (a) shows how various input blocks are generated by DivaServices-Spotlight. Currently it is possible to generate blocks for the following elements: strings (textual data), numbers, selection (one of multiple), and checkboxes. In Figure 3 (b) validation of input elements is visualized. When the user inputs data that is not valid for the given input type (e.g. text data for numbers) an error message is displayed and the user cannot execute the method.
                        
                        Furthermore, an algorithm can specify that a user needs to select a region within the image. This is needed by methods which want to only work on a subset of the image and can speed up the runtime, as well as the quality of the results of a method (e.g., of text line detection). DivaServices-Spotlight allows for drawing the following selections onto an input image: rectangle, polygons, and circles. These regions are drawn using the mouse. Rectangles and circles can be created using a simple click and drag operation. Polygons are created through manually creating every point of the polygon and clicking near the start point to close it. After creating the various highlighters, they can be edited (e.g., a single point of a polygon can be moved to a new location after creation). The various highlighters are visualized in Figure 4. 
                        
                            
                           Figure 4 The different selection methods; rectangle (left), polygon (center), and circle (right).
                        
                        Once the user has entered necessary parameters and selected a region on the image (if needed) the execution can be started using “Submit”. The user is notified of the process at the top of the page that shows more information when clicked on with the mouse (Figure 5 (a)). Once the execution is finished, again the user is notified by a small balloon that pops up in the top right corner (Figure 5 (b)). Also, the counter behind the “Results” link in the menu navigation is increased (Figure 5 (c)).
                        
                            
                          Figure 5 Notifications shown to the user about the current status of an execution (a), when an algorithm finishes (b), and the number of available results (c).
                        
                    
                    
                        Results
                        The “Results” page provides the user an overview of all available results. Using the “+” button on a specific result will show him the computed result. On the left side the user sees the input image as well the used parameters and on the right side the user gets a visualization of the results.
                        
                            
                         Figure 6 Results of a text line segmentation method. User input (left) is shown together with the computed results (right). Below the images is the JSON information a programmer would receive when calling the methods on DivaServices directly.
                        
                        Figure 6 provides an example of a detailed result. The user input is shown (left) with the computed result (right). The image view can be manipulated (dragging, and zooming) to get a better view of certain areas. Below each image is the JSON information that is sent to and received from DivaServices. This information should help programmers to see with what kind of information they have to deal with should they decide to integrate that method into another application.
                    
                
                
                    Using DivaServices-Spotlight for Designing DIA Workflows
                    
                    We provide an example how DivaServices-Spotlight can be used to design a full workflow. The aim is to build a system that takes an input image and performs OCR on the segmented text lines. For this we need to perform three steps: binarization, text line segmentation, and OCR recognition.
                    
                    Using the “Save Image” functionality on the result page we save the result image after each step. Figure 7 (a) – (d) show results at each stage using a combination of available methods. Parameters or even method could be changed at each step in order to find the best suited combination.
                    
                        
                      Figure 7 Results at different stages in the workflow. The input image (a) is binarized (b), segmented into text lines (c) and processed using an OCR algorithm, leading to its digital representation (d).
                     
                    Once a researcher is satisfied with the results on a small scale, he could then integrate that workflow into his application by directly invoking the methods on DivaServices using his programming language of choice.
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                With DivaServices-Spotlight we provide a web application to interact with all available methods hosted on DivaServices. Researchers can run small scale experiments to experience the possibilities of the different algorithms. Furthermore, the application provides developers with the necessary information they would need to use the methods outside of DivaServices-Spotlight and integrate them into other applications.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Clausner, C., Pletschacher, S., and Antonacopoulos, A. (2011). Aletheia – An advanced document layout and text ground-truthing system for production environments. 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, ICDAR, pp. 48–52.
                    
                    Embach, M., Krause, C., Moulin, C., Rapp, A., Rindone, F., Stotzka, R., … Vanscheidt, P. (2013). eCodicology-Algorithms for the Automatic Tagging of Medieval Manuscripts. 
                        The Linked TEI: Text Encoding in the Web, pp. 172.
                    
                    Würsch, M., Ingold, R., and Liwicki, M. (2015). DIVAServices – A RESTful Web Service for Document Image Analysis Methods. In 
                        Digital Humanities.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The aim of the poster is to present a digital edition of the 
                Excerpta Constantiniana  (Excerpta further on), a Byzantine encyclopaedia written in Ancient Greek in Constantinople in the 10
                th century (edited by de Boor, 1903, 1905; Büttner-Wobst, 1906; Boissevain, 1906; Roos, 1910).
            
            The underlying research project belongs to the field of Classical and Byzantine Philology and is devoted to the edition of an important historiographical source. The goal of this poster is interdisciplinary: it aims to define the role of the editor and the concept of the presentation of a historical source in the digital environment.
            The 
                Excerpta was planned as a large-scale encyclopaedia in multiple volumes. It consists of several thousand separate extracts (excerpts) that were taken from about three dozens of Ancient Greek and Byzantine historiographical works. The extant parts of the 
                Excerpta contain about 560 000 words (it is believed that almost tenfold is lost). We possess two original manuscripts of the 
                Excerpta (each of the two for a different volume of 
                Excerpta) that distinguish themselves through a remarkable 
                mise-en-page: for the purpose of navigation in the content several hundred notes and pictograms have been placed on the margins of the manuscript (see image 2).
            
            The digital edition of the whole work is in the preparatory phase; a section from the 
                Excerpta have been edited exemplary, to be more precise, 24 pages (about 9 000 words) from the original manuscript 
                Vaticanus graecus 73. The manuscript itself is a palimpsest. The text of the 
                Excerpta has been washed off in the 14
                th century and overwritten, leading to a limited legibility of the original text (see image 1). Standard solution in such a case would be to publish the facsimile of the manuscript and to prepare a historical-critical edition of the text. However, the publication of such a damaged text proved itself to be of little value for the reader not versatile in deciphering palimpsests. Moreover, the traditional layout of a historical-critical edition is not suitable for displaying the 
                Excerpta. The biggest challenge here is a faithful reproduction of the notes and pictograms on the margins that are important for the understanding of the text.
            
            The 
                mise-en-page of the 
                Excerpta was pivotal for the development of the concept of this digital edition. A 
                pluralistic approach to the text was taken as a basis. The goal was to ensure the presentation of the text in multiple 
                views (displaying perspectives), most important of which were the 
                document-focused and the 
                text-focused perspectives (cf. Pierazzo and Stroke, 2011; Rehbein and Gabler, 2013; Muñoz and Viglianti, 2015). In doing so three main views were chosen: (i) a digital reconstruction of the manuscript (
                topographical view), (ii) a diplomatic transcription (
                document-focused view), and (iii) a normalized, historical-critical version of the text (
                text-focused view).
            
            
                
                    Topographical view: The topographical view includes the digital reproduction of the original as a two-dimensional, detailed representation of the surface. In other words, it means that the earlier text of the manuscript, significantly enlarged, has been digitally replenished with stylus on the touchscreen (see image 1 and 2). To my knowledge this method has not been used in the reconstruction of the palimpsests before and therefore represents a novel way of displaying original texts. Its uniqueness lies in the combination of human expertise and the current technical possibilities.
                
                
                    Document-focused view: In this view, the text is reproduced as true to the original as possible. The design of the original is visualized, especially the layout of the text and the navigation elements in it (see images 2 and 3). Wherever possible, the original orthography is reproduced. Nevertheless it is also possible to switch to the normalized orthography within the same view. The reader can therefore choose between modern and medieval punctuation, between the spelling containing original abbreviations, or expanded text, etc.
                
                
                    Text-focused view (see image 4): This view has the layout of a modern edition, the orthography is largely normalized. An option is provided to highlight different types of content, such as quotations, places, personal names, peoples, etc.
                
            
            Technically the concept of the edition is implemented as follows. The topographical view is produced as images. The transcription of the original text for the document- and text-focused views is made according to the TEI/XML standards. Phenomena encoded with tags are divided into larger 
                blocks. The main blocks are:
            
            
                
                    Physical condition of the manuscript and physical structure of the text: physical damage of the manuscript, legibility of the text, page and line division at the locations where they are not connected with the logical structure of the text (see below);
                
                
                    Logical structure of the text, as well as all the elements of the layout, which support navigation in the text: units such as volumes, chapters, excerpts; elements of the design that refer to this classification (e.g. larger spaces in text intentionally left blank); pictograms and marginal notes;
                
                
                    Orthography of the manuscript: original punctuation, accentuation, abbreviations and ligatures;
                
                
                    Normalized orthography: modern punctuation, word boundaries (missing in the manuscript), uppercase and lowercase letters according to modern standards;
                
                
                    Contents of the text: quotes, names, places, peoples, and other items.
                
            
            The web presentation is created on the basis of XSLT. The transformation of separate blocks of tags is modeled for each view individually. The final presentation is styled with Cascading Style Sheets (CSS). It is planned to publish the edition online by mid-2016.
            
                
                Image 1: The process of the graphical reconstruction of the palimpsest
            
            
                
                Image 2: A screenshot of the topographical view
            
            
                
                Image 3: A screenshot of the document-focused view
            
            
                
                Image 4: A screenshot of the text-focused view
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Boissevain, U. Ph. (1906). Excerpta historica iussu Constantini Porphyrogeniti confecta. Vol. 4, Excerpta de sententiis. Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Büttner-Wobst, Th. (1906). Excerpta historica iussu Constantini Porphyrogeniti confecta. Vol. 2(1), Excerpta de virtutibus et vitiis. Berlin.
                    
                    
                        De Boor, C. G. (1903). Excerpta historica iussu Constantini Porphyrogeniti confecta. Vol.2, Excerpta de legationibus. Berlin.
                    
                    
                        De Boor, C. G. (1905). Excerpta historica iussu Constantini Porphyrogeniti confecta. Vol. 3, Excerpta de insidiis. Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Muñoz, T. and Viglianti, R. (2015). Texts and Documents: New Challenges for TEI Interchange and Lessons from the Shelley-Godwin Archive, 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], Issue 8 - PREVIEW | 2014-2015. URL: http://jtei.revues.org/1270.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. and Stokes, P. A. (2011). Putting the Text back into Context: A Codicological Approach to Manuscript Transcription, 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter 2 -
                         Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age 2. Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik, 3. Books on Demand (BoD), Norderstedt, pp. 397-429.
                    
                    
                        Rehbein, M. and Gabler, H. W. (2013). On Reading Environments for Genetic Editions, 
                        Scholarly and Research Communication 4(3). 
                        http://src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/123 (accessed 10 October 2015).
                    
                    
                        Roos, A. G. (1910). Excerpta historica iussu Constantini Porphyrogeniti confecta. Vol. 2(2), Excerpta de virtutibus et vitiis. Berlin.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            The nature of nineteenth-century culture, particularly literary, publication, and print culture, meant that many female writers plied their trade in periodicals. Even many American writers who we think of today primarily as novelists—Harriet Beecher Stowe, for instance—first published much of their material in periodicals. Stowe's 
                Uncle Tom's Cabin first appeared serially in 
                The National Era, an abolitionist newspaper. But writers like Stowe gained and have maintained notoriety in part because their work also existed in book form. Many writers whose work remained trapped in periodicals have since fallen off the literary map, their writing accessible only in increasingly fragile and scattered print runs of newspapers held in libraries and archives, or on microfilm. Attempts to digitize cultural heritage material in periodicals have been far spottier than comparable attempts to digitize books for a variety of mostly practical reasons.
                    
                         While there have been a number of large-scale newspaper digitization projects, most of them have been undertaken by large commercial entities that charge a fee for access to the content and provide material of mixed quality. Readex and Proquest are two of the more popular services, and genealogy site Ancestry.com has also undertaken its own mass digitization of government records, census data, and newspaper and periodical material; all three charge for access to the content. While these services can certainly be useful for certain types of research work, the quality of the digitization, particularly transcription, is in nearly all cases quite poor, with transcriptions being derived from optical character recognition (OCR) software, which often has difficulty accurately transcribing the small and often smudged print of nineteenth-century periodicals. 
                     Over the past decade or so, scholars such as Kenneth Price, Susan Belasco, and Meredith McGill have argued for both an increased acknowledgement of periodicals and periodical writing as a key site of intellectual and literary exchange in the nineteenth century, and the increased utilization of digital tools for the editing, study, and dissemination of periodicals.
                    
                         See Price and Belasco's introduction to their edited collection, 
                            Periodical Literature in Nineteenth-Century America. Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia, 1995. Also, see: Belasco. "
                            Whitman's Poems in Periodicals: Prospects for Periodicals Scholarship in the Digital Age." 
                            The American Literature Scholar in the Digital Age. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2011; McGill, Meredith. 
                            American Literature and the Culture of Reprinting, 1834-1853. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003.
                        
                     While the advent of the digital archive has afforded well-documented possibilities for the recovery and, more importantly, dissemination of previously unknown and/or largely inaccessible material,
                    
                         Perhaps the most relevant example of a digital recovery project, for the purposes of my presentation, is the 
                            Women Writers Project (http://wwp.northeastern.edu), now run out of Northeastern University and directed by Julia Flanders. Begun in 1988, the project has been instrumental in the recovery of rare or inaccessible work by early modern women writers (the project covers a period from 1526-1850, although the vast majority of texts are from the sixteenth and seventeenth-centuries). In addition to providing access to digitally encoded texts, the project has also provides various research and teaching materials. However, the 
                            Women Writers Project is only accessible with a paid subscription and does not deal with periodicals.
                        
                     digital transcription, encoding, and publication of literary texts still remain skills that many academics feel are well beyond their technical capabilities. This means that many of the people best positioned to undertake such recovery work—literary scholars and other subject-specialists—are held back merely by a technological learning curve that they feel is too steep.
            
            For the past year I have been using basic and widely-available digital tools and resources to build a digital archive of the newspaper writing of the nineteenth century American writer Fanny Fern, who, in the 1850s, was the highest-paid periodical writer in the country, writing for the widest circulated American periodical of its day. The project, 
                Fanny Fern in The New York Ledger (http://fannyfern.org) is the first attempt to make available the full run of Fern's newspaper columns. Using the Drupal content management system, I have been making TEI-encoded transcriptions of Fern's columns, high-resolution digital images of the complete 
                Ledger issues, and brief critical apparatuses about both Fern and the 
                Ledger available for free public and scholarly use. While the digital methods and tools used to construct my project were fairly simple, the functionality and appearance of the finished product belie the relative ease (from a technical standpoint) of its creation. But the 
                Ledger is just one paper and Fanny Fern is just one writer, albeit a significant one. "There are countless other periodicals and writers, particularly women writers, that deserve this sort of attention," I thought. "If only other 19
                th century lit scholars could see how easy this is!" And an idea was born.
            
            I already had a relatively simple TEI template designed to handle the metadata, textual content, and linking of digital image files for periodicals. I had an XSLT style sheet that converted the TEI to HTML. I had project documentation for how I had set up my own domain name and hosting space (using Reclaim Hosting, a web hosting service specifically designed for educators and students). I had documentation about how I had installed and configured Drupal. I had documentation about how I had incorporated the HTML of the transcribed newspaper columns into the Drupal architecture. And I had documentation about how I had tweaked and played around with the design of the site. In short, I had everything anyone would need to build his or her own digital archive; all they would need is the content. If I could just share these files and instructions with other literature scholars, scholars who themselves are experts and masters of all kinds of content, then piece by piece and site by site, the gaps in literary and historical scholarship could to begin to close, be it ever so slightly. While I knew this had long been one of the (increasing number of) mantras of digital humanities, I now felt that I had the means to do my small part to contribute to its realization. Thus, using 
                Fanny Fern in The New York Ledger as an example and template, I plan to soon begin providing other literature scholars with a single package, a package that contains the tools and instructions they will need to construct their own digital archives—I'm going to start handing out FannyPacks.
            
            Geared mainly for those wishing to gather and display texts in a digital environment, these FannyPacks (a zipped collection of files) will include the needed TEI templates, style sheets, and thorough but simple documentation about digital imaging, hosting setup, and Drupal installation and execution. Scholars with a bit of tech savvy can choose to begin hosting their own projects right away. For those looking to first experiment before fully diving in, Reclaim Hosting easily allows for multiple subdomains to be hosted under an existing domain free of charge. Thus, I will provide testing space on my "fannyfern.org" domain where users can download their own installations of Drupal and experiment with adding their own content. While I have chosen to take the time to encode Fern's newspaper columns in TEI—for the preservation, interoperability, and potential for enhanced functionality of the files and their content—there are some users who might wish to simply "get their material out there" using HTML. Drupal's graphical user interface allows for the easy input of basic or full HTML. Thus, users unfamiliar with or not wanting to take the time to encode in TEI could simply encode their transcriptions in basic HTML and paste them into Drupal's GUI. The setup of both Reclaim Hosting and Drupal also provide ample opportunity for student involvement in the creation of such projects.
            Projects such as 
                Fanny Fern in The New York Ledger and those facilitated by the FannyPacks occupy a scholarly space somewhere between large-scale, institutionally-hosted TEI-based projects such as the 
                Willa Cather Archive or 
                Walt Whitman Archive (both of which are well-funded and boast a host of technical and subject specialists) and a low-cost collaborative TEI repository such as the TAPAS Project (http://tapasproject.org). While not requiring any institutional technical resources, projects based on the FannyPacks model possess greater customization and more autonomy than TAPAS projects. And, in the world of nineteenth-century American women's literature at least, there seems to be a desire for just such a model. A recently created listserv of the Society for the Study of American Women Writers (SSAWW) is geared specifically to those scholars already working on or interested in creating digital projects devoted to American women writers. And initial communication on the listserv has made clear the appeal and potential of a method and means for facilitating the publication of digital scholarly content centered around women writers, particularly periodical writers. But while my main and initial goal will be to work specifically with nineteenth century literature scholars, particularly scholars of women's literature, the FannyPacks certainly have a broader application and could be adapted to fit any manner of digital archival project.
            
            My poster will thus provide a brief overview of my current project, 
                Fanny Fern in The New York Ledger, a discussion of the project's potential to serve as a model, and specifics of the FannyPacks and their creation, distribution, and application.
            
        
    


        
            
                Il progetto Tesserarum Sisciae Sylloge (TSS) mira alla digitalizzazione di più di 1100 etichette commerciali di piombo di epoca romana (I-III secolo d.C.) conservate nel Museo Archeologico di Zagabria. Hanno le dimensioni approssimattive dei nostri francobolli e portano incisioni con informazioni relative  alla tintura della lana (prezzi, prodotti, ecc.).
                L’edizione scientifica è a cura di Radman-Livaja, 2014 e il disegno seguente è il fronte dell’etichetta 12563 pubblicata dall’editore
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Queste etichette, beni archeologici sotto la responsabilità dei GLAM (Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums), sono anche oggetto di studio scientifico, e quindi da considerare sotto vari punti di vista: beni culturali, fonti primarie di informazione per gli studi storici, epigrafi, Text Bearing Object (TBO) etc. Sia nell’interesse del pubblico che della ricerca, abbiamo realizzato, tramite l'edizione digitale di queste etichette romane, un open access a questa documentazione (Terras, 2015), facilitato da un framework digitale che copre gli aspetti di visualizzazione, divulgazione e informazione scientifica.
                Lavori precedenti (vedi ad es. Terras, 2006 con le tavolette di Vindolanda) avevano approfondito le riflessioni riguardo alla rapresentazione digitale e alla decifrazione di un TBO simile per certi aspetti (scritura manoscritta) e sono serviti come punto di partenza in fase preparatoria. Il progetto TSS è stato, durante l’anno 2015, l’ambiente di sviluppo di un aspetto metodologico specifico dell’epigrafia digitale, che mette al centro della procedura di digitalizzazione l’oggetto archeologico, cioè la fonte primaria di informazione dello storico. Si basa sull’analisi dispositiva (dispositive analysis) ed è approfondito in Lamé 2015a. L’analisi dispositiva prende in considerazione i vari elementi eterogenei che partecipano al messaggio epigrafico, tenendo conto delle dimensioni sociali e culturali del TBO in quanto oggetto di studio della storia digitale. Propone un insieme di tappe e di procedure che possono includere il crowdsourcing (vedi Ridge 2014).
                 Raggiunti i primi obiettivi prefissati, utilizzando le tecnologie di Reflectance Transforming Imaging (RTI), siamo entrati in una fase che potremmo chiamare di document editing e che riguarda le metodologie del Cultural Heritage, i Digital Autoptic Processes (DAP), la materialità dell’oggetto, e la sua accessibilità a tutti i pubblici dell’Archeological Museum of Zagreb in modo da svolgere sia una missione scientifica che di mediazione museografica verso il suo pubblico. Tuttavia, come sottolinea Pierazzo 2015 (specialmente pp. 70-83), document editing (edizione del TBO) e textual editing (edizione del testo) sono metodi editoriali complementari: se si possono distinguere non si possono separare. Il textual editing è uno dei campi di ricerca più sviluppato nell’ambito delle Digital Humanities ed è ben supportato dal punto di vista tecnico, in particolare grazie allo standard TEI. Il testual editing ha raggiunto la matturità necessaria per essere abbinato e combinato agli aspetti che riguardano il documento.
                Il contesto dell’epigrafia digitale del progetto TSS, che presenteremo nella sua versione 1.0, con le conclusioni metodologiche attinenti all'informatica umanistica, in occasione del convegno DH16, fornisce documenti epigrafici la cui funzione è per natura diversa dal manoscritto. Questo genera alcune conseguenze, come, ad esempio, l’assenza del concetto di pagina ma l’uso di quello meno controllabile tecnicamente di ‘specchio epigrafico’, ovvero la superficie inscritta; essa non viene sempre definita da un rettangolo piano, ma può assumere numerose forme geometriche, come un cipo migliaro, avere confini meno delimitati nello spazio, come nelle iscrizioni arabe, nelle quali le scritte si miscelano a motivi floreali, o come le statue-geroglifiche egiziane. Diventa inoltre importante unire materialità archeologica (document editing) e interpretazione del testo (textual editing) in una “ricostituzione diplomatica” dell’oggetto in caso di lacuna (Lamé 2015b) tramite un tool dedicato, il MarkOut, che permette di associare calco digitale, paleografia e codifica testuale al momento della decifrazione.
                MarkOut è un'interfaccia web (HTML5 e Javascript) che permette di tracciare le iscrizioni su di un'immagine e successivamente di correggere le linee tramite dei punti di controllo, consentendo di ottenere facilmente una rappresentazione fedele con uno strumento, il mouse, non proprio ideale, ma alla portata di chiunque.
                Ad ogni segno viene associato un simbolo di un alfabeto predefinito, o eventualmente una variante di una lettera (Unicode code point + un indentificatore della variante). L'interfaccia infine permette di gestire più strati di scrittura e nel caso siano disponibili rappresentazioni RTI, è possibile variare l'illuminazione dell'iscrizione per facilitarne l’osservazione. 
                Il risultato finale è un file in formato SVG, che può essere condiviso online, processato automaticamente per estrarre la trascrizione in altri formati (es. TEI), inserito in un database ad hoc, o impiegato in algoritmi che analizzino la forma delle varie lettere e la loro posizione topologica sul TBO.
                Questa interfaccia è concepita per servire i vari tipi di usi, con alcune varianti nel suo design: la discussione scientifica tra esperti (MarkOut Expert), la formazione degli studenti universitari alla decifrazione di iscrizioni (MarkOut Assisted, see Lamé 2016), la mediazione museografica verso il pubblico generale del museo, adulti e bambini. Di seguito, immagine dell’etichetta 12563 con il MarkOut Assisted.
                Specialmente, il MarkOut Kids, in corso di sperimentazione presso i bambini da 4 a 10 anni, permette di mettere in pratica esercizi di scrittura del programma scolastico combinato ad un contatto con l’oggetto archeologico. Il gesto continuo che consiste nel designare la forma di una lettera dell’alfabeto viene associato a quello più astratto di identificazione e riconoscimento di un segno alfabetico con la sua posizione su una tastiera e il suo inserimento in modo tale che compaia associato al disegno sullo schermo.
                Il Tesserarum Sisciae Sylloge è finanziato dal Ministero della Cultura Croato, dal Comune di Zagabria e dall’European Association for Digital Humanities. È realizzato dal Laboratorio di Cultura Digitale dell’Università di Pisa con la partecipazione del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Borillo, M. (1984). 
                        Informatique pour les sciences de l’homme: limites de la formalisation du raisonnement. (Philosophie et langage). Bruxelles: P. Mardaga.
                    
                    
                        Lamé, M. (2015a). Primary Sources of Information, Digitization Processes and Dispositive Analysis. New York: ACM.
                    
                    
                        Lamé, M. (2015b). Scritture in contesti: il dispositivo epigrafico come veicolo di echi epigrafici. 
                        Lexis, 
                        33: 9–17.
                    
                    
                        Lamé, M., Ponchio, F., Robertson, B. and Radman-Livaja, I. (2016). Teaching (Digital) Epigraphy. Rome: La Sapienza.
                    
                    
                        Masséglia, J. (2015). The Ashmolean Latin Inscriptions Project: Bringing epigraphic research to museum visitors and schools. 
                        Studi Umanistici – Antichistica Convegni Information Technologies for Epigraphy and Cultural Heritage. Rome: La Sapienza, pp. 221–30.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital scholarly editing: theories, models and methods. Farnham; Burlington: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Radman-Livaja, I. (2014). 
                        Tesere Iz Siska/Plombs de Siscia. Vol. IX/1-IX/2. (Musei Archaeologici Zagrabiensis Catalogi et Monographiae). Zagreb: Archaeological Museum in Zagreb.
                    
                    
                        Ridge, M. (2014). 
                        Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage. Farnham: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Rosselli del Turco, R. (2015). Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-based Digital Editions. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(8).
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2006). 
                        Image to Interpretation: An Intelligent System to Aid Historians in Reading the Vindolanda Texts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
                    
                        Terras, M. (2015). Opening Access to Collections: the Making and Using of Open Digitised Cultural Content. 
                        Online Information Review(Special Issue on Open Access: Redrawing the Landscape of Scholarly Communication).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Up-to-date research in the humanities today depends as much on digital methods and digital data. However, the use of computer-based methods and online sources in the humanities still faces several challenges, including the difficulty of ensuring the longevity of research data, the lack of common basic services, inadequate standardisation of data formats, insufficient training in digital methods and best practices, and weak international Digital Humanities networks. Digital documents are accumulated, organised and annotated using electronic databases. However, the necessary infrastructure is most often established in a project- specific way and is not designed for the long-term preservation of data. After the completion of a research project, these digital resources quickly become unavailable if they, and the software and hardware they rely on, are not properly maintained. Keeping digital data accessible after the end of a project is costly in terms of money and labour and is usually not included in the project funding.
                While the digitisation of analogue sources produces large numbers of digital documents, these documents usually have a simple structure. By contrast, the data produced during the research process is much more complex, consisting of interlinked information (databases, annotations etc.). Because of the complexity of this research data, it is very difficult to make it permanently available. However, there are several reasons for doing so:
                
                    Transparency:
                    As research data is the foundation on which published results are based, it be- comes necessary to have access to this data in order to evaluate the results.
                
                
                    Reuse:
                    New research projects can reuse existing research data to propose different answers to the same questions, or to ask entirely new questions, especially if the datasets from different projects can be linked.
                
                
                    Citability:
                    Digital sources may only be referenced in scientific texts if they can be accessed permanently without modification. The long-term accessibility of arbitrary digital objects (together with permanent links and unique object identifiers) is usually not possible.
                
            
            
                Organisational form
                The Swiss Academy of Humanites and Social Sciences (SAHSS) therefore decided to establish in collaboration with the Digital Humanities Lab (DHLab) of the University of Basel a new “national research infrastructure” (Data- and Service Center for the Humanities, DaSCH) which takes this kind of digital research data into custody and preserves the direct online access. The primary goals are:
                
                    Long-term curation of research data 
                    Permanent access and reuse 
                    Services for researchers to support data life-cycle management 
                
                The secondary goals are:
                
                    Promoting the digital networking of databases created in Switzerland or in other countries 
                    Carrying out a pilot project in close proximity to humanities research 
                    Collaboration and networking with other institutions on developing digital literacy
                
                During a pilot phase lasting two years that ended in July 2015, the data of about 25 different research projects ranging from ancient history to musicology have been passed to new institution for preserving long term accessibility. In order to copy with such heterogeneous data, the platform has to be extremely flexible and versatile.
                Since Switzerland is a highly federalist country, a balance between a central/decentral approach had to be chosen. We decided to form of a network that currently consists of several “satellite” nodes and a central office which acts as coordinator, main provider of technology and software development. The individual locations have a great deal of freedom to take local decisions (e.g. which research projects are considered important to be included in the platform). At each satellite location, it is necessary to have both a broad knowledge and experience available in humanities research as well as in IT and software development skills. The central office provides second-level support.
            
            
                Technological issues
                Our daily experience seems to suggest that digital data is quite volatile and unstable. Everybody who works with computers on any scale has suffered the unfortunate experience of data loss. In a recent interview, Vincent Cerf, often regarded as one of the "fathers of the internet", says he is worried that all the images and documents we have been saving on computers will eventually be lost: "Our life, our memories, our most cherished family photographs increasingly exist as bits of information – on our hard drives or in "the cloud". But as technology moves on, they risk being lost in the wake of an accelerating digital revolution." (Cerf, 2015) Thus, it appears that "long-term archival" and "digital" are diametrically opposed concepts. However, the digital domain offers some unique characteristics that allow the long-term preservation of digital data. However, guaranteeing long-term access to digital information remains a tedious and difficult process.
                There are only a few fundamental methods for long-term preservation of digital data:
                
                    Emulation
                    The software and to some extent the hardware of obsolete computer system can be emulated ("simulated") on modern computers. Thus data can be rendered using vintage software.
                
                
                    «Eternal» media
                    The «eternal» media approach requires the digital data to be recorded onto the most robust and durable media available.
                
                
                    Migration
                    In the context of long term archiving, migration is defined as the process of periodically copying digital data onto new, up-to-date storage media and, if required, converting the file formats to new, well-documented standard formats.
                
                The OAIS reference model for a digital archive is based on the migration model. In addition to a formal process description, it also covers the ingest of data into the archive and the dissemination of archived data to a user. An important aspect of the OAIS reference model is the systematic approach to metadata that is distinguished between the metadata required to identify and find a «document», and the technical metadata required for the management of the migration processes. The OAIS approach can be adapted for complex «objects» such as relational databases or NoSQL-databases (e.g. using the SIARD-suite (Ohnesorge, 2015), a standard adopted by European PLANETS project and as Swiss eGovernment Standard eCH-0165), however in order to browse or use the data, the whole dataset has to be retrieved from the archive and converted back into a working RDBMS using the SIARD-Suite – a «quick overview» is not possible.
                Complementary to the OAIS archival process model, 
                    keep-alive archiving keeps a system of data, data management and access methods online and permanently up-to-date. Whenever the technology evolves (e.g. a new stable version of the data management software or a new version of a file format is released), the whole system is migrated to conform to the new environment. The keep-alive archives are especially well suited to complex data such as databases which are accessed very frequently. However, there two fundamental problems with keep-alive archives:
                
                If the data management system does not offer a method to record all changes, the history will be lost. 
                It is virtually impossible to keep each projects IT-infrastructure – especially the software – running forever. Each project uses its own software (Filemaker Version XY, MySQL, PHP, ruby, Excel, etc.) and data models. The adaption to the evolving technology would overwhelm each institution.
                The DaSCH implements a modified keep-alive concept. It has chosen to use the Resource Description Framework (RDF, standardised by the W3C) as a common ground for representing the data. It provides a very simple but highly flexible representation of digital information. RDF allows the definition of ontologies which formalise the semantic relationship of digital objects. We defined a base ontology which implements some required basic concepts (e.g. timestamp based versioning, annotations, access rights etc.). Starting from this base ontology, for each research project taken into custody a specific ontology is being derived. On delivery of the data, the original data structure is translated into this ontology preserving the important features and relationships of the data. This technological framework thus allows the «simulation» of almost any data models (relational databases, XML hierarchies, TEI-encoded texts, graph networks etc.) in a common infrastructure using open standards such as RDF, RDFS
                    
                         RDS-Schema for expressing simple ontologies.
                     and OWL
                    
                         Web Ontology Language for expressing complex ontologies and relations.
                    .
                
                The pilot phase has made it clear that project-specific access applications (such as online graph- ical user interfaces) have to be preserved. While this approach does not make it possible to directly reuse the original applications, it has been shown that is easy to re-implement their basic functionality as well as their look and feel. 
                Using the common platform, it is straightforward to create new tools and applications that reuse existing data by combining information from different datasets. Thus, new research methods can be implemented, e.g. using methods of «big data» analysis 
                Due to the success of the pilot phase where about 25 projects have been integrated, some with individual user interfaces, the Academy has decided to ask for funding. The request is awaiting the approval of the swiss national parliament.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cerf, V. (2015). Interview on BBC
                         http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-31450389 (accessed March 4th 2015).
                    
                    
                        Ohnesorge, K., Mérinat, T. and Büchler, M. (2015). SIARD Format Version 2.0, SFA | 2015-10-15 | DLM Forum 2015, Luxembourg, http://www.eark-project.com/resources/conference-presentations/dlm-oct15/37-siard2eark-1/file (accessed March 4th 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                
                The Canonical Text Services (CTS) protocol (Blackwell and Smith, 2014) offers the scholarly community a way to use URNs for referring to two categories of propositional objects commonly called texts: to their ideal representations, 
                    works, and their specific realizations, 
                    expressions (International Working Group on FRBR and CIDOC CRM Harmonisation, 2015). CTS URNs point to complete texts and their subdivisions. CTS has a potential to transform scholarly practices. It supports the migration of our interpretations and knowledge from print to digital. It also forces us to reconsider what exactly we are doing when we refer or cite. It could, eventually, integrate into our referring and citing machine-driven comparisons across multiple versions of texts.
                
                The CTS protocol is currently implemented in two projects: the 
                    Homer Multitext (Dué and Ebbott, 2015) and the 
                    Perseus Digital Library (Crane et al., 1987-). Both focus on texts which have traditionally been considered classical. Centuries, in some cases millennia, of appreciation and careful study have provided us with slightly different, but well-established citation schemes for such texts, and the main challenge to CTS up to now has been to reproduce these schemes. We put the protocol to a new test, by applying it to a non-canonical corpus of Latin texts published in the digital collection 
                    Croatiae auctores Latini, CroALa (Jovanović et al., 2009-).
                
                CroALa collects and enables research of texts from a rich tradition of writing in Latin in Croatia. Latin was written through the Medieval and Early Modern periods up to modern times (our latest title is from 1984). The corpus includes a number of translations of Homeric poems into Latin, such as the partial one – an episode from the 
                    Iliad - by Janus Pannonius (1447), and a complete 
                    Iliad by Rajmund Kunić (1776). We wanted to connect
                     CroALa manifestations (digital editions) of these expressions to the 
                    Iliad as work, thus making possible a connection to manifestations of its other expressions, published elsewhere – in our case, to the Greek editions published by the 
                    Homer Multitext. 
                
                The process involved three stages: making the CroALa texts canonically referable through XML catalog records, validating and verifying the prepared editions, and establishing connections between editions prepared by different projects.
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    Homer Multitext have produced URNs for each line of the 
                    Iliad as work; e. g. book 6, line 119 is described by 
                    urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:6.119. 
                    A RDF triple connects this to URN of a line in the edition of the Venetus A codex (urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.msA:6.119). Something similar is done for CroALa; 
                    you can see t
                    he work URN implied in the URN of a line our edition of Janus Pannonius’ Latin translation (which is an expression fragment): 
                    urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.croala-lat01:6.119. 
                    The same work URN is also implied by a line in the edition of Rajmund Kunić's complete Latin expression of the 
                    Iliad: 
                    urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.croala-lat02:6.119.
                
                The referencing happens through CTS Text Inventory (CTS TI), an XML catalog file. There Janus Pannonius' text is described by the following fragment:
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                The TEI XML guidelines allow multiple ways of marking up text structures (Schmidt, 2014). Therefore the most important sections in the fragment above are the XPaths which describe locations of individual books and linesin our editions. Books and lines can be encoded in a different way, represented by different XML elements, but through CTS URNs we are still able to connect the corresponding points, just as we refer to the same verse in the 
                    Iliad-as-work regardless of the fact that it is realised (printed or written) on different pages in different editions (Manifestation Product Types).
                
                Our descriptions have also to be checked for correctness. Here the Homer Multitext project also can help; they have developed an excellent system for automated validation of editorial descriptions. We are adapting this to ensure that everything works in CroALa CTS, that no errors are introduced during the encoding process.Validation happens in a Virtual Machine which ensures that the entire process is replicable (Smith, 2015). But, since faithful replication of the process will only faithfully replicate systematic errors, a validation system was developed to assess our work in a different method, independent of how it was created.
                The system first tokenizes all of the words. 
                    Parsley, a parsing machine for Latin morphology (Schmidt, 2015), checks that all tokens are valid Latin forms. Personal and geographic named entities do not parse automatically, so the system analyzes these separately. Named entities are checked for consistent markup and for compliance with our authority lists. The tokens that do not parse at either of these stages are analyzed by a researcher. 
                
                What has been validated has also to be verified as correct; our validation system ensures that all the tokens are acceptable Latin forms, but researchers have to ultimately decide whether the forms were correctly used. 
                Forms that are identified as being invalid are analyzed further for encoding errors, incorrect entries, problems with the parsing machine. One of recurring problems is that neo-Latin vocabulary is missing from the classical Latin dictionary used by the parser, so new words should be added to the lexicon. Even more numerous are neo-Latin forms that orthographically (sometimes morphologically too) violate classical Latin rules. Such forms have to be matched with the classical equivalents so that they can be accepted when the machine comes across these forms again. A similar approach would be required for all editions in which language differs markedly from the standard modern variant - e. g. for the Early Modern English as used in Shakespeare.
                Once we have a text referenced by canonical URNs and tested as validated and verified CTS, we can serve the URNs and retrieve them from wherever we want. Connecting different editions - for example, linking Croatian Latin translations of Homer to editions of manuscripts prepared by the Homer Multitext project - is then a question of aligning the two sets of URNs. These aligned sets will enable us later, for example, to display in parallel the texts served behind each of them.
                Though clear and simple in principle, the actual application of CTS to CroALa texts opened up a series of practical questions with certain theoretical implications. We mention only two.
                First, a text and its translation are not always in a 1 : 1 relationship. A verse of the original can be rendered by verse and a half, or by a half verse, in the translation; a description ("Peleiades") can be glossed ("Achilles"). This had to be taken into account during the process of editorial verification. We had to introduce additional checks for translation alignments and establish a procedure for marking places where translation "shifts" equivalents forward or back in the textual structure (Latin equivalent of a Greek word appears elsewhere in the sentence, and therefore may appear in a different line).
                Second, Croatian Latin translations of the 
                    Iliad are expressions of the Homeric work, but at the same time they themselves are of potential interest as authorial works, and they themselves exist in multiple manifestations (Kunić's translation was published in Rome 1776, Venice 1784, Vienna 1784, Firenze 1831 and 1838). To enable detailed scholarly study of translation as a work, the system has to take into account this additional level of multiplicity too: not only 
                    Homer Multitext, but also a 
                    Kunić Multitext (with the same underlying work).
                
                Among the grand visions of digital humanities there is a dream of a world - or a space - in which different digital editions, carefully prepared, annotated and interpreted, mesh easily together, thus providing an especially rich and detailed groundwork for further annotations and interpretations. This space of interchangeability is today attained only rarely and with difficulty. The level of difficulty can be significantly lowered, as shown by CroALa's successful implementation of CTS and its automated validation and verification processes. A further step towards interchangeability will be wider acceptance of a digital canonical reference system such as CTS. For this to happen, a series of applications and "recipes" for specific usage cases is needed. We hope to have offered one such recipe here.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blackwell, C. and Smith, N. (2014). Homer Multitext. 
                        Canonical Text Services protocol specification
                         (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Crane, G., Beaulieu, M.-C., Almas, B., Babeu, A. and Cerrato, L. (1987-). 
                        Perseus Digital Library (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Dué, C. and Ebbott, M. (2015). The Homer Multitext project (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        International Working Group on FRBR and CIDOC CRM Harmonisation (2015). 
                        Definition of Object-Oriented FRBR (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Jovanović, N., Haskell, Y., Lonza, N., Lučin, B., Marinova, E., Novaković, D. and Tunberg, T. O. (2009-). 
                        CroALa: Croatiae auctores Latini (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, D. (2014). Towards an Interoperable Digital Scholarly Edition. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(Issue 7) doi:10.4000/jtei.979. (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, H. (2015). goldibex/parsley-core 
                        GitHub (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Smith, N. (2015). homermultitext/vm2015 
                        GitHub (accessed 4 March 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                Mastering a complete workflow for creating editions when the editor works alone, or has no access to technologists, has proven challenging, leading to the creation and adoption of tools that make the final product conform to pre-determined models (Burnard et al., 2006; Pierazzo, 2015). Although having access to such tools can be very salutary in many cases, the need remains for independent scholars to be able to create their own editions based on unique visions, without recourse to grants or large teams. One of the main challenges we face to achieve these goals is our limited ability to train humanities students in the span of a semester the full stack of skills they would need in order to create digital editions according to standards (MLA, 2011). We believe that by adopting a minimal computing (
                    /) approach, we can achieve such a goal.
                
                This paper reports on a classroom experiment done during a course entitled  Creating a Minimal Edition: From the Manuscript to the Web, that tries to address these issues in context. The main goal of the course is to introduce students to textual scholarship in general, and to digital scholarly editing in particular (Fraistat & Flanders, 2013). Our core goal is to build a TEI-to-Jekyll workflow and a simple customizable web template to be used for small digital editions, and release it openly to scholars. Underneath our prototype, we adopt the principles of minimal computing. By minimal we understand computing done under a set of significant constraints, where we reduce the stack to the minimum needed technology to accomplish a scholarly need: in this case to produce a critical digital edition that meets standards and teach the necessary skills to students within the course of one semester. 
                We use our created template to publish a small-scale digital scholarly edition online of one of the most remarkable Spanish literary works, the 
                    Lazarillo de Tormes (16th century). The course is conceived as a combination between collaborative research and digital humanities design. At all steps of the process, instructors and students work together toward the completion of the digital edition. The course is divided into lectures and recitation sessions. The first is an opportunity for students to become familiar with central ideas in textual scholarship, while focusing on the textual situation of the Lazarillo; the second allow us to put those ideas into practice in the creation of the digital edition.
                
                Underneath our proposal, there are three main theoretical axes of different nature: ethical, technological, and scholarly. 
                First, we would like to underscore some issues related to execution and interfaces. Well funded research projects may afford IT services or the creation of standalone systems or "workstations" to build and publish their edition, but this is the best case scenario which sometimes is made publicly available; but not always these interfaces are flexible enough and not usable by people with few IT knowledge. Digital scholarly edition, and specially workflow and interfaces, need to be more diffused, more used, easier to build and less expensive, inspired in what has been called the "bricks approach" (Pierazzo, 2015: 116-117). Hence, the need to offer a simple framework that begins on an XML-TEI dataset and ends in a minimal interface, customizable by the user. 
                Second, and tightly connected with the ethical component, is the relevance of technological choices, which deals with two main issues: the use of available standards and the open source ethos. We believe that digital scholarly edition, and DH in general, must rely on free and standards web services and technologies. Furthermore, we align our project on what it has been called “open source critical edition” (Bodard and Garcés, 2009) underscoring the need to make available all the datasets and scripts involved in the project. 
                Third, we are aware that for our show-case scenario the term “scholarly edition” is somewhat simplified. For our goal we understand “scholarly” in a large sense where the scholarly paradigm and a critical approach to primary sources are applied. Our work consists on the critical representation of one historical document, taking into consideration the full textual tradition (4 printed editions from the 16th century) of the literary work. The scholarly paradigm is obviously rethought from the digital perspective, giving special attention to execution and workflow, that is to say, giving room to understand concepts such as modeling and presentation. Furthermore, we wish to insist in two other main issues connected with DH discussions. On one hand, the fact that scholars need to take full control of their digital tools, as well as understand digital methods from their hermeneutical point of view. On the other one, we explore complex issues such as collaboration and authorship, in our case, wagering for a GitHub proposal. 
            
            
                Description of the Course
                The course is divided into six main units and is conceived as a collaborative project, where each student is in charge of a main chapter of the literary work. 
                First, we offer a general introduction to textual scholarship and text editing, paying attention to scholarly editing trends from the 19th century to the present, through a selection of core readings in the field. We also offer a theoretical framework for digital editions, specifically to help students understand how digital editions differ from their traditional counterparts. Afterwards, students are introduced to Github and acquire the methodology needed to work collaboratively. The goal of these two sessions is to create a collaborative and robust work environment, and to ensure that all students gather the basic skills to become fully involved. In Unit 2, we present the primary source: the historical context, the argument, the literary relevance and the text of the 
                    The Life of Lazarillo de Tormes and of His Fortunes and Adversities. This work, published in 1554, is one of the first novellas in Iberian literature and a classic in the picaresque Spanish tradition. We then start planning the digital scholarly edition and its workflow. Students gather the basic approaches to the data modeling and conceptualize the text as a document object, starting from the analysis of the primary source. The next Unit is devoted to the eXtensible Markup Language and the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative. Students gather the basic principles of the Extensible Markup Language, following the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative. We also offer a general overview of the concepts of schemas (RelaxNG) and ODD documents. Each student is in charge of pursuing a textual encoding, marking up the main features: structural parts, typographic features, dates, place, and person names. They also become aware of the process of quality assurance of the text encoding of their peers.
                
                The next steps of the process consists, on the one hand, in introducing students to the basics of Markdown, HTML and CSS, giving students the opportunity to think about data transformation, and to participate in the design and the final presentation format of the edition. On the other, we focus on inputs and outputs and textual migrations. The central node is the eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformation, and the conversions from text encoding (XML-TEI) to the web (Markdown/HTML). 
                The last part of the course is devoted to web infrastructure and web publication. Students learn how to build a static website with Jekyll, dealing with the different technologies needed (HTML, CSS, Liquid, Markdown), and how to transfer their work from GitHub to GitHub Pages. We conclude with a minimal introduction to JavaScript, meant to introduce students to simple document interface: in this case the manipulation of the dates, places and person names marked up in the TEI. 
                As learning goals, we want our students to be able to participate in an authentic research and editing project, engaging in all steps of the process; to become aware of the challenges and opportunities of the digital medium for scholarly research and editing. We aim to teach how to apply different methods and technologies, to grasp the value of standards, and to understand data modeling and transformation from a theoretical as well as a practical perspective (Rehbein & Fritze, 2012). As a “technical” outcome, we seek to offer the basic skills to work independently in several languages (XML – TEI, HTML and CSS, XSLT, Markdown, Liquid, JavaScript), and a basic understanding of infrastructure (Jekyll, GitHub, Github Pages). Because this course is meant for students of Spanish as well, our program allows students to improve their Spanish language skills while engaging in public-facing, task-driven scholarship.
                Our presentation will give us the opportunity to present the online version of the course, the results of the collaborative edition created along the 27 lectures of the semester, and, finally, to release the first prototype for minimal editions as a Jekyll template, in the hope that can be useful to other DH courses and projects. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                         Bodard, G., Garcés, J. (2009). Open Source Critical Editions: A Rationale.
                        Text Editing, Print and the Digital World. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 83-98.
                    
                    
                         Burnard, L., O’Brien O’Keeffe, K. and Unsworth, J. (2006). 
                        Electronic Textual Editing. New York: Modern Language Association of America.
                    
                    
                         Fraistat, N., Flanders, J. (2013). 
                        The Cambridge Companion to Textual Scholarship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    Modern Language Association (2011). 
                        Guidelines for Editors of Scholarly Editions.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing. Theories, Models and Methods, Aldershot: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Rehbein, M. and Fritze, Ch. (2012). Hands-on Teaching Digital Humanities: A Didactic Analysis of a Summer School Course on Digital Editing. 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy. Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers, pp. 47-78.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            This short paper describes the initial phases of a Marie Curie Research Project, 
                Word Formation Latin (WFL), developed at the Centro Interdisciplinare di Ricerche per la Computerizzazione dei Segni dell’Espressione (CIRCSE), at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy. The project consists in the compilation of a derivational morphological dictionary of the Latin language, which connects lexical elements on the basis of wordformation rules, through the use of computational linguistic methods. 
            
            In the past two decades there has been a considerable increase in the creation of computational language resources for the investigation of classical languages, which have updated the state of the art almost to the same level as that of the resources currently available for modern languages. 
            However, among the existing language resources, we currently lack, for Latin, a morphological derivational dictionary that connects lexical elements on the basis of Word Formation Rules
                
                     Word formation is the creation of a new word from either the combination of two other words (
                        dish-washer, compounding) or of adding one of more affixes to an existing word (
                        wash-er, derivation), or from a part of speech change (
                        clean, verb vs. 
                        clean, adjective). 
                    
                 (WFRs).
            
            A first attempt at constructing a lexicon based on wordformation for Latin was made by Marco Passarotti and Francesco Mambrini in 2012 (Passarotti & Mambrini, 2012). The WFL project has been awarded funding to expand on these efforts.
            The project has three main aims: 
            
                the enrichment of an existing morphological analyser for the Latin language, LEMLAT (Passarotti, 2004), with wordformation information, and the integration of data within a interface similar to Word Manager (Domenig & ten Hacken, 1992), which has been already applied to other modern languages (English, German, Italian);
                the integration of the information extracted from the resulting derivational morphological dictionary into the morphological layer of annotation the 
                    Index Thomisticus Treebank (IT-TB); 
                    
                         The 
                            Index Thomisticus (IT) is considered a pathfinder in digital humanities; started by Padre Roberto Busa in 1949. It is a database retaining the 
                            opera omnia by Thomas Aquinas (118 texts), plus works by other 61 authors related to Thomas (61 texts). The size of the corpus is around 11 million tokens (150.000 types; 20.000 lemmas). The corpus is fully lemmatised and morphologically tagged. The IT-TB, based at CIRCSE, is the syntactically annotated portion of the IT, and it contains around 300.000 tokens for 15.000 syntactically parsed sentences.
                        
                    
                
                offering the results of the project work via a user-friendly project website which will display the derivational morphological dictionary through a web based search interface. This will allow the lexicon to be accessed: 
                    
                        by single lexical entry, which will show both the ancestors and their derived words;
                        by morphological family; 
                            
                                 By “morphological family” we mean the set of lemmas morphologically derived from one common ancestor-lemma
                            
                        
                        by WFR.
                    
                
            
            The project relies on the automatic realisation of the linguistic resource both at the level of WFRs creation and to their application on the lexical items included in the morphological analyser LEMLAT. The LEMLAT lexical basis contains around 40.000 lemmas from three major Latin dictionaries ( Georges, 1913-1918; Gradenwitz, 1904; Glare, 1982). We conceived WFRs according to the so-called Item-and-Arrangement model (IA), which follows a morpheme-based approach to morphology. In IA, word forms are analysed as arrangement of morphemes according to the following three axioms:
            
                Roots and affixes have the same status of morphemes (Baudoin’s single morpheme hypothesis);
                They are dualistic, as they have both a form and a meaning (Bloomfield’s sign base morpheme hypothesis);
                They are stored in the lexicon (Bloomfield’s lexical morpheme hypothesis).
            
            The aim is to assign a WFR to each morphologically complex lemma (i.e. one morphologically derived from another lemma) and to link each complex lemma to its ancestor. The data are organised and presented according to a system similar to that for morphological dictionaries devised by Word Manager, in which relations between the members of the same morphological family are represented in a tree-graph. 
            WFRs are grouped in two classes: 1. compounding; 2. derivational. Derivational rules are divided in two categories: a. affixal (in its turn split into prefixal and suffixal), and b. conversive, a derivation process that does not imply any affix; these are manually defined.
            This happens in two steps:
            1. Phase A: Semi-automatic data-driven finding of WFRs: 
            
                lemmas are divided into two classes, according to their part of speech and inflectional category; 
                two lists are produced: an 
                    incipitarium and an 
                    explicitarium, where lemmas are ordered according to a traditional alphabetical order, or to a right-to-left alphabetical order respectively; 
                
                prefixal and suffixal rules are created from the two lists respectively, part of speech and inflectional category of the lemma(s) are manually assigned to each candidate rule.
            
            2. Phase B: Application (and evaluation) of the WFRs resulting from Phase A, and creation of the “morphological families”. New rules are added in this phase by confrontation with data. Phase B is divided into two subtasks:
            
                each complex lemma is assigned a WFR. This task is performed by assigning in semi-automatic fashion to each (possibly) complex lemma its most likely WFR according to the PoS of the lemma and the string of its initial (prefixal rules) and final (suffixal rules) characters;
                morphological families are built.
            
            All those (morphologically simple, or complex
                
                     WFRs do not take in input morphologically simple lemmas only, but also complex ones. For example, the noun 
                        excubatio derives by suffixation from the verb 
                        excubo, which is morphologically complex, as it is derived (by prefixation) from the verb 
                        cubo.
                    
                ) lemmas that share the same invariable part are automatically assigned to the same morphological family.
            
            Finally, the members of each family are automatically linked to each other according to their PoS, inflectional category and affixes by means of the WFR assignment (2.a). The morphologically simple (i.e. not derived) lemma member is assigned the role of ancestor of the family.
            Phase A finds the WFR, Phase B applies the WFR to data, obtaining input and output lemmas for each WFR. 
            Phase A is not to be considered exhaustive, but exploratory: the recall of WFR identified in Phase A is not 100%. The aim in the first phase of the project is to refine the data by tagging the highest number of lexemes using data driven WFRs, which will be increasingly complex, covering most well known wordformation issues.
                
                     i.e. stem change featuring internal vowel alternation (
                        fac.io, 
                        per-fic-io), assimilation of prefix (
                        fer-o > 
                        *ob-fer-o > 
                        of-fer-o), unclear segmentation (
                        cre-a-tor or 
                        cre-at-or?), etc.
                    
                 Given the high number of homographs in Latin, this automatic procedure is regarded as non-ultimate for building the morphological families. However, it is helpful as it provides filtered data that must be checked manually.
            
            This is why we need Phase B during which, by comparison with the evidence given by data, we can identify the rules that were missed in phase A. Manual hard-coding will be necessary for those lemmas produced by poorly productive WFRs, or morphotactically obscure wordformation processes. Evaluation of the language resource is performed by manual checking data organised into homogeneous groups based on WFRs (coverage of rules) and stemming (coverage of morphological families). Precision and recall are used as evaluation metrics in order to calculate the rate of positive and negative cases.
            To date, 118 WFRs have been found automatically. Around 50 of these rules, those showing a certain degree of morphological transparency, hence easier to obtain through the automatic finding in the input-output relation (e.g. derivational, verb-to-verb, prefixal, etc.), have been added to a SQL database, and resulted in the tagging of some 9000 morphologically complex lexemes.
            The final resource will be both a standalone dictionary accessible through its own website, and interconnected with the 
                Index Thomisticus. 
            
            The integration with the IT-TB will be operated through the embedding of the dictionary data within the morphological layer of annotation of the treebank, using TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) P5 conformant XML encoding to favour data exchange and linking to other lexical resources. The data resulting from the dictionary, once encoded in XML, will be applied to the IT-TB data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Busa, R. (1988). 
                        Totius latinitatis lemmata. Milano: Istituto Lombardo - Accademia di Scienze e Lettere.
                    
                    
                        Domenig, M. & ten Hacken, P. (1992). 
                        Word Manager: A system for morphological dictionaries. Hildesheim: Olms.
                    
                    
                        Forcellini, A. (1771). 
                        Totius Latinitatis lexicon, consilio et cura Jacobi Facciolati opera et studio Aegidii Forcellini, lucubratum. Patavii: typis Seminarii, 4 voll.
                    
                    
                        Georges, K. E. (1913-1918). 
                        Ausführliches Lateinisch-Deutsches Handwörterbuch. Hannover: Hahn.
                    
                    
                        Glare, P. G. W. (1982). 
                        Oxford Latin Dictionary. Oxford.
                    
                    
                        Gradenwitz, O. (1904).  
                        Laterculi Vocum Latinarum. Leipzig.
                    
                    
                        Index Thomisticus Treebank. http://itreebank.marginalia.it/.
                    
                    
                        LEMLAT. http://www.ilc.cnr.it/lemlat/lemlat/index.html.
                    
                    
                        Lewis, C. T. and Short, C. (1969). 
                        A Latin Dictionary. Oxford: At the Clarendon press.
                    
                    
                        McGillivray, B. and Passarotti, M. (2009). "The Development of the Index Thomisticus Treebank Valency Lexicon". In 
                        Proceedings of LaTeCH-SHELT&R Workshop 2009. Athens, March 30.
                    
                    
                        Passarotti, M. (2004). "Development and perspectives of the Latin morphological analyser LEMLAT". In A. Bozzi, L. Cignoni and J. L. Lebrave (Eds.), 
                        Digital Technology and Philological Disciplines. Linguistica Computazionale, XX-XXI, pp. 397-414.
                    
                    
                        Passarotti, M. and Mambrini, F. (2012). "First Steps towards the Semi-automatic Development of a wordformation-based Lexicon of Latin", In 
                        Proceedings of LREC 2012. Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 852-59.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium, (eds).  
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 2.9.1. 2015-10-15. TEI Consortium. 
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/current/
                         (accessed 22 February 2016).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                How can one virtually ‘circle’ some music notation as one would on a printed score? How can a machine interpret this ‘circling’ to select and retrieve the relevant music notation in digital format? This paper will introduce the concept of addressability for music notation, on the basis of a comparison with textual addressability as defined by Michael Witmore (2010). Additionally, the paper will report on the work of 
                    Enhancing Music notation Addressability (EMA), a NEH-funded one-year project that has developed methods for addressing arbitrary portions of encoded music notation on the web.
                
                Many Digital Humanities projects are concerned with the digitization of cultural objects for varied purposes of study and dissemination. Theorists such as Willard McCarty (2005) and Julia Flanders (2009) have highlighted the fact that digitization involves the creation of a data model of a cultural object, whereby scholarly interpretation and analysis is inevitably included in the model. Editorial projects in literary studies, for example, often model sources by encoding transcription and editorial intervention with the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) format. The ability to identify and name textual structures is a fundamental operation in the creation of such models. Michael Witmore has called text a “massively addressable object” (2010); that is, given certain abstractions and conventions, it is possible to identify areas of a text such as characters, words, as well as chapters or proper names. Reading practices influence and contribute to the development of such conventions and abstractions, but, Witmore argues, addressability is a textual condition regardless of technology. With digital texts, modes of address become more abstract, so that arbitrary taxonomies can be identified as well as more established ones. To exemplify a more abstract mode of address, Witmore suggests items “identified as a ‘History’ by Heminges and Condell in the First Folio”. This enhanced addressability available in a digital context is the engine for textual analysis and scholarly discourse about digital text.
                This idea of addressability is arguably applicable to many more kinds of “text”, including music notation; indeed, addressing units of music notation (such as measures, notes, and phrases) has long been a powerful instrument in musicology for both analysis and historical narrative.
                     When talking about music in general, it is important to say that addressing written music notation is not the only instrument of the musicologist. Music exists on several domains besides the written or "graphemic" one, each addressable in its own way (see Babbitt 1965). For the purpose of this paper, we focus on written Western music notation, because it shares features with written language and for its prominent role in musicological discourse. Music notation, however, is more complicated to represent digitally than text. Human-computer interaction has since its early days been built around the concept of character and line, which makes dealing with “plain” text a fairly straightforward matter for many basic operations; counting the number of characters in a given plain text document is trivial in any digital environment.
                     Modern computing systems are able to support complex ancient and modern writing systems, including those requiring right-to-left strings and compound symbols. The Unicode Consortium has been at the forefront of the internationalization of computing systems. Nonetheless, computationally speaking, a “string” of text remains a sequence of characters even in more complex representations. Indeed, many compound Unicode characters still retain sequentiality, i.e. one component comes after the other and the compound symbol only makes sense if they are in the correct order. Music notation is not a string of text; therefore this is not possible. Music notation, on the other hand, requires substantial computational modelling even for the simplest musical text before any further operation is possible. This is particularly evident when music notation is represented with markup, which implies a system based on characters and lines. There are many different ways of representing a single note; some aspects are common to all representation systems, such as information about pitch and duration, but some systems will prioritize certain aspects over others. To give a simple example, one system may represent beams (ligatures between flagged notes, usually shorter in duration), while others may ignore them altogether.
                     By grouping notes together, beams provide important—but somewhat secondary to pitch and duration—information to the reader of a music score, such as a performer, a musicologist, or an algorithm.
                
                Nonetheless, there are simple units that are typically represented by all music notation systems for common western music notation, such as measure, staff (or instrument), and beat. The EMA project, therefore, developed a URI scheme and an Application Programming Interface (API) to make it possible to target music notation resources on the web regardless of their format. Such a scheme may facilitate (and in some cases enable) a number of activities around music notation documents published on the web. The following table gives a few basic examples of how an implementation of the URI scheme could be useful to musicological research:
                
                    
                        Scholarly
                        Visual
                        Procedural
                    
                    
                        
                            Analysis: being able to address components of music notation for analytical purposes. Example: precisely identify start and end of a pedal tone in Bach’s 
                            Prelude no. 6 in D Minor, BWV 851.
                        
                        
                            Rendering: rendering music notation in an interactive environment such as a browser or a tablet requires the ability to cut up a large music document. For example to show only the number of measures that fit in a given space.
                        
                        
                            Processing: extracted portions of music notation can be passed on to another process. For example, given the MEI encoding of the Overture to Mozart’s 
                            Don 
                            Giovanni, extract the string instrument parts and send them to another program that will return an harmonic analysis.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Citation: quote a passage from an encoded music notation file. For example the timpani in the opening bars of the Overture to Mozart’s Don Giovanni.
                        
                        
                            Highlighting: address a segment of music notation to highlight it in a visual context (e.g. with color).
                        
                        
                    
                
                The EMA project has particularly focused on facilitating citation and attribution of credit, as is discussed in the “Evaluation” section below.
            
            
                A brief overview of the specification
                The specification was created to provide a web-friendly mechanism for addressing specific portions of music notation in digital format. This is not unlike the APIs often provided by image servers for retrieving specific portions of an image. Such servers typically operate on a given large image ﬁle and are able to return different zoom levels and coordinate spaces. The International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) has recently created an API to generalize interaction with image providers, so that it can be implemented across multiple servers and digital libraries. IIIF was used as a model for the Music Addressability API created for EMA and briefly described here.
                Consider the following example,
                     Taken from 
                        Du Chemin:
                         Lost Voices project, at 
                        http://digitalduchemin.org.
                     and the notation highlighted in the boxes:
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                The highlighted notation occurs between measure 38 and 39, on the first and third staves (labelled 
                    Superius and 
                    Tenor — this is a renaissance choral piece). Measure 38, however, is not considered in full, but only starting from the third beat. This selection can be expressed according to a URI syntax:
                
                /{identifier}/{measures}/{staves}/{beats}/
                /dc0519.mei/38-39/1,3/@3-3
                The measure is expressed as a range (38-39), staves can be selected through a range or separately with a comma (1,3), and the beats are always relative to their measure, so @3-3 means the third beat of the starting measure to the third beat of the ending measure.
                    A complete description of the URI scheme and the API is available at: . In this specification the beat is the primary driver of the selection: it allows for precise addressability of contiguous as well as non-contiguous areas.
                
                Music notation, however, occasionally breaks rules in favor of flexibility. Cadenzas, for example, are ornamental passages of an improvisational nature that can be written out with notation that disregards a measure’s beat, making it impossible to address subsets of the cadenza wit the syntax discussed above. While EMA’s URI scheme offers the granularity sufficient to address the vast majority of western music notation, a necessary future improvement on the API is, indeed, an extension that would make it possible to address music notation with more flexible beat.
            
            
                Evaluation
                In order to evaluate the specification, EMA has created an implementation of the API as a web service. While the URI specification can be absolute from a specific representation, the implementation must know how to operate on specific formats. The web service that we coded operates on the The Music Encoding Initiative format and is called Open MEI Addressability Service (Omas).
                     A demo is available at 
                        .
                     Omas interprets a conformant URI, retrieves the specified MEI resource, applies the selection, and returns it. An additional parameter on the URI can be used to determine how “complete” the retrieved selection should be (whether it should, for example, include time and key signatures, etc.).
                
                
                    
                        
                    Similarly to an image server, Omas assumes that the information specified by the URL can be retrieved in the target MEI file. If requested, the web service can return metadata information about an MEI file, such as number of measures, staves, beats and their changes throughout the document. This can be used to facilitate the creation of URL requests able to return the selection required.
                
                Finally, EMA partnered with the 
                    Du Chemin: 
                    Lost Voices project to model a number of micro-analyses addressing music notation from their existing collection of MEI documents. In a second phase of the project, the analyses have been re-modeled as Linked Open Data according to the Nanopublication guidelines.
                     Nanopublication is an ontology for publishing scientific data: 
                        http://nanopub.org. The Nanopublication server for 
                        Du Chemin: Lost Voices is available at: 
                        .
                     Each EMA nanopublication addresses an arbitrary portion of music notation using the URL specification described here. Omas operates as a web service to connect the nanopublications with the collection of MEI files in 
                    Du Chemin.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Babbit, M. (1965). The use of computers in musicological research. 
                        Perspectives of New Music, 3(2): pp. 74–83.
                    
                    
                        Flanders, J. (2009). Data and Wisdom: Electronic Editing and the Quantiﬁcation of Knowledge. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(1): pp. 53–62.
                    
                    
                        McCarty, W. (2005). Chapter 1 - Modelling. 
                        Humanities Computing, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        Witmore, M. (2010). 
                        Text: A Massively Addressable Object. 
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction 
                The established pattern for a scholarly digital edition today is the website, which in many cases has a unique and well thought out user interface. It concentrates all information pertaining to the topic, but allows little interaction of the reader with the texts beyond what has been designed into the user interface by the developers of the site. 
                Although there are also many efforts to go beyond this and experiment with new forms of reading in the digital age, for example protocols for sharing annotations or reading communities, they have not yet reached a stage where they would be available to mainstream researchers. 
                In contrast to the polished and well advertised flagship editions of digital projects at prestigious institutions, there is also a continuing trend of making the source texts that feed into digital editions available in a way that not only allows, but actively encourages tinkering with the texts. The distribution for this latter type of texts is frequently on the site github.com, which is the world largest repository for software development 
                    The site claims: "GitHub is where people build software. More than 11 million people use GitHub to discover, fork, and contribute to over 28 million projects." (
                        http://www.github.com, accessed 2016-03-02).
                    , but as a free site for data sharing with collaborative editing it is becoming more popular for other purposes as well.
                
                Some of the large scale text projects using Github in this way include the 
                    Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association (CBETA) 
                    
                         (accessed 2016-03-02), more than 4000 Chinese Buddhist texts in TEI P5 markup.
                    , 
                    gitenberg
                    
                         (accessed 2016-03-02); a project that uploaded more than 40000 electronic texts from the Gutenberg.org project to make it possible to improve the texts that are otherwise distributed without the possibility for the readers to provide corrections.
                     and 
                    EEBO-TCP
                    
                         (accessed 2016-03-02), which contains 25000 texts released to the public on Jan. 1, 2015.
                     to name just a few.
                
                The presentation proposed here reports on the 
                    Kanseki Repository, a project that tries to establish a link between these two different types of text dissemination and through this combination to achieve the best of the two worlds: The texts can still be presented through a sophisticated web interface, which uses Github as a backend storage and reads the texts from there for presentation to the user. These texts can be forked (that is, cloned and copied to the user's account) which makes it possible for the user to revise or annotate them. The system is set up in a way that it will show this private copy of the text if configured so by the user.
                
            
            
                Methodological considerations 
                The goal here is not simply to upload as many texts at possible to public archives, but rather to develop a platform that allows the basic tenets of scholarly editing to co-exist and thrieve with the possibilities and affordances of the digital medium. It is therefore of paramount importance, to consider the requirements as voiced from practioners of scholarly editing and implement them as transparently as possible. 
                
                    Record and interpretation 
                    In a seminal article, the Swiss scholar Hans Zeller (1995) emphasised the fact that all scholarly editing should make a clear distinction between the record of what is transmitted and the scholarly interpretation thereof. While this distinction is blurry at times, it has informed the design of the 
                        Kanseki Repository, which arranges the editions of a text it represents into those that strive to faithfully reproduce a text according to some textual witness ('record') and those that critically consider the content and make alteration to the text by adding punctuation, normalizing characters, collating from other evidence etc. ('interpretation').
                    
                
                
                    Additional requirements 
                    Peter Shillingsburg (2015) outlines the following requirements of a digital edition (slightly edited for clarity): 
                    a. Digitize images of all the documents. That will make it possible, from anywhere in the world, to see any document side-by-side with any other document without traveling from Tokyo to Marburg and New York. 
                    b. Prepare a table of variants to show how all the documentary texts differ from one another. 
                    c. Write a textual history that explains the relationships among the variant documents and explains why we should care–why it is important to know. 
                    d. Transcribe at least one of the documents so that the variants list can be more easily used. Or transcribe all the documents so that readers can select and read any one. Transcribing all the documents will also make machine collation possible. 
                    e. Edit one of the transcriptions to correct obvious errors. This will preserve the text as a historical documentary text but will help readers avoid the distractions caused by scribal or compositorial errors. 
                    The architecture developed in this project strives to implement as much of this as seems feasible within the limits of the current funding and other constraints. The components will be further described below. 
                
            
            
                Main components of the project architecture
                The architecture of the project consists conceptually of two parts: (1) the text repository and (2) clients accessing this repository. Of these clients there are currently two, both developed within the project. 
                
                    Backend: Repository of texts: github.com/kanripo 
                    Since every text has its own unique history and witnesses, every text is allocated to its own repository (in the technical sense). These repositories, currently more than 9000, are are organized according to the traditional Chinese cataloging principles and kept under the Github account @kanripo. Since the texts are publicly accessible, they can be freely downloaded and cloned even without ever touching the client interfaces. Due to the large number of texts and the Github interface, which seems foreign and intimidating to most readers of classical Chinese texts, special clients cover most needs in interfacing with the texts. 
                
                
                    Client interfaces 
                    
                        Web interface at www.kanripo.org 
                        This website provides access to the texts, including full-text search, display of transcribed text and facsimile(s) of different editions. Users can log in using their Github credentials and get access to more advanced functions such as selecting lists of text of special interest, advanced sorting functions by text category or date as well as cloning of texts to the Github user account and editing on site. The site went into testing mode in October 2015 and a first public release has taken place in March 2016.
                    
                    
                        Mandoku, a stand alone tool for further immersive reading and study 
                        In addition to the website, an Emacs module called Mandoku (see Wittern, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2014b) has been developed (as an extension to Orgmode, see Domnik et al., 2015), that uses the API of the website to provide the same search functions, but clones the texts of interest to the user to her local machine, thus providing advanced editing possibilities and offline access.
                    
                
            
            
                Towards a platform for text-based Chinese studies 
                All modes of interaction described above are based on the distributed version control system git, using the Github site as a 'cloud storage'. However, in addition to providing storage, Github also provides a feedback mechanism through "pull-requests", where users can flag corrections to a text for the @kanripo editors to consider for inclusion in the canonical version, thus making it available to all users.
                The model outlined here is extensible and allows other developers of websites related to Chinese studies to access the same texts, and provide specialized services to the user, for example by enhancing the text through NLP processing. These enhanced versions can be saved ("committed" in git language) in the same way to the users account and are then also visible to the client programs described here.
                This will open the door to a open platform of texts for Chinese studies, where the texts of interest to the users form the center of a digital archive, with different services and analytical tools interacting and enhancing it. The user, who makes a considerable investment in time and effort when close reading, researching, translating and annotating the text, never loses control of the text and does not need to worry about losing access to it when one of the websites goes offline.
                By providing versioned access to the texts in question, it is also possible to make any analytical results reported in research publications reproducible (Rawal, 2015) by indicating the additional tools and processes needed, ideally also in a Github repository in the same ecosystem. 
                The aim is not just to provide a static, completed, definitive edition of a text, but as fertile a ground as possible for the interaction between the text and its readers, hopefully improving both through this process. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Domnik, C. et al. (2015). Org mode for Emacs — Your Life in Plain Text, at http://orgmode.org (accessed 2016-03-02).
                    Rawal, V. (2015). Reproducible Research Papers using Org-mode and R: A Guide, at  (accessed 2016-03-02).
                    Shillingsburg, P. (2015). Global Textual Scholarship: An American View, paper delivered at a symposium on textual studies in Japan available online at  (accessed 2016-03-02).
                    Wittern, C. (2012). Text Representation and Interchange in the Digital Age, paper delivered at Annual conference of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities 2012 at University of Tokyo, Sep. 15-17, 2012. 
                    Wittern, C. (2013). Beyond TEI: Returning the Text to the Reader. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], 2013, 4. () (accessed 2016-03-02).
                    Wittern, C. (2014a). Kanripo and Mandoku: Tools for git-based distributed repositories for premodern Chinese texts. In Digital Humanities 2014 Book of Abstracts, pp. 408-409.
                    Wittern, C. (2014b). Conventions for a repository of premodern Chinese texts. In: 東洋学へのコンピュータ利用第２５回セミナー, ２０１４年３月１５日, p. 73-88. 
                    Zeller, H. (1995). Befund und Deutung - Interpretation und Dokumentation als Ziel und Methode der Edition. In: Martens, G. and Zeller, H. (ed.), Texte und Varianten : Probleme ihrer Edition und Interpretation. München, pp. 45-89, translated as Record and Interpretation: Analysis and Documentation as Goal and Method of Editing. In: Gabler, H., Bornstein, G. and Pierce, G. B. (ed.), Contemporary German Editorial Theory, Ann Arbor, pp. 17-58.
                
            
        
    

        
            One of the most frustrating challenges facing practitioners of Dance is the need to use spoken/written language to reference non-verbal movement. The non-verbal to verbal, and vice versa, is not a challenge isolated to practitioners of dance, but is a frustration shared amongst researchers working to represent movement through technological means. Perhaps it is enough to allow the movement, non-verbal as it is, to speak for itself. Then again, it is often through verbal language that we can make meaning from movement. The intersection of language and movement is the point at which meaning-making enforces the mind-body connection, and it is often how embodied experience is transmitted. Two HCI research projects that have studied this connection between words and movement as a means to the classification and automatic recognition of movement, ARTeFACT and POEME, are now collaborating in a new project: Schrifttanz. 
            ARTeFACT seeks to enable automatic recognition, identification, annotation, and retrieval of movement-based data from streaming video. A lofty goal that has been approached through the generation and analysis of both codified and abstract movement using motion capture data collected at 120 Hz with a Vicon 8-camera motion capture system and a modified Plug-In Gait full body marker set with 38 infrared reflecting markers placed on performers. Early research included instances of iterative choreography created from accelerometer data and descriptions of movement through verbal language by observers (Coartney and Wiesner, 2009). The second phase of the project involved the capture of over 200 codified dance ‘steps’ in various genres, the development of an ontology, and the creation of IDMove, a tool through which we were able to automatically identify and name dance movement from single dancers (Wiesner et al., 2011, 2014). The third phase ventured into the realm of identifying abstract movement that represents the conceptual metaphor CONFLICT, as introduced by Lakoff and Johnson (2003).
            This data, derived from 7 dances about conflict and 19 CONFLICT terms, 396 different sections of movement, each lasting from 2-120 seconds, were captured and categorised. Critical reviews (written) about the dance works were also collected. Through statistical analysis of written and danced texts about CONFLICT, we distinguished body parts frequently used, structural preferences (e.g. stage spacing), and choreographic time spent on the different CONFLICT terms in total and per dance (Wiesner et al., 2015). The findings were validated by a small ‘crowd-sourced’ experiment, and movement ‘rules’ were developed per term in order to enable identification of a concept through movement (terms include victim, attack, surrender, struggle, conquer, hero, victory, survive, etc.) (Wiesner and Stalnaker, 2015). Concordances and collocation studies aided in the investigation of the intersections of words and movement, through the phenomenological approach of dancers’ descriptions and perceptions of viewers in the form of the reviews written by dance critics. A final step has been to align the non-verbal and verbal output with concepts used in Laban Movement Analysis (Body, Effort, Shape, and Space). ARTeFACT has collected a wealth of data from captured movement, from written descriptions and articles based on the dances, and from a broad LMA perspective. In the future, various modes of comparison (e.g. the metaphor PEACE, general language studies, etc.) will further test the system.
            Other researchers have incorporated LMA into their study as a means to identify movement (including studies on rats’ play) (Foroud and Pellis, 2003), yet their focus is on deconstruction. POEME and ARTeFACT coincide in that rather than provide a deconstruction of the movement they both seek to characterise the essence of that movement, an approach inspired by LMA. In the case of ARTeFACT, this is accomplished by describing the relations between parts of a movement that accompany the portrayal of abstract concepts in dance. For POEME, it means finding computational means to summarize a movement experience so that it can be studied as a whole.
            Where ARTeFACT has taken a more actively analytical approach - which resulted in a set of rules that describe stereotyped motion consistent with conceptual metaphors - POEME has taken a more abstract approach, letting data collection from a large number of human responses gradually expose relationships between verse and movement. POEME (Portrayal of Ephemeral Movement Experiences) is a mobile website (http://poeme.iat.sfu.ca) that interprets movement data, captured through a MARG sensor array commonly found in smartphones, into insightful, witty and whimsical poetry. The goals of POEME are twofold: 1) to create a playful game that can inspire movement exploration and 2) to explore new methods of classifying the nuances of bodily experiences through poetry and in turn understand how bodily knowledge can more easily be transmitted and articulated through words.
            POEME, inspired by the Japanese form of poetry known as haika no renga (comic, collaborative poetry), involves the social creation of poems through turn taking (Basho, 1998). Creating these linked poems requires participants to respond to previous stanzas with original verse creating a ‘movement poem’, an interleaved work of verses of words and phrases of movement. We believe, as Herbelot notes, that poetry can be “analysed along the usual dimensions of prosody, syntax, semantics, etc.” (2015). In POEME, each verse follows a rigid template that follows the form of a Parts of Speech Poem (PoSP). This PoSP template allows for very simple production of verses. Each poem begins with a noun, followed by two adjectives, two verbs, and an adverb. POEME composes verses from a large dictionary of English language words, based on measurements taken from prior movement responses. In an initial study, the system was trained by collecting movement responses to human- and machine-composed verses. In a later study, training was focused on two wordlists that depict different themes of movement: the ‘stillness wordlist’ (75 words that relate to little or no dynamic change in movement, e.g. frozen, still, serene); and a ‘motion wordlist’ (250 words related to the mechanics or physics of motion, e.g. buoyant, centripetal, accelerated). Using a Naive Bayes algorithm, POEME can differentiate between stillness and motion with 97% accuracy (Cuykendall et al., 2016).
            Schrifttanz is a unique project that combines the scale of data collection, which POEME offers, with the nuanced language model of ARTeFACT. In Schrifttanz we explore if POEME can recognise conceptual differences in movement, specifically concepts related to CONFLICT, which have been studied in detail during the creation of the ARTeFACT system. Three dancers train the POEME agent by recording movement based on the rules defined in ARTeFACT. These recorded movement sessions are used to model conceptual relations to movement in POEME. This allows us to generalise previous findings from ARTeFACT into a new sensor modality. Also, a Laban/Bartenieff Movement Analysis using the rules-based movements establishes a secondary set of language elements and validates distinctions between movement rules. A computational agent in POEME learns to classify these movements according to the metaphor terms and their associated movements generated by the rules. We then compare POEME’s ability to classify these movement metaphors with existing capabilities in ARTeFACT to validate and generalise previous findings and establish the reliability of the POEME system.
            Concurrently, POEME composes verses comprised of natural language words gathered through the written articles and reviews based on dances representing the conceptual metaphors identified in ARTeFACT. Free form responses to these verses are collected using POEME’s normal training procedure. A machine learning-process associates features of movement with the words. This allows POEME to generate relevant responses to movement. We explore methods of supplementing POEME’s verse generation by including the conceptual metaphor model.
            Words, like movements, have layers of meaning and can be recombined to create a multitude of sentences or sequences that all vary in their underlying meaning. As philosopher Mark Johnson states, “It is true that when we read, we read words. But words have meanings, and meanings go far beyond words” (2008). In Schrifttanz, the same could be said for bodily movement. POEME’s use of current mobile technology and the powerful interactive engine the POEME project has developed enables us to draw from a broader population in order to study and validate the findings of ARTeFACT. Synergistically, ARTeFACT offers to POEME the ability to advance its training mechanisms while it supports the representational nature of the data generated. The two projects are pieces of a puzzle that seeks to establish a better understanding of the relationship between movement and language through the particular and the universal. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Basho, M. (1998).
                         Basho’s Narrow Road: Spring and Autumn Passages. Southbridge, MA: Stone Bridge Press, Inc. 
                    
                    
                        Coartney, J. and Wiesner, S. (2009). Performance as Digital Text: capturing signals and secret messages in the media rich experience. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(2).
                    
                    
                        Cuykendall, S., Soutar-Rau, E. and Schiphorst, T. (February, 2016). POEME: A Poetry Engine Powered by Your Movement. 
                        Proceedings of the TEI'16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, pp. 635-64. ACM.
                    
                    
                        Foroud, A. and Pellis, S.M. (2003). The Development of “Roughness” in the Play Fighting of Rats: A Laban Movement Analysis Perspective. 
                        Dev Psychobiol, 42.
                    
                    
                        Herbelot, A. (2015). The semantics of poetry: A distributional reading. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(4).
                    
                    
                        Johnson, M. (2008).
                         The meaning of the body: Aesthetics of human understanding. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
                    
                    
                        Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (2003 (2nd ed.)).
                         Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
                    
                    
                        Simpson, T., Wiesner, S., and Bennett, B. (2014). Dance Recognition System Using Lower Body Movement. 
                        Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 30(1).
                    
                    
                        Wiesner, S., Bennett, B., and Stalnaker, R. (2011). ARTeFACT Movement Thesaurus. White Paper, NEH Office of Digital Humanities.
                    
                    
                        Wiesner, S. and Stalnaker, R. (2015). Representing Conflict through Dance: using quantitative methods to study choreographic time, stage space, and the body in motion. Dwyer, S., R. Franks and R. Green (Eds) 
                        With(out) Trace: inter-disciplinary investigations into time, space and the body, Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary Press (in press).  
                    
                    
                        Wiesner, S., Stalnaker, R. and Austin, A. (2015). Training the Machine: Movement, Mo-cap, and Metaphor. 
                        Visual Aspects of Performance, Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary Press (in press).
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            When TEI P5 version 2.0 was published in 2011, scholarly editors who are interested in the writing process of literary works gained an important instrument for encoding their genetic Digital Scholarly Editions in TEI-conformant XML. After a long process of deliberation, this version of the TEI’s encoding schema incorporated a large number of modifications proposed by the TEI MS SIG’s Workgroup on Genetic Editions that aimed to re-evaluate the existing TEI tagset in order to facilitate the encoding of genetic phenomena (TEI Consortium, 2011). The Workgroup’s ‘Encoding Model for Genetic Editions’ (2010) reveals two major points of interest in this proposal: (1) the need for the ability to encode features of the document rather than those of the text; and (2) the need for the ability to encode time, sequentiality and writing stages in those documents’ transcriptions. 
            The main answer to the first point of interest was the introduction of the  element (as well as its  children), that was allowed to exist on the same hierarchical level as the , , and  elements. Since the Text Encoding Initiative has (as its name implies) historically favoured ‘text’ over ‘document’, this can be regarded as a powerful statement to the TEI community that documents are as valuable as texts in textual scholarship, and that it should be possible to transcribe them as such. As a result, this encoding model has been gratefully adopted by editors who are taking a more document-oriented approach to the transcription of their materials – like those of the 
                Shelley Godwin Archive (S-GA) for instance (Shelley, 2013). The question remains, however, whether the use of this vocabulary is enough to classify a Digital Scholarly Edition as a ‘genetic’ edition. While the document will take up a central position in any genetic edition, the use of the ‘Genetic Editions’ document-oriented transcription model is not a distinctive feature of the genetic edition in itself. 
            
            The Workgroup’s second point of interest (the encoding of ‘time’) is much more central to genetic criticism. In ‘The Open Space of the Draft Page’, Daniel Ferrer makes a compelling argument that ‘the draft is not a text […], it is a protocol for making a text’, comparing it to a musical score that, though by itself inherently mute, can be interpreted as a set of instructions for a future performance (1998, 261). Likewise, a draft document leaves the writer with a set of instructions that help her transport the unfinished text from one writing stage to the next. The interpretation of these instructions, and of the distinction between different versions and writing stages, is one of the most important tasks of genetic criticism. This is what makes sequentiality such a key aspect of genetic editing: only by interpreting the draft materials as an interconnected sequence of writing acts can we expose the dynamics of the author’s writing process. 
            There are many ways of encoding this sequentiality in the transcriptions of draft materials, across varying levels of granularity. The Workgroup’s suggestion to use the  element to highlight distinct revision campaigns, for instance, effectively differentiates between individual versions of the same text when they are found within a single document. As Pierazzo and André’s ‘Proust Prototype’ demonstrates, this method can even be employed to sequence individual stages within a single version (2012). Going even further, projects like the CD-ROM edition of Willem Elsschot’s 
                Achter de Schermen (2007) and the 
                Melville Electronic Library’s TextLab software (2009-) analyze what John Bryant has called the internal ‘revision sequences’ of individual sentences (Bryant, 2008). The danger of analyzing the writing process on this small a level, however, is that the 
                mechanics of the writing process may start to interfere with the 
                dynamics of that writing process. From a genetic perspective, it is more important to expose the dynamic relation between the textual elements involved in a modification (e.g. ‘this is a substitution’) than the mechanical order in which that modification was made (e.g. ‘first this word was deleted, then this other word was added’). Since the exact writing sequence of such a modification is often impossible to reconstruct with any degree of certainty, consistently analyzing and sequencing all the work’s revision sites may introduce a number of hypotheses in the edition that the editor is not necessarily comfortable with committing to. 
            
            On the other side of the spectrum, analyzing larger macrogenetic processes across documents, the ‘Encoding Model for Genetic Editions’ refers to the TEI’s ‘Graphs, Networks, and Trees’ module, suggesting to encode the relations between documents as the s between s in a  element. Depending on the complexity of the writing process, this  may result in an intricate data structure that can be used to visualize the chronology of the writing process on a highly abstract level. For writing processes that are less complex on the macrogenetic level, however, this model may be too much pain for too little gain, as a manually designed timetable could also do the trick.
            The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’s approach to encoding sequentiality into its genetic Digital Scholarly Edition of Samuel Beckett’s works tries to seek a middle ground between these two extremes: rather than analyzing the way in which individual sentences were written, the BDMP’s encoding model allows the user to discover how those sentences were changed from version to version, across different documents. By linking related semantic clusters on the sentence level across versions, this model allows for the on the fly generation of a chronological overview of all the different versions of each sentence in the corpus. As such, this model combines the ability of comparing different versions of the same work of more macrogenetically oriented approaches with the higher granularity of more microgenetically oriented approaches. 
            After illustrating the challenges and opportunities of these different models of encoding sequentiality in genetic editions, this paper will demonstrate how the BDMP transcribes its genetic materials in view of visualizing their sequentiality in the edition’s ‘Synoptic Sentence View’ (see ‘Figure 1’). The paper will conclude by presenting an example of how this encoding model may also be used to interpret the macrogenetic writing sequence of individual documents by means of an animated visualization of the writing process of the first draft of Beckett’s 
                L’Innommable.
            
            
                
                Figure 1: BDMP Synoptic Sentence View
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Beckett, S. (2011). 
                        Stirrings Still / Soubresauts and Comment Dire / what is the word: a digial genetic edition (Series ‘The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’ module 1), edited by Dirk Van Hulle and Vincent Neyt. Brussels and London, University Press Antwerp (ASP/UPA) and Bloomsbury Academic. http://www.beckettarchive.org (accessed on 12 November 2013). 
                    
                    Beckett S.(2013). 
                        L’Innommable / The Unnamable: a digital genetic edition (Series ‘The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’, module 2). Edited by Dirk Van Hulle, Shane Weller and Vincent Neyt. London and Brussels and London, Bloomsbury and University Press Antwerp (ASP/UPA) and Bloomsbury Academic. http://www.beckettarchive.org (accessed on 9 January 2014).
                    
                    Beckett S. (2015). 
                        Krapp’s Last Tape / La Dernière Bande: a digital genetic edition (Series ‘The Beckett Digital Manuscript Project’ module 3), edited by Dirk Van Hulle and Vincent Neyt. Brussels and London, University Press Antwerp (ASP/UPA) and Bloomsbury Academic. http://www.beckettarchive.org (accessed on 22 October 2015). 
                    
                    Bryant, J.(2008). 
                        Melville Unfolding. Sexuality, Politics, and the Versions of Typee: a Fluid-text Analysis, with an edition of the Typee manuscript. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
                    
                    Elsschot, W. (2007). 
                        Achter de Schermen: elektronische editie . Edited by Dirk Van Hulle, Vincent Neyt, and Peter de Bruijn. Kalmthout: Willem Elsschot Genootschap. CD-ROM. 
                    
                       Ferrer, D. (1998). The open space of the draft page: James Joyce and modern manuscripts. In 
                        The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital Culture, edited by George Bornstein and Theresa Tinkle. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp: 249–67. 
                    
                       Melville, H. (2007). 
                        Moby-Dick, Edited by John Bryant and Haskell Springer, New York: Pearson / Longman. 
                    
                       Proust, M. (2012). 
                        Autour d’une séquence et des notes du Cahier 46: enjeu du codage dans les brouillons de Proust–Around a Sequence and some Notes of Notebook 46: Encoding Issues about Proust’s Drafts. Edited by Elena Pierazzo and Julie André, with technical support from Raffaele Viglianti. London: King’s College London. http://research.cch.kcl.ac.uk/proust_prototype/ (accessed 9 December 2015). 
                    
                       Shelley, M. (2013). Frankenstein. In 
                        The Shelley-Godwin Archive, directed by Elizabeth C. Denliger and Neil Fraistat. http://www.shelleygodwinarchive.org/ contents/frankenstein (accessed on 25 April 2015). 
                    
                       Workgroup on Genetic Editions. (2010). An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions. http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html (accessed on 30 October 2015).
                       TEI Consortium. (2011). P5 version 2.0 release notes. 
                        TEI-C. http://www.tei- c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/readme-2.0.html (accessed on 13 November 2015). 
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                The digital scholarly edition 
                    Stefan George Digital (StGD) is, as its name implies, dedicated to the oeuvre of the German author Stefan George (1868-1933).
                    The digital edition Stefan George Digital is developed in the context of a DiXiT (Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training Network) fellowship, funded under Marie Curie Actions within the European Commission’s 7th Framework Program. As part of my PhD thesis, StGD is concerned with the role and application of typography within the printed collections of George’s poetry and the formal canon, and development of the so-called 
                    Stefan-George-typeface (St-G-typeface). To capture typographical information within the digital edition, I have tested two approaches that this short paper will discuss: the application of a TEI-based model and the development and the integration of an ontology.
                
            
            
                Subject matter 
                More than any other poet in modern German literature, Stefan George (1868-1933) engaged with writing – particularly typography
                    Although the term typography includes both the micro- and macro-design of a print (and both are equally important when engaging with George’s work), this paper will focus solely on the level of micro-typography, by which I mean the level of the choice, design, and arrangement of types.  – in exceptional ways. From 1897 on, he almost completely abandoned his cursive handwriting, using instead highly stylized block letters. From 1904 on, this individual book hand was transferred into metal:
                    It is still unclear who designed the St-G typeface, though it is presumed that both the book designer Melchior Lechter and the printer Otto von Holten were involved. the third edition of 
                    Das Jahr der Seele (The Year of the Soul) was the first volume printed in the so called 
                    St-G-typeface, a Sans-Serif typeface which emerged when the German dispute between Serif and Black Letter typefaces was in full swing. Accordingly, St-G forms a third, alternative typeface, strongly inspired by modern Sans-Serif typefaces such as the Akzidenz-Grotesk of the Berthold foundry. Furthermore, St-G includes letter shapes of Roman and Carolingian scripts as well as of the Greek alphabet (Kurz, 2007). Between its inception and 1927, the 
                    St-G typeface was changed several times, so that it now exists in various versions.
                
            
            
                Problem statement and project goals
                George linked his poetry and his understanding of aesthetics to the design of his books by introducing an individualized typeface. He broke with typographical conventions at the time by applying a Sans-Serif typeface, by basing the design on his own handwriting, and by referencing historical script models in its formal features. The extraordinary design of St-G and the fact that the author himself was involved in its creation calls for special attention in a scholarly edition. However, previous editions neither include a detailed recording of the printed publications nor their typographical analysis. StGD aims to close this gap by providing a digital scholarly edition that allows for exploring typography in George’s poetical work.
                In the first phase of research, I will create a digital edition of printed poetry collections by George. I will develop a model to identify and describe typographical forms as well as to allow for citing them. In a second phase of research I will enhance the corpus of StGD with handwritten drafts, thereby allowing further investigations of the relationship between George’s book hand and the typeface.
                    The second research phase is planned in the context of a five-months visiting fellowship within the DigiPal project at King's College London in Spring 2016. Presumably the initial results of this collaboration will also be presented shortly in this paper.
                
            
            
                The digital edition
                The corpus of StGD consists of 29 printed editions of Stefan George’s poetical works published between 1890 and 1933. Individual works are represented in the corpus variable numbers of times according to their textual and typographical variation.
                     i.e. 
                        The Tapestry of Life (Der Teppich des Lebens) is represented four times (1900, 1901, 1904, 1932), 
                        The Star of the Convenant (Der Stern des Bundes) two times (1914, 1928).
                     Currently all volumes are encoded according to a customized XML/TEI schema and enriched by bibliographical metadata through FRBR (Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records) and METS (Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standards). The full texts will be enhanced by corresponding facsimiles, provided via a IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework) compliant image server using the OpenSeadragon viewer. At the end of the project (April 2017), all contents of the digital edition will be openly available through a Creative Commons (CC-BY-NC-SA) License via the FEDORA-based asset management system GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System)
                    > [all quoted URLs accessed 6.3.2016]
                    .
                
            
            
                Focus of the paper
                Due to the significant role of typography in George’s work, the creation of a digital scholarly edition calls for special attention to graphical features within the documents. This means that typography needs to be classified (i.e. typeface family, font) and its features need to be modelled. The latter includes the description of typographical forms, the identification of stylistic models, and the definition of the semantic function of types in the text. Such typographical enrichment is particularly challenging since neither a commonly shared vocabulary to describe typographical features nor a widely accepted type classification system exists. With regard to this lack of a common standard, StGD has mainly tested out two methods of typographical enrichment which will be discussed in this paper: the application of a TEI based model and the development of an ontology to describe typography.
                
                    Typography and the TEI 
                    A distinction can be drawn between two different purposes of encoding features of writing: representation and information enrichment. The first purpose is covered to a great extent by the TEI gaiji module
                        >
                         and the application of Unicode. Recent editing projects like 
                        Hugo von Montfort: the poetical work
                         Website of the digital edition 
                            Hugo von Montfort: the poetical work: >; example of a XML/TEI encoding: >.
                         demonstrate the potentials of these methods, even if they also show that performing them throughout a complete edition is work-intensive and impractical. Concerning the capture of information about writing, especially about typography, the possibilities offered by the TEI are more restricted. Although the element 
                        >
                         as part of  allows for a description of types in prose, there is no TEI vocabulary to describe types and their features in a formalized way. The paper will report on the benefits and drawbacks of the already implemented elements and attributes and demonstrate their application to material at hand.
                    
                
                
                    Typography and Ontologies
                    There are barely any digital projects dedicated to the modelling of typography. Those that exist include the 
                        Type Repository of Incunabula
                         Website of the 
                            Type Repository of Incunabula: >; example of XML encoding: >
                         at the Berlin State Library, a database which identifies and catalogues incunabula types. It applies a relatively flat project-customized XML schema that describes types in prose. However, the digital modelling of handwriting has made significant progress over the last decade, since Arianna Ciula coined the term “Digital Palaeography” (Ciula, 2005), and the modelling of typography can benefit from this research. Recent research projects like 
                        DigiPal
                         >
                         and 
                        ORIFLAMMS
                         >
                        , though not created in the context of digital scholarly editions, emphasize the strong tendency towards the application of semantic web technologies for the modelling of handwriting (Stokes, 2011 and 2012; Stutzmann, 2013). This paper will discuss their advantages for the identification, formal description and citation of typographical forms. Moreover it will give an overview of the technology or modelling language (i.e. RDFs, UML, SKOS) that might be the most suitable for the purpose of StGD. In this context, the paper will strongly take into account aspects of practicability and re-usability of the model.
                    
                
            
            
                Research questions
                By modelling and analysing typographical information, the digital edition opens up Stefan George’s poetical work for the following research questions: (a) Which formal features does the St-G-typeface contain and what are they referring to?; (b) How has the formal canon of the typeface developed between 1904 and 1927?; (c) Is the development of the book design across George’s work linear or is it marked by any significant breaks?; and (d) How are text and typography interrelated in George’s work, and how is typography applied as a stylistic device? 
            
            
                Context in Digital Humanities
                StGD is contributing to the field of digital scholarly editing, the focus of which is shifting increasingly to the materiality of the edited documents. This tendency has been encouraged by movements such as New Philology as well as by textual concepts such as the “material text: (Shillingsburg 1997) and the idea of text as interaction of “bibliographical” and “linguistic code” (McGann 1991). In this context writing – as the interface between the text’s message and its documentary carrier – plays a significant role and is particularly difficult to capture (Schubert, 2010). The goal of StGD is to aid in the development and promotion of a future best practice method for the modelling of typography in digital scholarly editions. Furthermore, the project’s thematic focus contributes to the field of digital book history. By putting typography in its focus, StGD represents a first step towards the burgeoning and as-yet-unexplored field of Digital Studies of Typography.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ciula, A. (2005). 
                        Digital palaeography: using the digital representation of medieval script to support palaeographic analysis. Digital Medievalist 1, ed. by D. P. O’Donnell et al. . (all URLs accessed 6 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Kurz, S. (2007). 
                        Der Teppich der Schrift. Frankfurt/M.: Stroemfeld.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. J. (1991).
                        The textual condition. Princeton University Press.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015).
                        Digital Scholarly Editions. Theories, Models and Methods. Aldershot: Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Shillingsburg, P. (1997). 
                        Resisting Texts. Authority and Submission in Constructions of Meaning. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
                    
                    
                        Schubert, M. (2010). 
                        Einleitung, in Materialität in der Editionswissenschaft, ed. by M. Schubert. Berlin, New York: De Gruyter, pp. 1-13.
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. (2011). 
                        Describing Handwriting, Part I [and following]. London. 
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. (2012). 
                        Modeling Medieval Handwriting: A New Approach to Digital Palaeography. DH2012 Book of Abstracts, ed. by Jan Christoph Meister et al. Hamburg, pp. 382–85. 
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2013). 
                        Ontologie des formes et encodage des textes manuscrits médiévaux. Le projet ORIFLAMMS. Document numérique, 16, (Ed). by Christine Bénévent, et al. Paris: Lavoisier (Hermes), pp. 81-96.
                    
                    
                        Wehde, S. (2000). 
                        Typographische Kultur: Eine zeichentheoretische und kulturgeschichtliche Studie zur Typographie und ihrer Entwicklung. Berlin, New York: De Gruyter.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            After decades of building digital resources for humanities research, such as Digital Scholarly Editions (DSE), and making them available to researchers and the broader public, we are at the point where many of these resources can be connected to one another and are more and more accepted by the scholarly community. However, we also experience the challenge to maintain all the various Digital Scholarly Editions which were built on a diverse base of different technologies. This is especially complex as Digital Scholarly Editions are “living” objects. On the one hand that means that the content can be extended and refined continuously. Hence they are never finished. On the other hand the technological basis must be kept accessible, secure and running. Those two processes can be summarized under the term “data curation”.
            If we assume that a Digital Scholarly Edition not only consists of the marked up texts, mostly XML documents, but also of another layer on top of the XML documents, the functionality layer – all the interactive parts, the visualizations and the different views on the texts, indexes or other research material, such as images or audio documents – it is obvious that data curation can become an unlimited complex task. This functionality layer provides an enormous additional benefit to the texts. A Digital Scholarly Edition can be seen as a tool which is used to analyze the XML documents, thus as part in the research process which must be preserved to reproduce research results which often cannot be achieved without the functionality layer.
            A Digital Humanities resource usually undergoes a typical life cycle and is built by a team of team members with a variety of competences that are needed for each task:
            
                Analysis of the sources to be edited (humanities scholars)
                Requirement Engineering (the whole project team)
                Design of the data or document model, choosing what standards to use (scholars, database-, markup-, metadata-specialists)
                Choosing, adopting, and/or developing software tools for transcription, editing and publishing (software developers, scholars)
                Installing and maintaining development servers and web servers (system administrators)
                Conceptual design and implementation of the web publication of the Digital Scholarly Edition (web designer, web developer, scholars)
                Preparation for long term access and archiving (documentation- and metadata-specialists)
                Service support and maintenance after project finished (data curators)
            
            At each step of this life cycle decisions are made which have impact on the subsequent steps. The first two steps of the list constitute the foundation on which the whole Digital Scholarly Edition is built on, from the data model over the choice of software tools until the publication as well as data curation.
            Digital Scholarly Editions are sufficiently described from a methodically point of view regarding the document and text modeling (Pierazzo 2015, Sahle 2013). An analytical description from the technological point of view still is a desideratum. To make a comprehensive data curation possible a technological publishing concept which uses standardized components is needed. Such a concept can consist of standards for a formal project documentation, a description of the used technologies, the provided interfaces and APIs, a design paradigm for typical user interaction tasks, and many more. Standards on the data- and metadata-layer are broadly accepted and in use – one example are the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI – 
                http://www.tei-c.org) – but they are still missing for the functionality layer.
            
            A high standard critical Digital Scholarly Edition can only be built in a sustainable way and be maintained when it follows technological standards which still have to be developed. The paper will present a first tiny step of a proposal for a minimal standard from the technological point of view of a Digital Scholarly Edition. It focuses on experiences made during the last ten years working on XML-based Digital Scholarly Editions built with certain tools, such as eXistdb (
                http://exist-db.org). Hence the proposed solution cannot be valid for all the different kinds of Digital Humanities scholarly resources.
            
            A possible next step towards such a formal description could be to package those XML-documents together with the source code of the functionality layer in a standardized self-descriptive format. An option for this task could be the EXPath Packaging System (
                http://expath.org/modules/pkg/), which works well for XML-based Digital Scholarly Editions and is widely used by Digital Scholarly Editions which are published using eXistdb. The main purpose of such a packaging system is not connectivity or interoperability rather than maintenance and data curation. The packaging system can be extended gradually to a technological publishing format which incorporates the aforementioned aspects such as a project description format.
            
            A possible formal project description format for the documentation will consist of the following information:
            
                The name of the project and all involved institutions and persons.
                The status of the project: planned, work in progress, published, or finished.
                The applied technologies and standards.
                The licenses, which are used for research data, source code and other components such as fonts, audio or video documents.
                Information about where to find the source code, if the source code is available under an open source license.
                Information about provided APIs and other interfaces to retrieve the research data and metadata in various formats (XML, JSON etc.) or get structured information about persons or places to be processed further in other contexts (In case of a correspondence edition metadata about the letters should be prepared in the Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (CMIF) to be reused by 
                    http://correspsearch.bbaw.de).
                
                Contextual details about the data producers, how data are collected etc. (More at Faniel 2015)
                Canonical citation rules and instructions for persistent referencing of current parts and older versions of the research data.
                A standardized change log, which can be evaluated by other services.
            
            Of course this list can be just a first suggestion and does not provide all the information that can be given about a project. The project description must be accessible under a standardized URL (e.g. 
                http://home.of.project/api/projectdescription) and can be serialized in different formats, such as XML or JSON, for further processing. That would allow a Digital Scholarly Edition to be registered at a central directory where all information and updates of various Digital Scholarly Editions which follow the same publishing model are collected automatically. Such a central directory does not exist yet. Currently existing directories collect information manually and describe projects externally, so changes and updates are harder to track.
            
            The success of such a publishing model depends on pragmatic usage possibilities and a critical mass of Digital Humanities scholars and projects who publish their Digital Scholarly Edition using this publishing model. It is difficult to find a standardized, generic approach in the world of Digital Scholarly Editions as every project encounters a different set of problems and a different set of uses. Thus it is important as developers to not make too many assumptions about the nature of a project and further the development of a technological publishing standard in continuous exchange with the scholarly community and in very small steps which take into account the diversity across the Humanities.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Faniel, I. (2015). 
                        Data Management and Curation in 21st Century Archives, 
                        http://hangingtogether.org/?p=5375> (accessed 6th March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing, Theories, Models and Methods. Ashgate.
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P. (2013). Digitale Editionsformen, Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels, Bände, Norderstedt: Books on Demand 2013, 3.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            First published posthumously in 1690, Furetière’s 
                Dictionnaire Universel had aroused controversy well before its publication. Nevertheless, it was quickly followed by an enlarged and corrected version edited by the protestant scholar Henri Basnage de Beauval. It is this extended version of 1701, with its broad coverage of terminological language that is our subject.
            
            The Furetière project seeks to render the entire 1701 dictionary available as an open access digital resource in an XML-TEI compliant format. Given the size of the task, and the current total lack of finding with little hope in the short term, the first stage will be an attempt to map and describe terminological coverage by reference to a small number of themes, namely architectural, legal and maritime terminology. This paper will demonstrate the mapping procedure being carried out using the Atlas Ti Computer-Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS) and the building of a model for the TEI encoding.
            
                Historical background
                Furetière was both a member of the French Academy and participant in the dictionary building team, hence the uproar at his publishing what was seen as a rival dictionary. This explains why a Catholic priest should end up being published by the protestant publisher in the Netherlands, Arnaud Leers. The dictionary was a success, but still needed much revising. This was carried out by the French émigré and scholar, Henri Basnage de Beauval. Despite being the most complete edition, only one attempt at digitising was ever made (Wionet and Tutin, 2001). Our aim is to encode the Basnage dictionary but with cross references to the edition of 1690 and the publication of Corneille (1694) so as to see how the terminological entries evolved and to what extent complementary information can be found in the Corneille dictionary (Williams, Forthcoming).
            
            
                Using CAQDAS
                One important task for the Digital Humanities community will be to bring or adapt existing tools to disciplines that are often less digitally aware. Thus, in using a CAQDAS tool to explore the three dictionaries, we aim not only to use a very powerful tool to allow pre-digitising analysis and mapping of data, but also to bring this technology into the sphere of literary analysis.
                CAQDAS were essentially created to meet the needs of sociologists carrying out rigorous qualitative analyses on data from multiple supports. Literary specialists also carry out qualitative analyses, but often tend to use highlighters to work on printouts of PDFs. By using a CAQDAS to work through a document as big and as complex as the Furetière’s dictionary, we aim to show how an electronic highlighter that allows coding and network analyses can be used in humanities research, and particularly in our own.
                There are a number of commercial CAQDAS on the market, and only one open-source tool. Although open-source tools are important to the community, we have adopted Atlas Ti as being a very powerful tool that is evolving rapidly with new functions. 
                The 1701 Basnage edition is over 4000 pages of very tight text. Text quality is poor which precludes use of OCR. Whilst it is structured, we are in a period of great experimentation in dictionary compilation leading to a complex meta and microstructure. The only way forward is to read the text. Using Atlas Ti, we skim the pages so as to locate and code entries designated as terms, to find the different introductory formulae, as well as spotting potential search formulae for unmarked terms, and to list the domains and crafts to which they belong. The coding system allows us to carry out a bottom-up conceptualisation of the dictionary with the quotations allowing us to create a headword list that links directly to the entries in the PDF file. Knowing the terminological domains covered by the dictionary is interesting in itself, but it also gives further keys for reaching unmarked terms. Networks allow us to reorganise domains and crafts into groups, such as legal terminology – represented by several domain names- and maritime terminology, which is often closely linked to language of fortification, architecture and law. Atlas Ti allow to output data in a machine-readable format so that the headword list could be transformed as an organised lexicon for use in the XML encoding process.
            
            
                XML TEI
                Use of Atlas Ti as an electronic highlighter with all its coding and management functions does permit a full qualitative analysis of the data. However, it is still not possible to share the data itself. Digitising the entire dictionary is a mammoth task that is only feasible using crowd sourcing over a long period of time. Marking up only thematically designated terminological domains allows us to create and test a model for the data as well as making available machine readable data rapidly. The dictionary is unique in having definitions accompanied by lengthy examples and citations thus providing both technical and phraseological information that will only be retrievable using in-depth mark-up. Whereas Wionet and Tutin (op.cit) marked up one letter, our plan is to attempt to follow the terminology through the entire dictionary.
                The first stage consists of marking up terms from a small number of highly productive thematic fields isolated using the CAQDAS analysis. The first field to be explored in depth is related to maritime activities as designated by ‘terme de marine’ (maritime term) so as to open a collaboration with French historians so as to compare an élite vision of naval terminology as compared by the situation in a major naval port, that of Lorient which founded in 1666 by the Compagnie des Indes, and then became a major naval base from 1703. 
                Our aim is to illustrate the decisions taken and how these affect output through visualisation, but also analysis using linguistic analysis tools as TXM and a database system as BaseX. Once more advanced, the data will be put online using a query interface. At the moment, we are sharing code on GitHub under the name Basnage.
                Mark-up is being carried out using Oxygen so as to mark-up using the TEI guidelines and use XQuery to ensure consistency. Entries can be extremely complex, as will be illustrated by reference to the verb 
                    Abatre. This means that the TEI guidelines do not always adapt easily to what is found in the text. However, we are endeavouring not to customise the guidelines so as to retain full compatibility with other dictionaries and allow easier linking with source texts. 
                
                The dictionary tends to group words orthographically so that there is a main headword in large capitals, which also carried the grammatical information, but then a series of subentries that generally have the headword in small capitals. These subentries may include the specialised terminological usage. To complicate affairs, polysemy is illustrated within an entry with short comments and examples. To handle this, we are using  to group the whole, and then  for what might be considered as subentries.  is used to cover polysemy within a given entry. The main entry for ABATRE has three main senses illustrated by a series of synonyms, with each sense accompanied by numerous examples, and occasionally a citation with bibliographic reference. The examples frequently contain collocations that activate a particular synonym, it would be useful to mark-up and illustrate this. Similarly, citations generally only give a link to a person, often via an abbreviated name, as in MEN for Ménage or ABL for M. d’Ablancourt. These are generally listed at the beginning of the dictionary, but it is not always the case and sometimes the abbreviations are inconsistent. Sometimes, even if a text is not named, it is possible to link to a source document. Given that Basnage was a prolific letter writer at the centre of network of European scholars, and the author of the 
                    Histoire des Ouvrages des Savants, and important task will be to cross link to this valuable source of information.
                
                Collocation mark-up means that we can link dictionary analysis to words in a wider context as fund in Frantext or, when a text has already been digitising by using a language analytical tool as TXM. Mark-up also aims to make an onomosiological analysis possible using BaseX rather than simply presenting the data in a linear semasiological format. 
            
            
                Conclusion
                This is a mammoth mark-up task which we believe is rendered easier by mixing tools so as to permit on-going analysis whilst gradually digitising the whole into XML compliant TEI. This strategy means that other scholars can use data without having to wait for the entire digitalisation process to be completed. In so doing, we seek to explore data whilst collaborating in the dissemination and improvement of digital tools and also a contribution to the art of digital mark-up of early dictionaries.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Williams, G. (Forthcoming). Le temps des termes: les termes et la phraséologie dans les dictionnaires du 17 siècle. In De Giovanni, C. (Ed.), Fraseologia E Paremilogia: Passato, Presente E Futuro. FrancoAngeli: Milan.
                    Wionet, C., Tutin, A. (2001). Pour informatiser le Dictionnaire universel de Basnage (1702) et de Trévoux (1704): Approche théorique et pratique. Honoré Champion: Paris.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Digital Humanities has seen slow adoption in the Slavic language and literature fields in North American academia. This issue frames our project, the Digital Émigré, a digital resource for exploring Russian émigré periodical literature. Our project has a threefold aim. As periodical studies scholars, we want to enable access to Russian émigré journals for new audiences. As digital humanists, we believe that DH tools and methodologies can facilitate new forms of knowledge about twentieth-century Russian, and more broadly diaspora, literary and cultural history. Finally, as Slavists, we hope our project will be a hub for discussion about the applicability of DH theory and practice for scholars working with Russian-language material.
            At this pilot stage, Digital Émigré is a web-based searchable database of article-level metadata of Russian-language journals published outside of Russia in the twentieth century. Our pilot contains four titles (approximately 100 issues and 1,500 articles): 
                Novoselye and 
                Novyi zhurnal were published in the 1940s in New York, and 
                Sintaksis and 
                Kontinent, in the late 1970s and 1980s in Paris. Our pilot site provides insight into literary culture at both the beginning and end of the Cold War, bookending the twentieth-century Russian diaspora experience. Digital Émigré is intended to scale, and will eventually contain additional titles and new functionality. 
            
            We will highlight the main scholarly avenues that DH methods allow us investigate, such as mapping networks of co-publication, tracking evolving political, social and cultural concerns of émigrés over the course of the Cold War, demonstrating the increased opportunities for émigré women as editors and contributors, and highlighting the proportion of original vs. re-printed work in émigré publications. This way, our project encourages experimentation that will enrich the study of Slavic periodical culture: accessing journals through their data can challenge narratives that are often framed by retroactive canonization, close reading and focus on individual authors. Digital Émigré thereby bridges philological approaches and sociological questions about intellectual networks and communities of artistic production. 
            The poster address the project’s core technical design: our strategy for data modeling and management and database design.  We will also present our plans for next steps, which is to provide full-text access and to federate our titles with other digital periodical collections. For this, we are designing a TEI schema modeled on major periodical studies digital collections -  specifically the Blue Mountain Project at Princeton University (
                http://bluemountain.princeton.edu and the Yellow 90’s Online at Ryerson University (
                http://www.1890s.ca)  
            
            We will also discuss the specific challenges of working with Russian language material and Cyrillic script, such as character encoding, transliteration, translation, and  tokenizing and stemming. These issues can be barriers to success when working with popular DH tools that are developed primarily for Western scripts and languages, and we will show our solutions for using some well-known tools for: data normalization (OpenRefine), text analysis (Voyant), network analysis (Gephi), visualization (Raw, Palladio), and topic modeling (MALLET).
            Digital Émigré is committed not only to the exploration of the intellectual experience of diaspora cultural life. As a digital humanities project, it is itself invested in building intellectual communities around the engagement with this material and its afterlife. It aims to foster contact between scholars working with Russian and other Slavic languages internationally, especially through the discussion of issues of interoperability and creating multilingual digital research environments.
        
    


        
            This panel is devoted to two main questions: “How are the function and qualities associated with a scholarly edition changed when it is digital?” and “Is excellence in scholarly editing promoted by guidelines, articulations of best practices, enhanced peer review, or seals of approval?” The panel is intended for members of the scholarly editing community, whom it wishes to engage in dialogue about these matters, along with a wider audience of prospective scholarly editors and members of the DH community who are engaged with questions of peer review and how to foster best practices.
            The immediate impetus behind the panel is “Considering the Scholarly Edition in the Digital Age: A White Paper of the Modern Language Association’s Committee on Scholarly Editions” published by the MLA in Fall 2015. The primary purpose of the white paper is to define the major elements of the “digital scholarly edition” and explore their significance for the ways editions are read, used, and evaluated. Publication of the white paper, however, raised a number of related questions that we hope to explore through this panel:
            
                Are the following criteria fundamental to scholarly editing, regardless of school or approach: transparency, accuracy, appropriateness of method, clear and responsible documentation, and the exercise of critical judgment in representing a full account of the textual situation at stake?
                Can a community­sourced edition also be a scholarly edition?
                What is the point of scholarly editions, as we currently understand them, in an era of mass data?
            
            
                Editions can be situated within and draw upon a much­larger­scale text archive. How are such editions related to the larger archive?
                How might different traditions of editing be “networked” or brought together by digital means in relation to the same text?
                How do editions relate to large­scale textual research? Must their representational precision and refined encoding be lost if aggregated through a mechanism like 
                    HathiTrust or 
                    TAPAS? How can their particular contribution­­the depths of their insights­­be maintained when incorporated within a broader cultural analysis?
                
                How far might the criteria for exemplary digital scholarly editions actually also apply to exemplary digital scholarship?
                To the extent that the standards for digital scholarly editing are formalized and programmatic could a large­scale digital scholarly corpus be produced largely algorithmically?
            
            
                Peer Review
            
            The discussion will then turn to the role of seals or hyper­peer­reviews of digital scholarly editions in a range of scholarly communities and contexts as represented by the panelists.
            A seal such as that awarded by the MLA Committee provides either added weight to peer review for those publishing with a press, or a potential alternative to peer review for editions that are not published by conventional scholarly presses. One would expect that with the shift towards digital editions the number of applications to the Committee would have risen. This, however, has not been the case. Panelist and members of the community of digital editors in the audience will be asked to assess the need for such seals of approval and to consider the adequacy of general guidelines such as the MLAs for editorial work.
            Panelists will reflect on questions including the following:
            
                How do seals or peer review of digital editing projects operate in various contexts?
            
            
                Can a seal to something that doesn’t reach closure in the usual way? How far along does it need to be?
                If the seal is awarded for one iteration of a project, how do we clarify what was award worthy and what later work is beyond the bounds of the award?
                Might best practices be better served by evaluating projects and their methodology at the beginning rather than the end of their life­cycles, so they have the opportunity to incorporate the results of the review to improve the project?
                If a lack of peer review has sometimes plagued digital scholarship, why have digital editors not done more to avail themselves of this kind of opportunity?
                Is the seal regarded as an additional burden­­one more hoop to jump through­­potentially delaying production and unlikely to lead to increased sales of books or increased usage of a digital edition?
            
            Panelists
            
                
                    Susan Brown’s work focuses on born­digital scholarly production and the spectrum from regular scholarly activity to editing, particularly in relation to her leadership of the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory virtual research environment. She recently joined the MLA CSE.
                
                
                    Hans Walter Gabler will discuss networked editing. The native ground for the scholarly edition in our day, and for the future, is the digital medium. The scholarly edition as digital edition is to be conceived of as processual, relational, and interactive. To open it on and as a web platform is the public beginning of its life in the body of its texts and document images, their interrelation and diachronic stratification; and equally in its body of response texts (
                    vulgo: commentary). Comprehensively, the digital scholarly edition should be a dynamic site for incremental enrichment through individual as well as communal research.
                
                
                    Fatiha Idmhand or 
                    Thomas Lebarbé, as coordinators of CAHIER (Corpus d’Auteurs pour les Humanités ­ Informatisation, Édition, Recherche), one of the consortia comprising TGIR­HumaNum (Très Grande Infrastructure de Recherche ­ Humanités 
                
                Numériques), will address the consortium’s support of digital editing projects through an
                initial application phase, followed by micro­grants, training, and workshops. They will also address the role of CAHIER in the improvement of visibility and impact of the editions grouped under its umbrella.
                
                    Elena Pierazzo will speak to the issue of standards in relation to her role as recent chair of the Text Encoding Initiative, and address the extent to which, in Europe, in general, where there are so many fragmented traditions and disciplines, the possibility of a single evaluating committee or set of guidelines is not feasible. Thus regular peer review and post­publication reviews are the norm. She will address the question of whether broad editing initiatives such as DiXiT 
                    (http://dixit.uni­koeln.de) or the Nedimah research group on digital editions (which she co­chairs) and the recently announced DARIAH­EU initiative Living Sources might usefully contribute to formalizing certain standards.
                
                
                    Kenneth Price will discuss the emergence of the white paper in light of the history of the MLA committee on scholarly editions. In an earlier print­only era the committee endorsed a single model of editing, the "critical edition." Now, at a time of both print and digital editions, and in a changed theoretical environment, the committee (through the white paper) endorses a diversity of additional approaches, including genetic and documentary editing. He will also discuss the challenges of awarding a seal to digital project that may well be later amended.
                
                
                    Ray Siemens, as principal co­author with Julia Flanders, will discuss the history of, impetus for, and basic thrust of the white paper, situating it in relation to earlier, iterative interventions by members of the CSE and our community ­­ among them Peter Shillingsburg’s “General Principles of Electronic Scholarly Editions” (1993), Charles Faulhaber’s “Guidelines for Electronic Scholarly Editions” (1997), the CSE/TEI­C volume 
                    Electronic Textual Editing (2006), and its publication of guidelines and guiding questions for those preparing and evaluating editions in electronic form ­­ and more recent considerations, such as social editing.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                            Burnard, Lou, Katherine O’Brien O’Keeffe, and John Unsworth, eds.
                        
                         (2006) 
                        
                            Electronic Textual
                        
                        
                            Editing.
                        
                        
                            New York: Modern Language Association P.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            http://www.tei­c.org/About/Archive_new/ETE/
                        .
                    
                    Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory. 
                        
                            http://cwrc.ca
                        
                    
                    CAHIER « Corpus d’Auteurs pour les Humanités ­ Informatisation, Édition, Recherche »
                    
                        
                            http://cahier.hypotheses.org/le­consortium
                        
                    
                    Committee on Scholarly Editions. (2015) Considering the Scholarly Edition in the Digital Age: A White Paper of the Modern Language Association’s Committee on Scholarly Editions.
                    New York: MLA. Web. 
                        
                            https://scholarlyeditions.commons.mla.org/2015/09/02/cse­white­paper/
                        
                    
                    DARIAH­EU (Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and the Humanities): 
                        
                            https://dariah.eu
                        
                    
                    Faulhaber, Charles. (1997) “Guidelines for Electronic Scholarly Editions.” December 1997. 
                        
                            http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/MLA/guidelines.html
                        .
                    
                    ITN DiXiT (Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training Network). 
                        
                            http://dixit.uni­koeln.de
                        
                    
                    NeDiMAH (Network for Digital Methods in the Arts and Humanities). Scholarly Digital Editions Working Group. 
                        
                            http://www.nedimah.eu/workgroups/scholarly­digital­editions
                        
                    
                    Shillingsburg, Peter. (1993) “General Principles for Electronic Scholarly Editions.” December 1993. 
                        
                            http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/MLA/principles.html
                        .
                    
                    Siemens, Ray, Meagan Timney, Cara Leitch, Corina Koolen, and Alex Garnett, with the ETCL, INKE, and PKP Research Groups. (2012) "Toward Modeling the Social Edition: An Approach to Understanding the Electronic Scholarly Edition in the Context of New and Emerging Social Media." 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 27.4: 445­461. 
                        
                            http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/4/445.full
                        
                    
                    Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        
                            http://www.tei­c.org/index.xml
                        
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Various approaches have been proposed to publish XML/TEI scholarly editions or XML/EAD finding aids on line, but no standard XML software with a ready to use web application has yet emerged. As a possible next step after the XML mark-up of an edition or of an inventory, online publications are still a difficult issue for many projects in Digital humanities. Among available frameworks (like eXist or baseX) there is no ready to use web application to easily expose XML scholarly corpora as Linked Open Data (LOD).
            Initiated by the Digital humanities network of ENS Lyon (Atelier des Humanités Numériques de l’ENS de Lyon), SynopsX is a lightweight framework which goal is to easily publish and expose XML scholarly corpora. It’s a full XQuery web application built with the native XML database BaseX. Involving different partners from various institutions the project is developed as a free and open source software under GNU, and is hosted on GitHub (https://github.com/synopsx). Three principles have guided the conception of the software: collaboration, mutualization and genericization. Thus, we decided to put together all the publication problems and needs we could encounter in our very various Digital Humanities corpora (disciplines, approaches, institutions) to specify the needs of a generic web application.
            SynopsX has been conceived as a scalable and easily customizable solution for XML publication of XML files (TEI, EAD, OAI, etc.). The software brings a templating system for various renderings of XML resources according to predefined or customized mappings from XML data to various output formats. SynopsX use the BaseX implementation of Adam Retter’s proposed specifications for RESTXQ. Because it allows full control on the URL scheme to build real REST applications, it could be used to expose XML corpora as Linked Open Data.
            This poster will present the needs of LOD for XML corpora publication. It will explain the different strategies that could be used and how we’re planning to use a RESTXQ controller with views and models to propose a tool that allows the contents exposition as LOD through a restful API.
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                A digital edition of Fernando Pessoa, considered one of the most significant Modernist poets and writers, is being established through a collaboration between scholars from the Institute of Literature and Tradition (IELT) of the New University of Lisbon and the Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH) of the University of Cologne. The edition focuses on the contrast between the potential character of Pessoa’s numerous lists of editorial projects and his few actual publications in lifetime.
                Though the digital platform is primarily designed to support the research aims of the project, the procedures can be reused by others (encoding, scripts). From a theoretical standpoint, the question of „work genesis“ (on a macro and micro level) is relevant to a wider audience. In the case of Pessoa, the publication of the editorial lists and plans together with the published works in lifetime contributes to the discussion on the genesis and status of each stage of a work.
            
            
                State of Research and Aims
                It has been much debated by literary scholars whether Fernando Pessoa’s work should be characterized as fragmentary or unitary (see Coelho, 1949; Gusmão, 2003; Martins, 2003; Sepúlveda, 2013). Due to the low number of publications in lifetime, the existence of a vast literary archive and the use of many fictional authors, named “heteronyms” by the author, the coherence of his work has been questioned. The present edition, in contrast, is based on the assumption that Fernando Pessoa constantly worked on the organization of his work, as witnessed by the many editorial lists, notes and plans which are part of his estate (Cunha, 1987; Sepúlveda, 2013).
                These papers are the subject of the digital edition at hand, together with the 60 publications of poems that Pessoa realized in journals and literary magazines. That way, the genesis and evolution of his work as planned by himself can be studied and the published texts be examined in the light of the editorial projects preceding, accompanying and following them during the author’s life. A significant part of the documents witnessing the editorial activity of the author have not been published before. For those which have been published, past editions in bookform define themselves by following either the first or the last version of a text, or by choosing from the existent variants from a hermeneutical standpoint (Duarte, 1988; Galhoz, 1993; Martins, 2011; Castro, 2013).
                As the textual variants and hesitations are critical to understand shifts in the conception of the work, e. g. when work titles are assigned to heteronyms or the composition of a planned publication is changed, the digital edition aims at offering several coexistent forms of transcription. To facilitate the understanding of the texts and the work they trace, editorial comments are to be added to the documents.
                In terms of editorial methodology, the digital edition targets at exploring the possibilities to combine different editorial procedures from a documentary, a diplomatic, a genetic and an enriched edition, overcoming previous oppositions between different editorial approaches to the poet’s work. Relations between the editorial projects and the published texts are formalized via the encoding of “work references”. By extending the concept of work to include projections which the author makes on a macro level, i.e. outlining his works in terms of titles, authorship, structure and publication organs, the present edition contributes to the debate about the status of the work and its place in the digital edition (Robinson, 2013; Sahle, 2013).
            
            
                Methods and Results
                The realization of the digital edition relies primarily on procedures and technologies coming from the X universe. Transcriptions of the documents and metadata are encoded according to the standard of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI-P5). The TEI documents are stored in an XML database (eXist) hosted on a web server together with the digital facsimiles. While the work on the documents is going on, a GitHub repository reachable at > is used to hold successive versions of both the TEI documents and the application which is developed. Scripts written in XQuery and XSLT control the transformation of the documents’ underlying representation into the presentation layer. Some of the components shipped with eXist are used: Bootstrap, JQuery and eXist’s Templating Framework plus a SIMILE timeline and the OpenSeadragon image viewer.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Technical setup and workflow
                    
                
                The TEI encoding is controlled with a RelaxNG schema based on an ODD file. The recorded metadata include bibliographic details, the date or period of the document’s genesis or publication and a genre classification (editorial notes, editorial lists, editorial plans, poetry).
                Among the encoded textual phenomena are additions, deletions, substitutions, omissions, variants and notes. First and last variants are especially marked to allow for the establishment of a first and last version of the text. Moreover, the following types of entities are labeled: persons, journals, texts and works. Special attention is paid to the four principal authorial figures of Pessoa: Alberto Caeiro, Álvaro de Campos, Fernando Pessoa and Ricardo Reis. Besides registering their mere occurrence, the role they have is determined (they can be mentioned as author, editor, translator or topic of a work). Occurring persons, journals and works are managed in a central knowledge base which serves as the basis for their identification in the documents and the creation of comprehensive indexes. The following figure illustrates how the relationship between an editorial list and a publication is established via the reference to works:
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 2: Example of the encoding of work references in TEI
                    
                
                The document MN909 is an editorial list. One item of the list is a mention of the work “Cancioneiro” or “Itinerario”. In the central work list, those titles are assigned to the poems of Fernando Pessoa. One of the poems is “Abdicação” which in turn is represented by a publication carrying that title. Thus, the relationship between the editorial list and the publication is made explicit through the encoding and can be exploited e.g. in the edition’s presentation.
                Work on the digital edition has been going on since October 2014. It is planned to launch the edition within 2016. Until then, more documents will be uploaded and work on the presentation will be finalized. Results so far can be viewed at >.
                
                The presentation is multilingual (Portuguese and English). Access to the material is facilitated by different browsing options: by author, documents, publications, works, genre, and chronology. A simple and an advanced search enable the user to make specific and custom requests. As a first analytic approach to the question of the evolution of Pessoa’s work during lifetime, an interactive timeline visualising the chronology of editorial projects and publications has been created.
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 3: Timeline of Pessoa’s editorial projects and publications >
                            
                
                The publications and documents are presented in a synoptic view, juxtaposing the transcription on the left and the facsimile on the right side. The presentation of the documents containing the editorial lists, notes and plans is enhanced by offering the possibility to switch between the diplomatic transcription, the critically established text in the first and last version and a so-called “customized version” where the user can combine transcription features (e. g. if original line breaks should be maintained or omitted). Additionally, the synoptic view can be changed to transcription-index mode, where occurring persons, texts and journals are shown alongside the transcription of the document and links to the central indexes are established. The following figures illustrate the above mentioned features:
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 4: Synopsis of editorial list and facsimile >
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 5: Synopsis of editorial list and index references >
                    
                
                For each of the four principal authorial figures, the relationships between “works”, “publications” and “documents” are presented on an individual page (see figure 6). In the example, the works of Ricardo Reis are listed starting with attested alternative titles of the whole work (“Odes de Ricardo Reis”, “Odes”, “Livro de Odes”), followed by the titles of individual works. Links to the documents show where the works are mentioned in the editorial projects and links to publications indicate where a work has been published by Pessoa.
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 6: Work list for Ricardo Reis >
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                The digital edition of Fernando Pessoa shows that the author was continuously concerned with the organisation of his work and that he persistently planned its publication, even publishing little in lifetime. This supports the hypothesis that his work does have a certain unity, revealing a consistent development and not a fragmentary purpose, as suggested by a large number of critics.
                In the edition, this understanding is underpinned by the encoding of micro-genetic textual phenomena in a basic way to elucidate shifts in the conception of work titles, authorship and publication plans in single documents. Developments of the editorial projects on the macro level are traced by encoding mentioned entities in the documents and thereby establishing links between documents, publications and abstract works.
                Different editorial procedures are combined to explore the potential of a digital edition which proves fruitful to bring the understanding and editorial presentation of Pessoa’s work further than existing print editions, as well as contributing to clarify a major critical topic concerning the author’s envisioned unity of his work.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Belknap, R. E. (2004). 
                        The List. The Uses and Pleasures of Cataloguing. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
                    
                    Castro, I. (2013). 
                        Editar Pessoa. 2nd Edition. Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional – Casa da Moeda.
                    
                    Coelho, Jacinto do Prado (1949). 
                        Diversidade e Unidade em Fernando Pessoa. Lisbon: Ocidente.
                    
                    Cunha, T. S. (1987). Planos e projectos editoriais de Fernando Pessoa: uma velha questão. 
                        Revista da Biblioteca Nacional, Series 2, 
                        2 (1): 93-107.
                    
                    Duarte, L. F. (1988). Texto acabado e texto virtual ou a cauda do cometa. 
                        Revista da Biblioteca Nacional, Series 2, 
                        3 (3): 167-81.
                    
                    Galhoz, M. A. (1993). A fortuna editorial pessoana e seus problemas. In Seabra, J. A. (Ed), 
                        Mensagem. Poemas esotéricos. Madrid, etc.: Coleção Arquivos, pp. 216-26.
                    
                    Gusmão, M. (2003). O Fausto – um teatro em ruínas. 
                        Românica, 
                        12: 67-86.
                    
                    Martins, F. C. (2003). Breves notas sobre a alta definição. 
                        Românica, 
                        12: 157-164.
                    
                    Martins, F. C. (2011). Fernando Pessoa e o Original Perdido. 
                        Tágides. Revista de Literatura, Cultura e Arte Portuguesas, 
                        1: 89-100.
                    
                    Robinson, P. (2013). The Concept of the Work in the Digital Age. 
                        Ecdótica, 
                        10: 13-41.
                    
                    Sahle, P. (2013). 
                        Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels.Teil 2: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik. Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
                    
                    Sepúlveda, P. (2013). 
                        Os livros de Fernando Pessoa. Lisbon: Ática.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
          
          Introduction et cadre conceptuel
            L’édition critique électronique, part active des humanités numériques, est aujourd’hui en pleine expansion, comme en témoigne la multiplication de projets d’envergure dans le domaine
                
                     Un répertoire des éditions critiques électroniques est tenu par Patrick Sahle ; il compte plus de 360 projets qui varient aussi bien par le type de sources éditées que les langues et époques concernées (http://www.digitale-edition.de/).
                . Parallèlement à la création de ces projets, les éditeurs électroniques effectuent également un travail important de définition de ce champ disciplinaire. La réflexion épistémologique, développée par les théoriciens, est également nourrie par les praticiens. Multiforme, le travail de définition d’un champ disciplinaire en cours de structuration et d’évolution est primordial pour asseoir la discipline sur des bases conceptuelles solides. Ainsi, dans chacune des monographies récentes consacrées aux humanités numériques, la question de l’édition critique électronique est traitée et débattue
                
                     Citons par exemple 
                        Digital humanities (Burdick et al., 2012), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities (Gold, Klein, 2012), 
                        Digital humanities in practice (Warwick et al., 2012), 
                        Defining digital humanities (Terras et al., 2013) qui consacrent tous des pages ou des chapitres à l’édition critique électronique. En outre, certaines publications récentes sont plus particulièrement dédiées à l’analyse des éditions critiques électroniques elles-mêmes : 
                        Digital Critical editions (Apollon et al., 2014) et 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing (Pierazzo, 2015).
                    
                . 
            
            Pour définir l'édition critique électronique, les chercheurs disposent du terreau historiographique et conceptuel façonné par l'édition critique traditionnelle et la philologie. L'édition critique électronique se situe en effet au lieu de rencontre de la philologie et des techniques informatiques. L’évolution apportée par les nouvelles technologies dans ce domaine est significative. Les humanités numériques, auxquelles se rattache l’édition électronique, impliquent de nouveaux modes de recherche, transdisciplinaires et collaboratifs, dans lesquels les techniques informatiques ont toute leur part (Burdick et al., 2012). Les éditeurs électroniques, justement, considèrent que l’imprimé n’est plus le vecteur de transmission principal du savoir. Selon eux, le web peut contribuer à améliorer la diffusion des connaissances. Ainsi, ces éditeurs tirent parti des outils technologiques afin d'améliorer et d'approfondir l'accès au texte pour le lecteur. (Vanhoutte, 2010).
            
          
          
          Normes de structuration des éditions critiques traditionnelles et leurs évolutions numériques
            Les éditions critiques traditionnelles, imprimées sur papier et regroupées dans des collections spécialisées
                
                     Prenons l’exemple de la maison Honoré Champion, qui propose les trois collections suivantes dédiées aux éditions critiques : 
                        Classiques français du Moyen âge, 
                        Textes littéraires de la Renaissance, 
                        Textes de littérature moderne et contemporaine.
                    
                , répondent à des codes stricts de structuration du contenu. C’est un jeu complexe de normes de lisibilité, élaborées au fil des siècles, qui a donné au texte imprimé son maximum d’efficacité et en a permis une lecture facile et rapide (Vandendorpe, 1999). Ces normes ont été mises en place au fil du temps, en fonction des pratiques de lecture et des règles établies par les éditeurs. Elles sont de divers ordres et portent sur différents aspects du texte : disposition et découpage du texte dans la page, orthographe, ponctuation ou encore syntaxe. L'homogénéité que l'on perçoit dans les éditions critiques est due à l'édiction de règles très précises qui permettent de guider le chercheur dans chacune des étapes de l'établissement du texte. L’apparat critique, cœur du travail du philologue, comporte lui aussi ses codes de structuration particuliers (Duval, 2006).
            
            Lorsque l’on passe au support numérique, ces conventions disparaissent en partie. A l'écran, il s'agit donc de reprendre les normes élaborées pour l’imprimé et de les faire évoluer afin qu'elles s'adaptent aux particularités du format numérique (Souchier, 2012). Les éditeurs qui s’occupent des livres et des artefacts scientifiques numériques, dont font partie les éditions critiques électroniques, doivent donc d’une part reprendre certains codes sémiotiques du livre imprimé pour les adapter au format numérique, et d’autre part inventer de nouveaux codes propres à l’environnement numérique. 
          
          
          Problématique
            Il existe un standard dévolu à l’encodage des documents textuels dont font partie les éditions critiques : il s’agit bien entendu du langage XML/TEI. Mais si la structuration des données est régie par les règles de la TEI, la présentation finale de l’information n’a pas fait, pour sa part, jusqu’à ce jour, l’objet d’une quelconque normalisation. Dans notre communication, nous nous attacherons précisément à cette question de structuration et de présentation du contenu sur les plateformes de consultation des éditions électroniques. Ce qui nous intéresse est de savoir quelles sont les règles empiriques de structuration, de disposition et de présentation de l’information qui peuvent être observées dans les éditions électroniques. Comment est-ce que les normes de présentation du texte édité, de l’apparat et des outils de recherche ont évolué de l’imprimé à l’écran ? Nous ferons une étude sémiotique de l’édition critique électronique. Ainsi, nous pourrons voir si l’édition critique électronique actuelle est, ou non, en voie d’inventer de nouveaux codes de structuration de l’information et de lecture du contenu. 
          
          
          Méthodologie et résultats attendus
            Pour étudier cette question, nous analysons un corpus d’éditions critiques électroniques sélectionnées par choix raisonné. Nous avons constitué un corpus de douze éditions qui illustrent la diversité des démarches éditoriales observées dans le champ des éditions électroniques : éditions critiques originellement publiées sur papier et transposées en format numérique, éditions critiques publiées simultanément de manière électronique et papier et enfin éditions critiques électroniques natives. Elles ont été développées par divers types d’institutions : universités (Ecole nationale des chartes ou Université de Virginie par exemple), instituts de recherche (à l’image de l’Institut Huygens) ou maisons d’édition (Sd-editions notamment). Enfin, certaines de ces éditions électroniques sont le fait d’initiatives personnelles de chercheurs, comme c’est le cas pour l’édition électronique des œuvres de Petrus Plaoul. Pour mener notre étude, nous nous fondons sur l’observation de ces éditions électroniques ainsi que sur les recherches déjà menées dans ce domaine, incluant les études les plus récentes.
            Les éditions critiques électroniques retenues pour notre corpus d'observation sont diverses : elles couvrent les traditions anglo-saxonnes et françaises et portent sur des documents d'archives ou des œuvres littéraires. La variété des types d’éditions critiques que nous avons retenues répond d’abord à un souhait d’examen le plus complet possible des points centraux de l’édition critique. Nous allons donc présenter un état des lieux des éditions critiques électroniques, au travers d’une analyse de la structuration du contenu. 
            Pour mener notre étude, nous avons élaboré une grille d’observation. Cette dernière est concentrée sur trois pôles : l’apparat critique, le paratexte et les outils de navigation et recherche proposés aux lecteurs. C’est en fonction du positionnement initial de l’éditeur électronique que nous allons comparer les normes de structuration et de présentation de l’information des éditions critiques électroniques. En effet, le positionnement éditorial joue un rôle important dans la fonction assignée à l’édition électronique. Dès lors, des tendances normatives s’observent au sujet de la structuration du contenu dans chacune des catégories d’éditions électroniques (éditions natives ; éditions traditionnelles au départ et publiées ensuite de manière électronique ; éditions simultanément publiées de manière traditionnelle et électronique). Bien entendu, le public de l’édition critique participe aussi, à tout le moins par ses attentes, à l’élaboration des éditions électroniques. Ainsi, la place du public et le rôle qu’il tient sont abordés à chacun des points d’observation (apparat critique, paratexte, outils). 
            Les observations que nous ferons nous permettront de dégager des tendances et caractéristiques des éditions critiques électroniques afin de comprendre comment ces éditions sont organisées et comment s’y créent des normes de structuration de l’information.
          
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Apollon, D., Belisle, C. and Régnier, P. (2014). 
                        Digital Critical Editions. University of Illinois Press. 
                    
                    Burdick, A., et al. (2012). 
                        Digital humanities. Cambridge: MIT Press.
                    
                    Duval, F. (dir.) (2006). 
                        Pratiques philologiques en Europe: actes de la journée d’étude organisée à l’École des chartes le 23 septembre 2005. Paris: École nationale des chartes.
                    
                    Gold, M (dir.) (2012). 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                    Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing . Ashgate.
                    
                    Sahle, P. (2015). Répertoire des éditions critiques électroniques.  http://www.digitale-edition.de/
                    Souchier, E. (2012). La « lettrure » à l’écran. Lire et écrire au regard des médias informatisés, 
                        Communication et langages, 174: 85-108.
                    
                    Terras, M., Nyhan, J. and Vanhoutte, E. (2013). 
                        Defining Digital Humanities. A Reader. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing.
                    
                    Vandendorpe, C. (1999). 
                        Du papyrus à l’hypertexte. Essai sur les mutations du texte et de la lecture. Montréal: Boréal et Paris, La Découverte.
                    
                    Vanhoutte, E. (2010). Defining electronic editions: a historical and functional perspective. 
                        Text and Genre in Reconstruction. Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 119-44.
                    
                    Warwick, C., Terras, M., Nyhan J. (2012). 
                        Digital humanities in practice. London: Facet Publishing in association with UCL Centre for Digital Humanities.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
          
            Introducción
            Este trabajo tiene como objetivo mostrar las posibilidades que ofrecen las herramientas digitales para representar literaturas de México pertenecientes a los pueblos originarios. Estas formas literarias han sido sub-representadas y los acercamientos a ellas siempre han estado marcados por una visión parcial sobre los procesos intrínsecos que las caracterizan y que las distinguen de las literaturas oficiales de México. 
            Las conclusiones se presentan en base a los resultados de dos proyectos: por un lado la edición digital 
                Códice Mendoza y por otro un prototipo digital para la representación de poesía ritual. Ambos proyectos, como se verá, ilustran las ventajas de la representación digital sobre la que se ha venido haciendo por décadas en soportes impresos. 
            
          
          
            Antecedentes
            México es un país con una profunda tradición intelectual que viene desde mucho tiempo atrás de la llegada de los españoles. Las culturas que habitaron lo que hoy se denomina Mesoamérica lograron un enorme desarrollo científico y cultural, que se ve reflejado en su organización política, en su esplendor arquitectónico, en la precisión de sus cálculos astronómicos y en sus expresiones artísticas y literarias. 
            Es importante mencionar que hoy en día ese conocimiento sigue vivo a través de más de 60 culturas que cohabitan en el territorio mexicano. Esas culturas, en mayor o menor medida, son portadoras de ese conocimiento milenario, y siguen representando y actualizando ese saber a través de sus literaturas. 
            El investigador británico Gordon Brotherston se ha referido a estas literaturas como los libros del “cuarto mundo”, expresiones literarias que no necesariamente responden a los estándares que hemos definido durante siglos en la tradición intelectual hegemónica como literatura. (Brotherston, 1997)
            Entre los ejemplos que podemos encontrar a lo largo del continente se encuentran los quipús andinos, y por supuesto los dos casos que nos ocupan: la poesía ritual y los manuscritos pictóricos mesoamericanos. Vale la pena recordar que muchas de estas culturas tenían una forma integral y holística de representar el cosmos, por lo que estas expresiones no se entienden de manera aislada de otros factores culturales como los rituales, la guerra, la caza o los fenómenos naturales. 
            Estos ejemplos de formas literarias no canónigas, que se multiplican por todo el continente americano, deben ser reconocidos como textos en sí mismos. Pueden ser entendidos como una modalidad enmarcada de lenguaje y todos cuentan con coherencia interna (estructura, formato y orden); codificación que le permite resistir al paso del tiempo; todas son entidades en sí mismas y cuentan con una estructura y una función comunicativa. 
            Es muy probable que los mecanismos de representación que hemos usado hasta ahora hayan sido poco sensibles a las necesidades formales que este tipo de expresiones exigen. Debemos reconocer que nuestros acercamientos están siempre enfocados a través de una visión binaria entre lo oral y lo escrito, irrelevante e insuficiente para las literaturas de la América Indígena. 
            En ese sentido hemos sido indiferentes o insensibles al ignorar todas estas categorías de representación. Si bien las hemos estudiado, y gracias a una enorme tradición de estudiosos desde fray Bernardino de Sahagún, pasando por el Padre Ángel María Garibay hasta llegar a Miguel León Portilla y Alfredo López Austin, las pudimos conocer, no hemos resuelto aún como adecuarlas para que su representación formal responda a la complejidad de su esencia. 
            Es necesario que entendamos que estos textos mesoaméricanos son mucho más complejos de lo que hoy leemos como medios escritos. Son indisociables de todos los elementos que lo integran: material, oral y ritual. Son diacrónicos y dialógicos y al mismo tiempo multimediáticos. 
            Por último es necesario tener en cuenta que las dos formas expresivas de las que nos ocupamos, tienen origen en el México prehispánico, y en algunos casos han sobrevivido a los procesos de aculturación. También, estas dos expresiones resultan únicas por sus características y, hasta el momento en que estas líneas se escriben, el autor no ha podido conocer otros proyectos que aborden desde una perspectiva holística el problema de representación de estas literaturas o expresiones culturales mexicanas en otro tipo de medios. 
          
          
            Representación de códices mexicanos en medios digitales
            El primer proyecto que se abordará es la edición digital del 
                Códice Mendoza esfuerzo histórico por ofrecer en plataformas digitales un nuevo acercamiento a estos manuscritos históricos. Estos documentos pictográficos son considerados objetos culturales complejos que representaban el conocimiento histórico, simbólico, calendárico, económico y ritual de los antiguos mexicanos. Fueron creados en diferentes tipos de soportes como el papel amate, el papel de maguey o el papel europeo, después de la llegada de los españoles.
            
            La escritura de los códices mexicanos no es fonética salvo en el caso de los códices mayas. En el caso de los códices zapotecos y mexicas la relación entre las imágenes es lo que determina el significado. Este tipo de escritura no alfabética ha sido definida como semasiográfica (Boone Hill, 1994, 20). Asimismo, integran en un todo holístico lo que nosotros podríamos considerar como elementos separados. En ese sentido, los podemos considerar como textos multimedia ya que echan mano de imágenes, oralidad, memoria, ritual e incluso elementos no directa o físicamente asociados como esculturas, sitios sagrados o algún corpus de inscripciones. De igual manera, la lectura de estos documentos era un acto performático y ritual, sólo ejecutado por quien Jerome Rothenberg llamaría un técnico de lo sagrado.
            En síntesis podemos decir que los códices son soportes abiertos, dinámicos, participativos, interactivos y ‘suceden’ en tiempo real. Por estas características resulta muy difícil imaginar que podamos representarlos en un soporte plano bidimensional como una edición en papel. 
            El especialista Miguel León-Portilla ha considerado que es insuficiente traducir un códice a una edición en papel. Quizá lo mismo se puede decir de cualquier traducción y transliteración, aunque por las características descritas arriba, se acentúa la complejidad en el caso de los códices. León-Portilla también estableció una interesante analogía, muy adecuada para nuestro tema, donde compara a los CR-ROMs con los códices. Enfatiza que ambos tienen varias formas de lectura, los dos son multimedia al combinar imágenes, texto y sonido, al tiempo que ambos tiene un afán totalizados de diversas facetas del conocimiento. (León-Portilla, 2003)
            Hoy, el equivalente a un CD-ROM sería una aplicación web o una aplicación nativa para algún dispositivo móvil. 
            En este sentido, la edición digital del 
                Códice Mendoza demostró que la representación digital es óptima para los códices mexicanos. Su complejidad semántica y también su carácter multimedial se representan de manera más holística en medios digitales. En este sentido vale la pena recordar las palabras de Willard McCarty cuando señala que toda traducción de un medio textual a un medio digital, conlleva una importante pérdida de sentido (McCarty, 2008). Sin embargo, en este caso la pérdida es mucho menor ya que lo que estamos trasladando es un medio dinámico a otro medio dinámico. 
            
            Del mismo modo, consideramos que el resultado funciona de manera doble en varios sentidos: permite un acercamiento al público en general y también un acercamiento a los académicos especializados. Al mismo tiempo, permite una representación más completa pero también las herramientas tecnológicas nos permiten un estudio más profundo de estos documentos, principalmente por su accesibilidad. 
          
          
            Representación de poesía ritual en medios digitales
            Dentro del territorio mexicano existen más de sesenta lenguas indígenas, que con sus variaciones dialectales son más de trescientas. Como en todas las lenguas del mundo, son complejísimas las expresiones literarias verbales que residen dentro de estas lenguas y estas culturas. 
            Estas expresiones son consideradas como patrimonio intangible, inmaterial o vivo y pese a que existe una buena cantidad de registros, son escasos los que recaen en su valor literario, y en muchas ocasiones se desdeña este tipo de acercamientos frente a los de las ciencias sociales. 
            Al igual que los códices, estas expresiones son dinámicas, abiertas, multimodales, participativas e interactivas. Dentro de la enorme diversidad de expresiones, se encuentran los cantos chamánicos o rituales, que por sus características son aún más complejos. En ellos, también inciden aspectos rituales, estados de trance y otros elementos contextuales difíciles de representar como pintura facial, eructos o incluso convulsiones. 
            Hasta hace poco tiempo estas expresiones se representaban y se estudiaban a través de ediciones impresas. En palabras del teórico John Miles Foley, esta forma de trabajar con las formas verbales aplana o diseca su expresividad. Asimismo, los acercamientos académicos han mostrado poco interés por las características poéticas de estas expresiones
                 Hay varios factores que inciden en la falta de preocupación por representar de manera más completa estas expresiones, principalmente hay poco interés de parte de los antropólogos por las características meramente poéticas de este tipo de literaturas En general, las consideran como un accesorio para conocer otros aspectos de la cultura a la cual pertenecen, una fuente más para el estudio del otro. (Rothenberg and Tedlock, 1970).. Fue gracias a enfoques novedosos y propositivos como la etnopoética, que se logró un cambio de actitud hacia cómo trabajar estos materiales. (Miranda Trigueros, 2007)
            
            Al igual que en el caso de los códices, los medios digitales parecen mucho más adecuados para representar estas expresiones orales. Podemos ser más fieles en la representación, incluir un mayor número de canales de significado, mayor contexto y ser más transparentes con la enunciación original. 
            En respuesta a estas necesidades el que escribe estas líneas creó el prototipo DARP (Digital Archive of Ritual Poetry) como tesis de maestría en 2013, para obtener el grado de maestro en humanidades digitales en el King’s College de Londres. . El prototipo está basado en un fragmento del canto chamánico de la reconocida sanadora mazateca María Sabina. 
            El resultado que nos ofreció el prototipo es un medio digital que nos permite representar de una mejor manera este tipo de expresiones. A diferencia de esfuerzos anteriores, donde, por ejemplo, se representaban en papel acompañados de un CD de audio (Miranda Trigueros, 2007), la integración total de la representación aural con el texto lo hace que funcione mucho mejor. El uso de una aplicación simple basada en Javascript y JQuery permitió sincronizar el audio al texto en una lectura interactiva. Asimismo se integraron otros elementos hipermediales que amplían la comprensión del texto y su significado. 
            Por otro lado, la creación del prototipo permitió comprobar que la codificación del texto permite un acercamiento totalmente novedoso al contenido, obligando al investigador a hacerse preguntas hasta ese momento inéditas (Sperberg-McQueen, 2009, 35). La codificación con TEI y XLST permitió la creación de índices automatizados que estructuran el contenido textual y ofrecen herramientas al investigador para hacer un análisis mucho más ágil y certero que si lo pensáramos en términos manuales. 
            El prototipo busca convertirse en un recurso más sólido para lo cual se plantean dar los siguientes pasos: 
            
                definir una ontología básica de los elementos que pueden encontrarse dentro de este tipo de expresiones.
                Integrar un corpus de diferentes expresiones que se encuentren a lo largo del territorio nacional 
                Creación de una base de datos consultable para poder encontrar elementos comunes y desde allí establecer una poética de los cantos rituales mexicanos. 
            
          
          
            Conclusiones
            Las herramientas digitales nos permiten representar de mejor manera los llamados libros del cuarto mundo. Podemos crear ediciones más holísticas, precisas, fieles y con un mayor grado de contexto que permite una mejor comprensión del objeto representado. 
            Se puede decir también que después de haber trabajado en dos casos disímiles en su formato, pero análogos en su origen y en su complejidad, la representación de un medio dinámico siempre debe de ser representada en un medio dinámico. 
            Tanto en el caso de la poesía oral ritual como en el caso de los códices se hace patente que la complejidad de las expresiones culturales prehispánicas encuentra una representación más rica y transparente a través de las herramientas digitales. Sus características dinámicas, abiertas, procesuales, interactivas y multimediales obligan a pensar en los medios digitales como óptimos para la representación y estudio de este tipo de literaturas. Los recursos digitales son más fieles al original, abren más canales semánticos, ofrecen más contexto, y una forma más holística y transparente de presentación. 
            Asimismo, en ambos casos encontramos enormes posibilidades para los interesados en el estudio de la cultura mexicana, para entender mejor este enorme patrimonio, esta literatura sumergida, donde creemos que es necesario profundizar en las ventajas y virtudes que nos ofrecen las herramientas digitales para un replanteamiento total en el estudio de ellas. 
          
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Brotherston, G. (1997). 
                        La América indígena en su literatura: los libros del cuarto mundo. México, FCE. 
                    
                    Boone Hill, E. and Mignolo, W. (eds). (1994). 
                        Writing Without Words: Alternative Literacies Mesoamerica & the Andes. EUA, Duke University Press.
                    
                    Foley, J. M. (2012). 
                        Oral Tradition and the internet. Pathways of the mind. EUA, University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    León-Portilla, M. (2003). 
                        Códices, los antiguos libros del nuevo mundo. México, Aguilar. 
                    
                    Miranda Trigueros, E. (2007). 
                        La etonopoética y los cantos de María Sabina, una aproximación, (tesis de licenciatura). México, UNAM.
                    
                    McCarty, W. (2008). What's going on?. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(3): 253-61.
                    
                    Rothebnberg, J. and Tedlock, D. (1970). Statement of Intention. 
                        Alcheringa, 1: 5.
                    
                    Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2009). How to teach your edition how to swim 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 24(1): 27-39.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Digital resources in the humanities – text, images, audio and video files – show large variation in terms of quality and provenance, while at the same time constantly increasing in number. As a consequence, requirements for digital (and collaborative) editing, annotating, and modelling of data are subject to constant change. Digital editions, for instance, no longer just offer the potential to annotate text and images through established standards (XML/TEI), but also to retrieve entities in an interoperable format (RDF) and to link them to other digital objects (LOD) in other editions, databases, and archives. The digital annotation of both text and/or image data can be published as a digital object itself. Thus, the relation between digital objects turns into a research object in itself, which can be explored, analysed, and searched by a given set of tools and technologies. 
            A fundamental challenge, however, is that a vast – and still continuously growing – amount of digitised sources is not searchable via one interface or entry point. Search results of numerous different archives, libraries, or other databases cannot be compared automatically; and search requests – as they have to be performed in a de-centralised manner – cannot be (centrally) saved and re-used. Established generic models, together with the necessary expertise in dealing with individual project data as digital objects, are still lacking practice and broad usage in digital humanities and cultural studies. This applies for both data modelling as well as for long-term archiving and persistent publishing of primary digital data.
            The proposed poster will illustrate these core aspects of generating, modelling, archiving, exploring, and presenting humanistic research data from a structural and methodological perspective. The digital infrastructure DARIAH-DE is developing a repository for humanities’ research data (
                https://de.dariah.eu/repository) to be archived and published in a sustainable and persistent way, allowing for re-use, citation, preservation, and further exploration:
            
            
                Persistent Identifiers, e.g. Digital Object Identifiers (DOI), enable scholarly users to identify research data distinctly. They serve as a crucial pre-condition for archiving, retrieving and citing primary digital data not only in science, but in the humanities as well. 
                The modelling of digital objects with established standards (CIDOC, SKOS etc.) and formats (RDF) provides the basis for generating links, thus allowing for generating new knowledge on objects, collections, and/or corpora. Modelling data with the RDF standard allows for linking different objects and therefore accessing information, which can be encoded in variable formats and stored in different databases and archives. The poster will show some practical examples for generic search across TEI-encoded corpora. 
                Digital data collections can serve as innovative sources for humanities’ research. As such, they can potentially generate new knowledge. Which are mandatory prerequisites for dealing adequately with information in image- and object- orientated research? Which standards for structuring research data apply, enabling a comprehensive search functionality also across heterogeneously structured data collections and archives? The poster will also present the DARIAH-DE Data Federation Architecture, a set of different tools and services creating innovative options of data management, e.g. accessing and linking heterogeneous data sources of various provenances, analysing existing distributed data collections as well as services to generate data and schema interoperability.
                The poster will show how repositories can help users of varying research disciplines to model, store, and publish their data in a standardised, interoperable way, allowing for re-use, sharing, and further exploration. 
            
            The poster will accompany a hands-on workshop adressing these questions in more detail, together with (potential) users. DARIAH-DE will present its repository, its features, the Data Federation Architecture and other tools and services related to dealing with and modelling of humantistic research data via demonstrations and hands-on sessions, enabling participants to actively explore the services also with their own data.
        
    


        
            
                Introduction
                Modern infrastructures for the management and dissemination of humanities data face various challenges. On the one hand, sustainability and availability for long-term preservation have to be guaranteed. On the other hand, flexibility and the possibility of individual data usage play a major role in this field. The FEDORA based Asset Management System GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System – Humanities’ Asset Management System) and the corresponding Cirilo client, developed by the Centre for Information Modelling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ZIM-ACDH), address both demands in combining long-term preservation with a presentation and management layer. This means that all of the mentioned challenges can be solved within one infrastructure. 
            
            
                GAMS
                GAMS is an OAIS compliant infrastructure designed for the management, publication and long-term preservation of digital resources. It is based on the Open Source software FEDORA and focuses on the long-term availability and flexible use of digital content. Since 2014 it is a certified trusted digital repository in accordance with the guidelines of the Data Seal of Approval.
                FEDORA offers content models for the aggregation of the digital content, metadata and processing instructions. An example for such an aggregation could be a TEI-document with XSL transformations for various dissemination formats (HTML, PDF, different views for analysis purposes etc.), an RDF datastream that handles the description of the object’s semantic relations and images with their metadata (e.g. facsimiles of the data covered in the TEI). A functional view on FEDORA’s object model includes program-controlled processes based on web services e.g. XSL transformations for dynamic outputs or automatic extraction of semantic relations within a TEI document. 
            
            
                Cirilo
                Cirilo is a java application developed for content preservation and data curation in FEDORA-based repository systems. The client operates through FEDORA’s Management API (API-M) and consequently offers functionalities, which are especially suited to be used as tools for mass operations on FEDORA objects, complementing FEDORA's inbuilt administrator’s client. Cirilo exploits FEDORA’s object model by providing a collection of predefined content models optimized for specific primary sources like TEI, LIDO, METS/MODS, OAI-Records, HTML, PDF, BibTeX or external resources that can be accessed via a URL.
                Several possibilities to semantically enrich the digital objects during the ingest process through different customizable mapping methods are offered: Dublin Core for exposing the objects in harvesting environments (like Europeana), geographical information to present data in map applications (like the DARIAH-DE Geo-Browser), or RDF statements that are stored in triplestores. Furthermore, extraction of semantic information, automatic addition of picture references to the object or resolving text data in combination with underlying ontologies are possible. 
                Since 2014, the Cirilo client has been available as an open-source tool including a comprehensive documentation, representing one of the Austrian contributions to DARIAH-EU. Thus, the entire infrastructure including repository and client is accessible as an archive-in-a-box solution for a broad user community. 
            
            
                Application
                In this context, the infrastructure was adopted by the Petőfi Literary Museum as a solution for their online editions. The project DigiPhil is an online knowledge base for publishing scholarly text editions, writers' bibliographies, aggregating philological metadata and semantic annotation of these sources. At the University of Graz, GAMS hosts numerous digital editions as well as image collections and source books from various disciplines: the literary analysis of the enlightened Spectator press of the 18th century, a postcard collection with topographical and historical views on Styria from 1900 to the present or the account books of Basel from 1535 to 1610.
                The workshop offers the opportunity to learn more on the underlying principles of the infrastructure and to try the mentioned functionalities of the Cirilo client in a hands-on session with a provided data sample.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burghartz, S. (2015). 
                        Jahrrechnungen der Stadt Basel 1535-1610 – digital. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/srbas (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Cirilo Client. 
                        https://github.com/acdh/cirilo (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (2012). 
                        Reference Model for an Open Archival Information System (OAIS), Recommended Practice. CCSDS 650.0-M-2 (Magenta Book) Issue 2, June 2012
                        http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/650x0m2.pdf (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        DARIAH-DE. 
                        DARIAH-DE Geo-Browser. 
                        http://geobrowser.de.dariah.eu/ (accessed 16 March 2016)
                    
                    
                        Ertler, K., Fuchs, A., Fischer, M. and Hobisch, E. (2011-2016). 
                        The Spectators in the international context. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/mws (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Fedora Leadership Group. 
                        FEDORA Commons. 
                        http://www.fedora-commons.org/ (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Lagoze, C., Payette, S., Shin, E. and Wilper, C. (2005). 
                        Fedora. An Architecture for Complex Objects and their Relationships. 
                        http://arxiv.org/ftp/cs/papers/0501/0501012.pdf (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Petőfi Literary Museum.
                        Tudományos szövegkiadások, bibliográfiák és kutatási adatbázisokonline tudástára. 
                        http://digiphil.hu/ (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Steiner, E., Stigler, J. (2015) 
                        GAMS and Cirilo Client. Policies, documentation and tutorial. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/doku (accessed 16 March 2016).
                    
                    
                        Stigler, J., Hofmeister, W. (2010). Edition als Interface. Möglichkeiten der Semantisierung und Kontextualisierung von domänenspezifischen Fachwissen in einem Digitalen Archiv am Beispiel der XML-basierten Augenfassung zur Hugo von Montfort-Edition. In Nutt-Kofoth, R., Plachta, B. and Woesler, W. (eds), 
                        Editio. Internationales Jahrbuch für Editionswissenschaft, 24/2010, pp. 39-56.
                    
                
            
        
    


        
            Crossing the divide between encoded XML sources and tangible, published digital edition has always been a weak spot for TEI community. Recent efforts of the TEI Simple project aimed to bridge that gap with TEI Processing Model idea. TEI Processing Model Toolbox, an eXist-db based application brings the promises of TEI Simple (Rahtz et al., 2015) to life with its implementation of the processing model enhanced with an app generator, allowing to create standalone digital editions out of the box.
            Publishing an edition from TEI sources so far involved tedious work on complex stylesheets and significant effort in building an application on top of it. Using the TEI Processing Model, customising the appearance of the text is all done in TEI ODD by mapping each TEI element to a limited set of well-defined behaviour functions, e.g. “paragraph” or “heading”. The TEI Processing Model specification includes a standard mapping, which can be tweaked by overwriting selected elements. Rendition styles are transparently translated into different output media types like HTML, XSL-FO, LaTeX, or ePUB. This approach easily saves thousands of lines of code for media specific stylesheets. The power of the eXist-db database and the application framework on the other hand take care of all the other core features like browsing, search and navigation.
            The proposed workshop intends to introduce the concepts of the TEI Processing Model and provide a tutorial on how to use TEI Processing Model Toolbox (Meier et al, 2016) app to experiment and try out various ODDs containing processing model instructions, upload users’ own files and create a custom ODD, and, finally, generate their own, standalone edition using the App Generator. As an inspiration it will also present examples of real apps built with App Generator and other systems employing TEI Processing Model.
            It is hoped that exposure to the concepts and technologies presented during the workshop will give its participants a point of exit in the task of publishing their own research data. The subject of the workshop is also strongly tied to a short paper on practical lessons from applying the TEI Processing Model that will be presented later at the DH2016, giving interested participants the opportunity to be introduced to the concept in a much more detailed manner than is possible during brief conference talk.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Meier, W. and Turska, M. (2016). 
                        TEI Processing Model Toolbox Documentation,
                         (accessed 5 March 2015).
                    
                    
                        Rahtz, S., Mueller, M., Pytlik-Zillig, B., Turska, M. and Cummings, J. (2015). 
                        TEI Simple Processing Model Specification,
                         (accessed 5 March 2015).
                    
                
            
        
    






A New Ecological Model for Learning


Cenkl
,
Pavel Thomas

Sterling College, United States of America
pcenkl@sterlingcollege.edu




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unlnotes.unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100







This paper introduces a new ecology of learning and innovative connections between ecological and a humanities curriculum. Drawing on points of intersection between experiential liberal arts education, digital humanities, biomimicry, and ecopsychology, this session will engage instructors and administrators in course development strategies and in helping students plan their own learning by using a DH-supported systems approach to curriculum design. The presentation will explore questions including (1) how can ecological thinking provide a model for a more intentional and dynamic liberal arts pedagogy? (2) can digital technologies help us develop more ecologically-focused learning environments and curricula? and (3) how can teachers integrate ecological thinking into new and existing courses, units, and overall curriculum design?



No source: created in electronic format.




SP09





Paper


Short Paper


writing
ecology
systems
liberal arts
environment


digital humanities — pedagogy and curriculum


withdrawn






Erin Pedigo
Initial encoding







This paper introduces a new ecology of learning and innovative connections between ecological and a humanities curriculum. Drawing on points of intersection between experiential liberal arts education, digital humanities, biomimicry, and ecopsychology, this session will engage instructors and administrators in course development strategies and in helping students plan their own learning by using a DH-supported systems approach to curriculum design.


The presentation will take as its case study Sterling College in Craftsbury Common, Vermont, the smallest four-year residential liberal arts college in the United States, and a community-centered, ecologically focused institution built upon a foundation of experiential education.


The College empowers the development learning community in which students and faculty engage in meaningful experiences each day as part of an integrative environmental liberal arts curriculum. The experiential scholarship that undergirds the College's curriculum enables countless moments of engagement between student, faculty, and place, but it is only with effective reflection that these moments coalesce and find their way into the larger dialogues and stories that make up the fabric of our community.

The presentation will explore the following areas:



Community



Concept

From individual experience to community narrative.



Application


Community learning, broadly, is enabled by tools that (1) create collaborative spaces and empower collaboration and (2) track 'wear' by layering metadata for administrators and faculty to shape and innovate teaching strategies, which further supports migration from instructor-based to co-creative learning.




Discussion


We are currently beginning to explore how technology can help to facilitate reflection on experience to both create a community timeline of layered narratives and help to support learning experiences campus-wide by sharing these boundary objects — or boundary events — and extending discourse across the College to support our integrative curricular model. The resultant archival wear can contribute to metadata that, itself, becomes the community story and creates a feedback loop to help faculty implement more effective classroom experiences.





Work



Concept


Learners are more active and engaged when participating in meaningful and consequential work as both an individual and shared experience.




Application


Work — whether remote or local — can be supported by mobile, accessible text and image sharing to serve as both individual archive and group collaboration can bridge between work experience and 'traditional' classroom scholarship.




Discussion


“Can there be any greater reproach than an idle learning?

Learn to split wood, at least. 

If one has worked hard from morning till night, though he may have grieved that he could not be watching the train of his thoughts during that time, yet the few hasty lines which at evening record his day’s experience will be more musical and true than his freest but idle fancy could have furnished.... The scholar may be sure that he writes the tougher truth for the calluses on his palms. They give firmness to the sentence.


Indeed, the mind never makes a great and successful effort, without a corresponding energy of the body.”


— Henry David Thoreau, A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849)



Work, whether daily practice of chores or performance of an extraordinary task, always represents the engagement of an individual with the materiality of the world. In a learning environment, the enrichment of that work by empowering space for dialogue among practitioners develops community. The geographer Yi Fu Tuan distinguishes between space — as a region empty of human memory or associations — and place — spaces re-created through individual or community stories, which suggests that inhabitation and work in a locale provides it with meaning.


If threads of narrative are similarly built through interactions between the individual and the world, the ensuing story would consist of an archive of field notes and observations layered with reflections that give meaning to experience and underscore field or classroom experience as learning.





Hyperreflection and Storytelling



Concept

Reflecting from within the heart of experience.



Application


Non-text-based, 'good-enough' video, audio, image, and soundscape capture. Geotagging media can foreground the relationship between place and story as well as place and community.




Discussion


“Reflection from the midst.” — Maurice Merleau-Ponty


Tools can complement real experience. Reflection is a critical aspect of experience as learning; however, technology can aid in the creation of boundary events during experience to empower later reflection. If we grant that reflection is itself a form of experience, then the reflective exercise becomes a graduated event, mirroring a process writing curriculum, from field observation and description to narrative and synthesis. Hyperreflection can help generate individual narratives of experience that can coalesce and create a larger community story.


“The real Logos,” asserts philosopher and environmentalist David Abram “is EcoLogos." Abram explores Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s ideas, expressed in The Phenomenology of Perception and elsewhere, about the dialogic nature of the body and the world: “language is everything, since it is the voice of no one, since it is the voice of the things, the waves, the forests.”





Capturing Reality



Concept


Is language an obstacle to reflection on experience?




Application


Mapping indelible, dynamic trajectories across space regardless of media.




Discussion


“What is crucial for us here is the place from which this real erupts: the very borderline separating the outside from the inside, materialized in this case by the windowpane” — Slavoj Žižek, Looking Awry, 1995


Michel de Certeau's suggestion in that individuals' "trajectories form unforeseeable sentences, partly unreadable paths across a space" — although he is writing particularly about consumer culture — resonates with David Abram's premise that language can be far more sensuous and experiential than our cultural scaffolding of mere graphemes enables us to be. Both de Certeau and Abram point both to the physicality of the Real and the challenges of representation.


If language can, in essence become an obstacle to effective reflection on individual or community experiences, what are the possible solutions? what tools can support reflection in media res?





Participation



Concept


Effective learning environments are systems that elicit and empower user contribution and collaboration.




Application


Students can shape their engagement of physical learning environments by scaffolding their experience with collaborative environments where they define their place and expectations of experience.




Discussion


If the work/learning community depends upon learning opportunities, facilitation, experience, and effective reflective practices, it can be aligned with Tim O'Reilly's definition of what he calls a Participatory Architecture, which points to "systems that are designed for user contribution." Whether explicitly or not, working communities both create and are created by the architectures within which they function. Thus, the spaces working communities inhabit simultaneously define and are defined by the place and the work itself. As Tim Cresswell writes, place is "something producing and produced by ideology" and "meanings of place are produced through practice."





Pedagogy and Reflection



Concept

Experience without reflection is merely activity.



Application


Pools of data streams should be aggregated and filtered by students.




Discussion


The engagement, collaboration, and experience that current and emerging technologies purport to provide are only metaphors for the learning/teaching in which many of us are already engaged. Getting one’s hands dirty in the performance of literal, actual, meaningful work can be the scaffold for community, collaboration, and engagement that technology can potentially help facilitate. It is this very interface of ‘high touch’ engagement with students in experiential learning and the ‘high tech’ of collaborative technologies that has been challenging my thinking about technology lately — how to be sure that effective technology supports rather than replaces the meaning of experience.


In the high-touch environment of an experiential work/learning curriculum, experience becomes part of the learning experience only through reflection. High tech tools that support such reflection can enhance reflective practice by creating a pace layered archive of experience from field notes, photos, and video streams that pool in collaborative archives and workspaces, which can then be tapped for continued co-creative learning through more refined and reflective applications such as weblogs, wikis, and pooled again by feed aggregation tools for summary and synthesis.





Environment



Concept


To engage in the environmental crisis through education, we must make space in learning for engagement with the environment.




Application


Global shared forms. Networked blogs to effect real social and political change. Data mining of weblogs.




Discussion


The ecosystem has become as much a metaphor for collaborative technologies as it presents a framework within which to contemplate its development; however, as much as ecology may be an apt metaphor for digital community — in its dynamic development and organic integration of ideas in (often serendipitous) boundary objects, there continues to be a tension between the ubiquity of software and the reality of experience, a tension which is ignored by many.


Self, society, and environment always inhabit the same space — thus creating a layered topography of individuals and their context.


If knowing is defined as being "constructed through the engagement between bodies and machines within the world...this knowledge can be arrived at through a range of methodologies and voices" (Susan Kozel), how do we engage the palpable existence of the world we are trying to "save" without knowing it?











Inspired by DH: The Day of Archaeology


Richardson
,
Lorna-Jane

UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, United Kingdom
l.richardson@ucl.ac.uk




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unlnotes.unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100







The Day of Digital Humanities has become part of the Digital Humanities landscape: Inspired by the project, the Day of Archaeology (DoA) was established by a group of professional digital archaeologists and PhD students in 2011. With over 500 participants, the web project aims to collate archaeological experiences and connect archaeologists across the world, using a variety of digital technologies. The participants record and share their Day on the Wordpress-based DoA website:
www.dayofarchaeology.com
, alongside photo-sharing sites, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. This paper will explore how the Day of Digital Humanities model has translated into a more defined discipline; what the DoA has learned from Day of Digital Humanities; the difficulties and benefits of the web-based model when applied to archaeology; how social media has been used; and what impact the DoA has had, and will have as it develops, for participants, the archaeology community and the wider public.



No source: created in electronic format.




SP01





Paper


Short Paper


archaeology
Day of Digital Humanities
online community
social media


archaeology
audio
video
multimedia
knowledge representation
internet / world wide web
social media
crowdsourcing


withdrawn






Erin Pedigo
Initial encoding







Inspired by DH: The Day of Archaeology


The Day of Digital Humanities has become part of the Digital Humanities landscape: Inspired by the success of the Day of Digital Humanities project, the Day of Archaeology (DoA) was established as a voluntary project by a group of professional digital archaeologists and PhD students in 2011. The project is organised and run for free, and server space and staff time is donated and voluntary. The aim of the DoA was to utilise digital and participatory technologies, using a simple Wordpress-based platform, that would enable even the least digitally-minded archaeologist to share their work within the archaeology community and with the wider public. The web project aims to collate archaeological experiences and connect archaeologists across the world, using a variety of digital technologies. The participants record and share their Day on the Wordpress-based DoA website:
www.dayofarchaeology.com
, alongside photo-sharing sites, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter.


The Day of Archaeology
www.dayofarchaeology.com
has subsequently developed into an annual Public Archaeology event, which offers a unique insight into the working day of archaeologists worldwide. Participant-archaeologists have come from Asia, North and South America, Europe, Australia and Africa. They have written about their day from excavations, offices, museums, community projects, the tourist industry, local government and voluntary groups. The project participants aim to answer a simple question in their contribution; “what do archaeologists do?”. Participants have contributed blog posts, films, photos, Tweets, Facebook pages, archive 'bingo' and 'ask an archaeologist'. The first event was held on the July 29th 2011, where some 500 people working, studying or volunteering in archaeology projects around the world contributed blog posts describing their day. The published posts and text are not scripted by the organisers, and only minimally edited to avoid defamation or incorrect information being shared.


The resulting website presents a behind-the-scenes view of archaeology that incorporates not only the exciting discoveries often showcased in Public Archaeology, but also everyday details of archaeological work in the real world. This project aims to move the public understanding of archaeology away from the 'Indiana Jones' model of excitement and object-oriented discovery, to one that can appreciate the painstaking and vital work undertaken by professionals and volunteers to protect, preserve and interpret our shared pasts.


This paper will explore how the Day of Digital Humanities model has translated into a more defined discipline; what the DoA has learned from Day of Digital Humanities; it will presents details of the project, how it was organised and who participated; the difficulties and benefits of the web-based model when applied to archaeology; how social media has been used; critical reflections on how the project has engaged with different audiences and what impact the DoA has had, and will have as it develops, for participants, the archaeology community and the wider public.











Knitic — The Revolution of Soft Digital Fabrication



Guljajeva
,
Varvara

Estonian Art Academy, Estonia
varvarag@gmail.com



Canet Sola
,
Mar


Interface Cultures, University of Linz for Art and Design

mar.canet@gmail.com




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100






No source: created in electronic format.





Poster





other


digital fabrication
open hardware
personal manufacturing
textile fabrication
soft fabrication
knitting


withdrawn






Laura Weakly
Initial encoding







The paper points out the rapid development of digital fabrication, the influences and importance of open source in this field, and overlooked manufacturing method that is textile fabrication. By introducing our practical work and research we demonstrate the potential of craft in the era of digital fabrication. Also the works by other artists and designers involved in improving and applying obsolete electronic knitting machines are covered.


We have started our research on knitting machines in the beginning of 2012 through our art project SPAMpoetry (Guljajeva 2012) (see Fig. 1.). We have purchased an old Brother knitting machine (Fig. 2.) in order to hack the uploading system and knit poems from SPAM. The research on reverse engineering of knitting machine made us realize that the electronic knitting machine was the first digital manufacturing tool at home that has been totally overlooked in the age of digital fabrication. Hence we got an idea and motivation for developing Knitic — an open hardware and integrate it to the field of digital fabrication (Canet and Guljajeva 2012).



Fig. 1

SPAMpoetry




Fig. 2

making a workshop on application of a modified Brother KH930 knitting machine.



What is Knitic? It is an open hardware (see Fig. 3.), which controls an obsolete Brother knitting machine from 1980s via Arduino (open source micro controller). Knitic does not use a floppy emulation or knitting machine’s keypad simulation, like previous hacks. Instead, the open hardware is the new ‘brain’ of a knitting machine that allows real-time control over the needles (see Fig. 4.). It means, one can knit as long patterns as desired and modify the pattern on the fly. Knitic has one more important advantage: it is compatible with all Brother electronic machines. Maybe also with punch-card ones, this needs to be tested though. How come? Because we do not use any Brother electronics but just sensors’ output and solenoids’ input of a knitting machine.



Fig. 3
PCB of Knitic



Fig. 4

Testing Knitic. Knitting machine's new brain is able to control needles according to the pattern.



Why are we developing open hardware for knitting? Digital fabrication is gaining importance. The numbers of Fab Labs, persons possessing digital fabrication tools, and open hardware are increasing. Furthermore, the number of start-ups and small-scale companies applying digital fabrication devices as their core business idea is increasing. Makers, designers and artists, who have invested in buying a 3D printer and/or laser cutter, in addition to their work are manufacturing for others, too. Now makers also replicate machines and sell, which all in all pays back the investments sooner.


Hence, society is shifting towards personal and custom manufacturing that is strongly supported by the information age. In the words of Neil Gershenfeld the founder of Fab Labs' model: 'the real impact of digital communications and computation came in giving ordinary people control over the information in their lives; digital fabrication will likewise give individuals control over their physical world by allowing them to personally program its construction.' (Gershenfeld 2007, 241).


However, all this innovation is around certain tools, mainly laser cutters, 3D printers, and CNC machines. At the same time textile fabrication has been overlooked. In the end, it is a shame to forget early fabrication methods, which can be adjusted for digital age needs. Also, re-application of obsolete media and integration of craft are interesting and novel approaches in the field of digital fabrication.


We believe that all these results could be augmented if textile fabrication is added as an option for open manufacturing. Individuals, who are experimenting with and making their living from digital fabrication practices could have more possibilities for creation as well as business. And what is more important, more people could be involved, especially the ones who are skilled in handcrafts like knitting and sewing. Hence, introducing this overlooked manufacturing field will certainly bring innovation, as well as novel business and collaboration models.


To tell more, there is a growing community of artists and designers working with and improving hacked obsolete electronic knitting machines. For example, Becky Stern from MAKE Magazine introduced the first tutorial how to modify a knitting machine (Stern, 2010). Andrew Salamone an artist from New Year has knit a body of work on those machines. The practice of Fabienne Serriere is a good example of one-person manufacturing. She has modified a knitting machine and now produces knitted items by applying parametric design approach while making her own patterns (Serriere 2011).


In addition to that, the machine that was produced for home-use in late 1980s, actually allows to knit big-scale and custom-made items. For instance, we have knit a car Kombi on Brother KH930 machine with Knitic (see Fig. 5,) and a number of SPAMpoetry pieces. Concerning innovation, knitting has a big potential in the field of smart textiles. At the moment the most of work in this field is done on fabrics. Hence, knitting is completely unexplored field from this point of view. For example, thermo chromic and UV pigments could be applied on yarn. Also conductive yarn is a thing to try out. Hence, we see lots of room for creativity and innovation in the field of knitting.



Fig. 5

Knitted Kombi on the streets of Belo Horizonte, Brazil.



Why does open source matters? In our point of view, open code, hardware, and design are the reasons for the success of digital fabrication field. For instance, Lipson and Kurman write about the phenomena of a factory at home and one-person industries, which is not a vision or future prediction but already a reality. There are a number of proofs for such a claim, but the most vital ones are open source hardware and software, and an active community around the rising paradigm. For example, 3D printers that were for industrial use and not affordable for individuals, can now, in 2012, be purchased for 1000 euros. Obviously, an industrial machine has better specifications from an open source one, but still a self-assembled RepRap can be applied for prototyping, a small-scale and customised production, and finally for self-replication. Moreover, the price of the machine is dropping and features improving because the machine is an open hardware! There are lots of 3D printers that are open source and through the innovation and contribution of the whole community the development curve is extremely rapid.


Concerning further reasons for the advent of digital fabrication, open design as well as software play an extremely important role. Thanks to the database of designs that are available online, like Thingiverse.com, one can find a huge number of 3D models as well as share their own designs freely. Hence, even non-experts are able to start experimenting and producing desired items. In addition to that, open code is also crucial for understanding and improving the performance of digital fabrication machines.


Coming back to Knitic, we have opened all our research in order to achieve similar effect in the community of makers as described above. Our ultimate goal is to contribute with completely open source knitting machine that can be produced by laser-cutting and 3D printing its parts. Hence, an open source knitting machine will not depend on availability of discontinued Brother electronic knitting machines.


We believe that textile fabrication has a huge potential in the age of digital fabrication and customisation. Moreover, knitting is a skill that humanity has been using for ages. Hence, there are lots of experts, knowledge, learning and production material, tools, etc. On the contrary, the ability to 3D print or laser-cut is the competence of very few people. It means, introducing craft in general to the desktop manufacturing communities and Fab Labs will bring more people and gender balance to these networks. Furthermore, the encounter of different skills and disciplines will most likely constitute innovation and creativity.


In the end, it is curious how an electronic knitting machine, the first digital manufacturing tool at home has been forgotten by digital fabrication labs and open hardware developers. Therefore, we are confident in the importance of our research project and contribution to the field of personal manufacturing. Moreover, our research and development of open source knitting machine is a perfect example of artists developing their own tools for their work. And that is what is happening in the world of open source hardware and software that affects greatly art, design, and manufacturing fields.


And finally, in our point of view it is impossible to talk about the shift of production paradigm by observing and describing the phenomenon of Fab Labs and novel open source machines that are able to produce hard-surface items, while excluding all other areas of manufacturing.


To sum up, since knitting is a well-known craft and there are lots of experts, it is a shame to run after new technology and forget good old skills. On the contrary, innovation should take advantage of existing knowledge.







Canet, M., and V. Guljajeva
(2012). Knitic.
http://www.knitic.com/
(accessed 14 March 2013).


The Economist.
(2011). 3D printing. The printed world.
http://www.economist.com/node/18114221
(accessed 1 September 2012).


Fab Lab International.
http://fablabinternational.org/
(accessed 20 February 2013).


Gershenfeld, N.
(2007).

Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your Desktop — from Personal Computers to Personal Fabrication

. Basic Books.


Goodspeed, T.
(2010). Hacking a Knitting Machine's Keypad.

http://travisgoodspeed.blogspot.com.br/2010/12/hacking-knitting-machines-keypad.html

(accessed 14 January 2013).


Guljajeva, V.
(2012). SPAMpoetry.
http://www.varvarag.info/spampoetry/
(accessed 14 March 2013).


Igoe, T., and C. Mota
(2011). Astrategist's Guide to Digital Fabrication.
m.strategy-business.com/article/11307?gko=63624
(accessed 1 September 2012).


Kurman, M., and H. Lipson
(2010). Factory @ Home: Emerging Economy of Personal Fabrication.

http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf

(accessed 1 March 2013).


Sierrere, F.
(2011). Mate cosies: warm hands, cold mate.
http://fabienne.us/
(accessed 2 February 2013).


Solon, O.
(2013). Digital Fabrication is so much more than 3D printing. In
Wired Magazine
, published 13 March 2013.

http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2013-03/13/digital-fabrication

(accessed 14 March 2013).


Stern, B.
(2010). How-To: Hack Your Knitting Machine.

http://blog.makezine.com/craft/hack_your_knitting_machine/













Ontology and collaborative knowledge environment in Digital Humanities: the Cardano Case



Luzzi
,
Damiana

Fondazione Rinascimento Digitale, Italy
luzzi@rinascimento-digitale.it



Baldi
,
Marialuisa

Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
marialuisa.baldi@unimi.it




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unlnotes.unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100







The

Girolamo Cardano Project: the Knowledge and the Arts of the Renaissance

is devoted to a major author in Renaissance philosophy and science, although not yet fully studied. We focus on our experiment on one of his work in medicine, the
Contradicentia medica,
according to the methodological approach of the semantic web ontology. The multidisciplinary nature of the text, its encyclopedic references and citations, its many sources, ancient and modern, explicit and implicit, make the
Contradicentia
a significant case study for the methodology adopted. Our aims are:


making available online the digital edition of the Contradicentia and its transcription together with other texts related to it


providing a collaborative environment for editing, reading, studying, researching, and posting annotations and comments.


An ontology has been designed to tackle the complexity of the
Contradicentia
, reconstructing Cardano’s ideas in medicine and philosophy of nature, and capturing knowledge about significant contextual information.



No source: created in electronic format.




SP05





Paper


Short Paper


ontology
semantic web
annotation
knowledge representation
collaborative environment


ontologies
software design and development
renaissance studies
semantic web
linking and annotation


withdrawn






Erin Pedigo
Initial encoding






1. Introduction

The

Girolamo Cardano Project: the Knowledge and the Arts of the Renaissance

1
is devoted to a major author in Renaissance philosophy and science, although not yet fully studied. Girolamo Cardano(1501-1576) was a polymath, philosopher, mathematician, physician, astrologer, encyclopedist and autobiographer
2
. In this paper we focus on our experiment on one of his most important works in medicine, the

Contradicentia medica
3
,

according to the methodological approach of the semantic web ontology(Kotis, et al. 2010; Domingue, et al. 2011). The multidisciplinary nature of the text, its encyclopedic references and citations, its many sources, ancient and modern, explicit and implicit, make the
Contradicentia
a significant case study for the methodology adopted. Our aims are:


making available online the digital edition of the
Contradicentia
and its transcription, together with other texts related to it


providing a collaborative environment for editing, reading, studying, researching, and posting annotations and comments.




A semantic web ontology has been designed to tackle the complexity of the
Contradicentia,
reconstructing Cardano’s ideas in medicine and in the philosophy of nature, and capturing knowledge about significant contextual information. Its application to the text of Cardano is an absolute novelty in Renaissance studies. The semantic web ontology is an excellent choice for representing Cardano’s encyclopedic knowledge. The main characteristics of an ontology are:

flexibility
extensibility
portability

it is shared and persistent over time, too.


The ontology and the semantic approach allow us to express the concepts drawn from the text and create links between them favoring the development, sharing, reuse, and updating of knowledge. The semantic web ontology can be published in the form of Linked Data (Eero, 2012; Heath et al., 2011) to facilitate sharing, interoperability and reuse of information.


Cardano himself, were he alive today, would be very interested in ICT and semantic web technologies, as he thought knowledge was a network
4
and that philosophers had to find hidden relationships between things and concepts.



2. Cardano's ontology

According to the OWL 2 (Motik, et al. 2009):

the core classes represent Cardano’s thought

the “general” classes represent the knowledge base designed to express the information about the temporal and spatial aspects, the persons and groups, the cataloging of the texts and bibliography references. To manage this information we have implemented classes and predicates, taking into account the standards
5
, in order to make an open and flexible system available in which information, with a different granularity, can be integrated and continuously updated by the users themselves, once enabled.




As an example (Fig. 1), we represent a significant portion of the ontological model which describes the evolution of Cardano’s thought over time, as it is expressed in some portions of the text.



Fig. 1:

Basic description in UML (Unified Modeling Language); in brackets the Latin term used by Cardano.



Cardano’s concepts (e.g. “Elementum”) are contained in the superclass
CardanoThought.
The “lifespan” of any concept is defined by the class
TemporalEntity
linked by the property
hasTemporalReference.
The class
TemporalEntity
can be aligned by equivalence relation to the class with the same name within Time ontology
6
. To express the evolution of Cardano’s concepts in time, related to a specific part of the text, the class
CardanoThought
is linked by the property
changes
with the class
Change,
and the property
hasTextualReference
with the class
Text.
In addition, to define when, where and which concept has changed, the class
Change
has been defined and linked by property:


when
to the class
TemporalEntity


where
to the class
Text


which
to the class
CardanoThought.


The class
Work
can be aligned by equivalence relation to the class with the same name within FRBR-oo standard
7
.



3. Web Application

Reperio
8
, a collaborative knowledge environment for Digital Humanities and Science, indicates a technological solution to meet the needs of specific scholarly projects. It takes advantage of experience gained during the experimental project Pinakes
9
, of which it is an evolution; Reperio is used in some national and international projects
10
. Its vision and mission is to help eliminate isolation within different research communities by facilitating collaborative ways of working and sharing content and resources, while respecting the intellectual property of the individual scholar. Reperio is a multi-user, modular, collaborative, flexible and customizable web work environment consisting of two modules:


Ontology Editor to edit classes and properties, and to insert instance in the ontology


Text to edit and manage texts and images, which provides specialized tools:

text editor
digital image manager
automatic importer of texts/images
metadata, full-text and semantic search
annotation editor
comparison and collation manager
textual and linguistic analysis



The Ontology Editor and Text modules communicate in a dynamic way: any changes made to the ontology schema (such as the addition, modification, cancellation of a class or a predicate) is “instantly” visualized in Text. The text is thus connected to the ontological schema that it uses for the different types of annotations.


The markup is stored and can be displayed as XHTML, XML, RDF. The data is stored in a Sesame Triple Store. A user-friendly interface allows the user to perform SPARQL queries. The URI
11
identifies digital resources, too. Reperio’s source code will be open-source.



4. Annotation

The Annotation Tool, developed on the basis of the standard Open Annotation Collaboration
12
, enables making various types of annotations on the text (and/or image): comments, links or cross-references to other resources, ontological annotations, etc. Users are allowed to select portions of the text and associate the tags proposed by the system or that they themselves enter.


In this context we present the collaborative Ontological Annotation Tool of Reperio, because it is the most widely used tool for the studies of
Contradicentia
and annotating is a core practice to scholars, too (Corcho, 2006). The expressive power hidden in the texts can be further maximized by combining ontology and annotation: annotation expresses, in a formal manner, the meaning of a text using the “terminology” provided by the ontology. Thanks to this type of annotation, users can study and analyze the text in different ways, philological, syntactic, morphological, grammatical. They can even comment on physical materials, inks, colors, etc.


Particularly, the semantic annotation (Agosti et al., 2007) helps to bridge the ambiguity of natural language in expressing notions and their computational representation in a formal language. The annotation operation can be performed:


1. through concepts associating classes to the selected term/s. If the class relating to the concept on the text is not in the ontology, it can be easily inserted (by user with appropriate permission) opening the ontology editor.


2. through instances:


a. the instances are already in the ontology: selecting (Fig. 2)
“Philosophus”
and connecting it to the instance
“Aristotle”
of the class Person and its subclass Philosopher(i.e. search for
“Aristotle”
shows the results where Aristotle is appointed
“Philosophus”
too, and a search for person or philosopher shows Aristotle in the result). Another example: Cardano writes "calor animalium secundum Philosophum est calor non igneus, sed coelestis"
13
: by semantically linking Cardano’s citation with the instance
De longitudine et brevitate vitae
of the Title class of the ontology, you get the reference to Aristotle's text and its bibliographic information. Therefore a portion of the ontological schema is based on FRBR-oo standard. In addition, if Aristotle’s book is present in a digital edition in Reperio or in another digital library, through a URI connection, you could read the page to which Cardano refers.


b. directly populating the ontology: selecting
"aquae"
and inserting it as instance of the class Elementum.






Annotation operations and/or the ontology population may be performed manually or in a semi-automatic manner by text parsing performed on the basis of the classes and/or instances.



Fig. 2:
Reperio: Semantic Annotation


The semantization of knowledge significantly improves accuracy and relevance of search results. The annotation ontological tool also allows you to write additional information on the annotation, and then to perform a search on them, too.



5. Conclusion

Ontology and an environment system like Reperio can be considered an evolving open ecosystem, that offers scholars the freedom to search and explore. On the experience of the project, the process of designing the ontology has been very useful, because it offers different views and perspectives on texts and the concepts they have, and will open new ways for further study and analysis. Such an “enhanced” search allows you to infer and deduce new knowledge based on what is available.







Agosti, M., G. Bonfiglio-Dosio, and N. Ferro
(2007). A historical and contemporary study on annotations to derive key features for systems design.
International Journal on Digital Libraries,
8(1): 1-19.


Corcho, O.
(2006). Ontology based document annotation: trends and open research problems.

International of Journal Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies.

1: 47-57.


Domingue, J., D. Fensel, and J.A. Hendler (eds.)
(2011).
Handbook of Semantic Web Technologies.
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.


Eero, H.
(2012).

Publishing and Using Cultural Heritage Linked Data on the Semantic Web,

Palo Alto, CA: Morgan & Claypool.


Heath, H., and C. Bizer.
(2011).

Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space.

Palo Alto, CA: Morgan & Claypool.


Kotis, K., and G. Vouros
(2010). Ontological Tools: Requirements, Design Issues and Perspectives. In Poli, R., M. Healy, and A. Kameas (eds.)
Theory and Applications of Ontology,
Netherlands: Springer, 155 -173.


Motik, B., P.F. Patel-Schneider, and B. Parsia
(2009). OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Structural Specification and Functional-Style Syntax. In
W3C Recommendation,
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-syntax/
(accessed 5 March, 2013).




Notes

The project is coordinated by the University of Milan-Department of Philosophy
http://dipartimento.filosofia.unimi.it/
(accessed 5 March, 2013) in collaboration with the Digital Renaissance Foundation (FRD,
http://www.rinascimento-digitale.it
(accessed 5 March, 2013).


Cardano G. (1663).
Opera Omnia: tam hactenus excusa, 
cura Caroli Sponi, 10 vols, Huguetan J. A., Ravaud M. A., Lyon, henceforth OO. The volume is available at:

Girolamo Cardano. Strumenti per la storia del Rinascimento in Italia settentrionale,

Baldi M., Canziani G. (edited by):
Opera Omnia,
http://www.cardano.unimi.it/testi/opera.html.


Cardano G. (1565).

Contradicentium Medicorum. Libri duo, quorum primus centum & octo, alte vero totidem disputationes continet,

Macaeus I., Parisiis.


Cardano G.:
De vita propria liber, 
XLI, OO, I.



The conceptual models used are: Time ontology in OWL to express the information about the temporal aspects

 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/
(accessed 5 March, 2013); Friend of a Friend (FOAF) to express information about persons and groups),
http://www.foaf-project.org/
(accessed 5 March, 2013); Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records-object oriented (FRBR-oo) to catalogue texts and bibliography references,

http://www.ifla.org/publications/functional-requirements-for-bibliographic-records

(accessed 5 March, 2013).

Cfr. note 5.
Cfr. note 5.

Developed by the FRD in collaboration with the Institute of Computational Linguistics “Antonio Zampolli” (ILC-CNR),
http://www.reperio.it
(accessed 5 March 2013).


It was developed from 2004 to 2011 by the FRD and the ILC-CNR, in collaboration with the MiBAC and the Galileo Museum.


See, for example:

Cataloging and Management of Digital Documents (Transcript of Texts and Images, Manuscripts, Books, Lectures, etc.)

of the Pontifical Gregorian University Archives in Rome;

DiTMAO: Information System for Old Occitan Medical Terminology; Bulletin (1893 - 1923) of the Società Dantesca Italiana.



Uniform Resource Identifier, the same identifier at the basis of Linked Data.


OAC,
http://www.openannotation.org 
(accessed 5 March, 2013) and Open Annotation Data Model (W3C draft,
http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/
(accessed 5 March, 2013).


G. Cardano,
 Contradicentium medicorum libri,
cit., I, I, XI.






        
            
                Introduction
                For many centuries, the metropolitan province of Salzburg played a key role in the cultural history of Austria. The digital availability of the many surviving liturgical musical sources which form an important part of this cultural heritage is therefore of great importance. This research project aims at investigating the records that survived as manuscripts and describe the practice of liturgical and musical acts of worship. Liturgical ordinals, called libri ordinarii (LOi), are key sources for this transmission, as they include a short form of the entire rite of a diocese or a monastery. Prayers, readings and chants are given as abbreviations (incipits). 
                This poster examines the technical background to the project and specifically the transformation process into TEI as well as the creation of semantic web knowledge representations of the liturgical occasions/functions and the chants based on existing relational databases.
            
            
                The object: Liturgy and music in the medieval metropolitan province of Salzburg
                A liber ordinarius usually includes all the information required by an individual institution (church, monastery) or a group (diocese, group of monasteries) for their services. This includes the incipits of chants, readings and prayers for the liturgy of the hours, mass and processions as well as rubrics that provide instructions on how and when particular liturgical acts should be carried out. 
                The rubrics often contain indications of how the chant is to be performed and are thus able to provide important information on chant performance practice. However, this information cannot be utilized without in-depth examination of the LOi: thus, scholarly studies have to include a critical transcription of the Latin texts, followed by an in-depth analysis of the origins of the liturgy and the commentaries.
            
            
                The aim: Reconstruct the development of the liturgy in the Salzburg metropolitan province by Semantic Enrichment
                The research project’s aim is to reconstruct and produce a synoptic study of the emergence and development of the liturgy in the Salzburg metropolitan province, based on the surviving LOi in the region. A primary task was the transformation of the ordinarii from docx into TEI. A Java algorithm parses the docx on word-level in order to create the desired TEI-Output. The encoding in TEI consequently allows a detailed transcription of textual phenomena and the reference between texts. This is the basis for an in-depth analysis of the different traditions and variants of the LOi. 
                The LOi as a textual genre need enriched editions, which cannot be fully provided in printed forms. The project will provide the multi-layered texts digitally working with a controlled vocabulary. This resource will be of particular interest for the international efforts on cataloguing the manuscript heritage and research on the history of liturgy, which will be able to refer to the controlled vocabulary via Semantic Web technologies and Linked Open Data. The data from the existing relational databases cantusplanus.at and cantusdatabase.org will be converted into semantic web knowledge representations (SKOS, OWL). With the usage of these standards, we can secure the long-term use of the data created. 
            
            
                The long term perspective: The technical infrastructure
                The digitized and enriched objects will be managed, published and long-time archived in GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System). GAMS is an OAIS-compliant Asset Management System based on the Open Source software FEDORA and further developed by the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities at the University of Graz. 
                GAMS focuses on the long-term availability and flexible use of digital content. The repository builds upon a webservice-based (SOAP, REST), platform-independent and distributed system architecture, a largely XML based content strategy, the support of XML based import and export standards (METS, DIDL, etc.) and the use of standardized data and metadata formats. All data objects in the system receive a persistent identifier (PID) and can thus be explicitly cited. 
                During the ingest process of the objects into the repository, the TEI documents can be semantically enriched through content-specific controlled vocabularies. Information will be extracted from the content document, for instance Dublin Core metadata or user-generated RDF triples for subsequent processing like complex search requests, the generation of indices and data visualization. For the storage and retrieval of RDF triples, an openRDF Sesame repository is accessed through a web service. 
                The manuscripts in the project will be presented with an interface, which allows navigating the data in the ways mentioned above, including elaborate multi-criteria search support by drill down methods. GAMS includes an efficient Imageserver (IIPImage) which allows seamless navigation and zoom in high resolution images.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Klugseder, R. (2014). Mittelalterliche musik-liturgische Quellen aus dem Augustinerchorherrenstift St. Florian. In 
                        Musicologica Austriaca, 31.
                    
                    
                        Praßl, F. K. (1998). Der älteste Salzburger Liber Ordinarius (Codex M II 6 der Universitätsbibliothek Salzburg). Zu seinen Inhalten und seiner Wirkungsgeschichte. In Engels, S. and Walterkirchen, G. (eds.), 
                        Musica sacra mediaevalis. Geistliche Musik Salzburgs im Mittelalter. St. Ottilien: pp. 31-47 (= Studien und Mitteilungen zur Geschichte des Benediktinerordens und seiner Zweige 40, Ergänzungsband)
                    
                    
                        CANTUS. (2016). A database for latin ecclesiastical chant. 
                        http://cantusdatabase.org/ (accessed 22 February 2016)
                    
                    
                        GAMS. (2016). 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/doku (accessed 22 February 2016)
                    
                
            
        
    
Many programs perform part-of-speech (POS) tagging on texts [Leech et al. 1983, Booth 1985, Church 1988, DeRose 1988, Brill 1992, Leech et al. 1994, Schmidt 1994, 1995, Toutanova et al. 2003]; although they use a variety of algorithms, their interfaces tend to be similar:

•    They work in batch mode, not interactively.

•    They generally model text as a flat sequence of characters; for most, XML markup must be removed before data are submitted to the tagger, and afterwards merged back into the output.

•    They are consequently unable to exploit information in XML markup — for example, that “Brown” is here a proper noun and “Essex” there a place name.

•    They tag each word token in the input with their best guess at the correct POS; by default, they do not distinguish low- and high-probability guesses.

•    They cannot accept partially tagged input. In consequence, the human annotator cannot help them by providing hints on some words.

•    They operate on words, not smaller segments.

This paper describes an XQuery-based POS tagger designed to differ from existing taggers in all of these ways. It works interactively one sentence at a time directly on XML (by default, TEI-encoded) text, exploits relevant markup, provides not just the most probable tagging of the input but several ranked alternatives, accepts partially tagged input, and can work on user-specified segments (e.g. TEI w [word] or m [morph] elements) instead of only on space-delimited tokens. Because the tagger described here is designed to support semi-automatic (or ‘half-automatic') POS annotation for XML data, it has been given the name Hapax. Hapax has been designed and implemented as part of the project “Annotated Turki Manuscripts from the Jarring Collection Online” (ATMO), supported by the Henry R. Luce Foundation; the author thanks both the Luce Foundation for their support and his colleagues in the ATMO project for their collaboration.

Design considerations

Early POS taggers used morphological and other rules to assign POS tags to input; later experience showed that purely statistical methods like hidden Markov models (HMMs) could achieve better accuracy with less effort; for tutorial descriptions of HMMs see Rabiner 1989 and Charniak 1993.

For batch-mode POS tagging, accuracy and speed are obvious desiderata. Many modifications, refinements, and alternatives to HMMs have been proposed; these can improve accuracy by several percentage points. Larger training sets make a much larger difference. Schmid 1994 reports a comparison in which the least and most accurate taggers differ by two to four percentage points, while accuracy rates for small and large training sets (< 10,000 and > 1,000,000 words) differ by twelve to sixteen points.

For Hapax, intended to support human annotators working on under-resourced languages, raw speed is unimportant. For any tagger, the human annotator will need to correct many proposed taggings; the key to improving annotation speed is to make corrections faster.

Selecting the correct tag from a menu requires several interactions: the 80 tags in the Brown Corpus POS tag set do not fit into a single menu; many tag sets are larger. Accepting a proposed tagging for a word requires a single user-interface interaction (e.g. clicking “OK”).

So speed improves with accuracy: the fastest corrections are those not needed. But high accuracy requires large training sets, which under-resourced languages lack by definition. Some algorithms cope well with limited data. In the Brown Corpus, 92% of all tokens are tagged with the most frequent POS tag for their word type. A trivial 1-gram tagger, which just assigns the most frequent POS tag for each word form, will thus do almost as well on known words as more sophisticated algorithms. In reality, not all words are known, but a 1-gram tagger trained on as little as 2000 words from the Brown Corpus will tag 60 to 70% of input tokens correctly. Larger training sets (8000, 32000, 128000, 500000 words) again do better (6878%, 73-85%, 77-90%, 82-92%).

Also, we can make tagging errors less costly to fix. If the tagger provides one tag for each segment, every wrong guess costs a manual tag selection. If the tagger proposes several POS tags, then some errors will be as cheap as a correct tagging: one mouse-click. So the goal of Hapax's design is to minimize the need to select tags from menus, by proposing not one but several POS tags for each word.

If a 1-gram tagger for the Brown Corpus proposes not one but three POS tags, the correct tag will be among those proposed 71-80%, 79-86%, 84-93%, 8797%, or 90-98% of the time (for 2000-, 8000-, 32000, 128000, 500000-word training sets). If five tags are proposed, the correct tag will be proposed 79-88%,

87-92%, 91-95%, 92-97%, or 94-98% of the time.

If a single user interaction can accept a proposed tagging for the entire sentence, we will save one interaction for each word of the sentence. Hapax uses a standard bigram HMM to calculate the N most likely taggings for the entire sentence. The higher N is set, the greater the chances that only a single mouseclick will be required, but more time will be needed for reading and considering the proposals; it is likely that there is a point of diminishing returns.

XQuery implementation

Hapax is implemented as a library of XQuery functions. One set of functions reads the training material and produces XML word- or POS-frequency lists from them. These list word types or POS tags by frequency, subdivided by POS tags or word types (or, for bigrams, POS of following segment). Additional functions calculate probability distributions for use with unknown words, using the technique of Charniak et al. 1993.

The 1-gram tagger consults the word/POS frequency list and returns the N most likely POS tags for the given word form. The bigram tagger consults the bigram and POS/word lists and uses the standard Viterbi algorithm to calculate the most likely path through the trellis of possible taggings for a sentence. A simple modification of the algorithm allows Hapax to calculate not one path but the best N paths, with time linear in the number of tags in the trellis.

Testing routines generate random test and training sets from a corpus stored as an XQuery database; in a project setting, the training sets are not created on the fly but prepared in advance and stored in a data-base.The primary interface for consumers of the Hapax library is the function hapax:tag(), which accepts as arguments:

• An XML element representing a sentence

• An indication of what frequency data to use

• Optionally, a set of access functions The function calls the 1-gram and bigram taggers and returns an XML document describing possible POS taggings for the input. In the common case, the input sentence is a tei:s element, containing tei:w or tei:m elements to be tagged. Input elements may have type attributes; such a partial tagging of the sentence will affect the probabilities for the POS tags for other elements. The optional set of access functions allows Hapax to be used with non-TEI markup; the user-supplied functions are used to identify words in a sentence, detect POS tagging in the input, and add POS tags to the output.

The entire Hapax library is a few thousand lines of XQuery; the rich sets of data structures (including XML as a native type), higher-order functions, and grouping constructs in XQuery and XSLT make the implementation of POS-tagging algorithms remarkably straightforward.

XForms interface

In the ATMO project, Hapax supports a browser-based user interface specified with XForms. The form displays a document, providing an Annotate button for each sentence. When the button fires, the form sends the sentence to the Hapax back end and uses the response to build a form for accepting or changing the annotation. The most likely taggings for the sentence are shown, each with an Accept button. A “Tag word-by-word” button is also shown; in word-by-word annotation, each segment in the sentence is displayed with several proposed tags: first those in the full-sentence taggings, then other common tags for the word type, and a worst-case “Tag manually” button which exposes the POS menus. The user can tag one or more words and activate a “Re-annotate” button, which resubmits the sentence to the back end. This allows the user to explore the effect of one POS assignment on POS probabilities for nearby words.

Within the ATMO project, data must also be segmented and spelling-regularized; those topics and their interaction with POS tagging are not discussed here.

Further work

Hapax v1 uses standard 1- and 2-gram HMMs for POS tagging (Charniak et al. 1993). Future versions should implement Schmid's binary-decision-tree method (1994, 1995), which helps with sparse data. More challenging will be adapting the directed-graph model of Xuehelaiti et al. (2013) to probabilistic POS tagging. This two-level model would allow the probability of a given stem's POS tag to depend not only on the POS of the immediately preceding morpheme(s) but on the tag(s) of the preceding word stems, which may improve tagging accuracy for agglutinative languages.

Bibliography

Booth, B.M. (1985), “Revising CLAWS,” ICAME News 9: 2935.

Brill, E. (1992), “A simple rule-based part of speech tagger,” in Proceedings of the Third conference on applied natural language processing, Trento 31 March - 3 April 1992 ([n.p.]: Association for Computational Linguistics), pp. 152-155.

Charniak, E. (1993), Statistical language learning (Cambridge: MIT Press).

Charniak, E., Hendrickson, C., Jacobson, N., and Parko-witz, M. (1993), “Equations for Part-of-Speech Tagging,” in Proceedings of the 11th National conference on artificial intelligence, Washington DC July 11-15, 1993 ([n.p.]: The AAAI Press; Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993), pp. 784789. Web. http://www.aaai.org/Pa-pers/AAAI/1993AAAI93-117.pdf(Accessed: 1 October 2016)

Church, K. W. (1988), “A Stochastic Parts Program and Noun Phrase Parser for Unrestricted Text,” in Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, Austin 9-12 February 1988 ([n.p.]: Association for Computational Linguistics), pp. 136-143. Web. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/A/A88/A88-

1019.pdf. (Accessed: 1 October 2016)

DeRose, S.J. (1988), “Grammatical category disambiguation by statistical optimization,” Computational Linguistics 14.1, pp. 31- 39.

Rabiner, L. R. (1989) “A Tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and Selected Applications in Speech Recogni-tion.”Markov Models and Selected Applications in Speech Recognition.” Proceedings of the IEEE 77.2: 257286.

Schmid, H. (1995), “Improvements in part-of-speech tagging with an application to German," In Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop. Dublin, Ireland. Revised version available on the Web at http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger/data/tree-tagger2.pdf (Accessed: 1 October 2016.)

Schmid, H. (1994), “Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees," In Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing, ManChester,    UK.    Web.    http://www.cis.uni-

muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger/data/tree-

tagger1.pdf . (Accessed: 1 October 2016)

Toutanova, K., Klein, D., Christopher Manning,, C. and Singer, Y. (2003), “Feature-Rich Part-of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency Network," In Proceedings of

HLT-NAACL 2003, pp. 252-259.

Xuehelaiti, M., Liu, K., Jiang, W., and Yibulayin, T.. (2013). “Graphic Language Model for Agglutinative Languages: Uyghur as Study Case." Chinese computational linguistics and natural language processing based on naturally annotated big data: 12th China National Conference, CCL 2013 and First International Symposium, NLP-NABD 2013, Suzhou, China, October 10-12, 2013, Proceedings, ed. Maosong Sun. LNAI 8202. Berlin: Springer, pp. 268279.

Leech, G. Garside, R., and Bryant, M. (1994), “CLAWS4:

The tagging of the British National Corpus,” In Proceedings of the 15th International conference on computational linguistics (COLING 94) Kyoto, Japan, pp. 622-628. Web. http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/papers/coling.html . (Accessed: 1 October 2016)

Leech, G., Garside, R., and Atwell, E. (1983), “The automatic grammatical tagging of the LOB corpus,” ICAME News 7: 13-33.
Introduction
From the Lexicon to the eLexicon
The first fascicle of the Lexicon mediae et infimae Latinitatis Polonorum (Dictionary of Polish Medieval Latin, henceforth LMILP) was published in 1953. The project aims at providing an exhaustive account of the Latin vocabulary used on Polish territory during the Middle Ages. Addressed to a scholarly public, the dictionary does not make many concessions to a less advanced user. Information is often conveyed only indirectly, by means of typographic devices or is left to be inferred by the reader. The project of retro-digitization of the LMILP started in the mid-2011 and was

completed by the mid-2014. The web application, although completed, is still subject to modifications and

refinements.

Dictionary Annotation
The XML encoding of the dictionary was by no means an ultimate goal of the project. Instead, the idea was to make the rich content of the LMILP fully searchable through a user-friendly interface. This objective, however, has deeply influenced the XML schema design. The TEI (TEI Consortium 2016) was chosen as an annotation standard because at the time the work started it had been already employed in major electronic lexicography projects (Lewis-Short by the Perseus Project; DuCange by the ENC). The popularity that the standard had gained among scholars contributed to emergence of lively community which produced documentation and use cases which supplemented the “Dictionaries” chapter of the TEI Guidelines. Also, the very fact that the TEI Guidelines offered a set of ready-to-use tags for the description of lexicographic content was not without significance. Finally, the TEI XML was supported by major software providers, an important factor for the project in which adaptation of existing rather than writing new software was planned.

Workflow
The paper dictionary was scanned and the output of the OCR program (Abbyy FineReader 11) was exported to ODT files; from each a content.xml file was extracted and then applied a series of XSL transformations. The main goal was to simplify styles that were automatically generated by the OCR software. Resulting XML files underwent second phase of XSL processing in which constitutive parts of the dictionary, such as entry, headword, sense definition etc., were encoded. The output XML files were again retranslated into ODT format: entries were encoded as paragraph styles, other tags were represented as character styles. In the next phase of the project the lexicographers started to proofread OCR text and correct errors of automatic annotation. This task was performed with the help of LibreOffice Writer exclusively without annotators being actually conscious of the underlying XML structure. From the practical point of view, annotation consisted in verifying whether automatic XSL processing produced correct styles; if this was not the case correct style had to be applied, as in standard text processing task.

B • 13 -

■□ass    s -

■es New Roman

ZU-«

DISPERSIO s. DISPARSIO, -onis.£ | Th. BI. |S. I . A. N. I.:>r„;,r \-'vrum: rozrzucenie, roz\ sianie; actus disper^ndi, dissipatio StPPP VIII |p. 229 (a. 1387): pro d-e frumenti. AKapSad II p. 94 (a. 1502): interrogatus super articulo de |d-e hostiarum consecratarum, quibu parochianos communicare. Cf. Th. V1, 1412, \42 sjpp N. conc£ foeni i. cpfyenum XIII p. 410 (a. 1463): ministerialis ... |post recepcionem feni vestigiis alias «koleg^ parsionem parwam feni recepti inse|cutus est... usque in bona tua. 2. Jwminum | a. rozproszenie; eiectio, dissipatio, |V cmetijonum: StPPP VIII p. 199 (a. 1386) : |tj

Fig. 1: “XML-unaware” annotation in the LibreOffice window



This approach allowed for reducing the learning curve to a minimum so that the team members could focus on the lexicographic content. However, it also has a serious drawback: annotation in the text editor cannot produce more complex hierarchies, since paragraph and character styles allow for representing at best two levels deep nesting.

TEI for the eLexicon
A guiding principle of the subsequent TEI annotation was to combine editorial and lexical view of the dictionary content by (1) preserving its original text and (2) storing normalized data in attributes and empty XML elements. Typographic properties of the

text, on the other hand, were not generally encoded, they are easily reconstructible though.

Automatic and manual annotation consisted in three major procedures:

a. translation: custom ODT styles (corresponding to elements of dictionary structure) were “translated” into respective TEI elements or attributes;

b. grouping: deeply nested XML structure was produced from flat annotation;

c. enrichment: implicit information was made explicit.

Translation

The paper justifies some of the annotation choices. Special attention is given to the peculiarities of encoding a scholarly lexicographic work.

1. <entryFree> element was chosen as a container for dictionary entries.

2. Essential features of the dictionary macro-and microstructure are encoded as:

<form>, <orth>;    <gramGrp>, <gen>,

<iType>, <pos>; <etym>, <lang>, <mentioned>;    <cit>,    <bibl>, <biblScope>,

<date>, <quote>; <sense>, <usg>, <def>, <gloss>; <xr>, <ref>; <lbl>; <re>, <certainty>, <oVar>, <note>.

3. Content and form peculiarities of the LMILP are reflected in respective attributes. So, for example, functional variation of the entries is represented in the @type attribute of the <entryFree> and can take one of the following values: main, xref, hom.

4. The TEI schema was only lightly customized: unused elements were deleted; a few content restrictions were overcome.

Grouping: adding depth

The flat entry structure had to undergo heavy XSL

processing, so deep nesting typical of scholarly dictionaries could eventually emerge. Relative ease of the XML-unaware manual annotation resulted in timeconsuming post-processing. The xsl:for-each-group

XSL function was employed in order to structure:

1. citation groups:

<cit>

<bibl>

<ref type="siglum" target="fons:RachJag">RachJag </ref> cbiblScope type="pp" n=ll215">p. 215 </biblScope>

(<time when="1395">a. 1395</time>) </bibl>:

<quote>pro cmilestone unit "lb" xml:id="2.1.3"/>VIII vlnis

<«gloss xml:lang="pl-x-med">pokoczin</gloss»> grisei ad c-um dni regis cmilestone unit="lb" xml:id="2.1.4"/>sub athlas ponendum. cmilestone unit="lb" xml:id="2.1.5"/>

c/quote>

c/cit>

2. etymological groups:

<etym>

(cmentioned xml:lang="la-x-cla">caput</mentioned> <certainty cert="low" locus="value"/>?)

</etym>

3. PoS and grammar groups:


sense groups:

csense orig="2." n="2" xml :id="caballinus.2"> clabel type="numbering">2.c/label>

cusg norm="nat" type="dom" target="abbr:nat.dom">nat.c/usg> cusg type="colloc"> tricmilestone unit="lb" xml :id="2.1.38"/>

cmilestone unit="page" n="2" xml:id="2.2"/> cmilestone unit="lb" xml :id="2.2.l"/>folium c/usg>

cdef xml :lang="pl">przetacznik bobowniczekc/def>; cdef xml :lang="la"> Veronica Becca

cmilestone unit="lb" xml :id="2.2.2"/>bunga Linn.c/def> ccit type="inline">

cbibl>

cref type="siglum" target "tons :RFil#XXV"> RFil XXV c/ref> cbiblScope type="pp" n="282">p. 282 c/biblScope>

(ctime when="1450">a. 1450c/time>) c/bibl>

c/cit>

c/sense>

Enrichment: expanding the dictionary content

Considerable effort was put into enriching the original content of the dictionary, namely: (1) resolving references, (2) normalizing strings, (3) adding redundant and/or inferred information.

Resolving references

A typical reference to an exact location in the dictionary text was encoded as follows:



References to a specific entry or sense relied on the @xml:id attribute:

<xr>

<label>Cf.</label>

cref target="#caballinus.2">CABALLINUS 2</ref> </xr>

The encoding of most frequent type of references (pointing to a source of a language use example) is illustrated in the section II B 4 above.

String normalization

By string normalization, we mean a set of various procedures applied in order to generate a lexical view of the dictionary content. Standardized strings are usually stored in @norm attributes of such elements as language or usage labels, prepositional and inflec-

tional patterns etc. Their primary goal is to enable unified search that would be agnostic of the exact formulation of the paper dictionary. For example, when looking up philosophy-related terms one should be able to retrieve them no matter whether they have been marked with a phil. label or with more verbose formula in textibus philosophicis “in philosophical texts”, as both are annotated as @norm= ”phil”. The second major goal of the normalization was to render chronological information consistent and machine-readable. Its proper annotation should reflect the fact that many medieval texts cannot be dated but only approximately. Apart from some obvious cases (@when attribute stores a year date, for example <time when="1450">a. 1450</time>) the LMILP employs:

1. century dates

(<time    notBefore="1401" no-

tAfter="1500">saec. XV</time> )

2. imprecise dates in year (<time no-tAfter="1120">ante 1120</time>) or century format (<time notBefore="1401" no-tAfter="1450">saec. XV in.</time>).

Making information explicit

Finally, substantial effort has been devoted to making explicit what is not expressed directly in the paper dictionary, but left to be inferred by an expert user. In the LMILP, this is the case, for example, of a part of speech label which is provided for adverbs or conjunctions, but is normally omitted from verb or noun entries. Empty elements have therefore been created and their attributes filled with the inferred content. So, in a typical case, an element <pos norm="subst"/> would be appended to a <gramGrp> group whenever the paper dictionary informs about a word's part-of-speech only indirectly, by means of a gender label (f. for Lat. femininum) or inflectional ending typical of nouns (-ae):

The Dictionary Web Application
The last part of the paper briefly presents the overall architecture of the dictionary web application, its user interface having been already described elsewhere (Nowak 2014). Written entirely in XQuery, the application is served directly from the eXist-db instance with HTML and JavaScript code being equally stored in a database or generated on the fly. The presentation focuses on those features available in the eXist-db which are of critical importance for dictionary application design:

1.    Various types of indexes available in the eX-ist-db allow for efficient retrieval of content from deeply nested dictionary files and dispersed textual data.

2.    A templating system allows for fine-grained web presentation of the XML content.

3.    A URL rewriting engine supports a logical system of dictionary content access.

4.    An out-of-the-box RESTful API exposes lexicographic content to external applications.

In the conclusion, I will also point to some difficulties that I have encountered and which have mainly to do with handling application's state, a crucial feature for multi-language tools which require storing user search results.

Bibliography
Nowak, K. (2014). ‘The eLexicon Mediae et Infimae Latini-tatis Polonorum. The Electronic Dictionary of Polish Medieval Latin'. In The User in Focus. Proceedings of the XVI EURALEX International Congress: 15 - 19 July 2014, Bol-zano/Bozen, edited by Andrea Abel, Chiara Vettori, and

Natascia Ralli, 793-806. Bolzano: EURAC Research.

TEI Consortium. (2016). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic

Text Encoding and Interchange. Version: 3.0.0.

http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-

doc/en/html/index.html.
This poster reports on research that examines the use of XML markup for student authoring, a marked shift from the mimetic roots of XML and its primary use in digital humanities research, the TEI. Thus far, two courses have been taught with a total enrollment of 35 students (19 students in advanced writing for the technical professions, Summer 2016; 14 students in first-year writing, Fall 2016). The research questions are: How does markup function rhetorically when used for authorship? Does writing in XML and designing schemas for authoring contribute to students' understanding of their writing and reading processes? Do reading and writing practices in the markup classroom transfer to other contexts?

These research questions present unique methodological concerns for the study of markup. How can we make claims about the rhetorical and expressive capacities of authorial markup? How can we better understand the role of the schema, the markup, and the platform(s) in students' writing, reading, and thinking processes? In short, how do we study this? These questions will animate the presentation of preliminary results, the subject of the poster.

There has been considerable interest in the semantics of markup languages at recent TEI (Ciotti & Tomasi, 2014; Eide, 2013) and DH conferences (Sperberg-McQueen Marcoux, & Huit-feldt, 2010, 2014), most of which has centered around formal approaches to modeling semantics to explicate the meaning of markup (Sperberg-McQueen, Huitfeldt, & Renear, 2000). A related thread of markup research has examined the rhetorical and expressive capacities of markup (Flanders, 2004; Flanders & Fiormonte, 2007), growing out of an understanding of markup as not merely descriptive, but also interpretive and, indeed, performative (Renear, 2000). Though

Wernimont and Flanders (2007) have discussed the potentials of authorial markup to expand our shared notions of scholarly communication, markup in this authorial realm remains rarely used (one exception being the work of Desmet et al., 2005) and even more rarely studied in a systematic way. This poster will present preliminary results from just such an attempt—a sustained study of an experimental approach to XML as a technology for the production of texts.

The production of texts, in this case, was undertaken by two cohorts of undergraduate students. In addition to writing their assignments in XML (using Oxygen), these courses engaged students in a semester-long, collaborative writing project: the design and implementation of a custom XML schema that structurally and rhetorically models a range of genres of writing. Pedagogically, this approach aims to foster the close attention and metacognition often cited in classroom-oriented uses of XML/TEI (e.g., Singer, 2013; Conatser, 2013). Where this approach to markup differs from earlier uses, however, is in the thoroughly bottom-up, data driven approach to schema design (Piez, 2001). Students begin with a (basically) bare schema and—iteratively and deliberately over the course of an entire semester—design and revise the schema for a range of writing tasks using document analysis and modeling, qualitative writing research methods, and their own experiences of authorship.

To research these classes, I employed a teacher research methodology—a systematic approach to data collection that honors the inside perspectives of teachers and students—that adapted qualitative research methods culled from ethnography, education, and writing studies research. Data was gathered from direct participant observation, reflective journaling, qualitative interviews (three interviews each with nine case study students), survey, and the collection of student writing (normal prose and XML, including version control logs for all XML files). Teacher research foregrounds and honors the experiences and perspectives of students as they compose; thus, the particular methods deployed in this study concern writing as a process, rather than as a static product. This methodology aligns with research in rhetoric and writing studies, which, fundamentally, understands “writing (and broader rhetorical practice) as a verb rather than a noun” (McNely and Teston, 2015: 115).

Preliminary results from the study speak to 1) how students develop and operationalize genre knowledge; 2) the rhetorical constraints and af-fordances of schema design as collaborative writing; and 3) markup's reported intervention into students' thinking and writing processes.

This poster frames this research study as a case study, a demonstration of the kinds of insights that systematic, qualitative research into markup can foster. It aims to organize the audience around a series of questions, including: How are rhetorical theories pertinent to our examination of DH tools and methods, particularly those of data modeling and representation? How does the study of student writing/authorship necessitate a willingness to invent methods sensitive to, and emergent from, particular sites of research? What methodological (re)orientation does an expansion of our disciplinary objects of inquiry require? These questions are best explored interactively, through the dynamic presentation of data generated through this research, and an exploration of the opportunities and limitations of this qualitative approach to markup research. Bibliography

Ciotti, F., Lana, M., & Tomasi, F. (2014). "TEI, ontologies, linked open data: Geolat and beyond.” Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, (8).

Conatser, T. (2013). “Changing medium, transforming composition.” Journal of Digital Humanities, 2.

Desmet, C., Balthazor, R., Cummings, R., Hilton, N., Mitchell, A., & Hart, A. (2005). “<emma>: Reforming composition with XML.” Literary and Linguistic Computing, 20(Suppl): 25-46.

Eide, 0. (2014). “Ontologies, data modeling, and TEI.” Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, (8).

Flanders, J. (2004). “The rhetoric of performative markup.” Critical Inquiry, 31 (1): 49-84.

Flanders, J., & Fiormonte, D. (2007). “Markup and the digital paratext.” Digital Humanities 2007: Conference Abstracts.

McNely , B., & Teston, C. (2015). “Tactical and strategic: Qualitative approaches to the digital humanities.” In Jim Ridolfo and William Hart-Davidson (eds.), Rhetoric and the Digital Humanities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 111-126.

Piez, W. (2001). “Beyond the 'descriptive vs. procedural’ distinction.” Markup Languages, 3(2): 141172.

Renear, A. (2000). “The descriptive/procedural distinction is flawed.” Markup Languages, 2(4): 411420.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Huitfeldt, C., & Renear, A.

(2000). “Meaning and interpretation of markup.” Markup Languages, 2(3): 215-34.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Marcoux, Y., & Huitfeldt,

C. (2014). “Transcriptional implicature: A contribution to markup semantics.” Digital Humanities 2014: Conference Abstracts.

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Marcoux, Y., & Huitfeldt,

C. (2010). “Two representations of the semantics of TEI Lite.” Digital Humanitis 2010: Conference Abstracts.

Wernimont, J., & Flanders, J. (2011). “Possible worlds: Authorial markup and digital scholarship.” Digital Humanties 2011: Conference Abstracts.
Recent work in the digital humanities has moved away describing the digital humanities as a “big tent,” to quote William Pannapacker's famous 2011 post. Taking inspiration instead from the multiple histories and temporalities of media archaeology, such research emphasizes the local contexts where technological and institutional history take place. Matthew Kirschen-baum's identification of the digital humanities in 2014 as a “discursive construction” that ignores the “actually existing projects” of the field set the stage for scholars to rethink how the digital humanities conceptualizes its work and its history (“What Is” 48). More recently, in the introduction to Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016, Matthew Gold and Lauren Klein use the scholarship of Rosalind Krauss who, in 1979, described art history as emerging as “only one term on the periphery of a field in which there are other, differently structured possibilities.” Whereas Krauss saw this as a failure of art history, Gold and Klein celebrate the multiplicity of what Patrik Svensson calls a digital humanities that is less a tent and more a disaggregated “trading zone” of various interests and disciplines. Instead of a transcendent, disciplinary category, the digital humanities emerges as an imminent set of assemblages and rhizomatic localities — converging in some places, diverging in others.

This panel of short papers intervenes in the discussion of an imminent digital humanities by describing several actual alternate histories of the field. All of the thinkers for this proposed panel have sketched variations on digital humanities history in the past. Steven Jones begins his book on Roberto Busa, for example, with an extended discussion of the “multiple potential continuities” existing beside the mythological figure as providing a possibility for “better historical understanding” (16). While Amy Earhart's work historicizes digital literary studies in America through the work of the new historicism, Tara McPherson sees it in the screen cultures of media studies, Roger Whitson points to the publics outside academia invested in steampunk and other nineteenth-century sources, and Padmini Ray Murray explores the repurposing practice of jugaad in India. Such alternate histories point not to a denigration of the meaning of the digital humanities as a disciplinary field, but rather describe — as Lori Emerson says about media archaeology — each strand as “one possibility generated out of a heterogeneous past.” Each of the presenters will spend 10 minutes discussing how DH can be historicized using various disciplinary, national, and outer-institutional contexts.

Activism in Digital Humanities:

Complicating Community, Technology, and Open Access

Amy Earhart
Much of our history in digital humanities has focused on proving that our work has legitimacy within the academy. As I have argued in other publications, the digital humanities has been critiqued as a regresive field, particularly in terms of its approach to cultural studies, and, at the same time, as a challenge to traditional humanities (“Futures”). Key to this simplistic critique of digital humanities is a representation of the digital humanities as a monolithic structure. As part of a panel which reveals the multiple histories of digital humanities, this paper will chart the alternative history of activism and community/academic partnerships in the digital humanities.

Arguing that critiques of digital humanities are ahistorical, the paper will focus on the connection between activism and community in the early digital humanities. For example, the public/academic focus of early digital humanities work has direct ties to what we now call public digital history. Douglas Seefeldt and

William G. Thomas have argued that the future of digital history “invites students and the public into the digital process,” yet this is actually not a future goal. It is our past and connects to a long historical interest in digital humanities as activism and a means of creating community partnerships.

Of particular focus, in the paper, are projects that bring scholars inside the academy into partnerships with community groups, such as the early NativeWeb or eBlackStudies. While such early projects are often viewed as retrograde technologically and often dismissed from our dh genealogy, they offer an alternative history of the way that technologies are used in service of particular fields within the academy. At the same time, such projects are interested in bridging the divide between the academy and the community and serve particular activist agendas. While there are some forms of digital humanities that reject a focus on cultural studies, this branch of digital humanities centers political activism and critiques of race, class, sexuality, and gender within its approach.

The paper will also focus on the way that technology is imagined in the various lineages of digital humanities. In the line of activist projects that the paper examines, technologies are decentralized, often out of the box, and less interested in innovation than in, say, current large corpora data mining projects. Too often “simple” technological projects are dismissed as not digital humanities, even when the theoretical usages of technology in relationship to humanities questions are innovative and forward thinking. Instead of accepting techno progressivism, scholars in digital humanities need to apply the full spectrum of humanities critique to the treatment and use of technology. For example, scholars have a responsibility to address the ways that technological specifications might force western representations of knowledge onto materials of cultural expression that do not use such systems. Projects such as the Tibetan and Himalayan Library's (THL) use of TEI/XML provides one example of how we might proceed. The THL has considered how the understanding of time might be culturally constructed and, as such, has revised the TEI/XML coding to reflect time from the perspective of the Tibetan culture rather than imposing western understandings of time through technological standards.

The history of activist digital humanities projects reminds us to think about how the exploitation of data is related to historical exploitations of people(s), to reconnect the digital with embodied experience. Mark Turin notes, “archives become more complex when the ‘documents' in question are representations of human ‘subjects,' as was the case for the ethnographic archives in which we were interested, including photographs, films, sound recordings and field notes on people's lives, their cultures and their practices” (453). Documents are never devoid of embodiment, as we might never use the term exploitation of data without understanding that, eventually, exploitation of data has real impact on individuals and communities. A division of human subjects and documents leads to problematic interactions with those who we are working to digitize. We need to think about how our data embodies experience.

The paper will close by focusing on the way by which ideas of open access are culturally constructed. Activist projects complicate the adage “information wants to be free,” reminding digital humanities practitioners that the model of broad ‘access' that often motivates western digitization efforts does not apply universally.” The complexities of technology as represented by such practitioners are central to digital humanities.

Roberto Busa, S.J., and Humanities Computing: Complicating the Origin Story

Steven Jones
The Jesuit scholar, Roberto Busa, is often called the founder of humanities computing. In fact, starting as early as 1949, he collaborated with IBM to perform experiments using suites of punched-card machines. These punched-card data systems—with their plugboard setups, clacking machinery, and flurries of perforated rectangular cards—were developed for business accounting and tabulating, and adapted for government censuses, defense calculations, archival management, and information processing of all kinds.

These systems coexisted for many years with electromechanical calculators and electronic computers, helping to define, delimit, and shape the possibilities for research applications, including humanities research applications like Father Busa's. Because the card systems were eventually connected to electronic computers, they've become part of the story of humanities computing. But in many ways, the first decade of humanities computing can more accurately be described as an era of humanities data processing—in the historically specific and contextually rich sense of the term.

My historical work on Roberto Busa's data processing has drawn on a key premise of media archaeology: that technology doesn't “evolve,” or “descend,” in a linear way. As Michel Foucault asserted, genealogy (in the sense he used the term) cannot be figured by strictly logical trees of descent, as in the “evolution of a species.” It's a way of viewing events in their “proper dispersion,” including the “minute deviations . . . complete reversals—the errors, the false appraisals, and the faulty calculations . . . the exteriority of accidents” that constitute history. When it comes to Busa, so often treated as the “founding father” of humanities computing and digital humanities, one way to complicate the origin myth is to pay attention to the “exteriority of accidents” that shaped the received story, to tell the story slant, as it were, by looking at what Steven Johnson has called the “adjacent possibilities,” even the dead ends or paths not taken that nevertheless help us to understand what was done.

One example is the fascinating Microfilm Rapid Selector machine, which Busa briefly considered but from which he swerved away. Based on an experimental design by Vannevar Bush for the famous me-mex, the prototype was viewed by Busa in operation at the library of the Department of Agriculture in 1949. It offered a competing paradigm (both technically and institutionally) for information processing and retrieval. Or, the large-scale photo-mainframe IBM SSEC, which Busa saw working at IBM in 1949-1952 but was unable to use himself (since it was dedicated to scientific and industrial applications). It nonetheless inspired his thinking about the nature and scale of his linguistic data. Its existence as a kind of adjacent possibility is a useful reminder both of the institutionalization of the “two cultures” of science and the humanities at mid century, and, at the same time, of the artificiality of the categories. Or, take the Dead Sea Scrolls project, which Busa's “lab” undertook but could not complete (and the remnants of which remain in the Busa Archive in Milan), but which revealed some of the limits of the idealized “computerized philology” that Busa was pursuing at the time.

My work on Father Busa, IBM, punched-card machines, and large-scale calculators has been inspired by Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair, who have called for a media-archaeology approach to the technologies of the mainframe era. I've also drawn on a related approach, platform studies, which looks at individual platforms in their multilayered material particulars. Because media archaeology looks at forgotten or discounted technologies (presumed to be superseded by what has come to dominate the present), and replaces a triumphal narrative of technological progress with messier stories, it can usefully check and complement the laser focus of platform studies. Together, they allow for richer, more detailed views of the changing cultural and historical conditions within which technologies emerge and jostle for prominence.

Theory/Practice: Lessons Learned from Feminist Film Studies

Tara McPherson
This talk investigates possible relationships of theory to practice within digital humanities and media studies and also calls for a politically engaged approach to both fields. It seeks to move beyond the binary framing of the DH slogan, “less yack, more hack,” by arguing for a more integrative and dialectical melding of making and critique. In particular, I turn to feminist film studies of the late 1970s to examine an earlier moment in media studies that sought to integrate media production, distribution, theory, and pedagogy toward expressly political ends. In conversation with contemporary feminist scholarship in new materialisms and digital media studies, I argue that practices of making can and should enrich our theoretical and discursive    endeavors    within    feminism.

In a recent article taking up the phrase “less yack, more hack,” Claire Warwick helpfully suggests that increased focus might be paid to the qualifiers “less” and “more” rather than to a binary opposition between “yacking” and “hacking” (538). I agree. We can then see yacking and hacking as held within a productive and dialectical relation. To take this line of thinking further, we might not even focus on “less” or “more,” as if the relationship between theory and practice can be reduced to balancing a formula. Instead, we might understand the two terms to be tied together in a productive and iterative friction. The tensions between “yack” and “hack” are not, perhaps, all that unique to the digital humanities. They exist across the university in structures that make it hard to combine theory and practice in our curricula, evaluation and promotion structures, disciplinary methodologies, and privileged forms of scholarly output.

As digital humanities scholars have struggled with the right balance of yack and hack, broader debates have emerged about the relationship of theory to practice across the academy. If these tensions have simmered just below the surface of disciplines for much of the twentieth century, then the digital turn has reanimated such debates in new ways in the new millennium. Returning to earlier moments of practice within and beyond the academy can provide valuable lessons for DH today.

The wedding of theory and practice was crucial to the formation of feminist film studies as a field over forty years ago. We see this joining quite literally in the title of key essays such as Claire Johnston's “The Subject of Feminist Film Theory/Practice.” The “/” signals a hybrid practice beyond the “and.” Published in the journal Screen in 1980, the piece reports on the Feminism and Cinema Event held at the 1979 Edinburgh Film Festival. Johnston writes that, “throughout the week, emphasis was placed on the need to locate feminist politics within a conception of film as a social practice, on the dialectic of making and viewing and on film as a process rather than an object” (27). The early history of feminist film theory models a vibrant relationship of making to critique. Many feminist film scholars engaged in a form of inquiry that understood theory and practice to be constitutive of one another. These insights were often born of a deep exploration of the material forms of cinema—explorations enriched by practice. Such work is vitally important terrain for digital humanities, leading us to ask how our machines encode culture in very particular and often damaging ways while also perhaps signaling an enhanced role for artists and designers within DH endeavors.

Decolonising Design: Critical Making and Jugaad in India

Padmini Ray Murray
This talk will cover the establishment of the first Masters-level digital humanities programme in India,

as well as a digital humanities research agenda that

contextualizes and embeds such work in an Indian environment. Ray Murray will discuss the shift that this unique context generates, in terms of necessarily moving away from modeling such work on paradigms established in Anglo-American institutions, and her work towards the creation of a locally reflexive practice which responds more appropriately to its conditions. Drawing on the work of architectural historian Arindam Dutta, Ray Murray will historicise these arguments, demonstrating how design as a discipline is implicated in the work of colonialism, and how the praxis of critical making (as formulated by thinkers such as Matt Ratto and Garnet Hertz) can contribute both to decolonising design and more broadly, humanities scholarship in India, as well challenging traditional institutional frameworks that are the legacy of colonial education. Ray Murray will demonstrate how critical making is a particularly useful mode of inquiry in a context where digital humanities work is relatively nascent, in order to supplement and inform an emergent narrative of the history of what might be considered digital humanities in India.

Radically different technological and infrastructural conditions as well as historical mean that this narrative diverges from those which underpin established histories of Anglo-American digital humanities, and Ray Murray will explicate on how this difference necessitates alternative methodological approaches in order to reconstruct alternative histories. The work of Jentery Sayers and others at the Maker Lab at the University of Victoria on their cultural kits for history, while emphatically not exercises in replication and more in remediation, and in foregrounding “how the past is interpreted through present conditions, exhibiting history as a collection of refreshed traces, with both loss and gain” often relies on historical material culture such as patent documents, illustrations, artefacts in order to inform their creation, much of which is conserved and made available by Victorian values of empire-building and taxonomic collection. In contrast, the history of indigenous technologies in India is patchy and often obscured by more visible archival material which asserted colonial structures of oppression, complicating the use of a mode of inquiry such as Sayers et al's cultural kits for digital humanities work in India.

In addition, in a country like India, where literacy is still at a premium, design and making privileges the value of other forms of knowledge found in communities, such as crafts or indigenous traditions. Ray Murray will thus demonstrate to how conceiving of critical making in the tradition of practices such as jugaad, an indigenous combination of making-do, hacking, and frugal engineering makes for a contextually appropriate intervention in understandings of the digital humanities, and allows for a more politically nuanced view of tools, materials and the conditions of production that have laid the foundations for digital humanities scholarship going forward. In closing, Ray Murray will discuss how contemporary design education privileges “solution-ing”, which anticipates a model of consumption rather than co-creation, tracing a trajectory from colonial ambition to neoliberal inevitability— and how digital humanities thinking discourages this mode by with its legacy of interpretation that discourages a one-size-fits-all response. Ray Murray will conclude by asserting the uses of creating a useful methodology to turn the lens of scrutiny upon digital artefacts and activities as well as being observant of different materialities and modalities of knowledge production in order to both historicise and limit the over determined nature of the digital.

Alternate Histories: Steampunk Fandoms and Digital Humanities Publics

Roger Whitson

The digital humanities is often characterized as dedicated to making scholarship publicly accessible. Yet accessibility is only one way to pursue a public digital humanities agenda. Another method leverages the complicated history described by media archaeology to highlight how various publics outside of University settings are already constructing digital humanities projects of their own. Jussi Parikka begins What is Media Archaeology? with an extended consideration of steampunk as an exemplary media archaeological practice, arguing that it falls outside of mainstream digital methodologies and is what Deleuze and Guat-tari call a “nomadic, minor science”: a set of quirky hacker techniques whose innovations are appropriated by the more economic powers of the state (qtd. in Parikka 168). As with any manifestation of what Deleuze and Guattari call “royal science,” or a hegemonic system relying upon the appropriation of nomadic practices, steampunk creates a tension between such minor sciences and their corporate and academic use. For every fascinating gadget produced by steampunk fans, there are also corporate phenomena like Justin Bieber videos featuring joyless representations of steampunk automatons whose cogs are appropriated only to sell more albums.

This talk explores a set of steampunk projects from fans in order to show how their methodologies constitute an alternate history of the digital humanities rooted in the practice of public hobbyism. One example of this steampunk hobbyist practice is Tim Robinson's 2007 build of a Babbage's Difference Engine No. 1 from parts manufactured by the toy company Meccano. Robinson says that he was intrigued by the brand's claim to “do something real,” and the tactile quality of Meccano parts mediates this sense of reality: the cold metal, the round rivets, the clicking of metal rods as they are moved by other parts. The machine's design is based upon Babbage's first engine and calculates numbers up to four digits and three orders of difference. It is composed of several ratchet wheels, each with 20 teeth and which are covered by printed tape showing numbers from 0 to 9. While visiting Robinson's website, you can find descriptions of his nostalgia for the toy company, which he describes as helping him build “the machines of my youth” — including “astronomical clocks, orreries, looms and other textile machinery [...] and perhaps most enduring, the differential analyzer (and analog computer).”

Robinson's project exists within a wide variety of other steampunk gadgets that express both nostalgia for various parts and fascination with methods of building: from other models of the difference engine, like Andrew Caroll's version created with Lego parts and rubber bands; to the varied projects of The Steampunk Workshop's Jake von Slatt — who rescues available parts from junk yards and repurposes them into workable Steampunk RVs (Recreational Vechicles), Wimshurst Influence Engines, and even a Stroh violin with an amplifying horn and aluminum diaphragm. For me, such projects underscore Matthew Kirschen-baum's argument that hobbyist activities enable the digital humanities to value “the unapologetically small, the uncompromisingly local and particular” (“Ancient” 196). Yet, steampunk hobbyism also enables a different understanding of the role various publics who engage in such activity play in the digital humanities as a field.

Many digital humanities projects envision the public as a homogeneous entity who acts primarily as an audience or — in some cases — a collaborator for what ends up being essentially a scholarly act. The sheer diversity of steampunk fandom, on the other hand, resists such an easy or homogeneous definition. While some aspects of steampunk fandom act, as China Mie-ville has observed, as forms of nostalgic imperialism; or as Charles Stross claims, as romances with totalitarianism, other fans use steampunk to imagine histories where the Industrial Revolution happened in Africa or China rather than in Europe. Miriam Rocek dresses up as a time-traveling “Steampunk Emma Goldman” and participates in protests like Occupy Wall Street. Lisa Hager, meanwhile, uses her steampunk persona to advocate for gender neutral bathrooms. Such diversity underlines the need to understand how steampunk and the digital humanities communities exist as discrete assemblages, rooted in the politics of the communities practicing them. While this talk will cover mainly hobbyist projects within steampunk fandom, it will contextualize that work with a multiplicity of various local practices. All of these practices, I argue, extend to the digital humanities as a field — which is less a big tent and more a massive assemblage of becoming, branching, and multiplicity.

Bibliography

Dutta, A. (2009). “Design: On the Global (R)Uses of a

Word.” Design and Culture, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 163-186. Earhart, A. (2016). “Digital Humanities Futures: Conflict,

Power, and Public Knowledge.” Digital Studies/Le Champ

Numerique, 2016.

Earhart, A. (2015). Traces of the Old, Uses of the New: the Emergence of Digital Literary Studies. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor..

Emerson, L. (2014). Reading Writing Interfaces: from the Digital to the Bookbound. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.

Gold, M. K., and Klein, L.F. (2016) Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.

Hertz, G. (2012). “Introduction: Making Critical Making.” Critical Making, Telharmonium Press, Hollywood, 2012.

Johnson, S. (2014) How We Got to Now: Six Innovations That Made the Modern World. New York, Riverhead Books.

Johnston, C. (1980). “The Subject of Feminist Film The-ory/Practice.” Screen, vol. 21, no. 2,pp. 27-34.

Jones, S.E. (2016). Roberto Busa, S.J., and the Emergence of Humanities Computing. London, Routledge.

Kirschenbaum, M. (2016) “Ancient Evenings: Retrocompu-ting in the Digital Humanities.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, Edited by Susan Schreibman et al., Wiley Blackwell, London, pp. 185-198.

Kirschenbaum, M. (2014)“What Is 'Digital Humanities,' and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things About It?” Differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 46-63.

Robinson, T. (2008). “Robinson's Difference Engine No. 1.” Robinson's Meccano Building Site, 24 Feb.

Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S (2014). “Past Analytical: Towards an Archaeology of Text Analysis Tools.” Digital Humanities 2014 Conference, 2014.

Sayers, J. (2015) “Kits for Cultural History.” Hypperhiz, no. 13.

Seefeldt, D., and Thomas, W.G. (2009) “What Is Digital History.” Perspectives on History: The Newsmagazine of the American Historical Association, 0ADAD.

Turin, M. (2011). “Born Archival: The Ebb and Flow of Digital Documents from the Field.” History and Anthropology, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 445-60.

Warwick, C. (2016) “Building Theories or Theories of Building? A Tension At the Heart of Digital Humanities.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, Edited by Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens and John Unsworth, Wiley Blackwell, London, UK , pp. 538-552.

Werner, S., and Kirschenbaum, M. (2014) “Digital Scholarship and Digital Studies: The State of the Discipline.” Book History, no. 17, pp. 406-48.

Whitson, R. (2017) Steampunk and Nineteenth-Century Digital Humanities: Literary Retrofuturisms, Media Archaeologies, Alternate Histories. London, Routledge.

Zielinski, S. (2006). Deep Time of the Media: toward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means. Cambridge, MIT Press.

McPherson, T. (2017). Feminist in a Software Lab: Difference Design. Harvard UP, Cambridge, 2017.

Pannapacker, W. (2011). “'Big Tent Digital Humanities': A View from the Edge.” The Chronicle of Higher Education , 31 July 2011.

Parikka, J. (2012) What Is Media Archaeology? Cambridge, Polity Press, 2012.

Patrik, L.E. (2007) “Encoding for Endangered Tibetan Texts.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 1, no. 1, 2007.

Ratto, M. (2011) “Critical Making.” Open Design Now: Why Design Cannot Remain Exclusive, Edited by Bas Van Abel et al., Bis Publishers, Amsterdam, 2011, pp. 202-213.

Ray Murray, P., and Hand, C. (2015) “Making Culture: Locating the Digital Humanities in India.” Visible Language, vol. 49, no. 3, 0ADAD, pp. 140-155.
Schema-based validation of XML documents has long been a fundamental tool for quality control in digital edition projects, and the emergence of richer schema languages and adjuncts such as Schematron has greatly improved the constraints and controls available to XML authors and encoders (Jacinto et al. 2002). However, schema-based validation typically takes place at the document level, whereas “most programs that use XML require information that is not encoded in the XML instance or in the schema that governs it” (Vorthmann & Robie 2001). The modern digital edition project typically consists of multiple documents with large numbers of pointers between them:    links between named entities and

personographies, placeographies and bibliographies; pointers to external documents and fragments, images and other media; and similar complex interrelationships within the collection, and to external resources and authorities. These relationships need to be tested, checked, and validated too, but it is impractical to do this using document-level schemas. As Durand et al. (2009) point out, “such testing requirements are in fact closer to conventional system or software testing requirements than to document testing in a narrow sense.” Most large- and medium-scale projects develop their own methods, programmed and/or impromptu, for addressing these problems, and these have been quite well-described and documented for enterprise-level and corporate contexts (for instance, see the papers presented presented at the International Symposium on Quality

Assurance and Quality Control in XML, particularly Waldt 2012), but little has been published on project-level diagnostic testing for XML-based digital edition collections (see Rahtz, 2007)

In our work as part of Endings, an umbrella project that comprises four diverse digital edition projects from different fields, we have been developing a structured approach to implementing methods for checking and enforcing project correctness, consistency, and coherence, which we will describe in this paper. Influenced no doubt by Star Trek, we have long referred to these processes as “diagnostics”, and in our description we follow the franchise tradition detailed in Sternbach and Okuda (1991) in dividing diagnostics into levels; however, we depart from convention in ordering our levels from most granular/least comprehensive up to the most general. For each level, we provide real examples of processes run on one of our projects.

We stress that these diagnostics are built on top of a solid basis of RelaxNG and Schematron schemas. In the case of our projects, we use highly-customized versions of the TEI schema (all TEI-compliant) in addition to project-specific Schematron rules, which not only police tagging practices (e.g. enforcing the use of private URI schemes in pointing attributes, and checking the presence of appropriate custom dating attributes for pre-Gregorian dates), but also style guide rules such as prohibiting the use of straight apostrophes in document text nodes (excepting computer code samples). Our diagnostic processes normally take the form of ant scripts and XSLT transformations, and are run on a Jenkins Continuous Integration server; every time changes are committed to a project repository, the Jenkins server checks out the changes, validates all documents, and runs the entire set of diagnostics processes, providing the results in the form of a public web page such as this one:


Figure 1: A diagnostics output page from the Map of Early Modern London project.

In combination with this paper, which is intended to be a useful primer and guide, we have developed a Diagnostics project hosted on GitHub (http: / / github.com/proj ectEndings / diagnostics) that can be used by researchers whose digital edition projects have grown to the point where ad hoc manual checking has become impractical. This tool provides generic referential integrity checking that can be applied to any set of TEI XML files.

Level 1
Level 1 diagnostics provide project-level, as opposed to document-level, consistency checking to establish the internal coherence of the project, primarily through ensuring referential integrity. We borrow the phrase “referential integrity” from the MLA's “Guiding Questions for Vetters of Scholarly Editions” (2011), which advises peer-reviewers of digital editions that link to multiple databases to see if “referential integrity [is] enforced within the database(s).” This includes checking for non-existent pointers, duplicate @xml:ids across the project, and erroneously encoded references (e.g. tagging a place name as a bibliography reference). Ensuring referential integrity is particularly complex for projects that use “abbreviated pointers” to facilitate internal linking (see TEI Consortium (2016)), since it may not be obvious to the encoder which resource is being referenced by a pointer. Thus, the first level of diagnostics checks both whether or not an object pointed to actually exists and whether or not the markup correctly represents the relationship between the element and the target resource. For instance, to check all instances of the relationship shown in Fig. 2, a number of different tests are actually done:


Figure 2: a simple referential integrity check.

1.    Every <name type=”org”> points at an @xml:id which exists in the project.

2.    The element pointed at by <name type=”org”> is an <org> element in the ORGS1.xml document.

3.    Every <name> element which points at an <org> element in ORGS1.xml has @type=”org”.

For small-scale projects, this kind of referential integrity check could be accomplished with Schematron, since a Schematron rule using XPath 2.0 can read external documents, but for a project of any significant size, this is impractical. For example, Schematron checks to confirm the rules above may add around six seconds to document validation in the Oxygen XML Editor, causing frustration for editors, while simply checking that a linked location exists would require the processing of over a thousand files in this project, since each location is a distinct file. Level 2

While Level 1 diagnostics generally focus on coherence and consistency, Level 2 is more concerned with completeness. Level 2 diagnostics provide progress analysis, generate to-do lists, and identify situations that may indicate error, but require human judgement. These include cases in which:

•    Two bibliography or personography entries appear sufficiently similar that they may be duplicates.

•    Several <name> elements point to the same authority record, but the text of one of them is significantly different from the others, so it may point at the wrong target.

•    A document in the project is not linked from anywhere else, and therefore cannot be “reached”.

Such issues cannot be automatically rectified— they are not necessarily errors—but they must be examined. Figure 3 shows an example of the first check, which uses a similarity metric to identify potential duplicate bibliography entries.

Possible duplicate <bibl> entries (24) ▼

Explanation

These bibliography entries appear very similar, as measured by a similarity metric, so they are possibly duplicates.

•    Closer to l indicates higher similarity.

•    Closer to o indicates lower similarity.

•    <bibl> DEKK2 appears similar to SMALi (similarity score 0.925):

Dekker, Thomas. The Shoemaker's Holiday. Ed. R.L. Smallwood and

Stanley Wells. Manchester: Manchester UP, 1979. The Revels Plays.

Smallwood, R.L., and Stanley Wells, eds. The Shoemaker's Holiday. By

Thomas Dekker. Manchester: Manchester UP, 1979. The Revels Plays.

•    cbibl > DEKK13 appears similar to SMUTi (similarity score 0.90697676):

Dekker, Thomas, Stephen Harrison, Ben Jonson, and Thomas Middleton.

The Whole Royal and Magnificent Entertainment of King James through the City of London, 15 March 1604, with the Arches of Triumph. Ed. R. Malcolm Smuts. Thomas Middleton: The Collected Works. Gen. ed. Gary Taylor and John Lavagnino. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2007. 219-79.

Smuts, R. Malcolm, ed. The Whole Royal and Magnificent Entertainment of King James through the City of London, 15 March 1604, with the Arches of Triumph. Thomas Middleton: The Collected Works. Gen. ed.

Gary Taylor and John Lavagnino. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2007.

Figure 3: Results of a Level 2 diagnostic check that attempts to identify duplicate bibliography entries.

At Level 2, we also generate to-do lists for specific sub-projects, providing a set of tasks for the project team to focus on in order to reach a milestone or publish a particular document. The definition of “done” for a specific document may transcend the document itself. For instance, before we deem a particular edition of a text publishable, we may require that all authority records (people, places, publications) linked from that document are themselves complete, so the to-do list for a given document may require work in a variety of other documents in the project

Level 3
Armed with a comprehensive set of Level 1 and Level 2 diagnostics, and assuming our data is managed using a version-control repository such as Subversion or Git, we can now generate diachronic views of the project's progress. A script can check out a sequence of incarnations of the project, weekly over a period of months, for instance, and run the entire current diagnostic suite against it; we can then combine these snapshots to get a clear sense of how our work is proceeding. This also means that every time we develop a new diagnostic procedure, we can apply it to the entire history of the project to see the trajectory of project work with respect to the datapoint in question. Two examples, this time from the Nxa?amxcin Dictionary project (an indigenous dictionary project described in detail in Czaykowska-Higgins, Holmes, and Kell (2014)) appear in Figs 4 and 5 below. Figure 4 shows the number of completed dictionary entries in orange, rising steadily over a period of 18 months, and the number of occurrences of a known problem: duplicate instances of the same gloss. These duplicates rise along with the number of entries until October 2016, when this issue was added to our diagnostics process, and the encoders were able to address it.


Figure 4: The number of instances of duplicate glosses, tracked against completed entries, in the Nxa?amxcin Dictionary project.

Fig. 5 shows cases of broken cross-references, which also tend to increase along with the number of completed entries, but we can see from the graph that the issue was aggressively addressed in two separate campaigns in fall 2015 and summer 2016. New instances continue to appear, however.


Figure 5: The number of broken cross-references, tracked against completed entries.

Fig. 6, from a different project, shows how this approach can be used to forecast completion dates for tasks in a project based on the progress rate so far.


Figure 6: Diachronic diagnostics used to project task completion dates.

Conclusion
As Matthew Kirschenbaum (2009) tells us, there “is no more satisfying sequence of characters” than “Done.” The overall purpose of a digital edition project is to finish and publish the edition, and this requires not only that the document-level encoding be valid, but also that the entire dataset be coherent, consistent, and complete. Programmed diagnostics enable projects to enforce coherence and consistency, manage the workflow effectively, and measure their progress towards completeness.

Bibliography
Czaykowska-Higgins, E., Holmes, M., and Kell, S. (2014).

“Using TEI for an Endangered Language Lexical

Resource:    The Nxa?amxcfn Database-Dictionary

Project.” Language Documentation & Conservation 8: 1

37.

Modern Language Association. (2016) “Guidelines for

Editors of Scholarly Editions.” Modern Language

Association. Accessed September 15.

https://www.mla.org/Resources/Research/Surveys-

Reports-and-Other-Documents/Publishing-and-

Scholarship/Reports-from-the-MLA-Committee-on-

Scholarly-Editions/Guidelines-for-Editors-of-Scholarly-

Editions.

Modern Language Association. (2011) “Guiding Questions for Vetters of Scholarly Editions.”. Modern Language Association.    Accessed    October    21.

https://www.mla.org/content/download/3201/81158 /cse_guidelines_2011.pdf.

Jacinto, M. H. , Librelotto, G. R., Ramalho, J. C., and Henriques, P. R. (2002). “Constraint specification languages: comparing XCSL, Schematron and XML-Schemas.”

http://repositorium.sdum.uminho.pt/handle/1822/61

9.

Kirschenbaum, M. (2009). “Done: Finishing Projects in the Digital Humanities.” DHQ 3    (2).

http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/3/2/0000

37/000037.html.

International Symposium on Quality Assurance and Quality Control in XML (2012) “Proceedings of the International Symposium on Quality Assurance and Quality Control in XML.” August 6,    2012.

http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol9/contents.h tml.

Rahtz, S. (2007). “Technology Overview and Discussion: Data Capture, Editing, and Schemas.” Oxford, February 13. http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/Talks/2007-02-13-oucs/talk-editing.xml.

Sternbach, R., and Okuda, M. (1991). Star Trek, the next Generation: Technical Manual. New York: Pocket Books. http://catalog.hathitrust.org/api/volumes/oclc/24648 561.html.

Vorthmann, S., and Robie, J. 2001. “Beyond Schemas: Schema Adjuncts and the Outside World.” Markup Languages: Theory & Practice 2 (3): 281-94.

Waldt, D. 2012. “Quality Assurance in the XML World: Beyond Validation.” Accessed September 15. http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol9/author-pkg/Waldt01/BalisageVol9-Waldt01.html.
The Tasso in Music Project, currently funded by an NEH Scholarly Editions Grant (2016-2019), is an open-access and interactive digital platform that allows music historians, performers, and literary scholars to access and analyze late 16th- and early 17th-century settings of poetry by Torquato Tasso, arguably the most prominent literary figure of early modern Italy. The project has been realized by a team of scholars from North America and Europe, with the technical support of Stanford University's Center for Computer Assisted Research in the Humanities (CCARH) and UMass Amherst. Upon its completion, the Tasso in Music Project aims to provide upon critical editions of the about 650 extant musical settings of Tasso's poetry, the vast majority of which have never been edited before. These settings represent the work of over 100 composers from a variety of geographic areas and with different musical styles, and as such provide a snapshot of secular vocal music in an age in which it underwent profound transformations. In

addition, these settings shed light on Tasso's

extraordinary influence on the music of his time- an aspect of his reception that has received surprisingly little attention to date.

The editions, which constitute one of the largest digital repositories of Italian madrigals and related genres, are encoded with Humdrum software tailored specifically for the project by Stanford's CCARH. The editions are presented on the project's website in a variety of electronic formats, such as MEI, MuseData, MusicXML, MIDI, and PDF, among others. They can also be visualized online using Verovio, a recently developed SVG viewer for music encodings. The editions are accompanied by dynamic, in-score critical notes and by music and textual search tools developed by Stanford's CCARH that facilitate analysis of this repertoire. Some of these search tools- such as single pitch and melodic or rhythmic pattern- draw on CCARH's work for the Josquin Research Project, a platform for the analysis of Renaissance music that has received wide recognition in the early music community. Other tools are unique to the project, including those that allow users to run combined musical/textual and vertical sonority searches that are crucial for the study of this particular repertoire.

The platform also features a substantial textual component, with TEI transcriptions of the poetic texts as they appear in the musical settings and in contemporaneous literary sources, both manuscript and printed. The textual apparatus allows for a dynamic visualization of literary variants, thus facilitating the collation of different sources. Thanks to this feature, the project will become an indispensable resource for literary scholars interested in the tradition and transmission of Tasso's poetry, as well as for music historians interested in tracking the literary sources from which composers may have drawn the texts they set to music.

The Tasso in Music Project addresses an interdisciplinary audience, bringing together two institutions invested in the development of digital platforms for musical and humanistic research as well as a group of scholars from the North America and Europe who form the project's editorial and advisory boards. As such, the project may serve as a model for institutional cooperation, opening avenues for interdisciplinary approaches to the creation of digital databases of music and poetry from the late Renaissance and early Baroque periods.
Introduction

Bernoulli-Euler Online (BEOL) is an interdisciplinary research project funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation focusing on the mathematics influenced by the Bernoulli dynasty and Leonhard Euler. It is being carried out by the Bernoulli Euler Centre and the Digital Humanities Lab at the University of Basel. Its main goal is the integration of different edition projects relating to the Bernoullis and Leonhard Euler into one target platform, offering appropriate functionality for researchers interested in the history of science.

The methodological efforts will also be applicable to other editions since they are developed in a generic way. BEOL is based on Knora, a generic infrastructure for humanities data.

BEOL aims at integrating three edition projects, that are currently all technically different and thus incompatible with one another:

• Basler Edition der Bernoulli-Briefwechsel

(BEBB): BEBB is an online edition that is based on the MediaWiki software and hosted by the University Library of Basel. It is connected to the library's metadata catalogue for manuscripts (Basler Inventar der Ber-noulli-Briefwechsel)_ The letters are encoded in Wiki markup and are converted to HTML to represent them on the web. The mathematical formulae are encoded in LaTeX.

•    Leonhardi Euleri Opera Omnia (LEOO): LEOO is a printed edition of the works of Leonhard Euler that was begun in the early 20th century. In the context of BEOL, the volume containing Euler's correspondence with Christian Goldbach (Euler 2015) will be integrated as a proof of concept. This volume has been prepared using LaTeX (as well as the volume with Euler's correspondence with Daniel Bernoulli that has been published recently). We expect to be able to integrate all the other recent volumes set in LaTeX in a similar manner. For the older volumes, the printed books would have to be scanned (including OCR) and marked up.

•    Jacob (I) Bernoulli's scientific notebook Med-itationes: The manuscript is held in the university library of Basel (shelfmark L Ia 3, 367 pages) and has already been digitized. The manuscript consisting of 287 entries is being transcribed at the Bernoulli Euler Centre using XML (The XML format is specified closely to the TEI specifications P5, so it can be transformed quite easily to TEI/XML) for the text and LaTeX for the mathematical notation that is embedded in the XML.

The three edition projects do not only overlap thematically, but also in terms of the persons involved (authors, mentioned persons) and bibliographical items (literature referred to in the texts, references in-between the editions' texts). Letters exchanged between members of the Bernoulli dynasty, Leonhard Euler and contemporary mathematicians and scientists are an important part of these edition projects and thus it is desirable to identify and match the persons in all editions in order to display their relations.

The technical basis for BEOL is Knora, an infrastructure for humanities data (Rosenthaler and others 2015) consisting of an RDF-triplestore, an OWL base ontology, and a RESTful API that allows for querying and adding to the data. The base ontology (see prefix ‘Knora' in Figure 1) defines common value types (such as a calendar independent format to represent dates using the Julian Day Number) used among humanities projects and can be further extended in project specific ontologies. BEOL will provide such an ontology (see prefix ‘BEOL' in Figure 1), defining its own resource classes and properties needed to represent the edition projects' texts and entities. Wherever possible, existing ontologies will be reused by making subclasses and subproperties. BEOL is part of the NIE-INE project, which aims to create a general-purpose infrastructure for digital editions, using Knora as its technical foundation. A focus of this project will be abstracting out concepts shared by different projects and formalising them as ontologies.


Figure 1: BEOL network and its components

Figure 1 represents all relations between persons (We refer to the Integrated Authority File (GND), and in order to represent locations, we will also refer to GeoNames), letters, and manuscripts (we also link to the catalogue of the Basel university library that keeps many of the original copies of the letters and manuscripts of BEOL), as well as their properties as directed graphs. For reasons of clarity, we use a simplified model here. The coloured rectangles indicate that

these have been imported from different edition projects which - considered in isolation - do not allow for this kind of overview. Moreover, indices and bibliographies have to be unified on the BEOL platform (e.g., Christian Goldbach occurs both in BEBB and LEOO). The BEOL platform will be connected to Early Modern Letters Online, so it will be interoperable with other edition projects.

Importing editions to the same target environment

In order to represent all three editions in the same target environment, they have to be homogenised first. We decided to do so using an XML-based approach. This has the additional advantage that we can make both the texts of BEBB and LEOO available as TEI/XML to the outside world quite easily by applying XSL transformations. We can also use the same routine to import the editions into BEOL. Knora converts XML-encoded texts to RDF in order to store them in the triplestore. From RDF, an XML document can be recreated that is equivalent to the one originally imported. A mapping defines the relations between XML elements and attributes and the entities defined in the ontology.

•    BEBB Wiki markup can be transformed to XML using a MediaWiki parse . Wiki tags and structures are mapped to XML tags, and references to other letters, bibliographical items, and images (facsimiles of the letters) can be handled. Once the letters are available on the BEOL platform, the old URLs will have to be forwarded.

•    The Goldbach-volume of LEOO is set in LaTeX and can be converted to XML using La-TeXML. Additional mappings to the available standard functionality and customisations can be provided using Perl scripts. LaTeXML provides a MathML conversion for mathematical formulae.

•    The Meditationes are transcribed in an XML-based format (see LaTeXML). Derived texts of these files can be generated using XSL-transformations. In this way, several layers (diplomatic, normalized) of the text can be produced. Our approach addresses segments defined on the facsimile (see Figure 2) and turns them into a reading text step by step. The figures (see segment ‘M151-03-F' in Figure 2Figure ) will be extracted by applying a combination of various image processing techniques and redrawn as vector graphics.


Figure 2. Part of Meditatio 151


Bibliography

Euler, L. (2015): Leonhardi Euleri Opera Omnia. Vols. IVA/4:

Correspondence of Leonhard Euler with Christian Goldbach, ed. by Martin Mattmüller and Franz Lemmermeyer. Basel 2015.

Rosenthaler, L., et al (2015) Final Report for the Pilot Project “Data and Service Center for the Humanities”. Swiss Academy of Hümanities and Social Sciences. http://www.sagw.ch/dms/sagw/laüfende_pro-jekte/DaSCH/FinalReport-DaSCH_print

One of the main challenges in the BEOL project is the faithful representation of mathematical notation and its relation to the surrounding text (see Figure 2)

using web technologies. At the moment, we are using

MathJax (which accepts both LaTeX and MathML as input formats)_to render the mathematical formulae in the web browser. We also consider MathML as an option, although not all web browsers fully support MathML.

We are aiming at developing a browser based user interface that will be based on the Angular 2 framework (although in the meantime, we are already using Knora's current interface, SALSAH) that not only makes it possible to present the texts on the web and to offer search functionality, but also to add to the data (sufficient permissions provided). The users may create their own annotations on the BEOL platform. Basically, the user interface interacts with the Knora API in order to create new resources, manipulate properties etc. Since BEOL is based on Knora, all of its generic functionality can be used for this purpose.

Conclusion

BEOL integrates three different edition projects into one platform and allows researchers to query previously separated contents and add to them. The specific problems posed by the combination of text and mathematical notation can be addressed in a generic manner. All the functionality to be developed will be part of Knora and can be reused by other projects dealing with scientific texts from mathematics and physics.
Brief Summary
Persée développe une plateforme de numérisation, d'enrichissement, de diffusion et d'archivage de publications francophones en SHS, de la 1ère parution à la période la plus récente (revues scientifiques, actes, livres). Résultat d'un travail collégial entre chercheurs, éditeurs, bibliothécaires et ingénieurs, cette plateforme diffuse près de 650 000 documents scientifiques en open access. Elle constitue une expérience originale et concrète pour explorer les enjeux croisés de la numérisation patrimoniale, de l'édition électronique et de l'analyse sémantique. La communication vise à décrire le passage de documents imprimés (représentation arborescente) à une publication numérique puis à un ensemble de données structurées (représentation réticulaire sous forme de graphe) et, à analyser la recontextualisation opérée et les transformations à l'œuvre. La bibliothèque numérique, l'entrepôt OAI et le triplestore Persée sont des points d'accès complémentaires et offrent des potentialités radicalement nouvelles de fouille de texte et de données, d'analyse, de mise en relation et de réutilisation.

Full abstract
Persée est une plateforme de production, d’enrichissement, de diffusion et d'archivage de collections de publications francophones en sciences humaines et sociales, de la 1ère parution à la période la plus récente (revues scientifiques en 1er lieu mais aussi actes de colloques et livres). Résultat d’un travail collégial entre chercheurs, éditeurs, bibliothécaires et ingénieurs, cette plateforme diffuse actuellement plus de 650 000 documents scientifiques en texte intégral et en open

access et, elle poursuit son enrichissement.

Une décennie après l'ouverture de persee.fr, alors que la numérisation du patrimoine documentaire est massive et que de nouveaux modes de publication ont émergé, cette plateforme constitue une expérience originale et concrète permettant d'explorer les enjeux des collections numériques dans un monde connecté et les interactions entre numérisation patrimoniale et édition électronique. Dans le cadre de cette présentation, il est proposé de décrire les conditions du passage du monde de l'imprimé à celui du numérique, de volumes papier à un ensemble de documents structurés et reliés entre eux et, d'analyser la « recontextualisation » qui a été ainsi opérée et les transformations structurelles qui sont à l'oeuvre.

Méthode de fragmentation et chaîne opérationnelle de traitement
Confrontés à des objets qui disposent d'une matérialité évidente (la revue comme un ensemble de documents papier) et d'une pertinence intellectuelle (la revue en tant qu'objet éditorial), nous avons assuré une modélisation des données pour mettre en évidence les structures des documents et leurs dépendances. Ces structures sont représentées dans un modèle qui contrôle la validité des documents. La chaîne éditoriale Persée réunit un ensemble de méthodes et d'outils permettant de constituer des corpus numériques en XML, de manière intégrée et largement automatisée, en vue de leur indexation fine, leur diffusion et leur archivage. Les métadonnées sont encodées selon les schémas Dublin Core, MarcXML et MODS. Le

texte intégral issu de la ROC (reconnaissance optique de caractères ) est disponible selon le schéma TEI et enfin, l’ensemble des données est décrit et organisé au sein d’un container XML au format METS. La publication des documents s'opère par des algorithmes de transformation qui s'appuient sur le modèle pour publier des documents dans des formats standards.

De l'arborescence au réseau : l'évolution de la représentation logique des documents
Les publications scientifiques imprimées sont organisées selon une logique arborescente avec, pour les revues, par exemple, un agencement de type : titre/an-née/tome/volume/numéro/article. Cette représentation abstraite fait l’objet d’une retranscription numérique jusqu’à un niveau plus précis qui est celui du plan des articles, de la liste des illustrations, des résumés et, des annexes, etc. Considéré isolément et intrinsèquement, l'article devient le nœud d'un nouveau maillage en se fondant sur l'exploitation des citations, des noms d'auteurs et des informations en son sein même. Nous mettons en œuvre un référencement

croisé (cite / cited by) et un alignement sur des référentiels d’autorités Auteurs et des sources comme DBpedia. Une analyse plus fine des articles permet d’identifier des entités nommées et d’établir des liens avec des thesaurus disciplinaires. Loin de tout traitement massif, la méthodologie retenue combine des algorithmes de recherche ciblée soumis à validation humaine afin de garantir pertinence et qualité. Les objets numériques ainsi créés se distinguent fondamentalement du matériau papier de base et ils offrent des potentialités majeures en termes de recherche, de Text and Data Mining, d’analyse et de mise en relation. Ainsi, le numérique permet-il de référencer parallèlement la collection appréhendée comme un objet intellectuel à part entière, des segments constitutifs (ar-ticle/communication/chapitre) et des données, de multiplier les points d’accès à un ensemble structuré, contextualisé et historicisé.

Ouverture de l'accès, ouverture du code source et ouverture des données
Dès l’origine, la voie de l’Open Access a été retenue pour la diffusion sans aucune restriction des métadon-nées et des documents en texte intégral, l’ouverture et le partage étant considérés comme des instruments essentiels de visibilité et de circulation de la production scientifique dans un environnement où la langue française n’est plus en situation d’hégémonie. Selon une suite logique, les développements informatiques ont été opérés dans un esprit Open Source et les données Persée sont intégrées au web de données sous la forme de triplet RDF. L’objectif poursuivi est double : favoriser la réutilisation des contenus dans d’autres contextes que ceux qui ont vu leur création et l’accès de tous au patrimoine scientifique au-delà des cercles académiques.

Pédauque, R. T. (2006) Le document à la lumière du numérique. Forme, texte, medium : comprendre le rôle du document numérique dans l'émergence d'une nouvelle modernité. Caen : C&F Editions. 218p

Salaün J M. (2007) « La redocumentarisation, un défi pour les sciences de l'information ». Études de communication, Num. 30, p13-23.

Vitali Rosati, M. (2016). What is editorialization? Sens public.    Mars 2016 http://www.sens-public.org/ar-

ticle1059.html

Bibliography
Babeu, A. (2011). « Rome Wasn't Digitized in a Day »: Building a Cyberinfrastructure for Digital Classicists. London : CLIR Publication. 307p

Bachimont, B. (2007). L'indexation multimédia : description et recherche automatique. Paris : Hermès. Nouvelles

tendances applicatives : de l'indexation à l'éditorialisa-tion. P15-29
La rédaction de journaux intimes en français était un phénomène assez répandu parmi les élites russes

e

au XIX siécle. Les aristocrates de l’époque apprenaient souvent le français dés le plus jeune age et continuaient a pratiquer cette langue tout au long de leur vie. Le français n’était cependant pas leur langue maternelle, et leurs écrits offrent des données précieuses sur l’interaction entre les deux langues et cultures. Par ailleurs, certains journaux présentent de grandes qualités littéraires et artistiques (grâce aux dessins d’auteur qui les accompagnent) et méritent d’étre plus largement connus par la communauté académique et le grand public.

Le projet présenté dans ce poster est porté par une équipe franco-russe de l’Université d’état de Novossibirsk et de l'École normale supérieure de Lyon. Il vise a analyser et a publier numériquement plusieurs corpus, dont les journaux d’Alexandre Tchitchérine et d’Olga Orlova-Davydova.

A. Tchitchérine, lieutenant au régiment Semi-onovski de l’armée russe, a tenu son journal de septembre 1812 a aout 1813, son manuscrit contient 83 illustrations, dont la plupart en couleurs. Son texte a été traduit en russe et publié (Chicherin 1966), mais cette traduction dont les qualités littéraires sont indéniables, est parfois inexacte et présente des lacunes. L’original français de ce journal est inédit.

Les journaux d’O. Orlova-Davydova (1814-1876) sont le fruit d’un vaste projet autobiographique que l’auteure a mené tout au long de sa vie. Ces journaux n’ont jamais fait l’objet d’une recherche scientifique. Dans le cadre du présent projet les passages francophones de ses journaux (1830-1847) servent de corpus pour étudier le bilinguisme de l’auteure et pour déceler les voies de formation de personnalités bi- ou

e

plurilingues dans la Russie du XIX siécle (Debrenne 2016a et 2016b). Le noyau du corpus est constitué par une copie des journaux d’Orlova-Davydova réalisée vraisemblablement à sa demande et corrigée par sa propre main. Ce document est conservé a Novossibirsk, a la Bibliothéque scientifique et technique de la Branche Sibérienne de l’Académie des sciences russe (BST). Il fait partie du fonds patrimonial Tikhomirov ( http://www.spsl.nsc.ru/rbook/ogl_tix.html ).

Les journaux du corpus sont transcrits et « encodés par stylage » dans un logiciel de traitement de texte (Microsoft Word) de façon a permettre une conversion quasi-automatique dans un format XML-TÉI enrichi d’un certain nombre d’annotations. Il s’agit de repérer et de classer les différents types d’erreurs par rapport au français standard de l’époque (orthographiques, grammaticales ou lexicales), de recenser les différents types d’entités nommées présents (index hiérarchique), ainsi que les différents passages rédigés en russe. La conversion se fait en deux étapes : d’abord a l’aide de l’outil de conversion en ligne Odette (Glorieux 2015), puis avec une feuille de transformation XSLT spécifique au projet. Aprés validation formelle, la forme finale des sources est importée dans la plateforme TXM (Heiden et al. 2010). TXM permet d’analyser et de publier des corpus complexes encodés en XML-TÉI en combinant des outils de traitement automatique de la langue (TAL :tokenisation paramétrable, étiquetage morphosyntaxique avec TreeTagger), de philologie numérique (éditions présentant de façon synoptique le fac-simile de la source et plusieurs niveaux de transcription), et d'analyse qualitative (recherche de motifs lexicaux avec le moteur plein texte

CQP) et quantitative (analyse de spécificités, analyse factorielle de correspondances, etc.). Le projet utilisera les outils de TXM pour lire de façon integree l’edi-tion du texte avec les illustrations correspondantes. Il permettra également de synthétiser le vocabulaire utilisé juste devant les passages en russe et étudier les emprunts français propres à chaque auteur par rapport à la langue russe. Les illustrations ci-dessous présentent un exemple d’encodage XML-TEI dans les sources d’un dessin situé au début d’une page du journal de Tchitchérine (Fig. 1) suivi de la copie d’écran d’une visualisation synoptique correspondante dans TXM de la transcription comprenant le dessin et le fac-similé du manuscrit (Fig. 2).

de la BST (bibliothèque numérique du fonds Tikhomi

rov). Des exemples de réalisations similaires peuvent

être consultés sur le portail de démonstration.

<P>- [...]!

■    -<pb-n="20,,/>«-1

■    ^figure^-1

■    ■ ■ -<graphic-url="img/tchitch.erine/Tchitch.erin_p20_dessinl. jpg"/>»-J

■    -</figure>J—

instants■me■semblent■précieux.■Peut■être■maccusera-ton■d'inconstance■mon■j ournal est-moins - rempli - que -1' autre-moins - détaillé. - ,..</p>ï

Fig. 1. Encodage XML-TEI d'une illustration insérée dans le corps du texte



Fig. 2. Affichage synoptique d'une transcription et d'un fac-similé d'un texte doté d'une illustration sous TXM en mode « retour au texte » depuis une concordance (de l'expression « mon journal » dont l'occurrence est mise en évidence dans la transcription)

Remerciements

Ce travail a bénéficié du soutien la Fondation scientifique de Russie pour les sciences humaines (RGNF) [16-24-08001] et de la Fondation Maisons des Sciences de l'Homme (FMSH).

Note

Tous les corpus édités dans le cadre du projet seront publiés en ligne via un portail TXM et sur le site
Introduction
This paper describes a collaborative approach of information exchange between art history and literature via IIIF as conducted by two projects: the SAT

Daizokyo Text Database Committee (SAT) and a project to leverage an open dataset of the National Institute of Japanese Literature. This approach is technically similar to that used by previous projects such as TILE and TEI. However, as it has not been easy for them to fully treat the binding of images of a book between Web services, this approach adopts the IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework) so that both can connect easily and efficiently. After explaining the distinctive aspects of both projects, we will introduce a collaborative solution.

In May 2016, SAT released the SAT Taishozo Image DB (SATiDB), which includes digital facsimiles of a series of Buddhist images and their interpretations in the Taisho Tripitaka consisting of 12 volumes originally published in 1933. SATiDB provides annotations for about 5,200 Buddhist icons (busson) and symbols (sanmayagyd and mandala) in the books and several search functions of the annotations with a simple translator from English to technical terms in CJK characters via the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism. As the annotations use a vocabulary of attributes of Buddhist icons, such as hair style, sitting style, type of chair, possessions, etc., which was defined by this project due to the absence of such a vocabulary in the source data, users can also search the objects by clicking a checkbox of one or more term in a list form of the vocabulary (Figure 1).


Figure 1. A search result of “burning hair”

As the system is compliant with IIIF, the images and annotations can be leveraged in various ways, even from other web sites. SATiDB has a function to expose several objects in parallel by clicking checkboxes of cropped images by coordination of each object in the search results on the IIIF viewer, Mirador (Figure 2).


Figure 2. Checked images are displayed in parallel.

The annotations were embedded by forty-three researchers in the field of Japanese art history on a web collaboration system in 2015. We developed the system utilizing RedHat Linux, Apache, PostgreSQL, PHP,

jQuery, and Annotorious, which enabled the easy annotation of images. The annotations were stored in PostgreSQL including attributes such as date and responsibility. After input, the data were converted into IIIF Presentation API and distributed with hi-resolu-tion images converted from 60M-pixel images delivered with IIIF Image API. This system provides researchers of Japanese art history with a brand new function to see and compare Buddhist icons and symbols. Many positive comments have been received from the researchers of Japanese art history and the number of visitors of the site was over 12,000 in the first month, but no papers have yet been produced explicitly using this system.

The other project also developed a Web collaboration system to embed transcription of Japanese texts (the issues of such transcription have been described by Nagasaki et al, 2016) line-by-line in the style of IIIF annotation which enables to search images as-they-are via Smart-GS. (Hashimoto et al, 2014) It adopts OpenSeaDragon and its plugins to annotate images with zooming and has a function to convert them into the format of IIIF Presentation API. So far, two premodern woodcut printing books written in cursive Japanese script were completely done by two researchers and available via customized Mirador for right-to-left viewing-direction and vertical texts (Figure 3).


Figure 3. Customized Mirador for right-to-left viewing-direction and vertical texts

Finally, we explain the approach of linking both projects. As one of the two transcribed woodcut printing books includes names of Buddhist saints, we added tags on the names to trigger an event to search the name and prepare a function to request queries to the SATiDB. On the other hand, in the SATiDB, a function to distribute only a list of search results including images cropped by IIIF Image API was implemented to pull search results from other Web sites by use of a form of URL such as:

http://dzkimgs.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SATi/key:_keyword_


Figure 4. Search result of SATiDB by clicking a red-colored part of transcribed text

As a result, readers- primarily researchers, but laypersons as well- can see images of related Buddhist icons on SATiDB while reading the book. See Figure 4 to understand background of it. This is a typical solution of IIIF and easily applicable for any environment in the digital humanities.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant

Numbers JP15H05725, JP16H03422.

Bibliography

Hashimoto, Y., Aihara, K., Hayashi, S., Kukita, M.,

Ohura, M., (2014)The SMART-GS Project: An Approach to Image-based Digital Humanities, Digital Humanities

Conference 2014, http://dharchive.org/pa-per/DH2014/Poster-48.xml.

Nagasaki, K., Tomabechi, T., Muller, A. C., Shimoda,

M.(2016) “Digital Humanities in Cultural Areas Using

Texts That Lack Word Spacing”, Digital Humanities 2016, http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/416
In a poster session “Photogrammar and the Federal Writer's Project: A Model for Teaching Data and Mapping Rhetoric,” we outline the use of some of the educational opportunities we have discovered in using

large Digital Humanities projects to create

collaborative partnership pedagogies to teach students digital rhetoric. In this approach, students become

project managers serving the needs of a real world research client - Yale University, the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill and the University of Richmond's collaborative Photogrammar team.

Bringing together pedagogical theories in Composition and Rhetoric that stress the importance of understanding the role of rhetoric in the construction of digital texts (Sayers, Sample, Galloway) and strategies for equitable collaborative practices in Digital Humanities (Posner and AlgeeHewitt), we teach students to “critically make data” by becoming project leaders tasked with textual mark-up and metadata creation using digitized archival documents. As team leaders, students must think through key rhetorical issues involving naming practices, organizational practices, and user interface and access with a mind toward both historical authenticity and greater inclusion. In this way, they participate robustly in contemporary real world debates about civility, discourse, history and accountability in naming persons, events and things. Therefore, this pedagogical approach opens access into the center of current pedagogical and historical concerns.

The Photogrammar project brings together photographs by the Farm Security Administration taken during the Great Depression and World War II with life histories created through Federal Writers' Project. The new tools currently in development will offer users the opportunity to search and map both the visual and textual histories of the Great Depression in relation to each other. These life histories hold great historical significance as they mark an important precursor to the development of oral history methodology by collecting the histories of people who were previously excluded from the historical record, including women, the working class, and African Americans (Couch, Hirsch, Penkower). Since they will function in some sense as extended captions to the FSA/OWI photographs, adding the life histories also touches upon important issues in the history and criticism of visual culture. Additionally, they hold linguistic keys to racial, gender, class, sexuality and location classification patterns of the time that the photographs alone may not expose. Ethical as well as methodological issues in bringing buried histories to light vividly arise.

Applying collaborative partnership pedagogies in an undergraduate course in Composition, Rhetoric and Digital Literacy at the University of North Carolina that had no prerequisites, students were tasked to create a metadata schema for the life histories to be added to Photogrammar, using TEI to create rules for encoding the text. Because most students entered the class with little technological or collaborative skills, the course places students in small working groups and used Trello (project management software) to organize work flows for lower stake exercises designed to address larger theoretical issues in digital rhetoric (Eyman, Hart-Davidson, Ridolfo). These small stakes activities helped students develop the skills necessary to tackle the larger project that required them to work through critical issues of power stemming from the task of making archival material from the 1930's useful in a digital setting today. For instance, some of the language used to classify racial groups in the FSA and the Federal Workers Project is off-putting, or even offensive today. Students had to come to consensus on such difficult issues because the project required that they present (via skype) their rationale for the metadata schema to a Photogrammar Co-Director. The Co-Director then gave feedback, which students used to write their schema rationale within the TEI of the archival documents. Their decisions did an excellent job of balancing the need to maintain the historical authenticity of the documents while using technology in the service of great inclusion and social justice are now used as the template for the

entire life histories collection. Therefore, they not only learned crucial transferable digital skills, but also were given the ability to contribute materially to how the historical record is produced.

Based on the students' work, it will be possible to map the movement of interviewers, trace the prevalence of important issues of the time such as sharecropping, women's labor, WPA work, and mill work, and generate comparative analyzes of rhetoric used via specific interviewer practices. This project highlights the new kinds of classroom as well as scholarly opportunities that arise when rhetorical questions and insights begin to allow students to direct and inflect the further development and buildout process of an established DH site.
The Athar project (from Arabic traces or footprints,

and by extension monuments or antiques) makes available, in open access, all of the work of the Committee for the Conservation of Art Monuments

Arab (1882-1953), body created in Cairo to inventory, describe and restore the Islamic then Coptic monuments of Egypt. Based on the  reports of the Historic Monuments Commission in France , this annual publication, written in French, now extinct and free of rights, consists of 41 volumes published in Cairo between 1882 and 1953, totaling 8,000 pages and nearly 800 boards. This corpus sometimes brings together the only documentation still remaining on disappeared, very degraded or radically transformed monuments. Through his illustrations, he finds himself in relation to the rich backgrounds of commercial photography present in Cairo from 1860, disseminated increasingly on Gallica and Europeana. The partners

This project is the result of a fruitful collaboration between three structures from the French scientific and university world: the InVisu laboratory  , the French Institute of Oriental Archeology and

Persee . Complementary expertise from each of these partners was essential to successfully complete this project. The InVisu laboratory, thanks to its documentary know-how, took charge of the fine structuring of the corpus and the indexing of toponyms using the Cairo Gazetteer .This multilingual repository (French, Arabic, English) makes it possible to identify, describe and finely locate the 600 buildings classified as Cairo as historic monuments by proposing the orthographic variants of these toponyms. The IFAO allowed the completion of the collection by lending the missing volumes and brought its skills on Egyptian toponymy and cartography. Persee, thanks to its expertise of more than 10 years in the field of digitization, oceration and dissemination of scientific heritage, has put its technical platform at the service of the project (JGAlith: integrated and complete application, developed by Persee, which allows ''

Technologies and formats, use of Linked Open Data

The technologies and formats used are based on the norms and standards in force in the context of open access and interoperability. The metadata generated by the structuring of the corpus are encoded in XML format according to the Dublin Core, MarcXML and MODS schemas . The full text from the uncorrected OCR is available according to the TEI scheme and all of the data is described and organized in an XML container in METS format  . The content of the Cairo Gazetteer, deployed thanks to Ginco(terminology repository management tool), is made available to the digital humanities community through the SKOS format. It offers an innovative solution to solve the difficulties linked to the transliteration of Arabic toponyms.


Figure 2. Cairo Gazetteer data encoded in RDF


Illustration 1. A sheet of the Cairo Gazetteer



Illustration 4. In JGalith, selection of the monument to link to the corresponding label in the Cairo Gazetteer


Links to two repositories available at international level have been inserted in the data for structuring the corpus: IdRef for the authors and the Cairo Gazetteer for the buildings. These links make it possible to deduce alignments to complementary external resources such as data.bnf.fr, DBpedia, Subject Headings of the Library of Congress and GeoNames. The development and implementation by the IT team of Persee of a specific module in the JGALITH platform was necessary to carry out this step.


Illustration 3. In JGalith, inclusion of a <name> tag in the title of the article pointing to the corresponding named entity in the Cairo Gazetteer

Dissemination of the corpus

The dissemination of this corpus is currently

performed on the Persée portal.


By 2017-2019, a corpus site will be developed by Persee, thereby evolving its service offer. All the data produced and aggregated as part of the Athar project will be integrated into a larger ecosystem to provide richer, more complete and centralized information for the user of the dedicated site. Composite pages constructed from the data produced by the Persee chain and those recovered through alignment with the selected external repositories will also be developed. They will complement the range of navigation and exploration functionalities (author index, table of contents, cross-references, table of illustrations) already implemented in the Persee portal. In addition to webcasting, data exposure through Bibliography

Perrin, E. (2015). “Cairo Gazetteer: a thesaurus to identify the monuments of Cairo”. 6th days of the Medici network. Multilingualism: brake or catalyst for scientific dissemination in Europe and the Mediterranean? Marseille: Medici network. Available at:  https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01213678  [Viewing March 31, 2017].

Perrin, E. (2014). “Tools, methods, corpus: the

modeling of data in SHS. In Day of web study of data and human and social sciences. Paris. Available at:

https://www.inha.fr/fr/agenda/parcourt-par-annee/en-2014/novembre-2014/outils-methodes-corpus.html [Consulted March 31, 2017].

Perrin, E. & Mounier, P. (2015). “Structure, link and disseminate data with semantic web technologies”. INHA digital Mondays. Paris. Available at:

https://www.inha.fr/fr/agenda/parcourt-par-annee/en-2015/mai-2015/structurer-relier-et-diffuser-des-donnees-avec-les-technologies-du-web- semantic.html [ Accessed March 31, 2017].
Digital humanities practices are often understood in terms of significant scale: big data, large data sets, digital humanities centers (Terras et al. 2016; Kowalczyk et al. 2014; Borgman 2009; Kretzschmar 2009). This emphasis leads to the perception that projects cannot be completed without substantial access to financial resources, data, and labor (Prescott 2016; Hockey 2016; Evans and Rees 2012). While this can be the case, such presumptions serve as a deterrent to the development of an inclusive digital humanities community with representation across academic hierarchies (student, librarian, faculty), types of institutions (public, private, regional), and geographies (Global North, Global South). In response, how can digital humanities scholars find value in work undertaken at a small scale? This question is at the heart of this paper theorizing the practices of micro digital humanities by reporting on initiatives at Salem State University. These practices include the embrace of minimal computing, small data sets, local archives, and freely available platforms for creating small-scale digital humanities projects while working with undergraduate students.

The work of the Minimal Computing Working Group has articulated a vision for minimal forms of digital humanities praxis (Minimal Computing Working Group 2015). Jentery Sayers (2016) has identified key components of minimal computing, including minimal design, maximum justice, and minimal technical language. These principles privilege access and openness for stakeholders across economic and technical barriers. More importantly, they are precepts that envision how digital humanities practices might be available to those who work outside of macro structures that have historically shaped digital humanities. This has been important at Salem State, a regional, public university undergoing an unprecedented budget crisis due to funding cuts from the state legislature. However, we have faculty and librarians who are committed to using digital humanities to cultivate digital and 21st century literacies in our students. As a result, we have conceptualized a micro digital humanities approach inspired by minimal computing. Micro DH validates scholarly output that does not require digital humanities centers, big data, large data sets, and access to high-performance computing. As an intervention in local digital humanities, it places high value on working with available resources, however small.

At Salem State, we have embraced micro digital humanities through our work with undergraduates. This talk explores these practices in depth, as a model for claiming the legitimacy of small-scale digital humanities. It considers how we have drawn on minimal university resources and existing institutional structures to build a digital humanities community.

First, the focus of our work is our university’s archives and special collections, a diverse and free but untapped source of material. This choice emphasizes the primacy of local resources in micro digital humanities. Although Salem is known for its history of the Salem Witch Trials and literature of Nathaniel Hawthorne, our archives focus on the common person’s experience in Salem from the mid-19th century to present. This includes a rich history of immigration and activism. It exemplifies the power of micro digital humanities for the diversifying the historical record by giving voice to the ordinary and everyday. Through our work, we shed light on the hidden histories that shape Salem today.

We undertake this work in service of our undergraduate students. Micro digital humanities is an approach that cuts across hierarchies in academic labor, bringing faculty, librarians, and students together to create small projects. Salem State is the most diverse state university in Massachusetts (35% students of color, 40% first-generation college students) and draws a primarily regional, working-class student population. Both the students and the university have few resources, but we work with what we have. To serve this population, we developed the Digital Scholars Program, piloted through a small grant from the university. We designed the program to answer the call of the university’s strategic plan to foster student success through research opportunities. Students apply to become Digital Scholars, and those who are selected are mentored through the process of creating a small-scale digital humanities project over the course of a semester.

Because they receive course credit rather than payment, we do not believe that we can, ethically, ask students to work on projects for us. Instead, the program is student-centered and student-led through a scaled down approach emphasizing the creation of micro projects. We select collections for the students to explore related to the history of Salem State then lead them through the experience of creating a digital humanities project from start to stopping point. The process includes making discoveries in the archives, identifying research questions that suit their interests, curating materials, envisioning project design, selecting platforms, and creating a final product - and all the iterative dimensions this process entails. Students also have access to professional development workshops and opportunities to engage with guest speakers who are themselves digital humanities practitioners. Projects our students have undertaken include recovering the history of LGBTQ activism at the university, revealing the colonialist gaze of Salem residents who traveled to India in the 1920s, creating historical models of the university’s oldest campus building, and connecting contemporary student activism around Black Lives Matter to the history of antiracist activism at the university in the 1970s. These projects have helped students engage in a range of practices: digitizing texts, TEI, Omeka, 3D modeling, quantitative textual analysis, data visualization, and oral history. In the spirit of micro digital humanities, we only use freely available resources or open source software we can host ourselves. This is a response to our lack of financial resources but is also a result of our focus on students; we do not want to force them to use proprietary technologies they may not be able to afford to access outside of a university or on their own.

We situate this work as a practice of micro digital humanities, cutting across hierarchies to shift students from the position of consumer of digital media and technologies to the role of producer. This requires setting aside our preferences for what projects based on the collections should look like and recognizing that students will be working at a small scale. However, we view these small projects as pieces of a bigger puzzle that illuminates life in Salem. To bring these projects together, we developed an umbrella digital humanities project called Digital Salem, a portal that aggregates student projects by collection. Users visiting Digital Salem are offered multiple ports of entry into the history, culture, and literature of Salem. There, the small student projects add up as they contribute to a rich, varied resource on Salem. This experience has suggested how a micro digital humanities can be designed with emphasis connecting small projects as modular pieces that work together to form a bigger picture.

These micro digital humanities practices have been the foundation of the digital humanities community at the university. They have brought together faculty, librarians, and students to facilitate student research at a teaching-intensive university. Further, they offer a model for developing digital humanities at scales appropriate to institutional contexts and strategic planning. Perhaps more importantly, they offer a vision of digital humanities with learning curves and barriers to entry that do not require affiliation with centers, access to expensive technologies, or substantial resources. This, we argue, is essential to the development of an inclusive digital humanities community.

Bibliography

Borgman, C. (2009). The Digital Future is Now: A Call to

Action for the Humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly

3.4.

http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/00007

7/000077.html. Accessed October 29, 2016.

Evans, L. and Rees, S. (2012). An Interpretation of Digital

Humanities. In D. Berry (Ed.), Understanding Digital

Humanities (pp. 21-41). London: Springer.

Hockey, S. (2016). Digital Humanities in the Age of the Internet: Reaching Out to Other Communities. In W. McCarty & M. Deegan (Eds.), Collaborative Research in Digital Humanities (pp. 81-92). London: Routledge.

Kowalczyk, S. T., Sun, Y., Peng, Z., Plale, B., Todd, A., Au-vil, L., Willis, C., Zeng, J., Pathirage, M., Liyanage, S., Ruan, G., & Downie, J. S. (2014). Big Data at Scale for Digital Humanities: An Architecture for the HathiTrust Research Center. In W. Hu & N. Kaabouch (Eds.), Big Data Management, Technologies, and Applications (pp. 270294). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4699-5.ch011

Kretzschmar, W.A. (2009). Large-Scale Humanities Computing Projects: Snakes Eating Tails, or Every End is a New Beginning? Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.2. http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/2/000038/00 0038.html. Accessed October 29, 2016.

Minimal Computing Working Group. (2015). About. Minimal    Computing.    http://go-

dh.github.io/mincomp/about/. Accessed October 29, 2016.

Prescott, A. (2016). Beyond the Digital Humanities Center: The Administrative Landscapes of Digital Humanities. In S. Schreibman, R. Siemens & J. Unsworth (Eds.) A New Companion to Digital Humanities (pp. 461-475). Malden, MA: Wiley.

Sayers, J. (2016). Minimal Definitions. Minimal Computing. http://go-

dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/02/minimal -definitions/. Accessed October 29, 2016.

Terras, M., Baker, J., Hetherington, J., Beavan, D., Welsh, A., O'Neill, H., Finley, W., Duke-Williams, O., Far-quhar, A. (2016). Enabling Complex Analysis of LargeScale Digital Collections: Humanities Research, High Performance Computing, and transforming access to British Library Digital Collections. In Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts (pp. 376-379). Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, Krakow.
Abstract
This paper introduces the field of international textbook research and discusses how the WorldViews project is working towards enhanced access to textbook resources for digital humanities research.

Textbook Research
The field of textbook research is one of the more recent and more diverse areas of academic investigation. The condensed and canonical character of the information selected for inclusion in textbooks -here understood as conventional textbooks - gives them central significance in academic, political and educational respects. Textbooks, as carriers of the knowledge and information that one generation wishes to pass on to the next, frequently find themselves at the center of political controversy. As such, their importance as an object of investigation in historical and cultural research has gained significant traction in recent decades. However, textbook research has not yet found dedicated representation as a main subject at universities.

As a non-university institution, the Georg Eckert Institute (GEI) for International Textbook Research conducts and facilitates applied and multidisciplinary research into textbooks and educational media primarily informed by history and cultural studies. For this purpose, the GEI provides digital and social research infrastructure services such as its renowned research library and various dedicated digital information services, such as Edumeres, a virtual network with modules for specific aspects of textbook research. As such, the GEI realizes a unique position in the international field of textbook research.

The study of textbooks has not only been facilitated by growing institutional support and infrastructure but also by the proliferation of new digital methods and resources in humanities research. In the digital humanities, the investigation of research questions is supported by a range of increasingly sophisticated digital methods such as automatic image and text analysis, linguistic text annotation, or data visualization. Digital tools and services combined with the increasing amount of resources available through digital libraries (such as the German Digital Library, the Deutsches Textarchiv, and Europeana) and research infrastructures (such as CLARIN or DARIAH) provide digital support for textbook analysis.

Digital Information Services
At the GEI, the shift towards more digitally oriented research has resulted in a range of digital information services specifically tailored to textbook research. EurViews, for example, is a multilingual digital platform containing primary sources from twentieth and twenty-first century history textbooks from around the world that manifest particular concepts of Europe and Europeanness (for example, see Gehler and Vietta, 2010; Best et al, 2012, and Chakrabarty, 2000). The service also offers essays, commentaries, and educational histories written by designated experts in the field. EurViews is a useful tool for historians searching for relevant, reliable and hard-to-find research materials on topics related to textbooks. The materials may provide inspiration for research projects or be the starting point for more extensive searches for sources. EurViews also demonstrates that the printed monograph is no longer the dominant form of publication but that digital representation is gaining in importance.

Digital representations are increasingly becoming objects of investigation themselves. GEI-Digital , for example, a digital library focusing on out-of-copyright works published between the inception of textbooks in the seventeenth century and the demise of imperial Germany in 1918, holds potentially relevant textual resources for EurViews. Other important information services provided by the GEI offer factual and bibliographic data relevant for textbook research: edu.data, for example, provides information about textbook systems in individual countries, and the library catalogue contains bibliographic metadata about textbooks from around the globe.

While these services all contain resources and information that are immediately relevant to textbook research, their content is frequently stored in isolated data silos that lack appropriate interfaces or standardized data models and which prevent convenient use or exchange of data within the GEI or with external services. For example, even though GEIDigital makes metadata about its resources available as METS/MODS encoded data via an OAI-PMH interface, EurViews lacks the interfaces that would enable it to utilize these full-text resources. Similarly, data on textbook systems from edu.data or bibliographic metadata from the library catalogue cannot be reused by existing or new research projects. External digital humanities infrastructures such as CLARIN-D are also unable to easily access texts stored in GEI-Digital or EurViews since those platforms contain plain text documents only which are not semantically annotated.

WorldViews
The WorldViews project, which is financed by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), addresses these challenges in order to further elevate access to textbook resources. Its aim being to enhance discoverability, reusability, and sustainability of textbook resources in cultural and historical research and in the digital humanities. The formative use case has been the digital platform for textbook sources, EurViews, a service that has proven to be in high demand- Since 2015 EurViews has had an average of 400 visitors per month, a comparatively high number for this kind of digital academic service- and which constitutes one of the cornerstones of the GEI’s research infrastructure.

Two significant milestones have been achieved on the path to enhanced access. The first is the selection of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) standard that will be used to encode the semantics of conventional textbook resources and thus facilitate access to fulltext sources. In addition, the Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) framework has been chosen for the overall integration of metadata at the GEI; a framework also compatible with the CLARIN-D infrastructure.

An extensive search for publicly available and dedicated encoding schemas for textual characteristics of conventional textbooks yielded no results. Therefore, a profile specifying the most relevant metadata and textual features in textbooks was developed from scratch after consulting historians at the GEI. The only viable option for creating an encoding schema based on the profile turned out to be the TEI encoding standard. The TEI schema created for textbooks focuses on basic elements for the selective and formal description of those structural and semantic features that are immediately relevant for WorldViews. For example, headings of sections or the semantics of particular paragraphs should provide the necessary semantics to enable retrieval scenarios to contextualize search results and to formulate more precise queries targeting particular segments of the text. This groundbreaking schema is designed to provide the nucleus for more comprehensive descriptions of whole textbooks, such as those found in GEI-Digital.

The Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) provides a framework that allows blueprints of distinct metadata components to be defined and reused. CMDI allows standard metadata components to act as profiles for virtually any kind of metadata. CMDI profiles have been created to describe textbooks resources in WorldViews (we have switched to the new version of CMDI, released in mid-2016) and we are currently investigating their application in more fact-based resources such as edu.data. By using CMDI as a general framework for metadata descriptions, full-text resources can immediately be indexed by CLARIN’s Virtual Language Observatory and can be analyzed using its various tools and services such as Weblicht. The CMDI description of GEI resources allows for internally standardized search and retrieval operations in federated search scenarios.

The second milestone for better access to textbook resources was the implementation of a logic tier. Central components of this tier are Solr-indices for federated searches, tools for handling digitization workflows, controlled metadata annotation and fulltext annotation of textbook sources and, significantly, a Fedora repository that will dynamically provide access to standardized representations of textbook resources and other data from the various digital infrastructure services at the GEI for internal as well as external consumers. After extensive evaluation of similar repository software such as DSpace, Fedora was selected due to the greater customizability and flexibility offered by its strong modularity and existing applications with CMDI metadata. Furthermore, use of Fedora is a prerequisite for becoming a CLARIN center, one of the long-term objectives of the GEI. Through the logic tier digital platforms such as EurViews are able to send queries for bibliographic metadata on newly added textbooks directly to the library catalogue or they can directly reuse textbook resources from other systems such as GEI Digital or obtain contextual data from databases such as edu.data.

Summary

The WorldViews project has four main strategies aimed at improving overall access to digital textbook resources through enhanced reusability, discoverability and sustainability. These are a logic tier based on the Fedora repository, which mediates data between internal and external services; the digitization workflow tool Goobi, which controls metadata descriptions of digitized textbook resources; full-text encoding schemas based on TEI; and the metadata standardization based on the CMDI framework. WorldViews has laid the groundwork for standardized data models at full-text and metadata level in the field of textbook research; thereby providing a firm foundation for textbook resources and related data to be made accessible for digital humanities research.

Georg Eckert Institute for International Textbook Research.    (n.d) EurViews. http://www.eur-

views.eu/nc/en/en/home.html [Accessed 24 March 2017]

Georg Eckert Institute for International Textbook Research.    (n.d)    GEI Digital.    http://gei-digi-

tal.gei.de/viewer/ ^Accessed 24 March 2017]

Georg Eckert Institute for International Textbook Research.    (n.d) WorldViews Project.

http://worldviews.gei.de/en/ [Accessed 24 March 2017]

Bibliography

Gehler, M., and Vietta, S. (Eds). (2010). Europa - Eu-ropaisierung - Europaistik, Wien.

Best, H., Lengyel, G., and Verzichelli, L. (Eds) (2012). The

Europe of Elites. A Study into the Europeanness of Europe's Political and Economic Elites, Oxford/ New York

2012

Chakrabarty,D. (2000) Provincializing Europe. Postcolonial Thought and Historial Difference, Princeton, New Jersey.

CLARIN. (n.d.) Component Metadata Infrastructure. https://www.clarin.eu/content/component-metadata [Accessed 24 March 2017]

CLARIN.    (n.d.) Virtual Language Observatory.

https://www.clarin.eu/vlo_LAccessed 24 March 2017]

Gehler, M., and Vietta, S. (Eds). (2010). Europa - Eu-ropaisierung - Europaistik, Wien.
Dans cette présentation, nous nous proposons d'analyser la chaîne éditoriale de production et de diffusion des revues savantes en Sciences humaines francophones, en nous appuyant sur le corpus diffusé par la plateforme Érudit. Nous montrerons les limites et les problèmes que présente une telle chaîne éditoriale, pensée à la fin des années 1990, et qui n'a depuis fait l'objet que de très peu de modifications majeures et nous présenterons l'éditeur de texte Stylo, la solution proposée à ces problèmes par l'équipe de la CRC sur les écritures numériques.

Absolument fondamentale en vue d'une diffusion numérique, la structuration des documents et leur balisage sont actuellement reportés à la fin du processus éditorial (l'encodage XML est pris en charge par l'équipe d'Érudit) quand en réalité ceux-ci devraient être envisagés dès la production (par l'auteur lui-même, dès la première révision des articles). À cet égard, il semblerait urgent et logique de réintégrer le travail de balisage et de structuration en début de chaîne.

Un tel objectif se heurte cependant au manque de compétences suffisantes de la part des auteurs : les pratiques d'écriture, telles qu'elles existent aujourd'hui, demandent en effet aux chercheurs de traduire leurs connaissances sur le sens des contenus (ce qu'est une référence ou un titre, l'importance d'un mot, etc.) en simples marques graphiques (italiques, gras, type de guillemets, etc.). Or des erreurs se glissent régulièrement au cours de ce processus du fait du recours à des solutions qui ne sont ni tout à fait spécifiques ni tout à fait explicites, soit finalement à faible valeur de scientificité.

Par ailleurs, ce texte formaté graphiquement est actuellement retravaillé en bout de chaîne par Érudit qui cherche à réinterpréter le sens du texte, à partir de ces indices graphiques. Érudit entreprend alors de transformer ces signes graphiques en balises sémantiques : cette espèce de rétro-programmation implique une perte de temps faramineuse ainsi qu'une potentielle perte d'informations problématique d'un point de vue scientifique.

Pour y remédier, notre équipe est en train de développer l'éditeur de texte Stylo. La philosophie de Stylo consiste à remettre dans les mains des chercheurs la gestion du balisage en partant cette fois-ci de leurs compétences, qui sont des compétences sémantiques plutôt que graphiques. Conçu sur le principe d'un éditeur WYSYWYM (what you see is what you mean), Stylo a le potentiel de changer l'ensemble de la chaîne de production des contenus dans le domaine des revues savantes en Sciences Humaines, en proposant une interface uniformisée et sans perte de données, depuis la rédaction jusqu'à la diffusion, en passant par l'évaluation, la correction et l'édition.

L'éditeur propose aux auteurs un environnement d'écriture très simple mais permettant un enrichissement sémantique à travers des fonctionnalités de balisage léger mais spécifique au travail d'auteur. Le chercheur a ainsi la possibilité de baliser l'ensemble des informations qu'il produit de façon sémantique (titres, sous-titres, références bibliographiques, notes, index), simplement en sélectionnant les éléments, en leur appliquant des styles préprogrammés, ou selon les compétences de l'auteur, en utilisant le format markdown.

La suite de la chaîne éditoriale (évaluation, édition,

diffusion) est assurée au sein du même outil, permettant aux producteurs de contenus - les éditeurs de la revue ou de la plateforme de diffusion, ou encore directement les chercheurs eux-mêmes - d'enrichir le texte en sélectionnant et ajoutant des métadonnées (mots-clés, nom de l'auteur, nom de la revue, etc.) et en les alignant avec des autorités.

Les métadonnées, étant alignées, pourront être facilement mises en relation avec d'autres contenus existants (traduction automatique en plusieurs langues, notamment, en se basant par exemple sur les alignements des vocabulaires RAMEAU de la Bnf et LCSH de la Library of Congress). Grâce à l'alignement avec des autorités, les contenus créés via Stylo pourront par ailleurs être mis en relation avec n'importe quels autres contenus - par exemple via un moissonnage qui interroge les autorités, ou encore être mieux indexés par les moteurs de recherche spécialisés.

N'importe quelle plateforme de diffusion peut ainsi exploiter les contenus produits par Stylo. La brique logicielle centrale communiquera via une API avec plusieurs plateformes en fournissant des métadonnées très riches, sans que l'enrichissement soit réalisé par le diffuseur ou l'exploitant final - puisque pris en charge directement par le producteur.

Dans l'esprit des éditeurs WYSIWYM, le formatage graphique du contenu est automatiquement effectué lors de l'export, en s'appuyant sur des modèles programmables et intégrés à la chaîne éditoriale des revues et des plateformes de diffusion (Erudit.ca, Opene-dition.org).

1.    Ces exports pourront être de plusieurs types selon la diffusion visée :

2.    des fichiers XML selon les schémas sélectionnés (Erudit, TEI, etc.)

3.    des fichiers HTML pour publication directe sur des CMS (grâce à des API)

4.    des fichiers print (.pdf) stylés selon des modèles programmables.

L'éditeur pourra être utilisé pour différents types de contenus, notamment :

1.    les articles de revues

2.    les monographies

3.    les mémoires et les thèses

4.    les billets de blogue de recherche

Au moment de cette soumission, nous disposons d'un prototype de l'éditeur, dont une version stable est prévue pour le mois d'avril 2017.

Bibliographie

Bachimont, B. (2007). “Nouvelles tendances applicatives : de l'indexation à l'éditorialisation.” In L'indexation multimédia. Paris: Hermès.

Doueihi, M. (2011). Digital Cultures. Harvard University Press.

Floridi, L. (2014). The 4th Revolution: How the Infosphere Is Reshaping Human Reality. First edition. New York; Oxford : Oxford University Press.

Guyot, B. (2004). Sciences de l'information et activité professionnelle. Vol. 38. C.N.R.S. Editions. http://www.cairn.info/resume.php?ID_ARTI-

CLE=HERM_038_0038.

Vitali-Rosati, M. (2015). « An editor for academic papers (xml, html, md, TeX, pdf and if you really need it rtf) », Culture numérique. http://blog.sens-public.org/marcel-lovitalirosati /an-editor-for-academic-papers-xml-html-md-tex-pdf-and-if-you-really-need-it-rtf/.
What do transcripts tell us about their exemplars, and how? A transcript T is commonly said (inter alia) to reproduce as far as possible the letters and words of its exemplar E. The tokens of T typically reinstantiate the letter and word types of E; T may also contain commentary on E.

Transcribers vary in their practice: some record page and line breaks in E, silently omit deletions, expand abbreviations, and correct spelling; others don't. Often a statement of practice documents such details, but some things apparently go without saying. We conjecture that what goes without saying will be the most common assumptions and habits in a community of practice. We have proposed the term "transcriptional implicature" to denote the inferences licensed by a transcript although not explicitly justified in the statement of practice [SMMH2014].

Practice (and implicature) vary across communities, but we think that some silent assumptions are shared by almost every community of practice. We believe that we can identify a common core of such assumptions, and that individual practices can be characterized by listing their deviations from this core, which we call the "default rules" of transcriptional implicature.

Like all implicatures, the rules of transcriptional implicature are defeasible: they are taken to hold in the absence of evidence to the contrary. [SMMH 2014] proposes these rules:

•    Reciprocity: There is a one-to-one relation between normal tokens in an exemplar E and normal tokens in its transcript T.

•    Purity: Every normal token in T transcribes something in E.

•    Completeness: Every normal token in E is transcribed by something in T.

•    Type similarity: corresponding tokens in E and T have the same type, or non-identical but similar types.

Given these rules, the transcription practice of any project can be described by defining what counts for that project as a special (not "normal") token and what type pairs count as similar. This paper puts these general principles to an empirical test by applying them to a concrete example: the transcript, in the Northwestern-Newberry Edition, of Hermann Melville's notes on the end-papers of a volume of Shakespeare [Melville, p 967-970]

The "Symbols used" are (numbers ours):

1.    [...] revision or insertion enclosed in square brackets was made later than initial inscription of leaf

2.    <...> letters or words enclosed in diamond brackets were canceled by lining out

3.    <...>word letter(s) or word(s) written over are enclosed in diamond brackets closed up to the following word or letter that was superimposed

4.    ?word prefixed question mark indicates conjectural reading 5 xxxx undeciphered letters (number of x's approximates numbers of letters involved)

5.    all words in roman are Melville's

6.    all words in italics outside brackets are words Melville underlined

7.    all words in italics inside brackets are editorial

If transcriptional implicature is to play the role we ascribe to it, it must be possible to recast these rules in terms of normal tokens, special tokens, and types instantiated by tokens:

•    Square brackets, diamond brackets, question marks prefixed to words, and sequences of the form xxxx in T are special tokens; they transcribe no material in E.

•    Italic material inside brackets in T is special.

•    A word written without underlining and the same word underlined have distinct types in E; the same holds for italic and roman

material in T. Words underlined in T and the same words italicized in E are type-similar.

•    Later additions to E have distinctive types; that is, we can distinguish them. A sequence of words inserted in E and the same sequence enclosed in square brackets in T are type-similar.

•    Overlined words, overwritten words, and words neither overwritten nor overlined instantiate different types. Overlined or overwritten word-types are instantiated in T by enclosing the words in diamond brackets.

•    "Undeciphered letter sequences of length N" are distinct types for distinct N, instantiated in E by undeciphered characters and in T by sequences of the form xxxx. The individual x tokens are special: they do not transcribe tokens of E.

•    A word prefixed with a question mark and the same word without it instantiate different types in T. Such a word token, and its constituent character tokens, are type-identical with their exemplars in E if the editors' conjectural reading is correct. We describe such tokens in T as "probably type-identical" to their exemplars.

Both generic and project-specific rules can be formalized using first-order logic. The generic rules include the rules of transcriptional implicature:

(Vt t:tokens(T))(normal-transcript-token(t)0 (3ie e:tokens(E))(e = exemplar(t))

(Ve e:tokens(E))(normal-exemplar-token(e)0 (3,t t:tokens(T))(t = transcript(e)))

(Ve e:tokens(E), t: tokens(T))(t = transcript(e) 0 (type(e) = type(t) v type-similar(e, t))

Reciprocity has no formalization here; it's a property of the functions exemplar() and transcript().

Other generic rules constrain the classes of normal and special tokens:

(Vt t:tokens(T))(normal-transcript-token(t) | special-transcript-token(t))

(Ve e:tokens(E))(normal-exemplar-token(e) | special-exemplar-token(e))

The Melville-specific rules identify special tokens in T:

(Vt t:tokens(T))(special-transcript-token(t) 0 (square-bracket(t) v angle-bracket(t) v prefixed-question-mark(t) v xxx-sequence(t)

v (italic(t) & within-square-brackets(t)) v (italic(t) & within-angle-brackets(t)) v prefixed-question-mark(t)

v page-furniture-token(t)))

The predicate page-furniture-token identifies material like running heads and page numbers in T. Project-specific type similarity rules cover conjectural readings:

(Vt t:tokens(T))(Ve e:tokens(E))

(probably-identical(type(t), type(e))0 type-similar(e, t))

The Melville transcription policy defines no special exemplar tokens:

-(3t t:tokens(E))(special-exemplar-token(t))

We hypothesize that it is rules like those above that enable readers of a transcript to draw conclusions about an exemplar they have never seen. Such reasoning can be formalized with the aid of a full formal representation of T and its mapping of tokens to types. In the case of Melville's notes, such a formalization will involve several thousand tokens in T and E and their types. The formal representation will not be given in full here, but it will include formulae like the following, in which "d", "p524", "L1", etc. are logical constants naming tokens:

document(d)

page(p524)

page(p525)

document_pages(d, (p524, p525)). linetoken(Ll)

line_word_tokens(Ll, (Llwl, Llw2, Llw3, Llw4, Llw5, Llw6, Llw7))

word_token(Llwl)

word_token(Llw2)

word_token_type(Llwl, "A") wordtokentype(Llw2, "seaman")

word_token_type(Llw7, "Tales.") line_token(L2)

line_token(L40)

linetype(LTl)

line_type(LT2)

line_type(LT40)

page_lines(p524, (LI, L2, L3, ... L30)) page_lines(p525, (L31, L32, L33, ... L40))

Sequences are here represented using comma-separated lists of items, enclosed in parentheses.

As an example: We can infer from the transcript that the first line of the first page transcribed reads "A seaman figures in the Canterbury Tales." This will surprise no one who can read and understands what a transcript is. The challenge here, however, is to establish the result using nothing but the normal rules of logical inference, without hand-waving.

Let us focus on the line token L1. We draw our initial inferences from the formal representation of T. As is usual for composite types, the type of the line is determined by the types of the words which make up the line. So the type of L1 is the sequence of words (or characters) "A seaman figures in the Canterbury Tales."

composite_type_string(LTl, “A seaman figures in the Canterbury Tales.")

Since L1 is not a square bracket, diamond bracket, etc., it can be inferred that L1 is a normal not a special token. From the rule of purity it then follows that there is some token e in E which L1 transcribes. This fact, together with the rule of type-similarity, tells us that e is a token which like L1 instantiates the composite type "A seaman figures in the Canterbury Tales."

A second example: A student examining a reproduction of the original of Melville's notes might ask "Are the dots to the left of the first line significant, or just discolorations of the paper?" We take this question to mean "Do the dots instantiate a type?" Let us assume that they do. If they instantiate a type, then they are tokens in E; if they are tokens in E, then either they are normal or special. They cannot be special tokens: there are none in this transcription practice. If they are normal tokens, then there exists a token in T which instantiates the same type. But there are no such tokens in T. If there is no token in T which transcribes the dots at the upper left of the page, then they are not (in the transcribers' reading of E) normal tokens. If they are neither normal tokens nor special tokens, they are not tokens at all. So: they are merely marks, not tokens, and they instantiate no type.

We have postulated transcriptional implicature as a way of bridging the gap between the explicit statements in descriptions of transcription practice and the inferences actually licensed; the empirical test reported suggests that the concept does provide the required basis for the intended inferences. If formal representations of the information content of a transcript can be generated automatically (e.g. from a TEI-encoded transcript), then we will be slightly closer to being able to describe formally the semantics of transcription-oriented markup languages like MECS-WIT or TEI when used to transcribe pre-existing exemplars.

Bibliography

Melville, H (1998) Moby Dick, or, the Whale. Ed. Harrison Hayford, Hershel Parker, and G. Thomas Tanselle. Vol. 6 of The Writings of Herman Melville, The Northwestern-Newberry Edition 1988, rpt. 1994, 1997.

Huitfeldt, C. (1993). MECS-WIT - A Registration Standard for the Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen, 1993 approx. 250 pages. Available electronically only,    now    at

http://folk.uib.no/fafch/oldstuff/mecswit.html

Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Marcoux, Y., and Huitfeldt, C.,

(2014). "Transcriptional Implicature: A Contribution to Markup Semantics." Paper at DH 2014, Lausanne. Abstract    on    the    Web    at

http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-61.xml

TEI Consortium, eds (n.d.) TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [Version 3.1.0. Last updated on 15th December 2016, revision d3f5e70]. TEI Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
The Civil War Governors of Kentucky Digital Documentary Edition (CWG-K) is a freely-accessible online collection of historical documents associated with the chief executives of the state, 1860-1865. Yet CWG-K is about far more than the five governors. Uniquely positioned to view, reflect upon, and intervene in the lives of thousands of people experiencing the traumas of civil war, Kentucky's chief executives stood at the intersection of public and private life during an era that transformed the nation. Collectively, their papers provide a multi-faceted lens through which we can recover and understand more fully the lives of countless men, women, and children who have been heretofore both historically undocumented and archivally silenced.

After five years of active editorial work, CWG-K

published the facsimiles and transcriptions of 10,000

documents online in 2016. Driven primarily by keyword searches and limited metadata faceting, Early Access is a digital evolution of the printed letterpress edition and its index. The content is interpretatively rich and suggestive and can be queried and sorted in a number of ways, but the experience is still ultimately linear. The ultimate goal of CWG-K, however, is to create a digital research environment within which a user can encounter the past multi-dimensionally through the documents and the powerful annotation network that links the documents together through the individuals, institutions, and places found in the texts.

CWG-K's true impact on scholarship, however, is through annotation. To the extent possible given the restrictions and biases of the historical record, CWG-K is identifying, researching, and linking together every person, place, and organization found in its documents. This web consisting of hundreds of thousands of networked nodes will dramatically expand the number of historical actors, show scholars new patterns and hidden relationships, and recognize the humanity and agency of historically marginalized people. The network of identified and annotated people, places, businesses, government agencies, and military units, will come as close as possible to a historical reconstruction of mid-nineteenth century society as it was lived and experienced in wartime Kentucky.

In this document-driven historical ecosystem, users can explore intuitively—moving seamlessly through seemingly disparate historical themes, events, and topics; breaking into the plane of social and geographic space to understand the deep patterns that underlay the issues raised in a text or set of texts; and moving forward and backwards through time to put this reconstructed historical world in motion and understand patterns of ebb and flow.

Phase II of the project (September 2016-September 2017) extends the edition into network visualization. Instead of reinventing the wheel for all the different functionality that an editorial annotation tool needs to have, we have taken the best existing open-source tools and integrated them to achieve our goals. TEI-XML files are exported from the transcription and control file tool DocTracker, published on the Omeka-powered Early Access website, and checked into a Github repository. Research assistants use Hy-pothes.is to identify entities within each document on the Early Access site. The custom-built MashBill tool queries Hypothes.is for those annotations, allowing research assistants to identify references to entities and

build relationships between initially coocurring entities and document biographical research from external sources. MashBill then uses the annotations and identifications to update the TEI documents automatically with the appropriate persName/or-gName/placeName references and re-publishing them to Github.

In the open source tool MashBill, CWG-K makes an important contribution to network analysis in digital humanities. With a few exceptions network analysis is still dominated by network construction based on cooccurence of entities within documents. These entities are most frequently created by automated named entity recognition performed on plaintext. CWG-K researcher's close reading of documents to extract entities allows for much accurate identification of entities. The use of Hypothes.is makes such human-powered entity recognition far more scalable than traditional manual tagging of TEI-XML. Rather than using pure cooccurence MashBill allows relationships to be defined by researchers consulting resources outside the documents of the edition. These relationships are then visualized with a D3.js visualization which is deeply linked to both the documents themselves as well as the articles written during the course of entity and relationship research on the people, places, and things. The open source MashBill tool may be reused for any TEI/Omeka project to reduce the effort and improve quality of entity identification.

Since the Civil War Governors of Kentucky Digital Documentary Edition is a project of the Kentucky Historical Society, it has always focused on public access. The development of MashBill and integration of the network visualization produced with that tool into the early access website will enable the public to discover the lives and stories of everyday people who interacted with the offices of the governors. Our synthesis of approaches and technologies provides an example other projects can benefit from, showing how to leverage open source tools and standards to efficiently identify and build network visualization in public digital editions.
Introduction
This paper discusses the importance of physical spaces, as a source of context, with relation to electronic resources. The presented arguments are based on a geo-located mobile application (due for launch in November 2016) developed for the Letters of 1916 project that allows users to see letters from the collection near them. The application is available for the Android platform and allows users to read letters from the Letters of 1916 based on the device’s geolocation providing a different way to engage with the resource. While the abstract considers a wider perspective, the presented paper will focus more on the implementation of the application and the means of access it provides.

Context
The Letters of 1916 is Ireland’s first public engagement, digital humanities project. It collects, digitises, transcribes, encodes, and makes available through its electronic platform epistolary documents written about Ireland between 1 November 1915 and 31 October 1916. The goal of Letters of 1916 is to reassess the narrative of this period through the collection of letters (including postcards and telegrams) with a tangible link to Ireland. The year 1916 was one of transition for Ireland: between its involvement in the Great War and the rise of militant nationalism, the country was divided by sentiment, separated by ideals. The rhetoric of the letter presents personal perspectives and individual memory traces; the collected letters provide an insight into those fragmentary stories that, inspected together, constitute a collective consciousness.

While the project uses its Explore database to provide a traditional interface (including search and browse functions as well as the ability to view the letters sorted by location, topic, institution, and author’s gender, etc.) to engage with the collection, the mobile application is limited to discovery through geo-location. The motivation behind such an application is to provide a different way to engage with the resource through a dynamic-content interface. Framework

As a project born out of humanities research, it is important to ground the mobile application within a framework that provides clarity about its function and design. The application addresses questions of access and investigates the following three key areas:

Re-inserting space

Archival objects are decontextualised artefacts that are removed from their place of origin and collected within resources outside their purpose and provenance. The importance of providing geographical positions to objects within collections, both as means of providing access and as a method of context-attribution, has been discussed broadly (Harekama 2012; Cusworth et. al. 2015). Mapping objects to digital maps is a common practice in collection building and may be seen in projects like Mapping the Republic of Letters or Photogrammar, for instance. The objects in the Letters of 1916 collection are written between individuals within a historic context and a spatial context. Letters are spatially-aware objects — written from a place and to a place; their understanding is deeply grounded within the geographical spaces they occupy. It is, then, obvious that their experience should be enhanced by providing them with geo-locations. The mobile application presents these letters within the spaces they are created or written to; the experience of reading a letter standing on the same street as it was composed is different to reading it on a screen detached from its physical space.

Serendipity

Collections are only as good as the access they provide. Most digital collections provide access through text-searches, which, at some level, always assume that the user knows what she is looking for. Even with faceted searches, the sense of discovery is limited by a prior knowledge of the collection. A geo-located retrieval of content is not mediated by textual input but through the user’s own existence in physical space. That tangible sense of discovery, or rather, that serendipitous moment of coming across a piece of history is mediated, not by some prior knowledge of the collection, but as a consequence of the user’s location in the world.

Aura, magic, and history

Stanley Cavell (1979), while discussing photographs, tries to find the relationship between the subject and the image of the subject. His exploration attempts to address that connection between the physical object and its representation; he explores ideas of aura (Benjamin 1969), magic (Barthes 1977), and history (Tagg 1988) to think about the experience of seeing the physical object and the impression of it; while he identifies that there is a differences, he struggles to describe quite what that is. Building on this line of inquiry, I would like to argue that reading a letter within the space it is conceived or received provides a mode of perception that cannot be found if it is read outside of it. Whether we choose to call that aura, magic, or history, the importance of connecting the object to its physical space lends a multi-sensory engagement that is lacking in other forms of digital interfaces.

Implementation
This mobile application is designed with input from two rounds of internal user testing and feedback in 2016. A focus-group is planned for summer 2017 to further test and enhance the user experience from both software and conceptual perspectives.

The Letters of 1916 has multiple moving parts and the application is designed and conceived within that existing framework. The project invites the public to transcribe and encode images of the collected letters. These machine-readable documents are then put through a rigorous editing phase which create valid TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) files. The sender’s and receiver’s addresses (that are present in the letters) are given unique identifiers and, consequently, geocoordinates. Specific fields(title of the letter, sender’s location, and link to the letter) found within the edited TEI documents are extracted and converted into a JSON object. This is the data structure and format that the application uses to dynamically pull information. The mobile application is built using the Adobe PhoneGap framework (for the Android platform). The application reads the user’s device geolocation; it uses the haversine formula to calculate the distance between the user and the letters. The application calculates the distance between two points on the earth’s surface and measures the distance between them in metres. This distance orders the letters from the least to the greatest (see Fig. 1). It is then possible to display the letters closest to the device’s geolocation. Clicking each object opens an in-app browser that makes the text of the letter available in a mobile-friendly interface (see Fig. 2).


Figure 1. The Letters 1916 mobile application user interface


Figure 2. Mobile-optimised letter-view for Letters 1916

Conclusions
The presented mobile application takes electronic resources outside the paradigm of the desktop computer and provides a meaningful way of engaging with the resource. The presented paper will consider how this application is built and the means through which it makes resources accessible. It will also consider the drawbacks and limitations of such a system opening up to discussion the use of mobile technology in the experience of cultural resources.

Acknowledgements
The mobile-friendly web-interface for reading letters on the website is built by Mr. Shane McGarry, Senior Developer, Letters 1916.

Bibliography
<http://letters1916.maynoothuniversity.ie/explo

re/>

Yale University (n.d.) Photogrammar, accessed 21 October 2016, <http://photogrammar.yale.edu/>

Stanford University (2013). Mapping the Republic of Letters, accessed 21 October 2016, http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/

Tagg, J. (1988). The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photographies and Histories. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

TEI Consortium (n.d.) TEI: Text Encoding Initiative, accessed 21 October 2016, <http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml/>

Adobe PhoneGap, accessed 21 October 2016, <http://phonegap.com/>

Barthes, R. (1977) ‘Rhetoric of the Image.’ In Heath, S. (ed). Image - Music - Text. London: Fontana Press. pp 32-51.

Benjamin, W. (1969). ‘Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’ In Arend, H. (ed) and Zohn, H. (tr). Illuminations: Essays and Reflections. New York: Schocken. 1969. Print.

Cavell, S. (1979). The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film. Harvard University Press.

Cusworth, A., Hughes, L. M., James, R., Roberts, O. and Roderick, G. L. (2015) ‘What Makes the Digital “Special”? The Research Program in Digital Collections at the National Library of Wales’, New Review of Academic Librarianship, 21(2), pp. 241248. doi: 10.1080/13614533.2015.1034805.

Harkema, C. and Nygren, C. (2012) ‘Historypin for Library Image Collections: New Modes of Access for Unique Materials at the University of Saskatchewan Library’, Partnership: The Canadian Journal of Library and Information Practice and Research, 7(2). doi: 10.21083/partnership.v7i2.1970.

Maynooth University (n.d.) “Explore”. Letters of 1916: A Year in the Life, accessed 21 October 2016.
Gentrification takes many forms, ranging from whole scale bulldozing and forced relocations, to skyrocketing rents and dominion of multinational corporations over entire neighbourhoods. In Toronto, gentrification is facadist: the hollowed brick skins of Victorian storefronts are preserved in orderly rows, with great glass office buildings or condos sprouting up through their once-solid roofs and porticos. Luxury boutiques and art galleries take over the spaces once held by convenience stores and leave the original, rusting signage above the door, urging pedestrians to drink Coke. A local diner closes one night and reopens the next as a cocktail lounge - the interior and exterior remain untouched. The same 1960s banquets that once served $5 burgers to an impoverished and marginalized local population now serve burgers that cost $17, even though the name advertised on the now-vintage neon sign outside remains the same.

Most city dwellers are familiar with these external signs of gentrification. Gentrification, however, does not just shape the streetscape, it shapes the outlook of city dwellers in a way that obliterates urban history, especially the history of marginalized communities, even though it is these diverse populations of people of colour, immigrants, queers, and the working poor that gave cities the dynamic qualities that made them initially so attractive to new residents. In Toronto, the building boom of the last decade has left only the facade of much of the city’s diverse history. What is behind the facade - luxury condos and chain stores -represents a completely different model for a city, one that prioritizes neoliberalism, conservative values, and the homogenization of thought.

In the traditional narrative of gentrification, gentrification begins with the influx of white gay and artistic communities, the so-called “creative class,” into economically disadvantaged areas. These “shock troops” of gentrification clear the way for yuppies with their preference for boutique coffee shops and organic vegetables. Rents rise and the original low-income or minority population of the neighbourhood is displaced, pushed further and further to the margins as the initial hot spot of gentrification rapidly expands. According to Sarah Schulman, Distinguished Professor of the Humanities at the College of Staten Island, this traditional narrative does not get to the heart of gentrification. The gay community has become a convenient straw man for an outcome that is shaped by much more powerful forces in municipal government, and the changing tenor of city life is due not to the introduction of artists spaces, but to the “gentrification of the mind” or the suburbanization of our understanding of city space.

In her book, The Gentrification of the Mind, Schulman quotes the artist Penny Arcade’s piece “New York Values”: “There is a gentrification that happens to buildings and neighborhoods and there is a gentrification that happens to ideas.” Gentrification, according to Schulman’s theory, is caused not simply by the influx of new people, but when those people come to cities “not to join in or to learn and evolve, but to homogenize,” bringing “the values of the gated community and a willingness to trade freedom for security” (30). Gentrification “replaces most people’s experiences with the perceptions of the privileged and calls that reality” and as a result “gentrified happiness is often available to us in return for collusion with injustice” (161, 166).

In the remaking of Toronto as a city of facades, are we not only erasing our history, but permanently altering the idea of what our city is, who it is for, and what purpose it serves?

And is there a way the digital humanities scholars in particular can fight these forces to a halt? Drawing on Schulman’s argument and using the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada project’s spatial model of the Toronto gay scene as a case study, the short paper proposed here will argue that the freely accessible publication of digital models of historical communities can be used to push back against the gentrification of the mind. The presentation that will accompany the paper will mark the launch of the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada map, built from the 17,000+ person, place, and event entity records in the LGLC database.

The Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada project reconfigures Donald McLeod’s remarkable two-volume work, Lesbian and Gay Liberation In Canada: A Selected Annotated Chronology, 1964-1981 as a TEI-encoded resource and graph database. The prototype database, available at http://lglc.ca consists of event, publication, person, and place records spanning from the founding of the first homophile associations in Canada through to the start of the AIDS crisis. The LGLC project extends McLeod’s codex form in order to data mine and represent queer history spatially and temporally. The project not only makes a much-neglected part of Canadian history available for mainstream scholarly use, it also provides a foundation for modeling identity and representing time and space in TEI.

There is much to model spatially and temporally. In the 1960s, the Toronto’s gay scene was located on Yonge Street and by the 1970s the bars had migrated north along Yonge from Queen Street towards Wellesley Street. Two of the most famous bars on this strip were the Parkside at 530 Yonge Street and the St. Charles Tavern at 488 Yonge Street, both owned by Norman Bolter. The neighbourhood surrounding the former sites of the Parkside and the St. Charles is currently a site of massive development. Gone are the seedy bars and massage parlours. Large glass condos are rising from bulldozed lots and from the tops of heritage buildings.

The building that housed the St. Charles Tavern still stands above Yonge Street at Wellesley. It is slated to become a condo in 2017, the iconic clock tower that served for decades as a meeting spot for the gay community will be preserved at the base of a proposed 153 metre glass spire. The incorporation of this piece of gay history into a shining skyscraper only furthers serves the ideology that scapegoats the gay community as the root cause of gentrification, making the million dollar condos imagined by a developer seem like an inevitability, rather than just one potential future amongst many. What is lost in this new instance of facadism is the history of the St. Charles Tavern, a violent history neither the city nor developers seem keen to acknowledge or commemorate.

For example, tracing the events outside the St. Charles Tavern on Halloween from 1968 to 1981 reveals Toronto's violently homophobic history, and the inadequate policy and police response to that violence. In the 1960s it was illegal for men to wear clothing of the opposite sex in Toronto, a rule that was relaxed at Halloween. Every Halloween St. Charles Tavern hosted a drag show, and every year a homophobic mob congregated outside the bar to throw eggs and rotten vegetables as the queens arrived. In 1968, police found gasoline bombs behind the tavern, and yet in the following years police still permitted crowds to hurl insults shout slogans such as "kill the queers", and throw debris at the patrons. It took a decade for the police to start arresting people in the mob; in the meantime a volunteer gay defense patrol, Operation Jack O'Lantern, escorted patrons through the neighbourhood and in through the back door of the tavern. Between 1975 and 1978, 14 patrons of Toronto's gay bar scene were murdered. Eight of those murders went unsolved amid accusations of police homophobia, which were only exacerbated by homophobic articles published in the Toronto Police Association Journal. Publishing this history online, not only in text, but in map form, will make it accessible to an audience that will include not just scholars, but the citizens of Toronto. By developing accompanying pedagogical tools to guide users through the map, we hope to engage local residents, as well as the thousands of students at nearby universities and schools, in working to reclaim that lost history, and undoing some of the effects of the gentrification of the mind.
Introduction
This panel brings together papers by three projects that are working on digital methods for researching and representing the textual networks of women writers. “Documentary Social Networks: Women Travel Writers in Prosopographies,” by Alison Booth with Worthy Martin, Rennie Mapp, and Jeremy Boggs, focuses on a cohort of travel writers from the

Collective Biographies of Women project to consider documentary social networks and the “sibling” relationship of subjects who occupy a single biographical volume. “Intertextual Networks: Theorizing and Encoding Textual Connections in Early Women’s Writing,” by Sarah Connell and Julia Flanders, presents the Women Writers Project’s (WWP) work on using markup to model and research the citation and quotation practices of early women writers in the context of the larger ecology of digital projects focused on gender. “Digital Representation, Intertextual Relationships, and the Impact of Early Modern Women’s Writing,” by Marie-Louise Coolahan and David Kelly, describes the research of the RECIRC project (The Reception and Circulation of Early Modern Women’s Writing: 1550-1700), focusing on RECIRC’s development of taxonomies of reception and circulation and on the methodologies for understanding textual transmission that the project has been testing.

These projects explore the problem of intertextuality at several different levels: primary source documents (including print and manuscript), metadata, and synthetic or critical narratives such as biography and annotation. Each project faces the challenges particular to its own place in the digital ecology and also the challenge of making its data usable in other parts of that ecology: connections that will depend on the collaborative generation of digital standards. The projects also share an interest in understanding the roles that gender played in the circulation of texts, investigating what women read and cited, which women were read and cited, and how women were represented in writing. Together they offer an opportunity to explore how intertextuality, as understood in the context of the modern web of linked open data, operates not only as a deliberate rhetoric of quotation but also through more complex interconnections between texts, authors, and other cultural agencies—and how those links can effectively be brokered through connections between digital research projects and resources.

These three papers will not only discuss the various textual networks of women writers that are the subject of their individual projects but will also consider connections between the projects themselves, highlighting both points of contact and distinctions. We see this panel as an opportunity to examine the wider possibilities for making intertextual connections legible among digital systems of textual circulation.

Documentary Social Networks: Women Travel Writers in Prosopographies
Alison Booth with Worthy Martin, Rennie
Mapp, and Jeremy Boggs
New literary histories using large digitized corpora can scale up the longstanding interest in intertextuality, beyond allusions and acknowledged influences. Such projects as the Women Writers Project and RECIRC engage not only textual but also personographic data, as all kinds of metadata interdependently form rigorous measures of intertextual transmission. As feminist literary history, such projects are also committed to contexts of women's lives and networks of representation. The Collective Biographies of Women (CBW) project studies Anglophone prosopographies (collective biographies, or a quantitative approach to standardized lives in sets) women of all occupations in books published since 1830, revealing trends in representation of women through an annotated bibliography, a database and stand-aside XML markup of narrative structure and discourse (Biographical Elements and Structure Schema, or BESS a stand-aside XML schema for marking elements of biographical narratives at the level of the paragraph). Unlike many feminist DH projects, CBW is not an archive of women's creative writing, though at least 700 of 8700 persons in the database are writers (one person is likely to represent several types). We study the collocation of women in books; thus Harriet Martineau, in 25 collections, is a “sibling” in “one degree of separation” from the 316 individuals found at least once in those collections. We have begun with typological cohorts and sample corpora focused on a nodal woman (all the volumes in which her biography appears) because of the labor-intensive analysis in our project's design.

This talk introduces the cohort of travel writers in CBW, focusing on the sample corpus of volumes that include a short biography of the famous mother and travel writer Frances Trollope (CBW includes 10 books entirely of female travelers; 17 collections of great mothers or mothers of the great. It should be noted that CBW assigns 137 collection types- e.g. genre; theme; types of women in them- and the 1272 volumes may each be assigned more than one type). Her biography joins assortments of different types:


One exemplary text for this paper will be Una Pope-Hennessy's Three Englishwomen in America (London: Benn, 1929), on Frances Trollope (for an earlier account of Frances Trollope as travel writer and mother, see Booth, 2015), Harriet Martineau, and Fanny Kemble, to illustrate the concept of documentary social networks and the “siblings” who occupy a single volume. More recently, we study the author of such a collection, in the cohort of some 995 “presenters” (i.e. biographers, illustrators, editors), 567 of whom were female. Currently, the CBW database relates an author such as Pope-Hennessy only to the book, not to the persons associated with its chapters. We would like to visualize the relations among authors and their subjects as well as we already trace intertextual exchange among versions of the same lives.

T)/!ME VNA FOPE-HENNESST

THREE

ENQL1SH WOMEN EX ^IMERJCs!

Fatty TntJsff Fatty FtttHt HarUt Mmiictia


Figures 1,2. Kemble: Steel engraving by Johnson Wilson, & Co., after painting by Alonzo Chappel, after painting by Sir Thomas Lawrence. Trollope: Frontispiece: “Francis Trollope from a portrait painted by A. Hervieu,” in Frances Eleanor Trollope, Frances Trollope: Her Life and Literary Work from George III. to Victoria, 2 vols. (London: Bentley, 1895). Harriet Martineau by Richard Evans (National Portrait Gallery). Mrs. Anna Brownell Jameson, 1844, Hill and Adamson salt

print, Art Institute of Chicago.

The portraits of British women authors who wrote

famous observations on America in the 1830s, adapted as frontispieces, take on a family resemblance in spite of the great social and personal distance among these mutual acquaintances. Covers and illustrations often create composite portraits (see Booth, 2004:33-42) Pope-Hennessy's Englishwomen had bestselling books or tours in the 1830s, warranting their then-fashionable portraits (Cecil Beaton photographed Pope-Hennessy). Whereas Trollope and Kemble, and Martineau and Kemble, only coincide in Three Englishwomen in America, Martineau and Trollope share 8 collections, 3 on travelers, others on more miscellaneous achievement. What common ground justifies narratives of their lives in a single publication? Pope-Hennessy's title suggests it is their gendered transatlantic vision. It does not spell out that these Victorian writers attacked America for its manners and for slavery. CBW finds distinctive features in lives of women writers who traveled, besides an increase in geospatial data: a publication event characterizes and types the author (“Trollopize” is the verb the came from Trollope's offensive Domestic Manners of the Americans); literary biographies devote a high proportion of paragraphs to summary of the works, in contrast with biographies of queens or nurses, for example.

Databases tend to label persons by nationality and familial role. Our research shows the temporal or narrative dimension of supposedly fixed traits as well as the unstable scope of events. Englishness (the event “birth”) should be modified by later adopted countries; Trollope and Kemble emigrated to the US for some years, and both primarily resided in Italy in later life. Married mothers, novelist Trollope and actress Kemble later separated or divorced; political theorist Martineau was unmarried and childless; these relations shape their representation. Many events challenge the researcher to affix GIS or standard dates, such as the bankruptcies (tied to family relations) that enabled all three writing careers; these crises had far-reaching continuance in creating their opportunities or need to travel. We have identified the most frequently narrated events in all versions of the three writers' lives, potentially mapping their travels, works, and lives in a way adaptable for any intertextual biographical cohort (see http: //cbw.iath.virginia.edu/cbw db /events.phpl

Events

E00170

Type:

Name: Move to Georgia Plantation

Note: December 1838; Butler Island Plantation, which was about 1 mile south of Darien, GA (GIS: 31° 22' 16" N, 8l° 25' 51" W) Latitude: 31.371111 Longitude: -81.430833


Edit Primary Fields

Persons

1. Frances Ann Kemble • —

The talk shares portraits, visualizations of documentary social networks, maps, and innovative interface (rich-prospect browsing) to reveal analyses of versions of the same person or persons within networks of text. We sample intertextuality in which these and other women enter into the body of each others' life narratives. Like any biography, Pope-Hennessy's chapters assemble citations and redactions of previous versions, from letters, archives, and autobiographical records to biographies; the textual methods of RECIRC or a tool like Juxta http://www.juxtasoftware.org/, as well as BESS analysis, fruitfully compare versions. The paper will reflect on the intertextuality of representation of women writers and travelers, as well as the challenges of a comprehensive prosopographical study using digital tools to develop a large-scale and finely grained analysis of women’s biographical histories.

Acknowledgements

The Collective Biographies of Women Project is supported by the E-Text Center, Scholars’ Lab, and Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (IATH) as well as English Department at the University of Virginia, CBW has received ACLS Fellowship and NEH ODH Level-II Startup funding

Intertextual Networks: Theorizing and Encoding Textual Connections in Early Women's Writing
Sarah Connell and Julia Flanders
Introduction

Intertextual Networks is an initiative of the Women Writers Project (WWP) at Northeastern University aimed at exploring and theorizing the representation of intertextuality, with a focus on the citation and quotation practices of the authors represented in the WWP’s digital collection, Women Writers Online (WWO). The WWP’s work on Intertextual Networks incorporates several strands: focused projects conducted by individual research collaborators; sustained examination of the modalities of intertextuality as revealed by the work of our staff and collaborators; and a large-scale encoding project creating a bibliography of all the texts named or quoted in WWO, linking the texts in that bibliography with their occurrences in the WWO corpus, and substantially expanding the encoding of intertextual phenomena in our textbase. In this paper, we will discuss the aims and methods of the project, offering models for encoding complex intertextual features and setting out some processes for the systematic application of additional markup to an existing corpus. We will also consider the implications of this project for the larger ecology of digitized collections focused on gender and on women’s writing.

Contexts

While Intertextual Networks is a recent initiative of the WWP, it has grown out of several decades of previous research as manifested in WWO and other WWP publications-particularly Women Writers in

Review, a collection of around 700 reviews and publication notices responding to the authors in WWO. The almost 400 texts published in Women Writers Online are primarily print English-language works, representing a broad cross-section of texts written and translated by women from 1526 to 1850. These texts have been transcribed and encoded using the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines. Intertextual Networks also builds on and contributes to ongoing research into the digital representation of intertextuality, including the substantial work already evident in the TEI Guidelines’ recommendations for encoding titles, quotations, and other textual references. Additionally, we are working with the Orlando Project’s (see also, Brown et al, 2004) and the RECIRC project’s (The Reception and Circulation of Early Modern Women’s Writing, 1550-1700) bodies of research into developing taxonomies of reception, circulation, and intertextuality. Intertextual Networks is equally grounded in literary and historical scholarship on the ways that women from the early modern period to the mid-nineteenth century read and responded to texts (e.g., Horrocks, 2008; Rumbold, 2006; Winterer, 2008).

Design and goals

This project is working to create a much clearer and more textured picture of the rhetoric of intertextuality: what female authors read; what they felt it important to quote, paraphrase, or cite; and what mechanisms connect their writing to that of other authors. In addition to the relatively straightforward instances of explicit quotations, citations, and references to specific titles, the project is also invested in developing practices for marking up subtler forms of intertextual engagement that emerge from verbal echoes, stylistic or topic similarities, imitation, parody, and other transformative ways of responding to what one has read.

Because WWO is chronologically broad and generically diverse, it provides a considerable range of opportunities to test different encoding practices against textual exemplars. The textual references in WWO are often densely layered and quite complex— for just a few examples, Lady Eleanor Davies inserts the full text of other documents into some of her political pamphlets; the 1706 Ladies’ Diary constructs short poems, called “Enigmas,” out of lines from several other poetic works; and Elizabeth Craven’s 1789 A Journey through the Crimea to Constantinople inserts a poem that she wrote based on, and sometimes “literally translated” from a pamphlet, with citations to the pamphlet itself (43). Thus, an important goal of this project is not only to reveal early women’s intertextual practices but also to test and model methods for representing the considerable complexity of these practices in TEI markup, working with formal categories without flattening out useful levels of nuance.

Encoding and bibliographic development

In developing a bibliography for the texts named in WWO, we have found that a balance of programmatic intervention and human attention can effectively accomplish systematic adjustments across our corpus. Using XQuery, we have generated a spreadsheet with the distinct titles—and authorship details where they are available—referenced in WWO. The WWP’s encoding staff has been gathering basic publication details (standardized titles, authors, and dates and locations of initial publication), removing duplicates, disambiguating wherever necessary—such as with the many texts that are titled “Poems”—and adding unique identifiers. Our bibliographic data follow Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) recommendations. Preserving the titles as they are represented in WWO, with the XPaths used to locate each, means that we can automatically add the unique identifiers back into the corpus when we have completed the initial bibliographic work. This approach enables us to identify the more than 6,000 <title> elements in WWO relatively quickly, while ensuring from the outset that there are no duplicate entries and laying the groundwork for the future additions of texts and textual details as we expand our source identification to quotations and other textual references.

We have also found that human and programmatic intervention can be fruitfully combined in establishing and implementing methods for encoding those intertextual features that are not straightforward <quote>s and <title>s and in expanding our understanding of how quotations and titles are being used by the authors in WWO. XPath and XQuery can reveal usage patterns and identify cases that might warrant additional investigation—such as the relatively rare instances in which titles are named in dramatic verse. Corpus-wide queries are also useful in locating additional examples of textual phenomena in order to decide how best to encode them. For example, we have reviewed emendations and translations of quotations, indirect references to titles, instances in which textual materials are elided from quotations, quotations within quotations, and incorrect or partially correct citations to develop consistent

encoding practices that are applicable across our corpus, despite its variety.

Conclusion

This project is concerned with both discovering textual reverberation (the traces of women’s reading that emerge in their writing) and with making that reverberation legible within the new digital systems of textual circulation. Within the boundaries of the Women Writers Project, that legibility is effected through the encoding that makes intertextuality an explicit feature of our modeling of texts. The use of a community standard like the TEI and the future availability of an API to the project’s data extend that legibility—in principle—beyond the project’s walls, but these methods do not in themselves build the complex web of interconnections that would constitute digital intertextuality. By placing the WWP’s work alongside that of Collective Biographies of Women and RECIRC (two out of a much wider field of relevant connections) this panel will suggest what that larger intertextuality could look like, and what further work would be needed to realize it.

Digital Representation, Intertextual
Relationships, and the Impact of Early Modern Women's Writing
Marie-Louise Coolahan and David Kelly
This paper emerges from the research of the team working on the RECIRC project (The Reception and Circulation of Early Modern Women’s Writing, 15501700; see www.recirc.nuigalway.ie), funded by the European Research Council (2014-2019) and led by Marie-Louise Coolahan. It will describe the project, its development of digital tools, collaborations, and plans for interoperability with cognate projects. It will focus in particular on our development of taxonomies of reception and circulation, designed to capture data that reflects early modern source material, as the basis for our dialogue with the Women Writers Project and Collective Biographies of Women project - a dialogue that is centrally concerned with questions of intertextuality, circulation and the collaborative generation of digital standards.

The RECIRC project is essentially a study of intellectual impact. Its fundamental research questions include: Which women were read? How, where, and by whom were they read? RECIRC is structured around four interlinking ‘work packages’, each of which takes a specific entry point in order to amass quantitative data relating to the reception and circulation of women’s writing between 1550 and 1700. The first of these posits the Catholic religious orders as transnational channels by which devotional and polemical texts were translated and transmitted; it investigates the martyrologies and bibliographies of the various religious orders, as large-scale compendia of texts that included female-authored works. The second ‘work package’ examines scientific correspondence networks (and therefore also complements the research currently brought under the umbrella of Women’s/Early Modern Letters Online (EMLO, WEMLO) and Reassembling the Republic of Letters (led by Howard Hotson); the wealth of data to be found in the scriptorium operated through Samuel Hartlib has meant we have focused specifically on this circle. The third approach aims to rebalance the bias of digitization projects toward print culture by harvesting data from early modern manuscripts. It does so by focusing solely on the category of the manuscript miscellany (a compilation of miscellaneous materials) in order to assess the contexts for excerpting and transcribing women’s writing. It differs from the Folger Shakespeare Library’s Early Modern Manuscripts Online (EMMO) initiative, which is a full-text transcription project, in its harvesting and structuring of data relating specifically to reception and circulation. The fourth RECIRC approach is concerned with early modern library catalogues; it captures data on the proportion of female-authored items in order to facilitate statistical analysis relating to the gendering of such book collections.

RECIRC, then, is testing these methodological approaches for understanding the ‘big picture’ of textual transmission, reception and circulation of women’s writing in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The focus on women’s writing enables investigation of the routes to impact that were exploited by early modern women, as well as of the ways gender inflected the construction of writerly reputation. It also delimits the corpus, facilitating our testing of methodologies for studying the circulation of non-elite, non-canonical writing in the period. Rather than producing a full-text digitization of primary materials, the project has been centrally concerned with developing taxonomies of reception and circulation - and these are the basis of collaboration with the WWP's current Intertextual Networks project and the Collective Biographies of Women project. This encompasses productive conversations around the kinds of intertextuality (quotation, excepting, citation of text and/or author) that occur in relation to women’s writing, and their modes of digital representation. There are also important areas of divergence: RECIRC is working with metadata categories rather than xml tags; although each instance of reception evidence is supplied as full-text, these instances are themselves extracts from significantly larger texts. Moreover, RECIRC is concerned with all - women’s and men’s -reception of female authors, which allows for equally productive conversations about gender and reception.

RECIRC data are stored in an online database, which will be made publicly accessible at the project’s close, and is intended to be interoperable with cognate projects, such as the NEWW Women Writers Virtual Research Environment. The database architecture (built using a RESTful API approach) enables multiple output formats and we will discuss possibilities for interoperable outputs. Moreover, the project is now (October 2016) at the stage of data cleaning, in preparation for experimenting with visualization tools and quantitative analysis. We aim to create network visualizations and analyses that embrace both the gendering of reception and the relationships of texts with each other. Questions include: Which genres of female-authored texts were most popularly circulated? What forms of circulation (translation, excerpts, citation) were most conducive to their transmission? How important (and prevalent) was attribution to their circulation? Which female authors were reading and using other women writers? What circulation contexts promoted women as authors? If accepted to DH2017, we intend to present our preliminary answers to the questions and patterns that emerge during this quantitative analysis phase.

Bibliography
Booth, A. (2004). How to Make It as a Woman: Collective

Biographical History from Victoria to the    Present.

Chicago: U Chicago Press.

Booth, A. (2015). “Frances Trollope in a Victorian Network of Women’s Biographies.” Virtual Victorians: Networks, Connections, Technologies, ed. Veronica Alfano and Andrew Stauffer. Palgrave Macmillan.83-106. Digital Annex http://www.virtualvictorians.org/

Brown, S., Grundy, I., Clements, P., Elio, R., Balzas, S., and Cameron, R. (2004). Intertextual Encoding in the Writing of Women's Literary History. Computers and the Humanities. 38(2): 191-206.

Craven, E. (1789) A Journey through the Crimea to Constantinople. London: G. G. J. and J. Robinson.

Early Modern Letters Online (n.d.)

http://emlo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk.

Early    Modern Manuscripts Online    (n.d)    :

http://folgerpedia.folger.edu/Early_Modern_Manuscrip ts_Online.

Horrocks. E. (2008) 'Her Ideas Arranged Themselves’: ReMembering Poetry in Radcliffe. Studies in Romanticism 47(4): 505-527.

IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements of Bibliographic Records. (1998). Functional Requirements of Bibliographic Records: final report. Last updated February 2009.

http://archive.ifla.org/VII/s13/frbr/frbr_current_toc.ht

m

Martineau, H. (2007). Autobiography, ed. Linda H. Peterson (Peterborough, Ontario, Canada:    Broadview).

New Approaches to European Women Writers (NEWW) (n.d.)    Women    Writers    VRE:

http://resources.huygens.knaw.nl/womenwriters

Reassembling the Republic of    Letters:

http://www.republicofletters.net

Pope-Hennessy, U. (1929). Three Englishwomen in America    (London:    Benn,).

http://cbw.iath.virginia.edu/books_display.php?id=199 0.

Rumbold, K. (2006).    .'Alas, poor Yorick’: Quoting

Shakespeare in the Mid-Eighteenth-Century Novel. Borrowers and Lenders: The Journal of Shakespeare and Appropriation 2(2).

http://www.borrowers.uga.edu/7151/toc

TEI Consortium. (2016). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.0.0. Last updated 29th March 2016.    http://tei-

c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/

Winterer, C. (2008) The Female World of Classical Reading in Eighteenth-Century America. In Brayman Hackel, H. and Kelly, C. (eds.), Reading Women: Literacy, Authorship, and Culture in the Atlantic World, 15001800. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 105-123.
Mver the last several years, spatial humanities have grown in prominence. Initiatives such as the University of Virginia’s Institute for Enabling Geospatial Scholarship and Stanford’s Spatial History Project have signaled and begun exploring the impact of the spatial turn. Writing for UVA’s institute, historian Jo Guildi states, “The spatial turn represents the impulse to position these new tools [i.e. GIS] against old questions” (Guildi, 2010). In this panel, we challenge the idea that the spatial turn simply asks old questions and rather argue that it helps pose new as well as answer old questions in twentieth-century American history. In particular, we employ the idea of deep mapping as theorized by historian David Bodenhemer to discuss new scholarship and directions in digital spatial analysis. We also explore the role public humanities plays in framing these projects. The 45-minute panel entitled “Mapping the 20 th Century United States” will focus on the role of the spatial analysis in the digital, public humanities and its impact on historical scholarship.

Robert Nelson will begin the panel with “Reckoning with Redlining: Public Engagement with ‘Mapping Inequality.’” The Mapping Inequality project provides unparalleled access to the infamous redlining maps and area descriptions created by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation during the Great Depression.

Accessed by tens of thousands of visitors in the first two weeks following its release, this paper will draw upon hundreds of contributions to a public conversation about redlining and urban inequality around “Mapping Inequality” in social media and the comment threads of press the project has received. Nelson will analyze the design decisions he and his colleagues made to prompt public engagement with these maps and the history of redlining. He will also critically use the reaction to the project to critically assess how successful this public-facing digital humanities project has been in prompting productive conversations about redlining and urban and racial inequalities.

Continuing with our exploration of the 1930s, we will turn to Taylor Arnold and Lauren Tilton who will discuss combining archives spatially in order to produce new knowledge about and public access to documentary expression in the era. They will focus on layering the Federal Writer’s Project, which documented through text the life histories of thousands of Americans, with 170,000 photographs from the Farm Security Administration-Office of War Information. Placing these archives for the first time in conversation, their deep maps incite new questions about the role of the federal government in documenting the lived experiences of Americans during the Great Depression and the types of representation produced.

Next we will turn to the work of Jason Heppler on post-war America. Silicon Valley represented one of the twentieth century’s greatest modernizations of urban space. Beginning in the 1950s, the formation of a new high tech suburbanism led the Valley to become identified not only with a center of hopeful possibility as the Industrial Age industries of the Midwest and Northeast began to decline, but also gave expression to an environmental politic that attempted to reconcile an environmentally conscious pursuit of the American Dream. Yet the claim for high tech’s “clean” industrialization fell short as environmental concerns -- ranging from controlling growth to widespread chemical contamination of water supplies -- reshaped discussions about public and private space. Deep maps help explore the transformation of urban space over time.

Along with addressing the role of spatial analysis in cutting edge humanities scholarship, each paper will outline which technologies they are using along with their possibilities and challenges. In particular, Robert Nelson will address a cutting edge spatial toolkit the University of Richmond Digital Scholarship Lab and

Statmen Design are developing for use across the digital humanities. The panelists will also discuss the role of collaboration, the process of developing crossinstitutional partnerships and designing for public audiences.

Reckoning with Redlining: Public
Engagement with "Mapping Inequality"
Robert Nelson
In keeping with the conference theme of access and its emphasis upon public-facing scholarship, this presentation will reflect upon hundreds of comments and several conversations from the lay public about "Mapping Inequality". A collaboration of teams at four universities, "Mapping Inequality" currently includes nearly all of the more than 150 "security maps" and nearly 10,000 "area descriptions" created by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation during the Great Depression. These maps assessed mortgage risk for thousands of neighborhoods in U.S. cities large and small on a scale of "A" to "D". "A" neighborhoods were deemed "best," presenting minimal risks for banks and lenders; "D" neighborhoods were deemed "hazardous" for mortgage financing.

MAPPING INEQUALITY Redlining in New Deal America

- Introduction Bibliographic Note & Bibliography About Contact Us -


These grades were explicitly racialist and racist. HOLC's survey instruments asked local agents to quantify the "infiltration of" undesirable populations of African Americans and immigrants. To cite just a few examples, a small subsection of a Tacoma neighborhood was graded "D" though otherwise identical to the surrounding "B" neighborhood because "Three highly respected Negro families own homes and live in the middle block of this area facing Verde Street. While very much above the average of their race, it is quite generally recognized by Realtors that their presence seriously detracts from the desirability of their immediate neighborhood." Proximity to black neighborhoods was enough to impact HOLC's risk assessment. A subsection of a neighborhood in Richmond was graded "C" rather than "B" because "Respectable people but homes are too near negro area D2." In contrast, a Camden neighborhood kept an"A" grade despite bordering an African American neighborhood, but only because "High walls separates this section from the colored area to the south" that effectively prevented their "spread."


These grades had real consequences. Through this HOLC program, the federal government reinforced redlining as a best practice within the real estate industry, in effect cutting off hundreds of thousands of African Americans off from equitable access to mortgage financing and thus homeownership, which arguably was the most significant mechanism of familial wealth accumulation in twentieth-century America. While of course it is by no means the only or even primary cause, this redlining program helped to contribute to generational wealth disparities between white and black Americans, where today the median wealth of white households is a shocking 13 times that of black households.

We designed "Mapping Inequality" not only with researchers but activists and the general public in mind. More than 150 of the HOLC maps have been georectified (nearly all of them, though we still have a few to add and undoubtedly a few more will surface), and polygons for each neighborhood added. The site is location aware and asks new users if they want to view their, or alternately the nearest, city. The opacity of the raster maps can be adjusted to help viewers connect the grades to the contemporary cityscape.

Nearly all of the neighborhoods polygons can be clicked to read the area description survey. In short, we designed it hoping to encourage viewers to grapple with the materials related to their own localities and to prompt them to make connection to the present.

MAPPING INEQUALITY Redlining in New Deal America

Search by city or state

- Introduction Bibliographic Note & Bibliography About Contact Us -


The introduction and other contextual materials on the site convey the authors' collective assessment that "New Deal era housing policies ... helped set the course for contemporary America." We also include a visualization inspired by Ernest Burgess's concentric circle theory to suggest that HOLC policies definition of the interior of cities as "slums" functioned as a selffulfilling prophecy. Nevertheless, the site prioritizes access, exploration, and reuse of these important primary source materials. We do not provide these materials completely without commentary, but through our design choices we do facilitate and encourage relatively direct engagement with HOLC's maps and surveys.

All of these materials were available in the National Archives. While materials for many cities had been digitized, to date there has been no comprehensive collection let along one offering the functionality of "Mapping Inequality." We have no doubt that these materials will be useful to researchers--not just historians but economists, urban planners, artists, medical doctors, etc.--and will facilitate a far more nuance understanding of HOLC and its consequences. We also have abundant evidence that these materials are a boon for activists working on fair housing and other social justice causes as well.

While we're excited about this, we intentionally developed the site as a public history project that aimed to spark conversations about wealth and racial inequality in American cities past and present. By that measure, the project so far has been a success. Two and a half weeks after being released, the map has received about 44,000 visits and been the subject of online coverage from NPR, National Geographic, Slate, CityLab, FastCo., Forbes, and Curbed, all of which have narrated the state's role in fostering redlining and wealth inequality.

In the comment section of these stories, in stories in local news sources, and in social media there has been a broad-ranging conversation about wealth and racial inequalities. On one of the spectrum, some respondents have been dismissive of the project, suggesting that this happened 80 years ago and is a remnant of the past that has little relevance today; one person notably characterizing the site as nothing more than "historical racism porn." Others have responded to such comments that this is important inasmuch as many of these 80-year old maps resemble the racial and class landscapes of America today and that the government's role in reinforcing redlining and racial disparities of wealth isn't widely understood.

Beyond these arguments about the impact of HOLC and relevance of redlining for understanding inequality in twenty-first-century cities, some of the most interesting and revealing comments have come from people for whom the maps have prompted reflection upon their own family histories. "I grew up in Detroit in the late 50's and 60's," one man wrote. "My address was 20400 Monte Vista, the corner Monte vista and Norfolk. Two streets east, starting at the corner of Birwood and 8 mile, was a wall. The wall was 12-15 feet high, made of grey concrete blocks and ran behind the homes towards 7 mile, extending to an abandoned army base at the corner of Pembrook and Birwood. The wall was built to divide the neighborhoods, one side was all African Americans, The other all Caucasian. My mother lived on one side of the wall, it was all African American. She once (just once) told me that one could hear the White families on the other side of the wall talking, see them occasionally if a ball came over the fence and they asked for it, most times they did not. One had no contact, ever. The wall is still there, physically and emotionally." While so far this story is rather exceptional in its detail, it has prompted us to think about the possibility of using the site to solicit and collect stories about the consequences of redlining and segregation on particular individuals, families, and communities.

Given that "Mapping Inequality" has been at the center of several online conversations and hundreds of comments on websites two and a half weeks after it was first released, I'm optimistic that it will continue to occasion more conversations about the role of racism, redlining, and the state in inequalities of wealth in American cities. This presentation will provide an opportunity to critically reflect upon these materials and gauge the success and failures of this particular digital humanities project and perhaps the digital humanities more generally in informing socially and politically important public conversations. This presentation will also reflect upon the pros and cons of interpretive framing in digital humanities projects aimed at the public.

Mapping the Federal Writers Project
Lauren Tilton and Taylor Arnold
“Mapping the Federal Writers Project” will explore the role and implementation of deep mapping and spatial analysis in interpreting and understanding documentary expression in 1930s America. As Bodenhamer argues, deep maps are “visual, time-based genuinely multimedia and multilayered” (Bodenhemer, 11). These maps allow for nuanced spatial analysis in the service of new humanities questions and arguments. We will focus on the application of these concepts in a new extension of Photogrammar (photogrammar.yale.edu), a digital and public humanities project focused on print and visual culture in 1930s America.

Photogrammar (photogrammar.yale.edu) uses methods from the digital humanities and digital resources to further contextualize and open new avenues of research into the federal project and documentary record of the era. In its current version, Photogrammar maps 170,000 photos from the Great Depression and World War II that comprise the United States Farm Security Administration and Office of War Information (FSA-OWI) photographic archive. Importantly, the collection includes some of the most prominent documentary photographers of the 20th century including Dorothea Lange and Walker Evans. Users can explore the collection through interactive maps through the use of spatial analysis; search by photo captions, photographer and time through text analysis; and browse by color and the faces depicted in the photographs through the use of image analysis. This new stage - funded by the American Council of Learned Societies- involves adding a new layer to Photogrammar - the Federal Writer’s Project (FWP), which funded writers to capture and describe the complexities of American life during the Great Depression (Couch, Hirsch, Mangione, Penkower, Stewart). Dozens of writers were sent to document through words the impact of the great depression on people's lives across the country. Prominent literary scholars such as Nelson Algren, known for The Man with the Golden Arm , and Ralph Ellison, known for Invisible Man. In the process, they asked people to provide their life histories pioneering the practice of oral history, a critical methodology in the field of history and in the humanities more broadly.

Using deep mapping to expand our understanding of 1930s America, Photogrammar is creating links across archives in order to place the FSA-OWI in the larger federal effort to document America during the Great Depression. Merging collections from the University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Libraries and the Library of Congress, the FWP includes over 4,000 life histories. Interviews are being plotted on a new geographical layer allowing search by space and time. For example, a user will be able to follow an interviewer as they move across a state and the country to collect oral histories in the same way they can now follow documentary photographs like Dorothea Lange and Walker Evans. Users will be able to search the new FWP layer independently or along with the geographical layer of FSA-OWI photographs and photographers. As a result, they will be able to compare the oral histories to the photographs taken in the same area allowing user to compare and contrast the documentary record created and funded by the federal government. As well, the new and cleaned transcripts created over this year are allowing for refined search functionality including faceted browsing and full text search. We are also experimenting with the role Natural Language Processing techniques such as Named-Entity Recognition to create new ways to browse the collection (Finkel and Manning 2005). In all, users will be able to explore the FWP and FSA-OWI spatially, temporally and through faceted searching allowing the public to explore the broader documentary record of the era relationally through deep mapping.

The second half of the paper will focus on methodology. We will start by discussing the potential benefits and potential difficulties of cross-institution collaboration in the cleaning and processing of data. In our experience, working with institutionally and spatially separated groups requires careful planning, but this extra up-front work improves both the general workflow and final products. We will touch on what scholarly and which technical questions guided our creation of a database schema for inputting metadata from the Federal Writer's Project. We take into consideration theoretical work regarding the creation of "smart data", best practices regarding TEI markup (Schoch, TEI Initiative on Libraries), and principles for creating normalized database tables (Codd 1971). The discussion will culminate in showing how these carefully curated data sources are made interactive and public on our website. The geographic data are plotted using custom layers created in CARTO (formerly CartoDB), giving a great deal of interactivity out of the box. Specifically, we will extrapolate on how we designed the interactivity to enhance the other data collections on the Photogrammar website, to make new arguments and pose new questions about about documentary expression in 1930s America, to realize the principles of deep mapping and to engage with various publics.

Mapping Silicon Valley
Jason Heppler
“Mapping Silicon Valley” explores the role of spatial history in the urban environment of post-World War II Santa Clara Valley. Silicon Valley is the product of competing landscapes. The geographer D. W. Meinig refers to landscapes as “a naive acceptance of the intricate intermingling of physical, biological, and cultural features which any glance around us displays" (Meinig, 1979). Wildlife refuges, fenced military installations, city and neighborhood districts, and polluted sites all hold definitions on the land. Historian Richard White has referred to this as "hybrid landscapes," where cultural ideologies clash over conflicting uses of natural resources. The hybrid landscape is neither purely wild nor purely built, but instead a construction of natural and cultural systems that shape and create place (White, 2004). People define places by embedding ideas on the landscape. In cities, urban planners lay down grids of roads, zones, and regulations that divide cities along labor, leisure, and consumption, thus imbuing certain places with particular meaning. Landscapes, as Meinig notes, are “a great exhibit of consequences," and are “symbolic, as expressions of cultural values, social behavior, and individual actions worked upon particular localities over a span of time" (Meinig, 1979).

By viewing Silicon Valley through the lens of landscapes and space, I argue for the importance of place in shaping a suburban vision of what urban historian Margaret O'Mara has called high-tech urbanism. Silicon Valley has come to represent the future of post-industrial economic development. Places as varied as Atlanta, Georgia; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Cleveland, Ohio; Omaha, Nebraska; Bangalore, India; Mission Hills in the Guandong Province of China; and Shenzhen, China, have looked to Silicon Valley as a model for economic and urban revitalization through high-tech economic development. Indeed, high tech is often drenched in green--from high-tech office campuses to "smart cities" that promise to transform work, leisure, transportation, and urban space into a more sustainable future.

The work of this high-tech landscape has been decades in the making and has come with high environmental costs, despite the promise of clean and green cities. Silicon Valley epitomized the trend of conflating a lack of smokestacks as a proxy for sustainable industrial development. High-tech landscapes centered around industrial research and scientific industry promised growth without pollution, but that promise was an impossible standard.

"Mapping Silicon Valley" is a broad discussion of three map-centric projects that have moved through different stages. The first set of maps were data driven thematic maps, produced largely during the course of my dissertation research. These maps were created largely out of a desire to understand the transforming landscape in Silicon Valley, from city growth and conflicts over urban space to the widespread presence of pollution and neighborhoods most threatened by toxic chemicals. The first section of this paper will reflect on the methodological underpinnings of these maps and their application to environmental humanities, while also discussing some of the potential shortcomings and enhancements that would make these maps more useful for historical research.

The Pollution Landscape, 1970—2000


SUPERFUND SITE

ComDany: Westinghouse Electric Corp. (Sunnyvale

Date added: 6/10/1986 Date deleted: N/A Address: 401 Hendy Avenue

Notes:LThel75?acre> Westinghouse Electric Corporation c (Sunnyvale Plant) site was formerly used to manufacture electrical transformers. It is currently used to manufacture steam generators, marine propulsion systems, and missile launching systems for the Department of Defense. Groundwater contamination is believed to have resulted from a leaking polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) storage tank and from localized spills. Most of the contaminated areas on site have been removed and/or have been paved over. Access to the site is restricted. Approximately 710,000 people live • 1

lA/ithin throo miloc nf tho cito Tho noareset rooirlonno io

Don Edwards’

ipertino

Campbell

® Show Superfund sites 0 Show companies 0 Show toxic sites and spills

About the Map

In December 1981, Fairchild Semiconductor identified a chemical leak in one of its solvents storage tanks in South San Jose. A nearby well operated by the Great Oakes Water Company was discovered contaminated and promptly shut down, but neighbors in the area had for years wondered about the miscarriages, birth defects, stillbirths, and other health issues affecting their families. When news of the chemical leak broke in January 1982, neighborhoods began to question just how clean the "clean" industries of high tech really were. Subsequent investigations by state, county, and city government and the Environmental Protection Agency discovered widespread chemical leaks throughout the San Francisco Peninsula, many of which became eligible for Superfund funding. Out of twenty-nine sites investigated by the EPA, twenty-four were placed on

San Jose Annexations, 1850—2000


The second mapping project is oriented around digital public history. Called Silicon Valley Historical (http://svhistorical.org) and built on the Curatescape platform, the project seeks to collect archival material and narrate the importance of specific places to the Valley's history. Contributions to Silicon Valley Historical are not solely driven by scholarly contributions, but also rely on contributions by students and volunteers in close association with area universities, colleges, historical associations, and historical societies. The material contained in Silicon Valley Historical is meant, in part, to step away from the business-centric stories so often associated with Silicon Valley and consider more fully the urban spaces that were affected by the growth of this high-tech region. Still in its early stages of planning, this section will discuss the challenge of working with community partners and developing a sustainable and scalable digital history project that seeks to serve both the community it studies as well as students and scholars who will find the project useful.

The final mapping project, still under planning and a partnership with the Stanford Spatial History Project, is tentatively titled From Orchards to Suburbs: Changing Landscapes in Silicon Valley and will represent the most technological and research heavy aspects of the project. As I investigate the politics surrounding the creation of place, this project will allow for the spatial exploration of zoning laws, general plans, government reports, and city council meeting minutes. The current design envisages the ability to navigate through a map and, depending on the viewport, presenting a list of primary sources available for reading about particular places in Silicon Valley. These will be accompanied by some computational and statistical tools for doing text analysis to uncover more about the kinds of conversations happening about particular places in the city and how they are being thought about.

Collectively, "Mapping Silicon Valley" will critically reflect on these projects and their evolution as research and public history projects. The paper will further delve into the opportunities for deep mapping and interactivity for exploring the changing landscapes of Silicon Valley.

Bibliography
Bodenhamer, D. (2013). History and GIS: Epistemologies,

Considerations and Reflections. Springer.

Codd, E. F. (1971) "Further Normalization of the Data Base

Relational Model". (Presented at Courant Computer

Science Symposia Series 6, "Data Base Systems", New

York City, May 24-25, 1971.) IBM Research Report RJ909

(August 31, 1971).

Couch, W. T., ed. (1939) These Are Our Lives. (University of

North Carolina Press, 1939).

Finkel, J. R., Grenager, T., and Manning, C. (2005).

Incorporating Non-local Information into Information

Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling. In: Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005), pp. 363-370.

Guildi, J. (2010) “What is the Spatial Turn?”.Available online: http://spatial.scholarslab.org/spatial-turn/

Hirsch, J. (2003) Portrait of America: A Cultural History of the Federal Writers’ Project: A Cultural History of the Federal Writers’ Project. (University of North Carolina Press, 2003).

Mangione, J. (1996) The Dream and the Deal. (Syracuse University Press).

Meinig, D., ed., (1979). The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes (New York: Oxford University Press), 2

Penkower, M. N. (1977). The Federal Writers' Project: A Study in Government Patronage of the Arts. (University of Illinois Press).

Schoch, C. (2013). “Big? Smart? Clean? Messy? Data in the Humanities.” Journal of Digital Humanities 2, no. 3.

Stewart, C. A. (2016). Long Past Slavery: Representing Race in the Federal Writers' Project. (University of North Carolina Press, 2016).

TEI Initiative on Libraries (2011). “Best Practices for TEI in Libraries.” Text Encoding Initiative. October 2011.

Available    online    at:    http://www.tei-

c.org/SIG/Libraries/teiinlibraries/

White, R. (2004). “From Wilderness to Hybrid Landscapes: The Cultural Turn in Environmental History,”The Historian 66 (September 2004): 562-664.
This talk will report on the formation of an online open source register for early modern English sermons, a collaborative effort that includes scholars and technical experts from North America, the United Kingdom, and Japan. The need for a digital register of early modern sermons is abundantly clear to scholars who specialize in the history of the church and religious practice. Sermons were, for better or worse, central to efforts to broadcast and enforce disquieting religious reforms and to address the unsettling controversies in religious practice during the early modern period. It should be stressed, also, that a well-constructed and user-friendly platform of this nature would reach the many among the general public who are interested in the history of religion in general and in Christian church history in particular.

The term register is used here to denote a comprehensive and searchable list of English sermons, sermon events, and related sermon information from a variety of contemporaneous records and sources during the period 1500 to 1700, including sermons delivered to English audiences in Latin will also be catalogued. This project will not attempt to digitalize full texts of print or manuscript sermons.

Extant sermons were often printed long after they were delivered and many remain separately catalogued in manuscript. Non-extant sermons are known about from disparate sources: chronicles, diaries, private correspondence, and records of church and state. This lack of cohesion creates something of a vacuum amidst a plethora of sources that make reference to preaching in general and also to individual sermons. The goal of this project, therefore, is to bring to a list of sermons the cataloguing and search functionality (on a much smaller scale) that the British Library Short Title Catalogue (ESTC) online currently affords printed works.

There have been efforts recently to explore and document sermons during this period in digital formats but with differing objectives. These efforts include digital platforms in early development such as the announcement to ‘Gateway to Early Modern Manuscript Sermons’ (GEMMS), as well as digital projects such as The St Paul's Cathedral Project (formerly the Virtual Paul's Cross Project) and John Foxe’s The Acts and Monuments Online. Standard resources for this project are, of course, the ESTC Online, EEBO-TCP, and for later reprints of early modern sermons Internet Archive has become increasingly useful. A host of fine scholars have been drawn to the study of early modern sermons, but this field has lacked an annotated and comprehensive register of sermons and sermon events.

The developers of this project will use a TEI-compliant XML structure. Much of the platform can be encoded with standardized markups for such elements as date, speaker, and location. However, this project is faced with the task of identifying and defining elements for a register in a space between digital bibliography and online textual archives or corpora.

Metadata will have to be extended to include an abundant number of tags for such areas as theological debate (e.g. purgatory, Eucharist) and church practice (e.g. baptism, burial). An exhaustive list of metaconcepts peculiar to the religious attitudes and movements of the period will have to be constructed. Among the many examples, such meta-tags as “antitheatre,” “Anabaptist,” and “recantation,” will have to be identified, agreed upon, and listed.

In sum, the greatest challenge for this project is in developing a comprehensive taxonomy for its metadata. In the view of the project team, the best way to approach this challenge is to start small and to learn by doing. Phase 1 of this project, therefore, is to digitalize and annotate Millar Maclure’s register of the sermons of Paul’s Cross along with the supplement to this edition.

Paul’s Cross, the outdoor preaching pulpit located on the northeast side of the St Paul’s precinct in early modern London, will be treated as ground zero for the cataloguing of early modern sermons. Located in the commercial and cultural center of London, Paul’s Cross was the most influential public site for preaching to large, non-elite audiences in England during tumultuous periods of religious reform. This one locale had an immeasurable impact on Christian practice and public opinion from the Henrican period until the years leading up to the Civil War.

As the project expands toward its goal of being a comprehensive annotated register for all early

modern sermons, the TEI XML encoding and extensions will allow scaling to a much larger platform. During Phase 1 the metadata arrangement for developers will be clarified. Should problems or omissions arise, which they invariably do, the fix can be made before the project expands. Finally, given that TEI has become the standard for what will become a partner project, this encoding will be highly adaptable should it eventually be contributed to a digital archive repository or OAIS.

Bibliography

ProQuest (2017). Early English Books Online (EEBO-TCP). Web (Subscription). eebo.chadwyck.com.

British Library (n.d). English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC). Web. estc.bl.uk.

GEMMS. (n.d.)'Gateway to Early Modern Manuscript Sermons’ (GEMMS). Web. gemmsproject.blogspot.com.

Internet Archive (n.d.). Web. archive.org.

Foxe, J. (n.d.)John Foxe’s The Acts and Monuments Online Web. johnfoxe.org.

Maclure, M. (1958). The Paul’s Cross Sermons, 1534-1642 (Toronto: Toronto UP, 1958). Revised

and augmented by Peter Pauls and Jackson Campbell Boswell. Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies (Ottawa: Dovehouse Editions, 1989).

NC State University (n.d.) The St Paul’s Cathedral Project (formerly the Virtual Paul’s Cross Project) Web. https: //vpcp.chass.ncsu.edu.
Introduction
The Martian is a best-selling science fiction novel by Andy Weir that became a hit film in 2015. The novel exists in two versions, or variants: Weir self-published The Martian on his personal website in 2011 (hereafter, “Martianl”) and began selling it on Amazon.com in 2012. Crown Publishing subsequently bought the rights, edited the book, and re-released it (hereafter, “Martian2”).

The research presented here investigates what exactly changed when The Martian got edited. At first glance, the two versions appear essentially the same, with no major changes to plot, character, or structure. A closer look using a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, however, reveals a number of noteworthy changes, as well as notable changes that result from thousands of seemingly minor copyedits. Aims

The aim of our research is to identify what changed between the two variants of The Martian using a combination of close reading and digital methods, analyze why those changes are important, and propose a methodology for comparing self-published and later-edited novels, an increasingly common phenomenon. We hypothesize that the editing process of a leading publishing house results in a novel that is more "mainstream", i.e. socialised, domesticated, and appealing to a general audience. In order to test this hypothesis, we explore a range of aspects, including style, content, and character. Our research also aims to bring a critical perspective to the strengths and weaknesses of a variety of qualitative and technical methods in identifying the edits and assessing their importance.

Related Work
In addition to work in digital genetic criticism (e.g. van Hulle 2008), a small number of studies use digital methods to explore variants of contemporary fiction. Yufang Ho (2011) compared the 1966 and revised 1977 versions of John Fowles’s novel The Magus, while Martin Paul Eve (2016) looked at differences in the US and UK versions of David Mitchell’s Cloud Atlas. As both Ho and Eve use different methods from one another and from us, it appears that no standard method has emerged so far for this type of research. Data

The data used for this research is primarily two plain text files of the variants of The Martian. Martianl was obtained in PDF format from Andy Weir’s website. Martian2 was obtained by scanning a print copy, performing OCR with manual corrections. We consider this our best option given the legal issues regarding text protected by copyright.

Methods and Results
Basic collation

We used the Wdiff frontend to the “diff” algorithm (Hunt & McIlroy 1975) to produce a collated version of Martianl and Martian2 and assess the number and extent of the edits. We then used bespoke Python scripts to classify the edits identified by Wdiff.

We found a total of 5146 edits were made to the novel. While 92% of the 101,000 words in Martianl remain unchanged in Martian2, the remaining 8% of the words undergo some type of edit, whether they are deleted or modified (Figure 1). The sheer number of edits calls for automatic means to classify them and detect any patterns.

120000 - 120000 —


Figure 1: Visualization of edits to The Martian as grouped by Wdiff.

Automatic Classification of Edits

Edits were automatically classified into two broad categories: script-detectable copyedits, and all other edits. Script-detectable copyedits includes changes in capitalization, whitespace, hyphenation, spelling of numbers, abbreviations, or combinations thereof (Figure 2). All other edits were classified as insertion, deletion, expansion or condensation and as “minor” or “major”, depending on the Levenshtein distance (Figure 3). Of the 5146 edits, 2863 (or 55%) were script-detectable copyedits, while 2283 (or 45%) comprised the rest. The code used as well as the collation data obtained are available on GitHub.


Figure 2: Script-identifiable copyedits to The Martian.


Figure 3: All other edits to The Martian.

narration or in sections written in the third person (Figure 4). When Watney narrates, the hundreds of misspellings, numerals, and scientific abbreviations in Martianl support the fiction that he is a scientist working in extreme conditions. Martian2 increases readability but eliminates the stylistic realism of Watney’s text. When Weir uses, for instance, numerals in the dialogue of other characters, the effect can be jarring. Martian2 corrects this for the better.

Martianl

Martian2

My idea is to make 600L of water (limited by the hydrogen 1 can get from the Hydrazine). That means I'll need 300L of liquid 02.

1 can create the 02 easily enough. It takes 20 hours for the MAV fuel plant to fill Its 10L tank with CO2.

My idea is to make 600 liters of water (limited by the hydrogen I can get from the hydrazine). That means I'll need 300 liters of liquid 02.

I can create the 02 easily enough. It takes twenty hours for the MAV fuel plant to fill its 10-liter tank with CO2.

"What's the biggest gap in coverage we have on Watney right now?"

"Urn," Mindy said. "Once every 41 hours, we'll have a 17 minute gap. The orbits work out that way."

"Whafs the biggest gap in coverage we have on Watney right now?"

"Urn," Mindy said. "Once every forty-one hours, we'll have a seventeen-minute gap. The orbits work out that way."

Figure 4: Edits to numerals and scientific abbreviations in Watney's narration (top) and third-person character dialogue (bottom).

Detecting transpositions with CollateX

Wdiff does not detect transpositions, or text that has been moved to a different location in the novel. Using CollateX (Dekker & Middell 2011) as described in Schoch (2016) revealed a total of 126 transpositions. Twenty-eight (or 22%) involve punctuation and should be considered artefacts of the method; 43 (or 34%) represent transpositions of a single word, showing stylistic preferences on the word-order level; 55 (or 44%) concern multi-word expressions which change the overall construction of a sentence or paragraph more substantially.

Figure 5 shows a relatively minor transposition appearing in combination with a contraction of a sentence.

Cumulative Effect of the Script-Identifiable Copyedits


Taken together, the 2863 script-identifiable copyedits have substantial effects upon the text. Weir’s many misspellings and misuse of hyphens and capitalization are corrected. Numbers in Martianl are overwhelmingly written numerically, and 765 of these become words in Martian2, e.g. “8” becomes “eight”. We found 231 instances of edits involving abbreviations, e.g. “L” becomes “liters”.

The copyedits work together in different ways when they appear in protagonist Mark Watney’s



Figure 5: An example of a transposition identified by CollateX.

We conclude that, quantitatively and qualitatively, transpositions were not a major part of the edit to The Martian. However, future work could apply the same method to other, comparable variants of novels to gain better reference points.

and expresses despair, loneliness, and introspection more often.


Figure 6: examples of toned-down profanity in the editing of The Martian

Additionally, Martianl contains an epilogue that is completely cut in the edit. It portrays Watney, back on Earth, being openly and profanely rude to a young fan. In Martian2, meanwhile, text is added to have Watney express gracious appreciation for all the parties involved in his rescue and a widespread faith in human nature. The edit therefore alters the tone of the ending substantially.

We believe that all of these changes, analyzed together with close reading, serve to align Watney's character with our overall hypothesized goal of the edit: to make Watney more “relatable,” “nice,” and “human,” and thus to appeal to a wider audience.

Close Reading of Other Edits


Edits Over the Course of the Novel

When we grouped the other edits, placed them into a spreadsheet, and manually inspected them, a number of thematic and stylistic shifts between Martianl and Martian2 became apparent.

Profanity is a key stylistic feature of The Martian that is substantially cut and softened by the edit. Words like “fuck” and “shit” are substantially reduced (by about 33% and 15%, respectively), while numerous other words and phrases are softened with “lesser” profanity or simple non-profanity (e.g. “the shit hits the fan” becomes “all hell breaks loose”). Figure 6 shows a selection of these edits. Similarly, crude and sophomoric humor is cut in key instances. The plot of The Martian revolves around solving one problem after another to rescue an astronaut, Mark Watney, stranded on Mars, while relatively little text is devoted to Watney's emotions or inner world. In Martian2, however, Watney expresses significantly more emotion: he misses his family and friends more

Patterns in the edits related to textual progression are revealed by measuring the absolute Levenshtein distance of the script-identifiable copyedits and other edits line by line (Levenshtein distance is a metric for measuring the difference between two sequences, see Navarro 2001).


Figure 7: Sum of absolute Levenshtein distance per line over textual progression (script-identifiable copyedits in red, other edits in blue).

Figure 7 shows the sum of the absolute Levenshtein distances for each line of the novel (with Savitzky-Golay smoothing applied). The graph shows the substantial modifications to the ending of the novel, but also a large number of locations with smaller but nonetheless above-average modifications.

Conclusion and Further Research
We have identified and analyzed a number of key features that emerged from the editing of The Martian, notably on the level of style and character, which combine to make the novel more appealing to a wider audience.

Ongoing research into The Martian concerns the relative frequency and function of parts of speech, quantifying the amount of syntactic change, and the legal issues affecting the obtaining and processing of the texts. We hope to present these additional findings in the near future.

As for our typology of edits, an established methodology for classifying edits in the companion fields of textual analysis and scholarly editing is the distinction between the “accidentals” and “substantives” used by the Greg-Bowers tradition and included in the MLA Committee on Scholarly Editions’ Guidelines for Editors of Scholarly Editions (Modern Language Association, 2011). Scholars are not unanimous, however, in supporting this. G. Thomas Tanselle, for instance, found these terms "misleading and often untenable in their implication of a firm distinction in all cases” (Greetham 1992, pp.335-336). Further, there appears to be no widely-applicable typology of edits in digital scholarly editing and collation, with different materials calling for different typologies (see TEI-L 2016).

Our typology of edits departs from previously proposed ones by focusing entirely on types which can be identified automatically, based on surface features. While limited in scope and excluding any semantic criteria, our typology may serve as a first approach to the edits of any text and allow quantitative comparison of some key phenomena. We believe that our method could be applied to other variants of fiction — by itself or incorporated alongside another taxonomy, including accidentals/substantives — particularly to novels which begin as self-published works but are later edited and re-released, an increasingly important phenomenon in contemporary fiction.

Bibliography
Dekker, R. and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-Supported Collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. Supporting Digital Humanities 2011. University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 17-18 November 2011.

Eve, M. P. (2016). "You have to keep track of your changes”: The Version Variants and Publishing History of David Mitchell's Cloud Atlas, Open Library of Humanities. https://olh.openlibhums.org/article/10.16995/olh.82/

Greetham, D. (1992). Textual scholarship: An introduction. New York/London: Garland Publishing.

Ho, Y. (2011). Corpus Stylistics in Principles and Practice: A Stylistic Exploration of John Fowles' The Magus. New York: Continuum.

Hunt, J. W. & Mcilroy, M. D. (1975). An algorithm for differential file comparison. Computer Science.

Modern Language Association (2011). Reports from the MLA Committee on Scholarly Editions, Guidelines for Editors of Scholarly Editions, available at: https://www.mla.org/Resources/Research/Surveys-Reports-and-Other-Documents/Publishing-and-Scholarship/Reports-from-the-MLA-Committee-on-Scholarly-Editions/Guidelines-for-Editors-of-Scholarly-Editions

Navarro, G. (2001). A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM Computing Surveys. 33 (1): 31-88. doi:10.1145/375360.375365.

Schoch, C. (2016). Detecting Transpositions when Comparing Text Versions using CollateX. The Dragonfly's Gaze. http://dragonfly.hypotheses.org/954

TEI-L (2016). Types of Edits. TEI-List. http://tei-l.970651.n3.nabble.com/Types-of-edits-tp4028495.html

van Hulle, D. (2008). Manuscript Genetics, Joyce's KnowHow, Beckett's Nohow. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

Weir, A. (2011). The Martian. Self-published.

Weir, A. (2014). The Martian. New York: Crown Publishing Group.
Aim

This paper explores the possibilities of applying computer-assisted methods to the field of Nordic manuscript studies, with a special emphasis on a network analysis—in a broad sense—of manuscript context. A case study of one Icelandic legendary saga's manuscript tradition is used to test the hypothesis that the manuscript context can carry information about ethnic genre associations of the text (on ethnic genre in Old Norse literature see: Harris, 1975; on legendary sagas as a genre see: Quinn, 2006).

Research Questions

Hromundar saga Gripssonar traditionally belongs in the corpus of legendary sagas (fornaldarsogur); it was included in the second volume of Rafn's (1829) Fornaldarsogur Nordrlanda, and in Bjorner's (1737) Nordiska kampa dater. The saga as it is known today, however, is a post-medieval re-working of a metrical version of the story known as rlmur (Brown, 1946), and is probably not much older than seventeenth century. Therefore it does not necessarily fit well with the other texts included the corpus of legendary sagas, as they usually date from the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (Driscoll, 2005:207). This makes Hromundar saga Gripssonar an interesting case study for investigations of the text's genre affiliation in the extant manuscripts preserving the saga. Does it appear frequently in manuscripts with the older legendary sagas or with younger rimur-based narratives? To answer this question, I first examine the manuscript context of legendary sagas as a corpus, based on collaborative research with Rowbotham and Wills (Kapitan et al., 2017); second, I examine the position of Hromundar saga Gripssonar within the corpus and its relationships with other texts.

Much discussion in the field of Old Norse studies centers on whether the legendary sagas deserve to be considered a separate literary genre, or should instead be analyzed as chivalric literature (Quinn, 2006). One of the main reasons for these considerations seems to be the fact that the term fornaldarsogur is not attested in the medieval texts; it was introduced in the early nineteenth century by C.C. Rafn, who published a collection of texts under the title Fornaldarsogur Nordrlanda (Rafn, 1829). Rafn's selection of texts and the definition of fornaldarsogur as a corpus of texts dealing with events taking place in Scandinavia before the settlement of Iceland, however, was not detached from pervious scholarship of early eighteenth century (Lavender, 2015). The current discussion on the legendary sagas as a corpus (or a genre) is polarized around contradicting opinions. Some scholars suggest that the legendary sagas had to be considered a separate category in pre-modern period, because they are frequently bound together in the manuscripts (Gudmundsdottir, 2001:cxlvii; Mitchell, 1991:21) while others, using the same argument, emphasize strong connections between the legendary sagas and the chivalric sagas (Driscoll, 2005:193). Additional problems arise when classifying the generic hybrids (Rowe 1993; 2004) appearing within the corpus, or distinguishing between the legendary sagas (fornaldarsogur) and the late legendary sagas (fornaldarsogur sldari tlma; Driscoll 2005). Even though scholars eagerly turn towards the manuscript context to support their claims regarding the genre classification, no comprehensive overview of the legendary sagas' codicological context has yet been presented. This gave rise to the project Stories for all times conducted at the University of Copenhagen, which created a complete catalogue of manuscripts preserving legendary sagas. The catalogue contains 818 TEI-conformant XML-based manuscript descriptions with over 8000 items, 1764 of which are classified as legendary sagas and 920 as chivalric sagas. This amount of data is much too large to be analyzed manually, therefore it is necessary to apply computer-assisted analysis in order to draw some general conclusions regarding this corpus and the relationships between these texts.

Methods

The first part of my paper, which aims to establish the position of Hromundar saga Gripssonar within the wider context of the manuscript, draws on the network analysis of the corpus, conducted in collaboration with Rowbotham and Wills (Kapitan et al., 2017). There, the codicological context of a text was considered as a system of relationships between texts, and following Hall's (2013) approach in his network of chivalric sagas, texts were represented as nodes, manuscripts as edges, both visualized with the free visualization software Gephi. The second part is based on database queries aimed at obtaining detailed information about particular manuscripts and their contents. The main focus of the analysis was to examine the manuscripts preserving the complete texts of Hromundar saga Gripssonar in Icelandic, therefore the manuscripts containing excerpts and translations were ignored. The distribution of texts appearing frequently alongside Hromundar saga Gripssonar by century has been obtained using XPath queries of the online catalogue Stories for all times. Main Findings

As a result of this research, the hypothesis can be confirmed: generally, texts belonging to one genre appear most frequently in manuscripts with other texts belonging to the same genre. However, an interesting transmission history of Hromundar saga Gripssonar suggests a close association of this saga with the late legendary sagas, and in particular Bragda-Olvis saga. Both Bragda-Olvis saga and Hromundar saga Gripssonar are post-medieval reworkings of older metric versions of the stories (rimur), and for both texts the manuscript AM 601 b 4to (Arni Magnuisson Institute, Reykjavik) was suggested as the witness carrying the best text of the saga (Andrews, 1911; Brown, 1946; Hooper, 1934; Hooper, 1932). Even though Hromundar saga Gripssonar appears most frequently with texts classified as late legendary sagas in pre-1800 manuscripts, after 1800 the texts classified as (traditional) fornaldarsogur start to dominate. The late Bragda-Olvis saga dominates the pre-1800 setting, but the distribution changes in the nineteenth century when Porsteins saga Vikingssonar, Starkadar saga gamla, Fridpjofs saga ins fr&kna, and Halfs saga Halfsreka appear more frequently (as presented on figure below). Starkadar saga gamla is a late-eighteenth century saga written by Snorri Bjornson (1710-1803), utilizing traditional legendary motifs of Saxo's Gesta Danorum and legendary sagas (Driscoll, 2009:209; Simek and Hermann Palsson, 1987:331), so its co-occurrence with other legendary sagas starting from the eighteenth century onwards is not surprising. The three remaining texts that started to appear more frequently alongside Hromundar saga Gripssonar in nineteenth-century manuscripts were all published in the same volume of Rafn's Fornaldarsogur Nordrlanda, in which Hromundar saga Gripssonar was published (volume II); likewise Fridtjofs saga ins fr^kna, and Halfs saga Halfsreka appeared in Bjorner's edition from 1737 together with Hromundar saga Gripssonar. This shows how printed editions influenced the saga's transmission in the manuscript form. A text, which once showed strong connections to another rimurbased narrative, became detached from its previous setting and gained new, print-influenced context after becoming part of printed editions.


Figure 1. Texts appearing frequently with Hromundar saga Gripssonar in manuscripts by century

Relevance

The topic of this paper fits in the advertised panel "Quantitative stylistics and philology, including big data and text mining studies," as it employs database quarrying and network analysis of significant amount of data.

Acknowledgements

The author of this paper owes a great debt to Tarrin Wills for merging the data from various databases (fasnl.ku.dk, skaldic.abdn.ac.uk, handrit.is, onpweb.nfi.sc.ku.dk) to obtain the input data for the network analysis, and to Tim Rowbotham, who worked on standardizing the uniform titles and genre classifications in the XML-files in the Stories for all times catalogue.

Bibliography

Gudmundsdottir, A. (2001). Ulfhams Saga. (Stofnun Arna

Magnussonar A Islandi 53). Reykjavik: Stofnun Arna

Magnussonar a Islandi.

Andrews, A. L. (1911). Studies in the fornaldarsogur

Nordurlanda. Modern Philology, 8: 527-44.

Bjorner, E. J. (1737). Nordiska kampa dater i en sagoflock samlade om forna kongar och hjaltar. Volumen historicum, continens variorum in orbe hyperboreo antiquo regum, heroum et pugilum res praeclare et mirabiliter gestas. Accessit, praeter conspectum genealogicum Svethicorum regum et reginarum accuratissimum etiam praefatio. Stockholmiae: typis J.L., Horrn.

http://books.google.com/books?id=9nZUAAAAYAAJ (accessed 28 January 2016).

Brown, U. (1946). The saga of Hromund Gripsson and Porgilssaga. Saga-Book, 13: 51-77.

Driscoll, M. J. (2005). Late prose fiction (lygisogur). A Companion to Old Norse-Icelandic Literature and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp. 190-204.

Driscoll, M. J. (2009). Editing the Fornaldarsogur NorSurlanda. A Austrvega, Saga and East Scandinavia, Preprints of the 14th International Saga Conference Uppsala 9th - 15th August 2009. Gavle: University of Gavle, pp. 207-12.

Gephi. (n.d.) Gephi: The open graph viz platform: https://gephi.org

Hall, A. and Parsons, K. (2013). Making stemmas with small samples, and digital approaches to publishing them: testing the stemma of KonraSs saga keisarasonar. Digital Medievalist, 9.

Handrit. (n.d.) Online catalogue handrit.org: http://handrit.org

Harris, J. (1975). Genre in the saga literature: A Squib. Scandinavian Studies, 47(4): 427-36.

Hooper, A. G. (1932). “BragSa-Qlvis saga” now first edited. Leeds Studies in English, 1: 42-54.

Hooper, A. G. (1934). Hromundar saga Gripssonar and the Griplur. Leeds Studies in English, 3: 51-56.

Kapitan, K. A., Rowbotham, T. and Wills, T. (2017). Visualising genre relationships in Icelandic manuscripts. Conference Abstracts. Gothenburg: The University of Gothenburg, pp. 59-62.

Lavender, P. (2015). The Secret Prehistory of the Fornaldarsogur. The Journal of English and Germanic Philology, 114(4): 526-51.

Mitchell, S. (1991). Heroic Sagas and Ballads. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.

Nordisk Forskningsinstitut (n.d). The “Stories for all time” Project. http://fasnl.ku.dk/

Quinn, J. (2006). Interrogating Genre in the Fornaldarsogur: Round-Table    Discussion’.    Viking and Medieval

Scandinavia, 2: 276-96.

Rafn, C. C. (1829). Fornaldarsögur Nordrlanda. Kaupmannahofn.

Rowe, E. A. (1993). Generic Hybrids: Norwegian ‘Family’ Sagas and Icelandic 'Mythic-Heroic' Sagas. Scandinavian Studies, 65(4): 539-54.

Rowe, E. A. (2004). 'Porsteins ^attr uxafots, Helga ^attr Porissonar,’ and the Conversion '^iettir'. Scandinavian Studies, 76(4): 459-74.

Simek, R. and Palsson, H. (1987). Lexikon Der Altnordischen Literatur, Die Mittelalterliche Literatur Norwegens Und Islands. (Kroners Taschenausgabe 490). Stuttgart: Kroner.

Skaldic Project Academy Body. (n.d.) Skaldic project: http://skaldic.abdn.ac.uk/db.php?

University of Copenhagen (n.d.) Ordbog over det norr0ne prosasprog Registre:

http://onpweb.nfi.sc.ku.dk/mscoll_d_menu.html
Introduction
The field of Digital Humanities is characterized by complex questions and interdisciplinary discussions. That applies not only to the cultural science-based side of the humanities but also to the digital representation of cultural artefacts and, among other things, their processing, analysis, preservation and long-term availability. In order to handle these issues, interdisciplinary collaboration is required to pool and to coordinate expert knowledge and skills.

The Digital Humanities project ZenMEM (Centre of Music - Edition - Media) represents such an interdisciplinary project. Since September 2014, researchers from Paderborn University, the Hochschule für Musik Detmold and OstwestfalenLippe University of Applied Sciences combine their expertise from musicology, various fields of computer sciences (contextual informatics, software engineering, usability engineering and music informatics) and media studies (media education and media economics) to investigate processes of change and new possibilities of the transition from analogue to digital music and media editions.

In this context, digitization can be discussed as distributed through material infrastructures and displayed on computer devices (cf. Huber 1998). But it can also be considered in non-physical dimensions. In this perspective cultures are containing specific structures that build a para-material quality (cf. Schrage 2006).

“Writing is a material act; textual production in any medium has always been a part and product of particular technologies of inscription and duplication.” (Kirschenbaum et al. 2009).

A third perspective can be discovered between these poles on the transition from material and immaterial (cf. Holl 2010, Manovich 2011, McGann 1991). The fourth dimension in this context refers to the fact that

“Digital Humanities work embraces iterative, in which experiments are run over time and become object to constant revision. Critical design discourse is moving away from a strict problem-solving approach that seeks to find a final answer: Each new design opens up new problems and - productively - creates new questions.” (Burdick et al. 2012)

Between these perspectives, we explore interdisciplinary approaches of digital (music) editions. First, the dimension of digital representation and the contents on the surface (cf. Manovich 2001). Here, the traditional Human Computer Interface (HCI) to digital editions is questioned and expanded to incorporate Computer Interfaces, ultimately demanding to “granting access to machines”.

The second perspective focusses on the relevance of the user for all types of media (cf. Fiske 2001). In this view, we present a qualitative research study (cf. Denzin 2000; Przyborski & Wohlrab-Sahr 2009; Keuneke 1999) dealing with the changing work processes of musicologists and music editors in the context of digital music editions. These changes have, among other things, lasting impacts on their scientific research, orientation, academic ethos and knowledge building.

The third paper deals with the structural changes in scientific work in context of Digital Humanities. A growing number of interdisciplinary academic projects causes an increasing need for researchers with the key qualification “interdisciplinarity” as well as methods to verify the projects’ efficiency and quality (cf. von Kardorff 2000).

The analysis of the complex interactions among these dimensions leads to essential issues of the digitization of (music) editions: The access to perspectives of digital representation, the impacts on scientific work and access to user views and at last a dimension of access to changing interdisciplinary project work within the Digital Humanities.

In case of acceptance, this multiple paper session would be presented by Bianca Meise (media education and qualitative research, Paderborn University), Peter Stadler (musicology, Paderborn University) and Franziska Schloots (media economy and management, Paderborn University).

Digital Editions and the Interface. Granting Access to Machines
Peter Stadler
Johannes Kepper
Daniel Rowenstrunk
The history of Digital Editions and its main driving force, the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), is a success story. It not only enabled the digital presentation and preservation of scholarly editions but subsequently facilitated further research on this digital material and the development of tools and methods, pushing forward the DH sector as a whole.

The TEI puts a lot of effort into its (prose) Guidelines and the formal specification of the schema(s) - it ultimately developed a meta language (ODD = One Document Does it all) for the definition and documentation of TEI schemas and customizations, leading to a well-documented, highly flexible interchange format. “This is standardization by not saying ‘Do what I do’ but instead by saying ‘Do what you need to do but tell me about it in a language I understand’.” (Cummings 2013)

The Music Encoding Initiative (MEI) adopts these principles, empowering it to encode a wide variety of musical styles and genres through its modular approach. Yet, a long-standing issue with the resulting XML documents is the lack of interoperability. True interoperability would allow the ‘blind’ reuse of files within one’s own processing chain (cf. Bauman 2011). But due to the TEI’s and MEI’s flexibility of encoding even the (assumed) simplest operations can hardly be processed blindly, e.g. the extraction of a plain text version (aka the “throwing away of angle brackets”) or the extraction of a single voice from a score.

Generally speaking, digital editions are potentially multifunctional and enable multiple views on the text (cf. Sahle 2013; Pierazzo 2016), yet this potential can hardly be activated from the outside but has to be revealed by a standardized endpoint or interface. Most commonly, the only (public) interface of a digital edition is the HTML version accessible online with a (Javascript enabled) browser. Different views are created from one TEI source file and prepared for a human reader, e.g. a “Semantic Edition” or a “Philological Version” (see the respective tabs at e.g. http://burckhardtsource.org/letter/508). While this interface and its functionality is adequate and pleasing for a human agent, it’s more or less useless for a machine agent which would have to grab the web pages and parse idiosyncratic flavours of (X)HTML(5). Only a few digital editions offer the direct download of TEI encoded files and even less offer a dedicated (and well documented) interface for machines.

Within the ZenMEM and ViFE research infrastructures we are trying to remedy this shortcoming of digital editions by developing dedicated APIs for our projects. We believe that this has at least two advantages:

1.    intrinsic: better documentation of our own work

2.    extrinsic: facilitated reuse of our work by others

These project APIs are developed and documented using the Swagger framework (http://swagger.io) and the resulting configuration files can be found at https://github.com/Edirom/ViFE-API. Along with those project specific APIs we strive to develop a meta API with a core set of functions which are to be supported by all projects. There is an ongoing discussion on what these core functions are -especially since we are dealing with various materials, from music to text encoding, from placeographies to bibliographies, from sketches to prints. On the other hand, we are confident to come up with a set of generic functions that could then easily be adopted by other projects. With these interfaces to digital editions we will finally leave the traditional resource based approach to digital editions behind and move on to a new functional, truly dynamic approach.

A changing paradigm? Implications of digitization on musicologists work on editions

Bianca Meise
Digital Humanities are focusing on digital data. Therefore, issues on modelling, representation, analysis and annotations are crucial dimensions of research like processing and archival storage. But digital data and the procedures quoted before are used by editors and have impacts on their scientific work, too (cf. Edwards 2012). This contribution is focused on an access to the editors as special user and producer group in the process of digitization through a qualitative empirical study. In this study, it is neither the editor nor the data alone, rather, it is the act of editing, analyzing, representing and annotating that gives insights into the relation between media, material and subjects that allow deep insights into the transformational impacts of digitization. First, I discuss the changes of the scientific working process from analogue to digital. Secondly, the challenges and potentials of this change of paradigm will be discussed. At last, as a result of these findings, the future inquiries of digitization of music editions, changes of work processes and not least the education and varying access to knowledge work will be pointed out.

Digital music editions have a lot of potential for editors, scientists and recipients (cf. Veit). Thus, the digital availability accelerates and arranges the editorial scientific process. Furthermore, the different representations of the digital offer a great transparency and confirmability. In this perspective, the digitization of music editions enriches the work of musicologists (ibid.). A lot of issues are discussed in context of digital humanities refer to the digital representation or the transformation of cultural artefacts, their further analysis and processing. These subjects are considered on data. The work, examination and handling of the digital and the influences of the knowledge evolving within is discussed less. In this contribution, the formal layer (cf. Kirschenbaum 2008) or cultural layer (cf. Manovich 2001) and moreover the performative interactions between the material and the subjects will be considered (cf. Drucker 2013). Issues like the challenges to adopt digital techniques, to prepare digital sources, to represent and analyze them are important, too. The examination of the various practices of adoption, handling and orientation offer deep insights into the possibilities of digitization and its relevance for scientific work. This study allows a rare attendant insight in the transformation of a media paradigm in music philologists’ work.

The editions contain different types of "texts" like several notation formats, facsimiles, born digital annotations, text and audio files. Before digitization there are analogue procedures of searching, collecting, arranging and reviewing. Since the digitization of music editions, the shift is not only digital. Moreover, it’s both digital and analogue, material and corresponding practices, that construct the editions. It is the operation, the handling of the musicologist with cultural, material and immaterial artefacts. To develop the importance of media and the corresponding methods in digital music editions, its necessary to explore these various interactions. Like the radical contextualization of the cultural studies pointed out that object and subject, media technology and context (cf. Winter 2010) continuously affecting each other and be interwoven.

Based on the qualitative research perspectives of the Grounded Theory Methodology (cf. Strauss & Corbin 1996; Denzin 2000, Przyborski & Wohlrab-Sahr 2009) in this study eight narrative guided interviews with problem-centered parts have conducted. Because of the academic void of the user perspective qualitative research offers great potentials to get essential insights and generate first hypothesis in this field (cf. Flick et al. 2000). The investigation on varying routines or the knowledge of the musicologists even if it's implicit (cf. Polyani 1985) is not simple to transfer in direct questions. In fact, the qualitative research provides many methods to manage this problem (cf. Flick 2002). The guided interview is an inquiry method that follows a structure, but allows a lot of free space for further situated questions and narrative answers (cf. Keuneke 2000). The questions are focused on the routines of the working process of music philologists, their evolving (implicit) knowledge and their biographical reference points to music editions. The qualitative material has been analyzed by a modified coding version of the grounded theory (cf. Strauss & Corbin 1996) like Przyborski and Wohlrab-Sahr (2009) pointed out.

The empirical data and their interpretation documented, that the change in the working process in not only a shift from analogue to digital. Moreover, the hole scientific process is changed and the work on digital music editions have deep impacts on editorial, juridical, organizational, social and not at least educational processes. Digitization changing the scientific work organization, the editorial work and the perspective on editions and the interwoven knowledge.

Interdisciplinary research and knowledge building - Development of recommendations for action for academic projects in the digital humanities

Bianca Meise,
Franziska Schloots
Jörg Müller-Lietzkow
Dorothee M. Meister
The heterogeneous research field of digital humanities is characterised by a high level of connectivity and interdisciplinarity. Not least because of this the digital humanities turned out to be a dynamic field with high velocity of scientific discourses (cf. Gold 2012). In this context, the development of research infrastructure for interconnected and collaborative scientific work (cf. Reichert 2014) as well as the management of interdisciplinary research projects represent particular challenges. Whereas especially the economically characterised management research (cf. Bea, Scheurer & Hesselmann 2011/ Steinmann & Schreyögg 2005) deals with project management processes in companies, network groups or other cooperation forms, project management in academic contexts is hardly found in research literature. One important distinctive feature, especially for academic projects without industrial partners, is that the goal dimension of academic projects fundamentally differs from economic projects. Its focus is not a typical measurable economic gross profit or other definable objectives. The openness for results as an important part of scientific research requires a modified form of project management. However, strategic and systematic project management is hardly implemented in the structure of universities, particularly in cultural science departments and projects. Oftentimes, a rather “muddling through” (Lindblom 1959) can be noticed. This is not a desirable condition because consequences might be increasing transaction costs as well as reduce chances for longterm and stable research collaborations. Furthermore, the special structures in academic contexts must be considered concerning the planning, implementation and organisation of collaborative interdisciplinary projects.

In view of these conditions, the importance of professional project evaluation is evident, especially in interdisciplinary projects involving cultural scientists as it is the case in digital humanities projects. Digital humanities can be seen as an extension of the complexity dimension according to Rinza (1998): A high scientific novelty grade is associated with an increased risk for the project goals and a relatively large project group might increase the dependencies in the work processes because of the close interlocking of the individual departments.

The growing concentration of interdisciplinary academic projects causes an increasing need for scientifically verified evidence of their efficiency and quality (cf. von Kardorff 2000). For this purpose, summative evaluations are used to review the effectiveness and the achievement of defined targets as well as formative evaluations which can contribute to the optimization of an ongoing project and can provide the basis of strategic decisions and changes (cf. ibid.). Within this paper, the procedure will be clarified through a concrete case study from the field of digital humanities.

In the project ZenMEM (Centre of Music - Edition -Media), a formative evaluation in the ongoing project was conducted so its results could be used to develop recommendations for action for the further process.

In ZenMEM, researchers from Paderborn University, the Hochschule für Musik Detmold and Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences investigate processes of change and new possibilities of the transition from analogue to digital music and media editions since September 2014.

The project is initially promoted for three years by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and combines experiences and expertise as well as concepts and methods from musicology, various fields of computer sciences (contextual informatics, software engineering, usability engineering and music informatics) and media studies (media education and media economics). The focus of their research is on musical and other non-textual objects in context of digital editions. In this sense, the researchers are able to link to their preliminary scientific work as well as international developments like the Edirom project or the standards of Music Encoding Initiative (MEI) and Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) . They participate in its further development and examine innovative interacting and editing functions for the creation of digital music and media editions. In addition to research work, corresponding software tools are developed, technical advice and coordination is provided to external projects and training activities in form of workshops, courses and lectures are conducted and further developed. These steps are being accompanied by qualitative and quantitative user studies which take the entire creation process of digital editions into consideration. The results flow back into research and development work within the ZenMEM center. This short project description gives an impression of the complexity of the tasks in this joint project and the amount of heterogeneous research questions the cooperation partners are dealing with.

To conduct a formative evaluation for the ZenMEM project in order to develop recommendations for action for the further project progression, a qualitative half-standardized written survey was chosen as research method. For this purpose, a questionnaire with 18 questions was given to all project members. These questions were relating to previous experiences with working in interdisciplinary projects, special challenges within the project, specific work packages and personal goals. In the last section, the researchers were asked for valuation of ongoing processes and constructive suggestions for improvement. In addition, a shorter questionnaire was sent to the project leaders. Thus, the perspectives of different project status groups could be surveyed.

For the analysis of the results, amongst other things, a categorization based on the concept of SWOT analysis was performed. Developed at Harvard Business School in the 1960s for the strategic planning in companies, the SWOT analysis is a versatile tool (cf. Schawel & Billing 2009) describing the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of any company or project which constitute a basic structure for developing strategic recommendations for actions (cf. Kotler, Berger & Bickhoff 2016). To derive concrete statements from these four dimensions, the categorization had to be refined. Regarding the evaluation method of coding with Grounded Theory (cf. Przyborski & Wohlrab-Sahr 2009) a differentiated categorization within the root categories was performed.

In this context, it is important to note that Grounded Theory is a methodology as well as an evaluation method (cf. Strubing 2004). The paper at hand focuses on Grounded Theory as an evaluation method to collect phenomena, condense them into concepts, identify categories and uncover connections between them. Following, recommendations for action could be worked out from the combinations of single phenomena in order to optimize processes within the project. Furthermore, indications could be provided to identify which actions should be focused and which should be avoided (cf. Pepels 2005). Individual competences of the project participants were also taken into consideration. Among other things, it became clear that interdisciplinarity in such a project can be considered as both opportunity and challenge, especially regarding the different preconditions, approaches and methods. People not only hold various paradigms and epistemological interests but also act within different organizations and social systems - nearly all university departments and courses are oriented mono-disciplinary (cf. Dressel et al. 2014). Stringent guidance is needed to enable successful interdisciplinary research. In the ZenMEM project, superiority of the subject disciplines was at least a little bit softened and reflected by mutual work observations as well as agreements on certain terminology so that a basal equality of the participating research partners could be established and constantly evolved.

While in this case, systematic knowledge building took place directly from within the project, it can be discussed how the mediation of interdisciplinary competences could be implemented a lot earlier. As already indicated, interdisciplinary collaborations in academic contexts are of increasing significance and the demand for qualified young researchers with the key qualification interdisciplinarity (cf. Mainzer 2013) grows. More and more universities offer degrees in digital humanities or related fields. However, corresponding curricula show very different weightings of cultural science-based or computer science-based contents (cf. Schubert 2015). A closer inspection of digital humanities projects and a comparison between project experience and curricula might be helpful to develop degree courses so that interdisciplinary competences and shared knowledge can be gained.

Bibliography

Bauman, S. (2011): “Interchange vs. Interoperability.” In:

Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2011.

Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 7 http://dx.doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol7.Bauman01 [01.11.2016]

Bea, F. X., Scheurer, S. & Hesselmann, S. (2011): Projektmanagement.    Konstanz:    UVK

Verlagsgesellschaft.

Burdick, A., Drucker, J., Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T., & Schnapp, J. (2012): DIGITAL HUMANITIES. MIT Press.

Cummings, J. (2013): “ODDly Pragmatic: Documenting encoding practices in Digital Humanities projects.” https://blogs.it.ox.ac.uk/jamesc/2013/09/21/oddly-pragmatic/ [01.11.2016]

Denzin, N. K. (2000); Symbolischer Interaktionismus. In: Flick, Uwe; Kardorff, E.; Steinke, I. (Hrsg.): Qualitative Forschung. Ein Handbuch. Hamburg: Rowohlt.

Dressel, G., Heimerl, K., Berger, W. & Winiwarter, V.

(2014). Interdisziplinäres und transdisziplinäres Forschen organisieren. In: Dressel, G., Berger, W., Heimerl, K. & Winiwarter, V. (Hrsg.) Interdisziplinär und transdisziplinär forschen. Praktiken und Methoden. Bielefeld: Transcript S. 207-212.

Drucker, J. (2013): Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface. In: Digital Humanities Quartely, Vol. 7 (No.1). Online verfügbar: http://www.    Digitalhumanities.

org/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html. [01.11.2016]

Edwards, C. (2012): The Digital Humanities and Its Users. In: Gold, M. K. Debates in the Humanities. See also http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/31. [01.11.2016]

Fiske, J. (2001): Die populäre Ökonomie. In: Winter, R./ Mikos, L. (Hrsg.): Die Fabrikation des Populären. Der John Fiske-Reader. Bielefeld: transcript, S. 111-137.

Flick, U. (2002). Qualitative Sozialforschung. Eine Einführung. 6. überarb. und erweiterte Aufl. Hamburg: Rowohlt.

Flick, U., Kardorff, E. von, Steinke I. (Hrsg.). (2000). Qualitative Forschung. Ein Handbuch. Reinbeck: Rowohlt.

Gold, M. K. (2012): The Digital Humanities Moment. In: Gold, M. K. (Hrg.) (2012): Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, S. IX-XVI.

Holl, U. (2010): Materialität/ Immaterialität. In: ZfM Zeitschrift für Medienwissenschaft (2), Berlin: Akademie Verlag,    10-14.

http://www.zfmedienwissenschaft.de/heft/text/materi alit%C3%A4t-immaterialit%C3%A4t [01.11.2016]

Huber, H. D. (1998): Materialität und Immaterialität der Netzkunst. In: kritische berichte, Zeitschrift für Kunst-und Kulturwissenschaften, Sonderheft Netzkunst, Jg. 26, 1998, Heft 1, S.39-53.

von Kardorff, E. (2000): Qualitative Evaluationsforschung. In: Flick, U., von Kardorff E. & Steinke, I. (Hrsg.) (2000): Qualitative Forschung. Ein Handbuch. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt, S.238-250.

Keuneke, S. (2005). Qualitatives Interview. In: Mikos, L. & Wegener, C. (Hrsg.) Qualitative Medienforschung. Ein Handbuch. Konstanz: UVK, S. 254-267.

Kirschenbaum, M. (2008): Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. Cambridge: MIT University Press.

Kirschenbaum, M. G. et al. (2009): Digital Materiality: Preserving Access to Computers as Complete Environments.

http://escholarship.org/uc/item/7d3465vg

[01.11.2016]

Kotler, P., Berger, R. & Bickhoff, N. (2016): The Quintessence of Strategic Management. What You Really Need to Know to Survive in Business. Second Edition. Berlin/ Heidelberg: Springer.

Lindblom, C. E. (1959): The Science of „Muddling-Through“. Public Administration Review, 19 (2), 79-88.

Mainzer, K. (2013):    Interdisziplinarität und

Schlüsselqualifikationen in der globalen Wissens-gesellschaft. In: Jungert, M. et al. (Hrsg.). Interdisziplinarität. Theorie, Praxis, Probleme. Darmstadt: WBG, S. VI-VIII.

Manovich, L. (2001). Language of New Media. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Pepels, W. (2005): Grundlagen der Unternehmensführung. Strategie - Stellgrößen - Erfolgsfaktoren -Implementierung.    München:    Oldenbourg

Wissenschaftsverlag.

Pierazzo, E. (2016): Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Routledge.

Polanyi, M. (1985). Implizites Wissen. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.

Przyborski, A & Wohlrab-Sahr, M. (2009): Qualitative Sozialforschung. Ein Arbeitsbuch. München, Oldenbourg.

Reichert, R. (2014): Digital Humanities. In: Schröter, J. (Hrg.) (2014): Handbuch Medienwissenschaft. Weimar: Verlag J.B. Metzler, S. 511-515.

Rinza, P. (1998): Projektmanagement. Planung. Überwachung und Steuerung von technischen und nichttechnischen Vorhaben. 4. neubearbeitete Auflage. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.

Sahle, P. (2013): Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Norderstedt.

Schawel, C. & Billing, F. (2009): Top 100 Management Tools. Das wichtigste Buch eines Managers. 2. Auflage. Wiesbaden: Gabler/ GWV Fachverlage.

Schräge, D. (2006): Kultur als Materialität oder Material -Diskurstheorie oder Diskursanalyse?“ In: Rehberg (Hg.): Soziale Ungleichheit - Kulturelle Unterschiede (Bd. 2), S. 1806-1813.    http://blog.dominikschrage.de/wp-

content/uploads/2014/04/material.pdf [01.11.2016]

Schubert, Z. (Red.) (2015): Digital Humanities als Beruf. Fortschritte auf dem Weg zu einem Curriculum. Akten der DHd-Arbeitsgruppe „Referenzcurriculum Digital Humanities“. Vorgelegt auf der Jahrestagung der DHd 2015 vom 24. Bis 27. Februar 2015 in Graz. Online abrufbar unter https://www.digitalhumanities.tu-darmstadt.de/fileadmin/dhdarmstadt/materials/Digita l_Humanities_als_Beruf_-_Stand_2015.pdf. [27.10.2016]

Steinmann, H., Schreyögg, G. (2005): Management. Grundlagen der Unternehmensführung.

Konzepte, Funktionen, Fallstudien. Wiesbaden: Gabler.

Strübing, J. (2004):    Grounded Theory. Zur

sozialtheoretischen und epistemologischen Fundierung des Verfahrens der empirisch begründeten Theoriebildung. Wiesbaden: VS.

Straus, A. & Corbin, J. (1994): Grounded Theory Methodology. An Overview. In: Denzin, N. K. (Hrsg.).: Handbook of Qualitative Research. London, New York: Sage, S. 279.

Suber, P. (2012): Open Access. MIT Press. http://bit.ly/oa-book [01.11.2016].

Winter, R. (2010):    Handlungsmächtigkeit und

technologische Lebensformen. Cultural Studies, digitale Medien und die Demokratisierung der Lebensverhältnisse. In: Pietraß, M. & Funiok, R. (Hrsg.) Mensch und Medien. Philosophische und sozialwissenschaftliche Perspektiven. Wiesbaden: VS, S. 139-157.
Introduction

Pedagogy in the Digital Humanities is now leaving its “bracketed” state - a term used by HIRSCH 2012 to emphasise the fact that this dimension was not given the consideration its practical importance deserves. As programmes and courses are created on a larger scale and increasingly drive institutional strategies, also in Europe (see Sahle, 2013 and the DARIAH Digital Humanities Course Registry), it becomes essential to make comparisons and shared reflections possible.

Since 2014 all students of Greek and Latin languages and literatures at the Université Paris-Ouest Nanterre (France) have been enrolling in a Master programme entitled “Humanités classiques et humani-tés numériques.” Each semester features a fully fledged course of Digital Humanities: it is therefore an experiment in embedding Digital Humanities into an existing discipline, or rather into the array of disciplines which constitute the field of Classical studies around its philological backbone.

The aim of this poster is to share the approach I take in designing and teaching these courses, and to reflect on what this experience suggests about digital educational models, in Classics and beyond.

The poster will have three components, devoted to situating, describing and comparing the courses. Context and History

I will set out the conditions in which the curriculum was reformed (which involves both national and local contexts), the specific problems encountered (as the heterogeneous levels and motivations of the students, the relationships with the other courses, the available technical options, or the recent introduction of podcasting and distance learning), as well as the rationale and methods which shape the courses, including its main sources of inspiration in the Digital

Humanities community, whether online syllabi or publications like Jockers (2014) and Rockwell and Sinclair (2016).

Overview of the Courses

The courses alternately take the form of more traditional classes and collaborative or personal projects. Across the two years, their contents include theoretical and historical insights, while concentrating on hands-on experience: digital literacy elements are gradually integrated as students go from traditional scholarly editing recreated in Markdown and HTML to critical editing in TEI XML (the focus of year 1) and, beyond text and editing, discover computer-assisted analytical and visualisation methods with the Voyant Tools software environment and then work in a literate programming framework (For which the canonical reference is Knuth, 1984) implemented in R Markdown (the focus of year 2, see Figure 1).


Figure 1: Text analysis in RStudio

The principles of the courses will be expounded: favouring active participation, learning-by-doing and flipped classroom teaching; insisting on the critical, reflexive dimension of digital procedures; promoting free resources like TEI by Example (Van den Branden, Terras, and Vanhoutte) and The Programming Historian (Crymble et al), as well as data reuse; developing an open publication culture through the Classiques et numériques blog maintained by the students (see Figure 2) or a shared Zotero group library; creating an awareness of the surrounding Digital Humanities communities; fostering actual collaboration, both between the students and with other projects or programmes - to date, with another MA specialised in Web design on an online edition prototype, with the Pelagios Commons project on the annotation of place names and with the Sunoikisis

Digital Classics network in its effort to collectively define a core syllabus.


Figure 2: Classiques et numériques, the blog of the MA

Sahle, P. (2013). “DH Studieren! Auf Dem Weg Zu Einem Kern- Und Referenzcurriculum Der Digital Humanities.” DARIAH-DE Working Papers, 1. http://web-

doc.sub.gwdg.de/pub/mon/dariah-de/dwp-2013-1.pdf.

Van den Branden, R., Terras, M. and Vanhoutte, E. (n.d.)

“TEI by Example.” accessed 1 November 2016.

http://teibyexample.org/.

Comparing Models

Finally, drawing on this experience I will address several aspects of the current development of Di-gital Humanities pedagogy: as a separate entreprise or within established disciplines, with or without infrastructural, collegial or cross-departmental support, in various time formats, with different modes of external collaboration, etc. To sketch this broader typology, I will compare this French series of courses with other models, using in particular the data contributed to the aforementioned Digital Humanities Course Registry.

The poster will be in English, but I will naturally interact with the audience of the poster sessions both in English and French.

Bibliography

Crymble, A., Gibbs, F., Hegel, A., McDaniel, C., Milligan, I.,

Taparata, E., Visconti, A. and Wieringa, J. (eds.) (n.d.)

. The Programming Historian. http://programmin-ghistorian.org/.

Hirsch, B. (ed.) (2012). Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers. http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161.

Jockers, M. (2014). Text Analysis with R for Students of Literature. New York: Springer.

Knuth, D. (1984). “Literate Programming.” The Computer

Journal, 27(2): 97-111. http://comjnl.oxfordjour-

nals.org/content/27/2/97.short.

Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (1984). Hermeneutica. Computer-Assisted Interpretation in the Humanities. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Introduction
GutenTag is a cutting-edge resource that allows literary researchers of all levels of technical expertise to perform large-scale computational literary analysis. It allows users to build large, clean, highly customized worksets and then either analyse them in-system or export them as plain text or richly-encoded TEI. It has been built from the ground up by literary scholars for literary scholars: rather than relying on off-the-shelf tools poorly suited to the domain of literature, we have developed many of the components ourselves based on the specific demands of literary research. GutenTag is fully open-source, its analyses are based on entirely open corpora, and researchers can save and distribute all the parameters of their analyses, allowing for unprecedented reproducibility of research in a field plagued by siloed corpora. GutenTag is easy to use, permitting casual non-programmers to perform complex computational literary analysis via an online interface, while offering additional offline customization options to more advanced users. Although GutenTag was initially designed to facilitate our own research in polyvocality and dialogism, we show here that it can be leveraged to intervene in pressing debates unrelated to our specific research, such as the discussion surrounding Matthew Jockers's analysis of gender in Macroanalysis.

Overview of GutenTag
The system has grown considerably since our initial proposal, presented to an audience of computer scientists (Brooke et al., 2015). Below, we review the main features of the software with particular emphasis on recent improvements.

Interface: GutenTag is primarily accessed through an HTML GUI, accessible via the web or as a downloadable tool (both can be accessed from http://www.projectgutentag.org). In offline mode, the configuration files can be saved and loaded, and additional lexicons and other lists used for analysis can be specified by the user. A Python API is also included.

Corpora: The original version supported only the 2010 image of Project Gutenberg USA, but we have expanded support to all texts from Project Gutenberg USA as well as Project Gutenberg Canada and Australia, which include many additional texts published after 1922 and still under copyright in the USA.

Metadata: Document collections of interest can be defined using a variety of metadata tags. These include metadata provided by Project Gutenberg (title, author, author birth, author death, and, for some texts, Library of Congress classification and subjects). We have added genre (fiction, non-fiction, poetry, drama), determined using a sophisticated machine classifier, as well as author and text information (author gender, author nationality, publication date, publication country, single work or collection, etc.) derived from (mostly) unstructured resources including Wikipedia and the texts themselves.


Figure 1: The GutenTag interface, showing the creation of a workset based on advanced metadata (Genre, Author Sex, Author Nationality, Date of Publication)

Text cleaning and tokenization: Sophisticated regex-based heuristics are applied to remove metatext elements related to Project Gutenberg before, after, and sometimes within the text boundaries. Literature-specific tokenization is provided, preserving important information needed for downstream analysis.

Structural Tagging: This module identifies the main structural elements of the texts. First, heuristics are used to identify the likely boundaries between front matter, body, and back matter. Identification of structure within the main text is driven primarily by the identification of headers, and fully supports recursive structures including entire embedded texts which can have their own front and back matter separate from that of the anthology. Structural tagging is sensitive to genre: in the context of fiction, we identify parts, chapters, and speech; for poetry, we identify poems, cantos, stanzas, and lines; for drama, we identify acts, scenes, speakers, speech, and stage directions.

Lexical tagging: GutenTag includes lemmatization and POS tagging. There are several built-in lexicons which capture semantic and stylistic distinctions, and users can define their own lexicons, including multiword lexicons. Most recently, and most relevant to our case study below, we have added our own state-of-the-art literature-specific named entity recognition system (LitNER) which bootstraps from context-based clustering of common named entities to distinguish previously unseen people and locations from other named entities (Brooke et al. 2016b). For fiction, we group individual person names into collections of characters, and then assign speech events to these characters in the vicinity, using efficient, rule-based logic inspired by work in He et al. (2013). We identify the indicated sex of these characters primarily using large lists of names and titles; when a name does not appear on our list, we fall back to matching common sex-indicative character n-grams automatically derived from those lists (e.g. names ending with “a” tend to be female).

TEI output: When corpus output is required, we use XML-based TEI format as the default output format when structure (rather than simply tokens) is requested.


Figure 2: The GutenTag interface, showing in-system options for analysis via textual measure

Analysis: In addition to building corpora for exporting, GutenTag users can directly compare the distribution of relevant lexical tags or other textual metrics across multiple corpora as defined in the metadata filtering phase. The latest version includes a selection of standard textual metrics (e.g. average sentence length), part-of-speech based metrics such as lexical density, and metrics that rely on structural/lexical tagging, such as the amount of dialogue and the amount of dialogue that has been assigned to female characters. Advanced users can easily define their own textual metrics using Python; these then become available through the main interface. We also welcome requests for metrics from the DH community.

Research Applications

GutenTag was initially developed to facilitate our own research in literary dialogism (Hammond et al. 2016, Brooke et al. 2016a). GutenTag allows us to perform three crucial steps in our research process: first, to build customized corpora (a set of novels published from 1880-1950, for which it yields 4,088 results); second, to identify passages of character speech in each novel and assign a unique character to each passage of speech; and third, to calculate a measure of dialogism for each text using an algorithm based on our six-style approach (Brooke et al. 2016a). Further, GutenTag allows us to save our workflow in a parameter file so that it can be reproduced by other researchers.

GutenTag is designed as a general system, however — not merely as a vehicle for our specialized research. We thus present an example of how it can be employed (by a non-programmer) to investigate a prominent debate in Digital Literary Studies, Matthew L. Jockers’s discussion of gender and authorship in Macroanalysis. Jockers argues that female authorship can be predicted reliably through topic modelling, based on the presence of themes that “correspond rather closely to our expectations and our stereotypes” such as “Affection and Happiness," “Female Fashion," and “Infants” (Jockers 2013). A reader might respond to Jockers’s analysis by querying his assumptions about literary authorship; specifically, his failure to distinguish between authors and characters. Suppose that female characters were just as likely to discuss “Female Fashion" in novels written by men as those written by women, but that female authors tended to include more female character speech in their novels, as Muzny et al. (2016) suggest. If this were so, Jockers’s findings would not confirm stereotypes about female authorship, but simply reveal the tendency of female authors to include more female voices in their texts than men.

GutenTag is uniquely suited to investigating such a question. Its advanced metadata and sophisticated lexical tagging allow it to easily and rapidly analyze the question of female character speech in a large corpus of English-language novels.

50%


^^Female Authors • Male Authors

Figure 3: Mean proportion of text which Is dialogue in prose fiction, female vs. male authors, 1850-1949.

Sample sizes as follow, in number of texts. 18501859: 53 female, 97 male. 1860-1869: 86 female,

128 male. 1870-1879: 110 female, 137 male. 18801889: 122 female, 262 male. 1890-1899: 221 female, 583 male. 1900-1909: 299 female, 975 male. 1910-1919: 354 female, 960 male. 19201929: 148 female, 656 male. 1930-1939: 77 female,

413 male. 1940-1949: 52 female, 135 male.

Figure 3 shows that female authors in the twentieth century included approximately the same amount of dialogue as a proportion of total text length as male authors, but that in the latter half nineteenth century, they included approximately 5% more than men. Since Jockers focuses on the nineteenth century, this finding alone might impact his conclusions.


Figure 4: Mean proportion of dialogue allotted to female characters in prose fiction, female vs. male authors, 18501949

Sample sizes as follow, in number of texts. 18501859: 53 female, 97 male. 1860-1869: 88 female, 128 male. 1870-1879: 110 female, 137 male. 1880-1889:

122 female, 261 male. 1890-1899: 220 female, 583 male. 1900-1909: 300 female, 795 male. 1910-1919:

354 female, 960 male. 1920-1929: 148 female, 655 male. 1930-1939: 77 female, 413 male. 1940-1949:

54 female, 135 male.

As Figure 4 shows, GutenTag supports Muzny et al.'s contention that female novelists incorporate far more (approximately twice as much) female dialogue compared with male novelists. The finding that the proportion of female dialogue decreased from the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century, in both female and male authors, is one that bears further investigation — particularly in relation to the emergence in that period of popular genres, such as children’s literature, Westerns, and romance novels.


Figure 5: Mean proportion of dialogue allotted to female characters in prose fiction, female vs. male authors, by nationality, 1850-1949

Sample sizes as follow, in number of texts. Scottish:

31 female, 80 male. Canadian: 49 female, 78 male.

English: 339 female, 1308 male. American: 572 female, 1545 male. Australian: 38 female, 104 male. Irish: 21 female, 92 male.

In Figure 5, we employ GutenTag’s ability to filter results by author nationality. The marked discrepancy between proportion of female dialogue in male authors from England and the United States again suggests the need for an further investigation of genre; for instance, whether the American preference for male-centred genres like the Western might explain the result. Looking at GutenTag’s fine-grained outputs, we observe that the texts with the lowest proportion of female dialogue are those directed at a young male audience (especially adventure fiction for boys) while those with the highest proportion consist largely of fiction for young women (L. M. Montgomery’s Anne of Green Gables devotes over 90% of its dialogue to female characters). These findings might prompt our hypothetical researcher to engage in a smaller-scale study of the representation of gender in children’s literature. Because all texts in GutenTag are accessible to users, it easily accommodates such movements from large-scale analysis to close reading.

Conclusion
GutenTag allows researchers of all levels of technical expertise to perform advanced large-scale literary analysis, as well as to independently test the hypotheses and conclusions of prominent research in the field. Our case study further shows how the integrated, end-to-end GutenTag system allows users to raise new research questions in the course of their analyses (such as the correlation between the emergence of children’s fiction and the proportion of female dialogue) and then, since all its corpora are accessible, to shift scales and explore these questions through close reading.

Literature. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL ’16).

Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Hirst, G. (2015). GutenTag: an NLP-driven Tool for Digital Humanities Research in the Project Gutenberg Corpus. Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature. Denver: NAACL, pp. 1-6.

Hammond, A., Brooke, J. (2016). Project Dialogism: Toward a Computational History of Vocal Diversity in English-Language Literature. In Digital Humanities 2016: Conference    Abstracts. Jagiellonian University &

Pedagogical University, Krakow, pp. 543-544.

He, H., Barbosa, D. and Kondrak, G. (2013). Identification of Speakers in Novels. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL ’13).

Jockers, M. (2013). Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois Press.

Muzny, G., Algee-Hewitt, M., Jurafsky, D. (2016). The Dialogic Turn and the Performance of Gender: the English Canon 1782-2011. In Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Jagiellonian    University    &

Pedagogical University, Krakow, pp. 296-299.

Bibliography
Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Hirst, G. (2016a). Using Models of Lexical Style to Quantify Free Indirect Discourse in Modernist Fiction. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 2(2): 1-17.

Brooke, J., Hammond, A., and Baldwin, T. (2016b). Bootstrapped Text-level Named Entity Recognition for
Short Description

My talk will focus on the problems and possibilities of conserving historic text generators, ‘historic' meaning roughly 1950-1970. For this purpose, I will develop the scientific interests in these generators either from the perspective of literary history and from the perspective of the history of knowledge, since many of the text generators in question were connected explicitly to scientific interests.

A system for conserving and editing historic text generators, that will enable researchers from both of these fields to access historic text generators in order to study their esthetics and functioning needs, in or-derto take into account not only the generated texts, but also the generating texts, meaning software and prerequisites such as flowcharts. In my talk, I will focus on the materiality and the potentiality of the historic text generators in order to propose a platform solution that should enable scholars to edit (and publish) historic text generators.

Full Abstract

In their manifesto Zur Lage (Bense and Dohl (1964)) (State of Things) Max Bense and Reinhard Dohl name several tendencies of contemporary literature. The sixth and last point of their list calls on a cybernetic and material poetry (“kybernetische und materiale Poesie”). Historically and biographically, Bense and Dohl were placed at one of the centers of concrete poetry and concrete art (Stuttgart, Germany), and their manifesto reflects the artistic and academic developments made in these areas. But already in 1964, when Bense and Dohl published their manifesto, experiments had taken place that had taken the notion of a cybernetic poetry quite literally, using computers and software to generate literary texts. (Strachey Okt.

1954; Lutz 1959; Levin 1963; Gunzenhauser 2004; Link 2004) The automatic generation of texts by way of combining syntax, vocabulary and a (pseudo) random generator that serves to fill the syntax positions with proper words from the vocabulary has a history dating back to the 17th century. However, it was the use of computers that prompted artists and researchers to expand their experiments and develop complex setups applying hundreds of syntactical structures and bigger vocabularies (as did, for example, Stickel [1967] ).

The research on early text generators has focused on biographical data and the literary history of automatic text generation (Bulow 2007), the autoreflexiv-ity of digital texts (Cramer 2003) and the genealogy of text generating systems (Link 2004). A literary and cultural history of text generators needs to take into account not only the texts that were produced, but also the modes and methods of production. In my talk, I will argue that in order to understand the history of automatic text generation, we need to join these different perspectives and research either the generated texts and the modes and methods of text generation.

Now the first problem when dealing with text generators (and the texts generated with them historically) is the availability of the material. Only a small fraction of historically generated texts has been published, and in most cases the documentation of the conceptual and technical setup is only partly available through publications, not to mention the actual code that was used to produce the text in the first place. This is due to the fact, that literary scholars have tended to ignore texts of this kind - that is, experimental text which barely fulfills any definition of poetry - and are only beginning to recognize them as a certain type of literature in its own kind. The second reason for a newly developed recognition for early text generation experiments is the fact that automatic text generation has become ubiquitous in our time, from simple twitter bots that employ the same methods as the early text generators (meaning simple syntactical structures filled with randomly chosen words), via the modern ELIZAs of contemporary electronic assistant systems, to complex machine learning algorithms that synthesize Shakespearean plays. (Goodwin 2016)

So in order to further research on early text generators, the multiple dimensions of text generators will have to be made available to researchers from all fields concerned with the history of automatic text generation. Since I am, by profession, a philologist, my approach is limited to the document side of things and does not consider hardware conservation or emulation.

Documents connected to text generators comprise flowcharts, punched tape, source code data on magnetic memory, print-outs, project documentation in various paper formats. For a digital representation, these materials can be digitized either in graphical or in textual format. Graphical representations can be annotated with their respective metadata describing their material, function, authorship etc. As for the texts contained in a text generator as a historic object, we are dealing with three different kinds of texts:

• texts that have been generated • texts that have been used to generate

texts (mainly software)

• texts that could have been or can poten

tially be generated (the full outcome of the underlying algorithm)

Texts in groups 1 and 2 are connected in a genetic

way. If we take the Stochastic Texts by Theo Lutz and

Rul Gunzenhauser (Lutz 1959) as an example, we can see that there is a published version of the generated texts and a raw version (published in Buscher, 2004). The differences between these versions are significant. From a text-genetic perspective, these differences lead to the production of the texts or, in other words, the execution of the underlying program. The execution of the program leads to the implementation of the program or the source code, the source code leads to the conceptual implementation of the algorithm (e.g. flowcharts) and thus to the abstract underlying algorithm.

Thus, a genetic perspective on text generators leads not only to the raw version of the output of the computer, but to the implementation of the algorithm in source code as well. The title of my talk searches to reflect this notion of text genesis, because the link between source code and output is not a certain similarity between two texts, but a functional, algorithmic connection. I think that problematizing this kind of functional genetic connection can also be fruitful for philology dealing with texts where computers don't generate all of the text, but help in generating certain features of the text. In order to describe and show this kind of connection in different text generators, it will be necessary to develop standardized notions for annotation schemas (Currently, the annotation of source code is not part of the TEI Guidelines (TEI-Consortium and Lou Burnard 2014)

Finally, studying the poetics of a text generator might also mean to study more generated text than is (historically) available. A representation of a text generator thus not only should comprise the source code itself, but also the possibility to run the algorithm in order to generate some of the potential texts. The best solution would be, of course, to run the code on the historic machines it was developed for. Not only would this repeat the original experiments, it would also hopefully reproduce the glitches that can be seen in the raw output that has been preserved and archived. (Büscher 2004) However, such a procedure would be way too costly. An easier way is to implement the reconstructed algorithm in a modern programming language and to offer researchers the possibility to run the code without being forced to undertake major ret-rocomputing tasks just in order to gather some more textual outcome.

Since this is a work in progress, I am confident that by August 2017 I will be able to outline not only the problems, but also some solutions for implementing a platform and database to preserve and present historic text generators.

Bibliography

Büscher, B., von Herrmann, H.-C., Hoffmann, C. (2004). Ästhetik Als Programm. Max Bense/Daten Und Streuungen. Berlin: diaphanes.

Bense, M., and Döhl, R. (1964). Zur Lage.

Bülow, R. (2007). “SINN IST FERN - Wie Die Computer Dichten Lernten.” In Ex Machina - Frühe Computergrafik Bis 1979: Die Sammlungen Franke Und

Weitere Stiftungen in Der Kunsthalle Bremen, 13472. München: Deutscher Kunstverlag.

Cramer, F. (2003). Exe.cut[up]able Statements. Das Drängen Des Codes an Die Nutzeroberflächen. Berlin.

Goodwin, R. (2016). “Adventures in Narrated Reality. New

Forms & Interfaces for Written Language, Enabled by Machine Intelligence.” March. https:// me-

dium.com/artists-and-machine-intelligence/adven-

tures-in-narrated-reality-6516ff395ba3#.5ko9ojqfq.

Gunzenhäuser, R. (2004). “Zur Synthese von Texten Mit

Hilfe Programmges- teuerter Ziffernrechenanlagen.” In

Ästhetik Als Programm. Max Bense/Daten Und Streuungen, edited by Barbara Büscher and HansChristian von Herrmann Christoph Hoffmann, 170-83. Berlin: diaphanes.

Levin, S. R. (1963). “On Automatic Production of Poetic Sequences.” The University of Texas Studies in Literature and Language V: 138-46.

Link, D. (2004). Poesiemaschinen - Maschinenpoesie. Berlin: Diss. Humboldt- Universität.

Lutz, T. (1959). “Stochastische Texte.” Augenblick 4 (1):

3-9.

Stickel, G. (1967). “Monte-Carlo-Texte. Automatische Manipulation von Sprachlichen Einheiten.” In Kunst Aus Dem Computer, edited by William E. Simmat, 53-57. Stuttgart: nadolski.

Strachey, C. O. (1954). “The 'Thinking' Machine.” Encounter 3 (4): 25-31.

TEI-Consortium, Bauman, S., Burnard, L. (2014). TEI P5:

Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.6.0, 20.1.2014, Revision 12802. o. O.
Introduction
Digital humanities teaching programs are today widespread mostly in North American and European universities. However, they are very different in terms of content, focus and audience and as mentioned, they are distributed unevenly around the world, while often linked to diverse academic policies. Some programs are long-term focused, shaped as masters or graduate degrees (with well-known pioneer examples at King's College, Virginia or Pisa, with the so-called In-

formatica Umanistica). Summer and spring schools

have also had great importance in this field, getting researchers into digital humanities as a complementary training and opening new horizons for traditional DH scholars. Names such as Oxford, Victoria and Leipzig deserve a special mention in this area.

Networks like DiXiT, and DH infrastructures such as DARIAH and CLARIN are making continuous efforts to centralize, standardize, unify and inform on the different nature, options and advantages of DH training programs. Some examples of these efforts can be appreciated in the deliverables of DARIAH (Sahle 2013), the CUNY list of curricula, the DARIAH course registry and German open-access teaching materials, as well as many other resources available on the web, with special mention to the DARIAH Teach Erasmus plus project, which is now on the spot on the future for DH teaching.

The Spanish Case
This paper presents the Spanish DH programs developed at LINHD as an innovative case-study from the Spanish-speaking DH community with the aim to illustrate the global teaching panorama. Most of the syllabi of the DH courses at LINHD have been developed under a common collaboration between Spain and Argentina, focused on a broad Spanish-speaking audience and applying e-learning teaching methods. The use of these virtual technologies and methodologies is the success milestone of this initiative, as it constantly reaches students from different backgrounds and profiles and from different parts of the world (Spain but also Latin America and Europe) as long as they are Spanish speakers.

We will first focus on the curricular design of all the programs offered by LINHD, followed by a detailed explanation of the teaching methodology.

The Design Of A DH Curriculum
LINHD was created in 2014 based on three axes: research, training and dissemination. It launched its first DH summer school: "Introducción a las Humanidades Digitales" in July 2014, getting more than 50 students involved. The summer school was followed by a longer DH program of 30 ECTS credits, lasting from December to September and amplifying all the contents that had been announced in the summer school. The strategy has been similar in the following years, in 2015, summer school was devoted to digital scholarly editing and a new longer winter training program was launched for 2015-2016. This last year, we decided to focus on DH methodologies applied to a specific field, poetry, which had as a result a high-quality summer school on this topic that is at the heart of LINHD projects and research interests. Taking into account the interests of the community, the needs of the field and the offers of new programs in different places, our new proposal for this year, starting in January 2017 is Semantic web technologies and language resources, introducing NLP possibilities for humanities, useful tools, and stylometry, Semantic web technologies will be the second focus of this summer school, supported and cofinanced by CLARIN as a CLARIN user involvement event.

Our strategy for designing curricula for all these programs has been twofold: first, we have always used as a model the reference curricula for DH mentioned above, along with the needs of the scholars in our own environment. There have been three keys for success: having a DH compliant interdisciplinary teaching faculty, variety in content (our first DH course covered a huge range of topics going from databases, TEI markup, semantic web, visualization to digital libraries), and flexibility to change, thanks to the lessons learned every year.

Distant Teaching Methodology
LINHD is based at UNED, the biggest Spanish university, founded more than 40 years ago, which uses semi-present and virtual teaching methods as its unique strategy. This has been a cornerstone for developing our DH teaching programs, as we have used UNED infrastructures as a key part of our teaching methodology. For summer schools, we use a double teaching model: there are keynote lessons with students in the room, but sessions are also recorded and broadcasted in streaming and can be viewed later. Students may choose to attend the school in either of these two ways and receive the same certification. Both options are combined with a virtual teaching platform (called aLF, designed by UNED) where professors upload slides and teaching materials and students interact with them.

The longer winter courses are only offered online using the aLF virtual platform as the main communication channel among students and faculty members, but the platform includes videos, exercises and virtual research environments as teaching materials to train students all over the world.

Anyway, the challenges we often face in our courses deal with:

• Creation of the materials. Two sided: on one hand, the materials should be written in Spanish; on the other hand, most of the “technical” documentation lacks a DH perspective (Ej. PHP, MySQL databases). This is a very important point, as although there are a lot of open access materials on the web on DH training, it has not been enough for us to translate them (Cordell 2015). It has been necessary to re-create the problems, to adapt existing materials to our own needs and examples (our libraries, our projects), and also to regroup the different cues on a not-yet consolidated DH history in Spanish.

• Teach an eminently hands-on field through a distant method and virtual learning (Forum, exercises). This has been one of our main pillars, in which we are proud to present our most innovative product in the DH world: online teaching has proven to be the present and the future of education, but has not been extended yet to the DH field (Bergmann 2013, Koller 2012). This way of teaching implies, however a specialized production of teaching materials and also a special faculty training, as they have to produce slides, videos, written materials and quizzes and tests for which they have to offer interactive help and solutions. Although this might look an extra workload for our teachers, the experience shows that all these efforts remain as digital contents (it is nice to have a look at the libraries of our YouTube channel), in which we add as open access materials all the recorded sessions of our courses.

• Make visible the DH training inside and outside the Spanish speaking world. This is an important point for us, not just as a way of getting more students, but also as a way of clearing the path to consolidating DH as an academic discipline (Trejos 2013). As our academic structure is pretty resistant to interdisciplinary work, we have to use social networks and other dissemination channels to go beyond barriers and reach our public outside our university. The result is a very mixed group of students coming from different parts of our country, and from other countries too. The challenge: identifying the ways to arrive at all these potentially interested groups. We work together in collaboration with scholars from Argentina, Mexico, Colombia and other universities and try to expand our visibility as much as possible.

In this presentation we will explore the success and difficulties we have faced in the use of this combined methodological approach during this 3 years, involving more than 500 students of different backgrounds, languages and countries. Expanding this model to other teaching programs and continue experimenting with new DH curricula proposal are the next plans at LINHD.

Bibliography
LINHD. (n.d.) Training programs - LINHD. [online] Available at: http://linhd.uned.es/en/training/ [Accessed 28

Mar. 2017].

Bergmann, J. y Grané, M. (2013). La universidad en la nube.

A universidade na nuvem. Barcelona: LMI. CoHecció

Transmedia XXI. Laboratori de Mitjans Interactius.

Universitat de Barcelona. Barcelona. Available at: http://www.lmi.ub.edu/transmedia21/vol6/index.html [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].

Cordell, R. (2015). How Not to Teach Digital Humanities. [online] Ryan Cordell. Available at: http://ryancor-dell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humani-

ties/ [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].

González-Blanco García, E. (2016). Un nuevo camino hacia las Humanidades Digitales: El Laboratorio de Innovación en Humanidades Digitales de la UNED (LINHD). Signa, Revista de la Asociación Española de Semiótica, 25,    79-93.    http://revistas.uned.es/in-

dex.php/signa/article/view/16959 [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].

Koller, D. (2012). What we're learning from online education. [Video file] Ted Talks. Available at: https://www.ted.com/talks/daphne_koller_what_we_re _learning_from_online_education [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].

Sahle, P. (2013). DH studieren! Auf dem Weg zu einem Kern- und Referenzcurriculum der Digital Humanities. DARIAH-DE Working Papers Nr. 1. Göttingen: GOEDOC 2013. Available at: http://web-doc.sub.gwdg.de/pub/mon/dariah-de/dwp-2013-1.pdf [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].

Trejos, B. (2013). A Pedagogy for Cross-cultural Digital Learning Environments. October 2. Available at http://www.digitalpedagogylab.com/hybridped/a-

pedagogy-for-cross-cultural-digital-learning-environ-ments/ [Accessed 28 Mar. 2017].
Une base de données organise la connaissance en vue de son utilisation par un public donne. Cette definition trop rapide et lacunaire ne tient pas compte de la complexite du processus de création, ni de la véritable nature d’une base numerique, qui, pour nous, doit etre le fruit d’un dialogue entre la partie scientifique et la partie technique du projet. Nous allons etudier, pour deux bases antiquisantes, le processus de passage d’une approche textuelle, libre de toute contrainte, a une autre basee sur la structuration, c’est-à-dire la transcription en structuration formelle des decisions prises par les analystes des textes antiques.

Dans ces deux cas, un nouvel acces, résultat de la restructuration des outils, vise un public nouveau tout en servant mieux l’ancien :

1)    l’abandon d’un modele conçu pour l’imprime, ou la recension annuelle des donnees pour produire le volume papier de l'Année Philologique, accompagne d’une transformation en site web, constituait pendant des decennies le but recherche : l’objectif etait un changement total du contenu et de la structure, pour obtenir une veritable base de donnees, tout a fait differente (IPhiS, la nouvelle base philologique en construction).

2)    la transformation d’un modele sans volume papier paru, qui n’etait pas pour autant une construction « native numerique » mais un simple export html periodique d’un ensemble de donnees thematiques : l’objectif etait la reprise des anciennes donnees avec une modeli-sation nouvelle permettant d’obtenir une nouvelle base, qui continuerait l’ancienne seulement en ce qui concerne le contenu (le cas du Répertoire des sources philosophiques an

tiques).

La question de l’acces libre aux donnees s’est posee à nous comme une contrainte. Notre travail d’an-tiquisants analystes de sources grecques et latines philologiques ou philosophiques (au sens large des termes) a croise celui des developpeurs d’applications numeriques quand nous avons commence a transformer les deux outils bibliographiques précites. Il existe plusieurs façons d’envisager la permeabilite et l’articulation scientifique-technique ; nous étudierons comment le dialogue permanent direct permet un meilleur acces aux donnees d’une base.

Quand un modele a fait ses preuves depuis prés de 80 ans et que sa notoriete est installe dans la communauté, la difficulte est d’imposer un modele nouveau quant a la pertinence scientifique et le traitement de l’information. La contrainte est double : passer d’un logiciel proprietaire (4D) dont l’adaptation convenait tout a fait a la bibliographie papier et a son export en ligne, a une solution de logiciel libre qui apporterait cependant la meme richesse et finesse d’indexation que 4D et créerait une véritable base de donnees numerique. La question ne concernait pas seulement le de-veloppement de l’outil nouveau, mais aussi le type des donnees a implementer dans la base. Notre questionnement concernait aussi le fait meme de rendre la base accessible librement sur le web : au moment de la proliferation de l’information grâce aux moteurs de recherche generalistes du type Google scholar, quelle serait la « plus-value » d’une enieme base ? C’est pourquoi nous avons commence a réflechir comment les entrées de la base pourraient pointer vers des donnees textuelles litteraires exterieures en XML/TEI, afin que nos bases ne soient pas simplement des thesauri bibliographiques riches et bien ordonnees, mais sans lien avec les sources qu’elles sont censees analyser. Cette question est pour l’instant pour nous au stade de la reflexion theorique.

La liberte d’acces, dans le cadre des disciplines rares comme les nôtres, pose la question de la protection contre le copiage, le plagiat, l’imitation et donc l’appropriation de notre travail. C’est pourquoi, des le debut du projet, il est important de choisir une licence adaptee, par exemple de la famille Creative Commons.

Il faut aussi envisager l'accessibilité effective des données via l’interface utilisateur et le respect des standards du web.

Nous constatons trop souvent que les bases de don-nees, sites collaboratifs, plateformes, editions etc. emanent de programmes limites dans le temps, au financement et au personnel précaire, ce qui impacte la realisation des projets dans les delais impartis. Or, si ces bases repondent à une demande d’acces à des don-nees fiables et de qualite contrairement à la masse in-controlee offerte par les moteurs generalistes du web, elles ont vocation à durer et ont besoin d’une mise à jour réguliere de leur contenu et de leur infrastructure logicielle pour remplir leur mission. Les changements de technologie (internes ou imposes par l’ecosysteme) peuvent comporter des risques pour les projets et leurs utilisateurs finaux. La disparition des outils entraîne souvent celle du savoir et du savoir-faire des personnels.

La necessite d’obeir aux injonctions du court terme impacte le travail de renouvellement des anciennes bases : les delais de transformation sont plus longs que prevu, puisqu’il faut d’abord passer par une expression de nouveaux besoins et ensuite par une modelisa-tion tenant compte des choix scientifiques et traduisant ceux-ci en solutions techniques ; il faut ensuite experimenter, adapter, affiner. Un tel fonctionnement est à l’oppose d’une demande de solution rapide cles en main.

L’implémentation des notices dans une base en flux continu sur le web (en vue de leur moissonnage par les moteurs de recherche en temps reel), le rêve d’exhaus-tivite, contribuent à alimenter l’idee de liberte totale individuelle qui va à l’encontre du mode de travail collectif. Le risque est d’instaurer une nouvelle forme de dependance et de contrôle generalise, voire deceleration des cadences et de fin programmee de toute verification de la pertinence scientifique. C’est tout à fait different d’une base de donnees participative et basee sur la contribution de la communaute.

Le travail sur le contenu d’une base depend aussi de l’elaboration d’un cahier de charges, de la modelisa-tion des donnees (qui definit à son tour le type d’acces aux donnees dans l’immediat mais aussi dans l’avenir), des formulaires permettant de la remplir, de son interface de consultation et de la constitution d’une com-munaute d’utilisateurs. La question est la (restructuration et la (re)présentation des donnees sous une nouvelle forme en ligne, qui tienne compte des standards actuels (libre acces, interoperabilite etc.). La normalisation des donnees et la reduction de la redondance de l’information sont des gages d’une base de donnees pleinement accessible et exploitable par ses utilisateurs.

Bibliography

Bénel, A. 2014. “Quelle interdisciplinarité pour les ‘Humanités numériques’?” Les Cahiers du numérique 10/4: 103132.    http://www.cairn.info/revue-les-cahiers-du-nu-

merique-2014-4-page-103.htm

Berra, A. 2015. “Pour une histoire des humanités numériques”, Critique 8    (n°    819-820):    613-626.

http://www.cairn.info/revue-critique-2015-8-page-

613.htm

Burnard, L. 2012. “Du literary and linguistic computing aux digital humanities: retour sur 40 ans de relations entre sciences humaines et informatique” in Read/Write Book: une introduction aux humanités numériques, Pierre Mourner    (dir.),    Marseille. http: //books.openedi-

tion.org/oep/242

Clivaz, Cl., Dilley, P. and Hamidovic, D. ed. 2016. (in collaboration with A. Thromas), Ancient Worlds in Digital Culture, Leiden: Boston.

Crane, G., Seales, B. and Terras, M. 2009. “Cyberinfrastructure for Classical Philology”. Digital Humanities Quarterly    3/1    www.digitalhumani-

ties.org/dhq/vol/3/l/000023/000023.html.

Flanders, J. 2009. “The Productive Unease of 21st-century Digital Scholarship.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 3/3 www.digitalhumani-

ties.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000055/000055.html.

Le Deuff, O. ed. 2014. Le temps des humanités digitales. La mutation des sciences humaines et sociales, Limoges.
Introduction

What role does place, if any, figure in the digital scholarly edition? Gunn and Hart offer a prescriptive view of the role of place in Joyce’s Ulysses: “The topography of Dublin is “on the page” at least as much as are the meanings of the words “priest,” “kidney,” and ineluctable modality”: it is a part of the book’s primary reference system, without which its full sense cannot be apprehended” (Gunn et al. 2004). Such a positivistic view grants a key role to place and suggests that the novel may be modeled, to some extent, along geospatial lines. This paper proposes a model for foregrounding geographical elements, within a digital scholarly edition, for Ulysses.

However, rather than supporting the naturalistic view that Ulysses constitutes a sort of textual analogue to geographic representations of Dublin, previous work has suggested that Ulysses complicates this perspective (Bulson 2011). In this context Pierre Joris’ formulation about the US poet Ronald Johnson, “He also knew that to make history you have to disfigure geography” might be applied equally to Joyce and the example of Ulysses (Joris 2009).

While significant work has been done to date outlining the extracting of geographical elements from texts and using the resulting toponyms in GIS contexts (Gregory and Hardie 2011, Cooper et al. 2015), this paper considers the question of toponyms in literary texts in both the context of modeling and the role of source texts in the representation of place. The key element of this research is making explicit the connections between source text and novel and how these connections are reflected in external ontologies.

Eide (2014) asserts that maps, texts and landscapes all constitute different ways of modelling and different ways of experiencing place. Texts have the characteristic of being “underspecified”: e.g. a text might designate a place as “east” as opposed to exposing coordinates on a map. Maps and texts work to create the condition of intermediality - a combined geocommunication system. Are there source texts, relative to Ulysses, that amplify this sense of intermediality? Do these texts, in conjunction with the novel, occupy a sort of liminal category between text and map?

Methodology

This approach extends earlier work using TEI in effectively modelling geographical elements in one episode of the novel and incorporates alternative models such as ontologies and RDF XML documents in augmenting TEI XML (Derven et al. 2012). Such an approach serves to instantiate Gabler’s claim for the digital scholarly edition as a “web of discourses” (Gabler 2010). The paper also considers whether this approach can be generalised beyond the specific use case of geographic named entities in the text and considers whether the combination of TEI XML, external ontologies and paratextual data stored in RDF triples may be more widely extended to digital scholarly editions. The approach taken in the paper extracts named entities from the text, identify toponyms and incorporates them as geo-rectified elements in an encoding of the novel. A sample of two episodes encoded in TEI XML is used. However, the approach to modelling taken extends beyond that offered by a strictly TEI-based approach by using a semantic web based approach and links placenames in the text to ontologies (for example, geoNames). The paper weighs marking up place names directly in the encoding itself against linking to external ontologies.

This paper also considers an interface for digital scholarly editions that accommodates multiple versions, displays geographic data extracted from the text and utilises an ontology to model and encode geographical elements within the text. The interface is used to interrogate a single episode from Joyce’s Ulysses, a text that can be avowedly positioned within a geographic context. The tenth episode of the novel, Wandering Rocks, both foregrounds and privileges geographic elements in such a way that place itself takes on a narrative function. The use of place too alters slightly from manuscript to fair copy through to printed editions. The paper foregrounds the methodologies and tools used in assembling the interface. Toponyms are extracted, modelled in terms of both possible sources used in the construction of the text and existing ontologies, and presented as part of the interface for the digital scholarly edition through a GIS service. The interface includes a map that plots changes in the use of place name in the construction of the text.

Conclusions

In the context of a novel where place and place names function as narrative markers, investigating geographical elements in a computational context becomes another way to both read through the novel and assist in establishing a critical editing function. For example, considering the digital scholarly edition as interface, it becomes interesting to track such changes not only from the perspective of the critical edition but also in terms of GIS. How does the role and use of placenames change in the developing text? Is there evidence for paratextual or secondary sources in the development of place as this role changes? What is the most appropriate way to model and refer to place in the text? The paper, then, models episodes in Ulysses along these three dimensions: as a digital scholarly edition, as a mapping network, and through an ontology for modeling geographic elements. Bibliography

Bulson, E. (2011) 'Disorienting Dublin’ in Making Space in the Works of James Joyce, 1st ed, Routledge.

Cooper, D.C., Gregory, I.N., Hardie, A., Rayson, P. (2015)

'Spatializing and Analyzing Digital Texts: Corpora, GIS, and    Places’,    available:    http://e-

space.mmu.ac.uk/579357/ [accessed 11 Aug 2016].

Derven, C., Teehan, A., Keating, J. (2015) 'Mapping and

Unmapping Joyce: Geoparsing Wandering Rocks’,

Presented at the Digital Humanities 2014, Lausanne,

Switzerland,    available:

http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-510.xml [accessed 20 July 2016].

Eide, 0. (2014) 'Reading the Text, Walking the Terrain,

Following the Map’, in Arthur, P.L. and Bode, K., eds.,

Advancing Digital Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan UK,

194-205,    available:

http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/978113733 7016_13 [accessed 20 July 2016].

Gabler, H.W. (2010) 'Theorizing the Digital Scholarly

Edition’, Literature Compass, 7(2), 43-56.

Gregory, I.N., Hardie, A. (2011) 'Visual GISting: bringing together corpus linguistics and Geographical Information Systems’, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 26(3), 297-314.

Gunn, I., Hart, C., Beck, H. (2004) James Joyce's Dublin: A Topographical Guide to the Dublin of Ulysses: With 121 Illustrations, Thames & Hudson, Limited.

Joris, P. (2009) Justifying the Margins, Salt Pub.

Joyce, J. (1986) Ulysses: The Corrected Text, reprint. ed, Vintage Books: New York.

Modernist Versions Project (2016) The Algorithmic Ulysses [online], Modernist Versions Project, available: http://web.uvic.ca/~mvp1922/the-algorithmic-ulysses/ [accessed 20 July 2016].

Travis, C. (2016) 'Bloomsday’s Big Data’, in Literary Mapping in the Digital Age, Digital Research in the Arts and Humanities, Routledge: London.
Introduction

Twitter data have been growingly used as a source for scholarly studies in various disciplines in recent years (Williams et al., 2013). The value of such borndigital data as primary source materials for future researches in history is already being acknowledged (Webster, 2015, Steinhauer, 2015). But, at least for now, historians seem rather reluctant to make use of them, although some recent works deal with the perception and memory of the past on Twitter (Clavert, 2016, Turgeon, 2014) or propose both documentation and analysis of present time events (Ruest and Milligan, 2016).

One possible reason of this reluctance could be the attachment of historians to traditional archival collections, e.g. those organized by professional archivists. But the creation of archives for social network sites data is not yet systematic and still in the beginning. As for the global Twitter archive of the Library of Congress, it is unknown when it will be functional (Zimmer, 2015). As it is possible for one to retrieve Twitter datasets, a second reason of this reluctance could be the need for acquaintance with basic methods and tools for gathering, understanding and analyzing born-digital data. However, not all historians are trained to digital humanities and quantitative methods that provide for such skills. Last but not least, the main reason could be the relation historians have with

time. It has always been difficult to define the moving

frontier between the present time and the recent past in contemporary history (Bedarida, 2003). As instant ephemera data that belong in the very present time, Twitter data precisely underline the difficulty for historians to define their own territory in these temporalities.

Nonetheless, for historians concerned with contemporary historical events - historical in the sense of a conjuncture that reveals a before and an after (Le Goff, 1999) - Twitter provides an original documentation. This documentation is generated in real time; organized around folksonomies - the hashtags - that reveal a direct perception from below; but also in close relation with media coverage. Since the creation of Twitter, a series of hashtagged global events (#IranE-lection, #15M, #Occupy, the 2011 Arab revolutions under various hashtags, the 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris...) update the concept of the monster-event (Nora, 1972) in that they are produced, lived, transmitted and shared in real-time around the globe - or at least in its connected parts. In spite of the known biases, mainly the fact that it is mainly used by relatively young and highly educated adults (Pew Research, 2016), Twitter offers an original kind of non-institutional primary sources (tweets) that can be complementary to the traditional ones the historians use.

This paper is a tentative to document and to provide a first analysis, based on Twitter primary sources, of the Greek referendum of 2015. This event has already obtained a distinctive status in the “before” and the “after” the current crisis marks in Greece's posttransition to democracy history (after 1974) (Avgher-idis et al., 2015), although time and future historians will definitely tell. The paper considers the transnational phase of this event, which followed the Greek vote in favour of the “no” to further austerity measures, included negotiations in the instances of the EU and ended with the agreement of the Greek government to conclude a third harsh austerity programme. Our main research hypothesis is that the imbrication of different hashtags reveals different temporalities that allow researchers to construct regimes of historicity of an event.

Event background

In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, Greece, an EU and Eurozone member, began going through a severe debt crisis that revealed the structural weaknesses of the European monetary union and soon expanded to other weak members (Portugal, Ireland, Cyprus and Spain). Since 2010, the crisis has been managed through the setup of a European financial assistance mechanism in exchange for national programmes of structural reforms and budgetary cuts. Two such programmes were applied to Greece in 2010 and in 2012, plus a debt restructuring, that were monitored by the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund (Papaconstantinou, 2016; Zettelmeyer, 2013). The ongoing crisis provoked profound social and political transformations in the country that brought to power a coalition government led by the radical Left party of Syriza in January 2015. Syriza won the election with the promise to put an end to austerity politics. The party emerged in the context of the post-2008 crisis that shook the countries of Southern Europe and the 2011 Indignant movements, just like Podemos in Spain. Thus, the referendum of July 2015 was far from being significant only in the context of the Greek crisis as an effort of the new government to ameliorate the terms of the Greek programmes, as it put at stake different visions for the EU and its crisis management politics.

Data collection and analysis: method and tools

Tweets using the hashtag #greferendum were collected with NodeXL, an add-in to MS Excel (Smith et al., 2009). The collect was setup once daily from July, 6 to July, 16 2015. The size of the gathered sample was determined by the capacities of the tool, that can collect a maximum of around 20,000 tweets at once. A total of 204,714 tweets were collected of which 139,945 are retweets (68,36 %), 8, 686 responses (4,24 %), 56,086 mere tweets (27,39 %). Minor collects were also launched for other related hashtags (mainly #thisisacoup). Hashtag data were treated with Open-Refine and further explored with R software.

Statistical analysis of textual data (tweets) was made with TXM-Textometry software (Heiden, 2010). The corresponding dataset had been previously encoded following the TEI P5/XML standard with use of the OxGarage service.

Social network analysis and visualizations were

made with Gephi software (Bastian et al., 2009).

Data analysis: first findings

Hashtags

The first part of the research focused on reading the hashtags of the dataset. The hashtag #greferen-dum was used with a variety of hashtags, a total of some 12,000 words (all languages and variants included). A first study focused on the hashtags with a frequency over 99, which gave a total of 158 words. After an elementary typology was established, it was possible to distinguish: geographic names, names of persons, institutions, common names, neologisms that came out of contractions (such as “greferendum”), short phrases that had the function of commentary.

The use of hashtags varied between tag and commentary, or included both functions at once (Bruns and

Burgess, 2011). The big majority of hashtags are in English (112 out of 158). However, in the thirty most frequent hashtags of the dataset, it is possible to find

words in Spanish, Italian, French, and German. By consequence, the linguistic communities that participated in the global interactions were the ones that were the most concerned by the crisis. As for the Greek language, it is not entirely absent as such, but it is mainly present in its greeklish form: Greek words used as hashtags but written in Latin alphabet.

A close reading of the thirty most frequent hashtags with parallel consideration of the associations of words (coocurrencies) shows the tractations that followed the Greek referendum were basically perceived as an intergovernmental affair with the EU actors occupying a secondary position.

An interesting case is the emergence of the hashtag #thisisacoup as an act of solidarity of Spanish militants of Barcelona en Comu towards the Greek government during the Eurogroup and the Euro Summit negotiations (12-13 July). The corresponding dataset is more oriented to the expression of personal opinion than the dissemination of information with hashtags in the form of phrases that function more as commentary than tags (such as #yovoycongrecia).

Domains

The most tweeted domains were twitter.com (7,352 tweets) and theguardian.com (7,217 tweets). In general, it is possible to distinguish two main tendencies. First, the dissemination of information in social media (Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, Facebook ). Second, the dissemination of authoritative information (international media, specialized independent blogs, personal blogs).

Communities detection

The network of the #greferendum corpus is composed by 103,733 nodes and 204,713 relations. After nodes with a degree higher than 10 were isolated (around 4% of the total), 326 communities were detected with Gephi (Louvain method). These communities need to be further explored, however the first findings for the most important of them show that affinities developed around sources of information (media), political and/or intellectual personalities, professional communities, and also linguistic communities. Conclusion

The network and the detected communities seem to have been structured around the dissemination of information but also political affinities and/or mili-tantism. However, further exploration is necessary in order to better understand the network structure.

A quantitative analysis of the tweets, with emphasis on the associations between the hashtags, indicate coexistence of different temporalities within the temporality of the 2015 Greek referendum that are principally related to the Eurozone crisis, the associated national sub-crisis, and post-2008 anti-austerity movements. In this sense, Twitter primary sources offer insights from a transnational scale.

Bibliography

Avgheridis, M., Gazi, E. and Kornetis, K. (eds) (2015).

M£TanoAÎT£uan. H EÀÀafta oto p.£Taixp.io Svo auiivoiv

[Metapolitefsi. Greece Between Two Centuries]. Athens:

Themelio, pp. 15-18 and 335-66.

Bastian, M., Heymann, S., Jacomy, M. (2009). “Gephi: An

Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating

Networks.” International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. San Jose, California: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, pp. 361-62

Bédarida, F. (2003). Histoire, critique et responsabilité.

Brussels: Complexe, p. 64

Bruns, A. and Burgess, J. (2011). “The Use of Twitter

Hashtags in the Formation of Ad Hoc Publics”. Proceedings of the 6th European Consortium for Political Research

(ECPR) General Conference. Reykjavik: University of Iceland. Available at: http://eprints.qut.edu.au/46515/

Clavert, F. (2016). “#ww1. The Great War on Twitter.” Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Krakow: Jagi-ellonian University & Pedagogical University, pp. 46162. Available at: http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/378

Hanneman, R. A. and Riddle, M. (2005). Introduction to social network methods. Riverside, California: University of California, 2005

Heiden, S. (2010). “The TXM Platform: Building OpenSource Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme.” 24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation. Sendai: Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive

Development, Waseda University, pp.389-398. Available at: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-

00549764/document

Le Goff, J. (1999). “Les « retours » dans l'historiographie française actuelle”. Les Cahiers du Centre de Recherches

Historiques,    22. Available at: http://ccrh.re-

vues.org/2322 ; DOI:10.4000/ccrh.2322

Nora, P. (1972). "L'événement monstre". Communications, 18: 162-72

Papaconstantinou, G. (2016). Game Over: The Inside Story of the Greek Crisis. Middleton, Delaware: CreateSpace

Pew Research Center (2016). “Social Media Update 2016”. Available    at:    http: //www.pewinter-

net.org/2016/11/11/social-media-update-2016/

Ruest, N. and Milligan, I. (2016). “An Open Source Strategy for Documenting Events: The Case Study of the 42nd Canadian Federal Election on Twitter.” Code4Lib Journal, 32. Available at http://iournal.code4lib.org/arti-cles/11358

Smith, M., Shneiderman, B., Milic-Frayling, N., Rodrigues, E.M., Barash, V., Dunne, C., Capone, T., Perer, A. and Gleave, E. (2009). “Analyzing (Social Media) Networks with NodeXL.” Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communities and Technologies. New York: ACM, pp. 255-64

Steinhauer, J. (2015). “Preserving Social Media for Future Historians.” Insights. Scholarly Work at the John W. Kluge Center.    Available    at:

https://blogs.loc.gov/kluge/2015/07/preserving-so-cial-media-for-future-historians/

Turgeon, A. (2014). “Comment travailler la mémoire sur Twitter”. Études canadiennes / Canadian Studies, 76. Available at: http://eccs.revues.org/216

Webster, P. (2015), “Will Historians of the Future Be Able to Study Twitter ?”. Webstory, Peter Webster's Blog. Available at: https://peterwebster.me/2015/03/06/fu-ture-historians-and-twitter/

Williams, Sh.-A., Terras, M. and Warwick, C. (2013). “What people study when they study Twitter: Classifying Twitter related academic papers.” Journal of Documentation, 69 (3): 384-410

Zettelmeyer, J. , Trebesch, Ch. and Gulati, M. ( 2013) “The Greek debt restructuring: an autopsy”. Economic Policy, 28 (75): 513-63.

Zimmer, M. (2015). “The Twitter Archive at the Library of Congress: Challenges for information practice and information policy." First Monday 20 (7). Available at: http://firstmonday.org/ois/index.php/fm/arti-cle/view/5619/4653
Introduction
MoEML’s gazetteer of 6500 London place name variants invites the mapping of datasets with a geographical component. As a textual editing project with an interest in print culture, we have long hoped to mobilize our GIS tools and gazetteer data in the service of mapping the English book trade. Our ultimate goal is to publish a layer showing the printing and/or retailing locations of the approximately 25,000 books printed in London between 1475 and 1640. Imprint lines in early modern books include highly granular location data, which has meant that book history has traditionally had an implicit geospatial dimension. A typical imprint line tells us that copies of a folio are “Printed by Elizabeth Purslovv, and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne, at his shop at the south entrance of the Royall Exchange, 1633.” Using the information in such imprint lines, Kathleen Pantzer reorganized the items in the Short Title Catalogue under location headings (Pantzer numbers) in Vol. 3 of the catalogue. Her work facilitates questions about the proximity of one printer or bookseller to another, and thereby questions about affiliations, collaborations, and specialization among a key group of early modern cultural agents.

However, considerable processing of Pantzer’s printed lists is required to visualize or map STC items. Thus far, digital databases like Early English Books Online (EEBO) and the English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC) have captured the imprint line without parsing it into discrete data points, thereby leaving Pantzer’s formidable interpretive work behind as we move into the era of digital historical bibliography. The Database of Early English Playbooks (DEEP) has included and corrected Pantzer numbers, but only for the printed plays, of course. MoEML has attempted to replicate Pantzer’s work via datamining the ESTC. After several unsuccessful NER experiments on ESTC data, we are now mobilizing the curatorial work of DEEP and planning to extend their work beyond playbooks. In this paper, we take imprint lines and geospatial information about the book trade as a case study in mining carefully curated data. We explain the long history of this project as it extends back to Pantzer’s own work creating the strict vocabulary for the print locations of early modern texts. We then discuss how MoEML has been able to put the STC data onto the Agas map, giving a better sense of the spatial relationship of printed early modern texts. In doing so, our argument centers on the necessity for authority names and strict vocabularies. Invoking Mike Poston’s suggestion that we cannot predict the uses of our data, we use our own work on various print and digital databases to show how we can control and scaffold the mining processes to establish links between several pairs of projects in order to mine and ingest data from databases that do not share a common data field with the initial project in the sequence. We conclude with a list of considerations and principles for maximizing future interoperability between literary datasets. Methodology

Although not strictly based in MySQL technology, our methodology borrows from the work of digital humanists like Harvey Quamen and Jon Bath who use MySQL to design relational databases. Indeed, in order to establish valuable connections across diverse datasets, we must first identify what data points these datasets have in common (either directly or indirectly). For example, suppose that Dataset 1 contains raw data for categories A, B, and C and Database 2 contains raw data for categories X, Y, and C. By identifying common data points in category C between databases 1 and 2, it becomes possible to make further connections among categories A, B, X, and Y. From here, we could identify common data points in a third database that contains raw data for categories E, F, and X. We believe that relational databases provide the best platform to capture this “web of relations” in big data. Quamen and Bath describe relational databases as “a series of interconnected spreadsheets. Each spreadsheet-called a table in database lingo—contains information on a real world entity such as People or Books or Songs or Birds or Rock Concerts or Places. Those tables are then tied together via relationships” (Quamen and Bath, 2016; 146-147). By providing a set of stepping stones or crosswalks between diverse datasets, relational databases enable us to build links between allied projects (i.e., ones that share a common data point) and more remote projects (i.e., ones that do not share a common data point) in order to combine expertise and mobilize already curated data in new environments.

Past Work
In 2014, MoEML research assistant Tye Landels-Gruenewald undertook a directed study course with director Janelle Jenstad with the aim of geocoding the English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC) from 1475 through 1666. With the generous assistance of David Eichmann and Blaine Greteman of the Shakeosphere project (based at the University of Iowa), we were able to extract toponyms from transcribed imprints in the ESTC catalogue using natural language processing (NLP) technology. We had intended on using named entity recognition to find matches between the extracted ESTC toponyms and our own gazetteer of early modern London locations; however, the toponyms themselves included too many errors or extra text to make this feasible. As Grover, Givon, Tobin, and Ball note in their white paper on “Named Entity Recognition for Digitised Historical Texts,” there is still much work be done in order to teach named entity recognition software to recognize early modern English (Grover et al., 2008).

Concomitantly, Jenstad was manually compiling a spreadsheet of Pantzer numbers and cross-referencing them to MoEML location identifiers. Pantzer numbers are an alphanumeric string consisting of a letter and an integer. The letter indicates a general location. All the Pantzer numbers beginning with the letter O indicate locations in, near, or “against” the Royal Exchange. The numbers offer more granularity. For example, O.2 designates a location “at the north side of the Royal Exchange.” Key challenges in matching Pantzer numbers with MoEML IDs were (1) different controlled vocabularies, and (2) the different levels of granularity inherent in the projects. Pantzer’s authority names came from the imprint line wording; MoEML authority names are standardized spellings of the official or most common toponym variant (determined by set of critical rules we codified in order to build our gazetteer). Granularity differences emerged from the different interests of the two projects. Book historians map the bookstalls in the Royal Exchange, a location for which MoEML considered as a single entity (ROYA1); MoEML finer granularity emerges elsewhere, in our mapping of conduits, landings, and the many other precise locations that John Stow mentions in his Survey of London. A full crosswalk between Pantzer and MoEML would require the addition of sublocations to MoEML’s placeography, a goal we will likely realize via the development of MoEML microsites for the Royal Exchange and Paul’s Churchyard. In the meantime, we lose some of the granularity of Pantzer’s data by assigning the same MoEML id to two or more Pantzer numbers.

Current Work
These    past-attempts    at establishing

interoperability between datasets illustrate the challenges in attempting to traverse projects that only weakly share common data points. Between MoEML and the ESTC are a number of assumptions, potential errors, and remediations that weaken the link between the two respective datasets. To get to our larger project of mapping the STC, we must take smaller steps.

Our current work relates the playbook data collected by Zachary Lesser and Alan B. Farmer at The Database of Early English Playbooks (DEEP) to our own toponymic data, relying on Pantzer’s vocabulary as a shared data-point. Jenstad’s spreadsheet was transformed into a TEI-conformant XML table, which we ran across DEEP’s openly available XML data. Doing so allows us to integrate DEEP numbers into the site, linking outwards to DEEP’s newly static and predictable URLs.

The DEEP data and Pantzer-MoEML table can be related, but we recognize that this relationship is not immutable. In other words, both datasets are “living” databases insofar as the data can—and should be— curated and edited. Once Jenstad’s spreadsheet was converted into TEI, Landels-Gruenewald was tasked with editing and refining Jenstad’s initial findings to reflect the the growth of MoEML’s gazetteer over the past two years (the MoEML team tagged nearly 2000 more toponyms between July 25, 2014- the last day Jenstad worked on the spreadsheet- and October 31, 2016, from 11,259 to 16,120). Lesser and Farmer have also recognized the need to amend Pantzer’s findings in their data.

Future Work
The experiment with DEEP data has given us a stronger link to the ESTC. Now that we know Pantzer numbers are relatable to MoEML toponym IDs, we can now mobilize the data from Pantzer’s appendix to connect MoEML with the ESTC. We plan to convert Pantzer’s printed aggregations of STC numbers to digital files via OCR. With some curation, we will then have a list of all the STC numbers at each Pantzer number; using our crosswalk between Pantzer numbers and MoEML IDs, we will have a list of STC numbers (and therefore of unique print editions and issues) associated with MoEML locations. From the ESTC, we can obtain a crosswalk relating STC numbers to ESTC numbers. We add the caveat that Pantzer’s locations will need to be corrected as book historians like Lesser and Farmer bring their knowledge to bear on her interpretation of STC data; every crosswalk dependent on her data will need to be refreshed and all the data maps remade. We can display these STC numbers as lists on MoEML location pages, much as Pantzer’s print database does; in the digital environment, we can make dynamic links to DEEP or ESTC open-access pages for the book. We can also map these numbers on our open-layers Agas map platform as a layer of imprints associated with locations, eventually in combination with other tags (such as genre, now being added to EEBO by other scholars) or with other metadata fields harvested from the ESTC. All this data will pivot on the STC-MoEML data crosswalk that we are producing via Pantzer, following DEEP’s initial work.

Distant Future Work
A longer-term goal is to harvest from the ESTC’s XML files the strings of characters transcribed in the imprint line metadata field. Since we will already know from the STC-MoEML crosswalk which location is described in the imprint line, we can sort the imprint lines by locations and do rapid human scans for outliers, which may be a quick way of correcting Pantzer’s data. We can also wrap TEI tags around the toponyms in the imprint lines, thereby increasing the number of toponymic variants in the MoEML gazetteer. The more variants in the gazetteer, the more accurate any future NER or geoparsing of large corpora will be. Given that we already search the EEBO-TCP corpus manually for references to place, we aspire to run our gazetteer against the entire TCP corpus to find and then map toponyms.

Principles and Practices of Curation for Future Mining and Interoperability
Acknowledging that the most interesting future uses of a project’s data have not yet been imagined (Poston, 2011), how can we maximize the opportunities for other people to do things with that data? We suggest the following principles and practices as a starting point for discussion:

1.    Make your data free to the world, preferably in easily downloadable and manipulable formats (in .json or .xml files, for example).

2.    Be clear about how you compiled your data.

3.    If you are aware of limitations in your data, tell the world.

4.    As you correct and refine your data, communicate regularly about data updates.

5.    If you are using other people’s data in your own applications, check back regularly and rebuild the data crosswalks.

6.    Know the weak link(s) in your data crosswalks.

7.    Plan for corrections as other projects improve their data.

8.    Be mindful of the potential for error to compound. Errors in my data, combined with errors in your data, have the potential to lead scholars to false conclusions.

9.    Test your data crosswalks in a variety of ways. Take a small subset of the data and compare NLP results to hand curated results, for example.

Conclusion
Pantzer died in 2005, the year before MoEML was published at a public URL, but we like to think that she would have welcome the digital recreation, correction, curation, and connection of her data. She used the capacities of print to create a map and dense crossreferences. Having “o’erleapt” Pantzer’s curatorial work in building our digital catalogues, we now need to capture her formidable scholarship of interpreting and relating disparate types of data. We began with the goal of relating MoEML toponyms to ESTC numbers, but discovered that Pantzer’s hand-curated data was more reliable than the results of NER and NLP. Our new question then became: “What sort of steps, processes, principles, and practices are necessary in doing this sort of work?” Handcrafted data, in conjunction with computer processing, allows for greater interoperability between projects and begins to achieve the possibilities of the data not conceived by Pantzer.

Bibliography
British Library Board. (n.d.) English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC). Available at: http://estc.bl.uk/ [Accessed 20 March 2017].

Farmer, A. and Lesser, Z., eds. (2007). DEEP: Database of Early English Playbooks. Available at: http://deep.sas.upenn.edu/ [Accessed 20 March 2017].

Farmer, A., and Lesser, Z. (2008). Early Modern Digital Scholarship and DEEP: Database of Early English Playbooks. Literature Compass 5(6), pp. 1139-1153.

Grover, C., Givon, S. Tobin, R., and Ball, J. (2008). Named Entity Recognition for Digitised Historical Texts. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation. Paris: European Language Resources Association, n. pag. Available at:

http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/np/publications/ltg/pa-pers/bopcris-lrec.pdf [Accessed 20 March 2017].

Jenstad, J., ed. The Map of Early Modern London (MoEML). Available at: http://mapoflondon.u vic.ca/ [Accessed 20 March 2017].

Pantzer, K. and Rider, P. (1991). A Short-Title Catalogue of Books Printed in England, Scotland, & Ireland and of English Books Printed Abroad, 1475-1640. Begun by A. Pollard and G. Redgrave. Vol. 3. London: Bibliographical

Society.

Poston, M. (2011). The most interesting use of our data will not be what we think it is. [Blog] The Collation. Available at: http://collation.folger.edu/2011/12/the-most-in-

teresting-use-of-our-data-will-not-be-what-we-think-it-is/ [Accessed 20 March 2017].

ProQuest LLC. (2003-) EEBO: Early English Books Online. Available at: http://eebo.chadwyck.com/home [Accessed 20 March 2017].

Quamen, H., and Bath, J. (2016). Databases. In: C. Crompton, R. Lane, and R. Siemens, eds., Doing Digital Humanities: Practice, Training, Research. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 145-162.

Stow, J. (1598). A Survey of London. London: Printed by John Windet for John Wolfe. STC 23341.
In this paper, the authors introduce a new research collaboration between the Institute for Linguistic Studies (St. Petersburg, Russia) and the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (Vienna, Austria), and exemplify multicultural, crossdisciplinary collaboration on the Ph.D project of Russian manuscript lexicons.

The project is aimed at the online representation of the Russian manuscript lexicons, which reflect a very important stage in Russian lexicography and served as a basis for the printed dictionaries appeared later. This lexicographical genre (called azbukovnik in Russian) appeared in the middle of the 16th century on the base of glossaries, and differ from them by the alphabetical order of the word entries. About 150 manuscripts, mostly from the 17th century, containing the lexicons came into our hands. The tradition of copying manuscript lexicons preserved in the Old Believers communities, and the latest lexicon dates from the beginning of the 20th century. Lexicons were classified by L.S.Kovtun in the 1989, and some additions were made later by K.I.Kovalenko (for details see Kovalenko, 2016).

Obligatory parts of the word entries were head word (or collocation) and explanation. Word entries could also contain inscription of the language source for loan words, lexicographical or literary sources, citations, and information about topic groups (animals, birds, plants, etc.). Sometimes, observations on various linguistic topics were included in the word entries as well. Despite the great importance of these lexicons as Russian language history resources, only small part of them is available for researchers (2 published in Kovtun, 1975 and 1989, and 16 can be found online as a facsimile.

The research idea is formulated collaboratively by the Russian and Austrian scholars, experienced in (traditional) lexicography as well as in digital transformation and research infrastructure development. An architecture to embed the Russian manuscript lexicons into a larger lexical resources infrastructure is developed based on these visions and needs at the Austrian Academy of Sciences. Cornerstones of the architecture are opening up lexical resources and develop as much as possible (due to different types of licensing) freely available resources to the broader public which meet the open science definition.

The established architecture consists of three layers:

1.    The human interface layer: supports data access e.g. list of headwords, geographical map, timeline and other visual approaches etc., which is further developed with every new project. Furthermore, via authentification it offers a private workspace.

2.    The persistent layer: offers a data repository, e.g. triple store, open access repository to sustainable store and interlink data.

3.    The enrichment    layer:    offers

opportunities and tools to interlink data and collaboratively enrich data, e.g. with Wikidata or Europeana.

Ideally, all Russian manuscript lexicons in text format and as facsimiles should be included in the research data environment. As a first step, main representatives of each lexicon type are represented. The plain text is marked up in TEI and is provided with metadata which include standardised form of the head word, information about its origin, foreign etymon for loan words (such as anouToAog for anocrojit) and topic group designation. Word entries contain metadata about lexicographical or literary sources. In case that the facsimile is available, it will be presented along with the text form of the lexicon.

The project is aimed, on one hand, at the representation of the most important lexicons in marked up textual form and as facsimile (if possible). On other hand, the search engine embedded in the infrastructure will make it possible to create enquiries to the data and make selections such as: words according to their origin, literary or lexicographical

sources, words belonging to a particular topic groups and so on. The manuscripts will be semantically exploited and concept-based, interlinked with knowledge resources in the linked open data framework (for more details see Kovalenko et al., 2016). For example, interlinking with Europeana will increase the accessibility and reusability of the data. Thus, the project will make Russian lexicons available and open them for further research and for public curiosity.

The poster will introduce the collaborative approach, the roles of the partners and their contributions, discuss the technical framework based on the research approach and present recent results the first time.

The project is connected to the COST action IS 1305 European Network of electronic Lexicography (ENeL).

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the RGNF (the Russian Humanitarian Scientific Fund), project Ns 1634-01008 “Russian manuscript dictionaries as a cultural phenomenon: the history of the ganre and literary context”.

Bibliography
Kovalenko, K., Wandl-Vogt, E., Schopper, D., Declerck, T.

(2016). “Opening up Russian Manuscript Lexicons for

Cultural Heritage Studies.” In El'Manuscript-2016. Rasyt-inis palikimas ir informacinés technologijos. VI tarptaut-iné moksliné konferencija. Pranesimai ir tezés. Vilnius, 2016 m. rugpjücio 22-28 d. Vilnius, pp. 71-74.

Kovalenko, K. (2016). “On the Classification of the Russian

Manuscript Dictionaries.” In Words across History: Advances in Historical Lexicography and Lexicology. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, pp. 276-286.

Kovtun, L.S. (1975). Leksikografiya v Moskovskoy RusiXVI — nachala VXII v. [Lexicography in the Moscow Rus' in the 16th - Beginning of the 17th Century]. Leningrad: Nauka.

Kovtun, L.S. (1989). Azbukovniki XVI-XVII vv. (starshaya raznovidnost) [Azbukovniki of the 16th and 17th Centuries (the Earliest Edition)]. Leningrad: Nauka.
Introduction
The Willa Cather Archive (WCA) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) is currently working on transcription and annotation of 1500 letters to be released in 2018. As editors will write several thousand annotations, the workflow logistics are complicated. Anno-

tonia ( a portmanteau of "annotation" and My Antonia, a

1918 Willa Cather novel) is a solution developed within the Center for Digital Research in Humanities (CDRH)

that allows editors to write annotations directly on letters in a browser and insert those annotations into

Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) XML files. Multiple editors review annotations, track letters' annotation statuses, and generate a new TEI file incorporating the annotations, avoiding having to manually edit each file. Annotonia utilizes both pre-existing, customized open source software and new software developed for this project. This paper describes the difficulties faced, the workflow of Annotonia, and its prospects for future annotation work.

The challenge
The Complete Letters of Willa Cather is a National Endowment for the Humanities-funded project to publish a digital, fully annotated edition of the letters of Willa Cather, a 20th century American novelist. The project includes student editorial assistants, staff, and faculty both at UNL and working remotely. Because of differences in locale, technical abilities, and Cather-re-lated expertise, a solution was sought for drafting, revising, and encoding letter-specific annotations that would fit the skillsets of all collaborators.

The WCA has two types of annotations: authority files and letter-specific information. Editors skilled with TEI XML curate and encode people, places, and works shared across the corpus into authority files. Letter-specific annotations are more challenging to manage as they are written by a wider group of scholars, many unfamiliar with encoding XML. Editors previously used a cumbersome process of pasting documents into Word files, sharing them for annotation, and laboriously copying received annotations back into the XML. This tedious process introduced errors and was deemed unsustainable for the large number of anticipated letter-specific annotations.

With these difficulties in mind, WCA editors collaborated with CDRH developers to envision tools that would allow viewing the content of letters with all associated materials; writing letter-specific annotations that might include images, links, or other materials; and exporting finalized versions of these annotations as TEI XML. Editors also identified the need to view annotations that had already been written so information contained in them would not be repeated.

Project requirements
• Display letters via HTML with existing controlled vocabulary annotations for people, places, and works.

• Provide an interface where editors can browse, edit, approve, and flag annotations.

• Export annotations to their preservation format, TEI P5 XML.

• Insert <ref> tags into the TEI XML corresponding to ID's in the annotation file above.

Existing software review
Before building Annotonia, we looked at existing technologies and methods for annotating HTML. Web-based annotation is not a new concept, by any means. The value of annotating HTML has long been recognized for its collaborative strengths, allowing users to identify errors, review, comment on, and bookmark documents (W3C Digital Publishing Interest Group, 2014). The W3C currently has a Web Annotation Working Group dedicated to creating specifications for "interoperable, sharable, distributed Web annotation architecture" (W3C Web Annotation Working Group, 2017; Web Annotation Data Model, 2017).

Most annotation software reviewed was not suitable for the project. Many existing solutions (such as Annotation Studio, Recogito2, and Editor's Notes) did not allow in place annotation, instead requiring one to upload documents to their system. This would strip out the existing annotations, making work more difficult for editors. Some (such as PundIT) were not fully open source. Others (Such as Hypothes.is) were developed for public input and would require stripping out many features for our needs. Other problems encountered included installation roadblocks, lack of maintenance, and poor documentation. Importantly, our requirement of exporting annotations and embedding them into TEI documents was not supported by any existing systems.

With these considerations, programmers chose to work with Annotator and its back end complement, Annotator Store, because the software interacts through an API and uses XPaths for pinpointing annotations' locations (Open Knowledge Foundation, 2016a; 2016b). Annotator proved to be easy to install and extend with community plugins, such as rich text editing, keyword tagging, and filtering. Annotator Store's use of Elasticsearch reinforced the decision to use it, as Elasticsearch is widely used and receives generous community development and support. Annotator deals only with the annotation part of the requirement and not categorizing or workflow, which had to be developed in-house.

Annotonia: the solution
The first step was simply to display the letters' TEI XML in a browser in a way that minimally rearranged the structure of the documents. TEI Boilerplate uses browser XSLT capabilities to create an HTML/TEI hybrid representation of TEI documents with small alterations for links, images, and other elements (Walsh et al. 2013). Boilerplate was therefore useful for constructing HTML from documents, while allowing for TEI files to be added and removed quickly from the site structure and workflow.


Figure 1: The Annotonia workflow for a single batch of letters


In order to be able to annotate the documents displayed using TEI Boilerplate, programmers embedded Annotator in the web page and modified it so it had suitable options for the WCA editors. These included stripping out some of the text editing capabilities and adding workflow-specific options.

well pleased in my busine advertise or

Or One has Do we need thjs annotation? The biographical annotations for both

T lav rlnuun m of McClung’s mentioned in this sentence reference the Squirrel i Idy uown oi Hj|| House and when she Hved there easy enough

done except

[The McClung home at 1180 Murray Hill Road in Pittsburgh, PA, was Cather's residence during her last five years in the city (1901-1906) and a frequent retreat thereafter.


to think. Only ? do not e for a living y family any if . It would be )t no work death and life. The loss of fight it out, but


Needs Correction Needs Annotation Draft Complete


© Cancel


Isabelle's maxv*6v a home like that leaves one pretty lonely and miserable. I can


Figure 2: An example of creating and categorizing an annotation with Annotonia

Annotator does not include an interface for searching, browsing, and editing all of the annotations from the Annotator Store. PHP pages were written to provide these capabilities.


Figure 3: Annotation review page including an annotation with an image and a referenced annotation

The last requirement for Annotonia was a conversion script that inserts annotation references into TEI documents while exporting an authority file containing the annotations. The conversion script takes a subset of XML files, queries the Annotator Store API, adds tags for annotations based on XPaths, and outputs a

list of possibly incorrect insertions that require review.

Use and extension
The collection of new scripts and open source software comprising Annotonia has been able to handle the workflow requirements of the WCA's letter annotations, though there is room for improvement. The areas that require the most attention are the rendering of TEI in HTML and the scripted editing of TEI files. TEI Boilerplate necessarily alters the TEI in order to mimic the behavior of HTML links and images, which means that occasionally the location of an annotation in the HTML view is difficult to match up programmatically due to differing XPaths.

A new alternative to Boilerplate, CETEIcean, which promises to preserve “the full structure and information from your TEI data model," may be one possibility to address this problem (Cayless and Viglianti, 2016). Programmers would need to evaluate how easily it can be incorporated into the Annotonia workflow, as well as the ability to load the Annotator JavaScript libraries in the page.

Some aspects of the Annotonia code base are tailored for use only with TEI Boilerplate display and WCA file naming conventions. These functions would have to be generalized to make Annotonia easier to integrate with other tools and projects. Meanwhile, the

Annotator community continues to improve the software. A new version is forthcoming which includes modifications to enhance the experience of creating, saving, and updating the highlighting of HTML content. When this version of Annotator is released, it may require some reworking of existing customizations, but updating Annotonia to incorporate its new features will support a broader variety of projects.

Reception
The WCA began using Annotonia in September 2016. Guidelines and instructional videos demonstrating Annotonia's functions have alleviated difficulties from the varying technical skills of editors. Although still in the beginning stages of annotating individual letters, the tool works well for collaborating on, drafting, and revising annotations. Editors have estimated that each annotation automatically handled saves around 5 minutes of time, so the potential time savings is several months of work. Through an iterative process, improvements have been added as users uncover inefficiencies and provide feedback. By 2018, several thousand annotations will be created with Annotonia and published with the complete letters on the WCA. Further applications

A frequent difficulty for digital archival projects is efficiently proofreading and annotating texts. In the CDRH, these workflows on other projects resemble the WCA's old process of marking up Word documents, or, worse yet, printing out entire websites and annotating by hand. Designing solutions by combining open source software with well documented, configurable scripts and workflows has proven to be effective in providing flexibility to cover a variety of needs. As we apply this method to extending and generalizing An-notonia for other projects like the Walt Whitman Archive and The William F. Cody Archive, we will further refine deployment and documentation.

The PHP and conversion components of Annotonia have been published (“Annotonia Status” and “Annotonia Converter”, and the customized pieces of existing software will be published soon. Full publication of Annotonia will involve further documentation and testing. It is the hope of the Annotonia team that this tool will not only prove to be useful internally, but will provide inspiration to other text based editions seeking to automate annotation processes.

Bibliography
Cayless, H. A. and Viglianti, R. (2016). “TEIC/CETEIcean.” GitHub. https://github.com/TEIC/CETEIcean (accessed 19 October 2016).

Open Knowledge Foundation (2016a). “Annotator - Annotating the Web.” http://annotatorjs.org/ (accessed 11 October 2016).

Open Knowledge Foundation (2016b). “Annotator-Store.” GitHub. https://github.com/openannotation/annotator-store (accessed 11 October 2016).

W3C Digital Publishing Interest Group and Open Annotation Community Group (2014). “Annotation Use Cases.” http://www.openannotation.org/usecases.html (accessed March 3, 2014).

W3C Web Annotation Working Group (2017). “Web Annotation Data Model.” https://www.w3.org/TR/annota-tion-model/ (accessed February 23, 2017).

W3C Web Annotation Working Group (2016). “W3C Web Annotation Working Group.” https://www.w3.org/an-notation/ (accessed October 11, 2016).

Walsh, J., Simpson, G., and Moaddeli, S. (2016) “TEI Boilerplate.” http://dcl.ils.indiana.edu/teibp/ (accessed 19 October 2016).

Willa Cather Archive. “Github Organization.” GitHub. https://github.com/Willa-Cather-Archive (accessed 19 October 2016).
Introduction
By publishing his “Graphische Litteratur-Tafel”

[Graphic Literature Table] in 1890, German writer

Cäsar Flaischlen (1864-1920) aimed to portray the influences of foreign literatures on the development of German literature. Flaischlen produced a 58x86.5-cm poster, depicting German Literature as a stream with feeder rivers from mainly other European (national) literatures. His chart covers the development of German literature from its beginnings with various sources, forming two parallel rivers subsumed under the concepts of “Volkspoesie” [folk poetry] and “Kunstpoesie” [artistic poetry], intertwining and finally converging into one broad stream of German literature. The broadening river reaches from the beginnings of German literature at around 750 to Flaisch-len's present, the 1890s.

Cäsar Flaischlen was not much of a practising literary scholar, nor an academic. After completing a dissertation around the same time as he published his “Graphische Litteratur-Tafel”, he left academia to continue writing (dialect) poetry, novels and plays, while working as an editor for arts and literary magazines.

The flowchart, although being a flamboyantly beautiful one, is not as novel and unique, as one might think: It follows a long tradition of visualising developments along the axis of time (cf. Rosenberg and Grafton, 2010) and follows the patterns of the highly influential graphical visualisation of history, “Strom der Zeiten”, published in 1804 by Austrian historiographer Friedrich Strass.

Being a representative of positive thinking of his time, Flaischlen builds on the time-stream metaphor, but strives to connect this idea with the exact sciences. Although he does not mention the sources used for compiling his chart, this early visualisation of literary history relies on some kind of data, even if, in his 8-column preface, Flaischlen de-emphasises the connection between quantitative evidence and visualisation: For example, he points at the fact that the breadth of the stream was not calculated mathematically (“nicht mathematisch berechnet”), but nonetheless, there seems to be a connection between the selection and especially placement and typographical styling of influencing and influenced authors' names on the chart.

As this example illustrates, the information density of the chart is enormously high:

Flaischlen includes names of authors, texts, literary groups and schools and uses typography (font, font size, font decoration, colour), symbols (circles in various sizes, Roman and Latin numerals), shading of creeks and rivers and language-information to visualise the information.

Our digital edition of Cäsar Flaischlen's “Graphische Litteratur-Tafel” aims to make digitally available the information deeply encoded in the table. Extracted data points are presented in two shapes: on an easily navigable website and in a machine-readable version.

For this reason, the preface was OCRed and encoded in XML according to the TEI guidelines. The flowchart was scanned and transcribed following the recommendations on “Advanced Uses of <surface> and <zone>” (cf. TEI guidelines) to also record spatial information. Coordinates of authors and texts were calculated by help of the GIMP ImageMap editor, then linked to corresponding authority files (VIAF, GND, and Wikidata). The cartographic inventory of the map is marked-up and made searchable by using CSS as a descriptive language for capturing the rendering within TEI @style attributes.

The TEI data is provided via a GitHub repository and processed via XSLT for displaying the flowchart as a web page.

The interface combines the three separate sections of Flaischlen's map and allows for searches via an index. For presentation on the web, the sections were stitched and put together into one giant river. In an analogue format, the river would be almost three meters long, now one can scroll seamlessly down and up the

river online. A prototype of the edition is available on

the project website.

Flaischlen's map is not only an inspiring prototype

for contemporary attempts to visualise data of literary history with “graphs, maps and trees” (Moretti, 2007), but also challenges the development and encoding of older graphical representations of (literary) history on a methodological level.

Flaischlen's 1890 visualisation “Graphische Litter-atur-Tafel” deserves further recognition and our online edition could serve as a test case for other - so far unknown and/or not edited - flowcharts of literary history.

Bibliography
Börner, I., Fischer, F., Hechtl, A. and Trilcke, P. (eds.)

(2016). Cäsar Flaischlen's 'Graphische Litteratur-Tafel'. A Digital Edition. (Version: Alpha, October

2016). Available at: http://litteratur-tafel.weltlitera-tur.net.

Flaischlen, C. (1890). Graphische Litteratur-Tafel. Die deutsche Litteratur und der Einfluß fremder Littera-turen auf ihren Verlauf vom Beginn der schriftlichen Ueberlieferung an bis heute in graphischer Darstellung. Berlin: Behr's Verlag.

Moretti, F. (2007). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. London and New York: Verso.

Rosenberg, D. and Grafton, A. (2010). Cartographies of Time. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.

Strass, F. (1803). Der Strom Der Zeiten. [online]. Available at: http://www.davidrum-sey.com/luna/servlet/detail/RUM-

SEY~8~1~281767~90054624.

TEI Consortium (2016). TEI P5 - Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.0.0. Available at: http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html.
Introduction

The Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative are generally recognised in the digital humanities as important and foundational standards for many types of research in the field. The Guidelines of the TEI are gen-eralistic, seeking to enable the largest possible user base encoding digital texts for a wide range of purposes. Working on many TEI-based projects, teaching TEI workshops, and advising researchers on data modelling needs, I have encountered many misunderstandings about the TEI. Indeed, one keynote lecture (not at DH) once told me that “the problem with the TEI is it has too many tags and there is no way to change it”. Inspired by myths like this, this paper will detail and expose common misconceptions about the TEI -- all of which have been espoused to me at some point -- but will concentrate on the more technical myths in a hope to increase knowledge about the TEI while dispelling some misconceptions along the way. Some of those to be investigated include:

“The TEI is too big (or complicated)”
While there is some truth to this -- the TEI Guidelines are numerous, consisting of around 565 elements -- no single project needs them all. Indeed, the TEI has mechanisms for customisation and recommends doing so to any project. The Guidelines themselves are modular and not all chapters will be appropriate or necessary to read for all projects.

“There is no way to change the TEI”
Although I have heard even well-respected keynote lecturers (not at DH) espouse this belief, it is patently and demonstrably false. This myth arises from unfamiliarity with the fact that the TEI is a framework entirely based on the concepts of adaptability and modification. Not only does the TEI have a sophisticated literate programming methodology to create meta-schemas which subset, constrain, and extend the vocabulary for any individual encoding project, but it also provides a variety of tools to enable users to do so.

“The TEI is too small (or doesn't have
<my:SpecialElement>)”
While seemingly the opposite of #1, a frequent complaint made by those unfamiliar with the customization mechanisms of the TEI is that it does not have the special element needed for a particuar encoding project. There is, naturally, a reluctance to add new elements to one's customization -- and getting more generalized solutions into the TEI Guidelines themselves is indeed a better solution -- however, many new elements are added to the Guidelines through community development across disciplines. Any user is free to add <my:SpecialElement> but generally it is a better idea to get a number of individuals or a special interest group to agree a more detailed proposal.

“The TEI is XML (and XML is broken or dead)’’
This idea is usually espoused by those who want to support some other, newer, format. Leaving aside the need some feel to denigrate one format in order to support another, XML is a widely supported format which will be with us for many years to come. However, TEI is not XML -- it is currently serialized as such, but previously it has been serialized as SGML, and in the future it may be expressed in another format(s). While there is currently no other widely adopted format which meets the many and varied needs of the TEI's central format, this does not mean that the TEI cannot be used with many other formats (as input, output, integrated with it).

“XML (and thus TEI) can't handle overlapping hierarchies”
Many people have discussed their concerns of overlapping hierarchies in XML, and while it is true that there are limitations in expressing multiple hierarchies in XML, it also has solutions built into it, such as empty elements to represent one or more alternative hierarchies. Primarily, this misunderstanding is also based on the assumption that all markup is embedded markup. The TEI Guidelines include a chapter on representing non-hierarchical structures, and the TEI framework has many features for representing fragmented element structures, out-of-line and stand-off markup, and the association of additional annotation through URI-based pointing. In addition, many DH text encoding projects only require two hierarchies (e.g. intellectual vs physical representations) and the TEI provides transformation solutions to alternate between these.

“You cant do stand-off markup in XML (or TE)’’
This myth shows a misunderstanding of both XML and the TEI. The former is a language for markup vocabularies and puts no restriction on whether that markup is embedded, out-of-line, or entirely stand-off. The TEI Guidelines provide a number of solutions entirely geared to stand-off markup, and its community is working towards introducing more features in this area. The combination of fine-grained markup, URI-based pointing and/or XPointer schemes, and descriptive markup designed to function this way, means that stand-off markup is supported in the TEI.

“You    can't    get    from    TEI    to
$myPreferredFormat"
One of the benefits of XML is that it is easily processable to other formats. The TEI Consortium provides around 40 conversions to/from other formats, including, for example: bibtex, cocoa, csv, docbook, docx, dtd, epub, html(5), xsl-fo, json, InDesign, latex, markdown, mediawiki, nlm, odd, pdf, rdf, relaxng, slides, txt, wordpress, xlsx, xsd, and many more. There exist RESTful web services like OxGarage which can provide a pipeline for these and other conversions.

“There are no tools that understand the TEI”
This is false -- thousands of TEI projects have created many tools which process, mine, convert, and visualize TEI data. While the TEI Wiki lists some of these, one of the problems is that projects do not necessarily advertise and openly share their tools. Much of the software developed by projects is also bespoke and specific -- they are not necessarily generalisable to other projects' needs. There are also many sophisticated encoding activities (such as stand-off markup) for which there are few general tools, since these are usually implemented in project-specific methods.

“If you create a TEI-based digital edition you must learn other $tech”
While historically it has been the case that to create TEI-based digital editions one must learn, or employ those who know, various technologies, this is increasingly less of an issue. Out of the box software like eXist-db's TEI Publisher and TEI Boilerplate mean researchers are able to publish digital editions for themselves.

Moreover, the TEI has introduced implementation-agnostic methods for documentation of intended processing models in a TEI customization. This can then be used to generate project-specific code based on changes to the customization, as in the case of the eX-ist-db implementation of the TEI processing model. This new aspect of the TEI enables developers to write more generalized software which relies on the TEI ODD customization file for information on the processing model.

“TEI is only for Anglo/Western works"
There is much about the TEI Guidelines that is based in Anglo and Western European textual traditions, but the Guidelines also make an effort to enable use in other languages and cultures. The definitions and glosses of elements (etc.) can be viewed in a number of languages (English, German, Spanish, French, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Chinese). There is an entire internationalization framework built into the TEI Guidelines and the TEI Customization language, which means that the schemas can routinely display these internationalized definitions in editors and those creating customisations can have definitions, examples, and attribute value descriptions, in any Unicode-expressable language.

“Interoperability is impossible with the TEI”
Interoperability is a good and laudable goal, but the potential richness of TEI encoding for research and analysis purposes should not be sacrificed for this (depending on the point of the initial encoding project). While interoperability does suffer in a framework that is customizable and extendable (which are necessary for such a generalized system), it is certainly possible. Usually it is a process of crosswalks or some scripted transformation to a lowest common denominator that involves someone knowing both resources. The creation of sub-communities (such as the TEI subset EpiDoc), which agree encoding standards that are tighter than the necessarily general and flexible TEI, can improve this significantly.

“The TEI is only for digital edition(s)"
The TEI may be used for many forms of output, for example camera-ready copy. The primary mistake here is to assume a one-to-one relationship between TEI encoded files and a single particular output. If significant encoding has taken place, a wide variety of outputs are possible. If the format is used to its full potential, many aspects of an edition can be created, as

well as supplementary files, indices, introductory material, interactive data visualizations, and more. The use of the TEI can also be used outside of editionbuilding, for the creation of linguistic corpora, digital facsimiles, and other resources.

Summary

While these are only some of the myths surrounding the TEI, discussing these will be beneficial to the DH audience, and will hopefully lead potential TEI users to question other “received wisdom” about the Guidelines.
Introduction
This paper presents the prototype of a “Database of Belarusian Literary Periodicals” developed at the University of Oldenburg, Germany. The project addresses the hitherto under-researched area of Belarusian literature from a field theoretical perspective (Bourdieu, 2002) in combination with a quantitative approach to Literary History (Moretti, 2005).

Belarusian Literature
The case of Belarusian literature is interesting in particular because it constitutes a highly unstable literary field. Due to historical reasons the formation of the literary field and the rise of a literary market dates back only to the beginning of the 20th century. During the first half of the 1920s the establishment of proletarian society in Soviet Belarus entailed the promotion of Belarusian language and literature, which were then consolidated by specific institutions. But already from the second half of the 1920s, cultural politics changed

and literary life came under increasing ideological

control ending in the infamous ‘cleansings’ ("cistki”) of

the 1930s.

Literary Periodicals
Research on the formation of literary markets and fields has illustrated the crucial role of literary periodicals (Bourdieu, 2002; van Rees, 2012). We consider these magazines media that allows us to reconstruct and to analyze the specific structure and internal development of the Belarusian literary field. They allow us to trace the configurations of authors within groups and magazines, the trajectories of single authors and/or literary groups in the field, the differentiation of the literary genre system, the formation of literary criticism and so forth.

The Database
The prototype of the database includes the four most important Belarusian literary periodicals published between 1922 and 1939: Maladnjak, Polymja, Uzvissa and Kalos'se (cf. Kohler, 2016). For the time being, we focus on capturing these periodicals’ tables of contents, assuming that a systematic analysis of literary periodicals does not necessarily require the literary texts themselves but that the corresponding ‘paratexts’ suffice (cf. Genette, 1989).

The database currently comprises the tables of contents of 252 issues that were transcribed manually and were encoded according to the TEI-Guidelines. The database itself is set up as an application for the opensource XML database eXistdb. An extensive range of search queries can be performed on the corpus, which enables users to identify quantitative characteristics of the periodicals and its contributing authors. It allows for the export of the data as a dynamic network graph in the gefx-format (Gephi).

Pilot study: corpus, questions, and method
For the pilot study we specifically focus a) on the period 1922-1932 (the year 1932 marks the end of literary diversity: groups and magazines dissolved and fused into the ‘one’ Writers’ Association with its official periodical Polymja), and b) on the three periodicals in Soviet Belarus (Kalos'se was established only in 1934 and was published in the Polish part of the country). Taking into account this focus, the pilot study deals with a complete corpus of 189 issues.

We focused on the analysis of c) authors’ trajectories (fluctuations between periodicals), including the question of "splinter groups’ trajectories” and of d) hi-erarchization of authors. These questions are interlinked with the questions, e) whether an author’s movement from one periodical to another brings an increase of his/her publication frequency, and how the constellation of authors changed in relation to such movements.

Step 1: Identification of authors: Problems we had to overcome in this respect were variations in spelling and the frequent use of acronyms and pseudonyms. The use of pseudonyms is in some cases not only linked to the periodical (some authors published in one magazine

using their real name and under pseudonyms in the others) but also to the author's role (e.g. writer vs. critic/reviewer).

Step 2: Identified authors were linked to a <person> record, where additional information on each identified author is stored. If available, these entries were linked to authority files (VIAF). As the coverage of Belarusian authors in the relevant authority files is rather incomplete, the authors were also linked to the corresponding Wikidata entries, to provide for an external unique identifier.

Step 3 (question ‘d'): We identified frequently published authors and compared their rankings in the periodicals at several points in time but also focused on literary reviews and translations.

Step 4 (questions ‘c', ‘e', ‘f'): We observed a relatively high fluctuation of authors and splinter groups between the periodicals, including also the authors that published most frequently. In analyzing the movements of authors, it was possible to complement hitherto lacking insights and background knowledge about the journals' interconnectedness.

Bibliography
Bourdieu, P. (2002). The Rules of Art: Genesis and Structure of the Literary Field. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Genette, G. (1989). Paratexte. Frankfurt a. Main.

Kohler, G.-B. (2016). “‘Success' and ‘Failure' of Literary Collaboration between Authors in Belarus in the 1920s.” In Butler, M., Hausman, A. and Kirchhofer, A. (eds), Precarious Alliances. Cultures of Participation in Print and

Other Media. transcript, pp. 207-40.

Moretti, F. (2005). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. London - New York: Verso.

Van Rees, K. (2012). “Field, Capital and Habitus. A Relational Approach to ‘Small' Literatures.” In Kohler, G.-B., Navumenka, P. and Grüttemeier, R. (eds), Kleinheit als

Spezifik. Beiträge zu einer feldtheoretischen Analyse der belarussischen Literatur im Kontext ‘kleiner' slavischer Literaturen. Oldenburg, pp. 5-56.
Introduction
Studies on user experience in the digital medium are often related to Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and the construction of user models or the performance of usability tests in order to support design and evaluation of digital artefacts. User modelling research has mainly focused on the construction of “usable” and “useful” tools providing the users with “experiences fitting their specific background knowledge and objectives” (Fischer, 2001: 65). A variety of characteristics have been used to inform such models, from demographic information (age, gender, native language) or relevant experience (novice, advanced, expert), to interests, goals and plans (general interest categories, task-related objectives/sequences of actions) or contextual information (location, time, physical environment) (Sosnovsky and Dicheva, 2010: 3334). Many of the approaches merge cognitive science and artificial intelligence (Webb et al., 2001; Biswas and Robinson, 2010; Mohamad and Kouroupetroglou, 2013), whilst usability testing, as a technique from user-centred design, often involves the iterative refinement of a prototype based on user's feedback (Massanari, 2010). Usability studies also evaluate how a tool is actually used (Brown and Hocutt, 2015) exploring constructs such as ease of use and learnability. Other researches, from the fields of philosophy of technology or digital hermeneutics, go beyond the usefulness and usability aspects of the technology, trying to address questions related to the “human, social, cultural, ethical, and political implications of those technologies” (Fallman, 2007: 296) or to the “self-interpretation of human beings” (Capurro, 2010: 10) in the light of the code. Further directions of study propose a re-orientation of the HCI as “an aesthetic field” (Ber-telsen and Pold, 2004: 23) or a cultural perspective on the “reflexive relationship between user and medium” as a “remediation” of the self (Bolter and Grusin, 2000: 230), considered as “humanistic HCI” (Bardzell and Bardzell, 2016).

This article tries to bridge the fields of HCI and Digital Humanities (DH), where HCI techniques are used to evaluate tools developed in DH projects and the results of this evaluation are analysed via DH methods, with the intention of potential development inspired by the literary theory of aesthetic response (Iser, 1980). The paper elaborates on previous work (Ar-maselu and Jones, 2016) and presents two case studies of usability tests conducted within the framework of interface and game design for digital historical editions and digital cultural heritage (Section 2). Section 3 describes the type of analysis applied to users' responses, whereby we propose a typology of users and interpretation of users' experience, followed by conclusions and future work (Section 4).

Two case studies
The first case refers to the design and implementation of an XML-TEI-based platform (Transviewer) allowing the exploration of digital editions of historical documents through features for page-by-page navigation, side-by-side view (facsimile/transcription), freetext and named entities search. The usability tests inspired by previous studies (Nielsen, 2000; Jones and Weber, 2012) involved a user-group of 8 researchers in history, political science and linguistics, 4 males and 4 females, aged 25-64. They had to complete 17 tasks using the prototype and to fill-in a USE-based questionnaire (Lund, 2001). During the experiments, the users were asked to think-aloud and the audio and screen interactions were recorded. The common language was English, although none of the participants was a native speaker.

The second case uses data collected during three sessions of gameplay conducted as part of a requirements gathering and co-design process for Pilot 4 of

the H2020 Crosscult project. Players were asked to play a board game and contribute reflections as they encountered historical objects pinned to various locations in the city (the Board was derived from a map of Luxembourg City). The first session contained 6 players (5 females, 1 male), the second 5 players (all female) and the third 5 players (4 males, 1 female). All players, aged 25 to 50, worked in a research environment, and none of the participants used English as his/her mother tongue. In the first session, players had 10 roles of the dice to score as many points as possible in successive rounds, the game was shortened so players had to score the most points and reach the end of a score board first.

Analysing user response
For both cases, the users' responses from the questionnaires were transcribed, when not already in electronic form. Partial transcription of the think-aloud audio recordings for the first case was performed (reflections on the experience, improvement suggestions, expressions of disorientation or frustration); the transcription of the second case video-audio recordings is not yet completed, therefore not included in the study. The transcribed snapshots were pre-processed (TXT,

XML, R) according to the formats required by the analysis phase. Three types of software were used: Textex-ture - a tool for representing the text as a network (Paranyushkin, 2011); TXM - a statistical tool for corpus analysis; TheySay - a sentiment analysis package.

The first experiment with Textexture drew attention to noteworthy connections between different clusters of meaning related to users' experience as expressed in their responses. Figure 1 presents two examples: the first highlights how the notion of trust is related to the side-by-side view feature of the interface, as allowing the users to compare the transcription with the scanned original and make sure it can be trusted (left); the second illustrates the linking of the sub-networks for player (reflection, discussion, exchange, opinion), place (location, malta, luxembourg) and story (card, map, point), which reveals the relations, at a conceptual level, between the significant features and interactions of the game.


Figure 1.Textexture

TXM allowed contrasting the specificities scores (Lafon, 1980) corresponding to each user, in terms of overuse/deficit of words usage, as compared to the rest of the corpus. Table 1 shows the positive/negative specificities diagrams based on these measures for three groups of linguistic features. The scores above/under a banality threshold (+/-2.0) indicate highest specificity for responses from particular types of respondents, which allowed us to make hypotheses about a potential “typology” of users that can be described within both case studies.


Table 1. TXM: User-response specificities

For instance, some users are characterised by an overuse of I, my or you, your, others by an alternation of them, which can create the impression of an “immersive”, “distant” or “versatile” point of view: “Which I found strange. Yes, I have not yet used the big arrow buttons”, “if you scroll, you have to scroll both” (Transviewer); “prefer to elaborate my own answer, without influence“, “I think it triggers your own thinking process” (Crosscult). Similarly, the use of conditionals, negations and uncertainty adverbs are suggestive of a “sceptical” user, in contrast to experiences described with appreciative adjectives and superlatives indicative of an “enthusiastic” standpoint.

After exploring the results in TXM and identifying possible types of users, we analysed the responses via TheySay (Table 2).

Transviewer (think aloud transcription)

Crosscult (questionnaire answers)

Immersed

Positive (0.446, 0.129, 0.425, 2163)

Positive (0.533, 0.082, 0.385, 253)

Sceptical

Positive (0.451, 0.163, 0.386, 2591)

Positive (0.646, 0.097,0.256, 206)

Enthusiastic

Positive (0.596, 0.119, 0.286, 733)

Positive (0.721, 0.121,0.158, 261)

Table 2.TheySay: overall and polarity scores (positive, neutral, negative, word count)

The results enabled us to explore differences in sentiment between the types of users. For example, the “enthusiastic” user from both experiments scores highly with respect to the measure of positive polarity, whilst the sceptical user scores are a bit lower but, interestingly enough, higher than the immersed user's.

It was also observed that sometimes, irrespective the type of user, sentences with high score for humour may actually point to interaction-related aspects like disorientation, confusion, contrariety: “I was ... where was I?”, “I clicked on people but I don't know what happened” (scores 0.996 and 1, Transviewer); “I've never been in the flow because I can't focus on other gamers”, “didn't use any, but I don't think I would“ (scores 0.996 and 1, Crosscult).

Conclusion and future work
The paper describes two case studies in interface and game design dealing with the application of textual analysis to user-response via three systems, for visualisation of the text as a network (Textexture), corpus analysis (TXM), and sentiment analysis (TheySay). The research is still in progress and more experiments with new cases are expected to further support, test and validate the proposed user typologies and interpretation modalities, which might in the future inform humanistic interface design and approaching of user models. In addition, we expect to explore the theoretical matters, assuming that this kind of analysis, beyond its usability-oriented value, may inspire new paths of reflection on user's self-projection in the digital space, at the intersection of digital hermeneutics, digital aesthetics, and the theory of literary response.

Bibliography
Armaselu, F., Jones, C.E. (2016). “Towards a Digital Hermeneutics? Interpreting the User's Response to a Visualisation Platform for Historical Documents.” DHBenelux

2016: Conference Abstracts, Belval, Luxembourg.

http://www.dhbenelux.org/wp-content/up-

loads/2016/05/106 Armaselu-Jones FinalAb-

stract DHBenelux long.pdf.

Bardzell, J., Bardzell, S. (2016). Humanistic HCI. interactions 23,    2 (February 2016),    20-29.

DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2888576. http://inter-actions.acm.org/archive/view/march-april-2016/hu-

manistic-hci.

Bertelsen, O.W., Pold, S. (2004). “Criticism as an approach to interface aesthetics.” In NordiCHI '04, October 23-27,

2004 Tampere, Finland, ACM 1-58113-857-1/04/10, pp.

23-32.    http://www.interactionde-

sign.us/courses/taught/2010 AD590/pdfs/Bertel-

sen 2004.pdf.

Biswas, P., Robinson, P. (2010). “A brief survey on user

modelling in HCI.” In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction (IHCI) 2010. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~pr10/publica-tions/ihci10.pdf.

Bolter, J.D., Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation: Understanding the New Media, The MIT Press, 1999, paperback edition 2000.

Brown, M.E., Hocutt, D.L. (2015). “Learning to Use, Useful for Learning: A Usability Study of Google Apps for Education.” JUS, Journal of Usability Studies, Vol. 10, Issue 4, August 2015, pp. 160-181. http://uxpajournal.org/usa-bility-study-google-apps-education/.

Capurro, R. (2010). “Digital Hermeneutics: An Outline.” In AI &    Society,    2010,    35    (1),    35-42.

http://www.capurro.de/digitalhermeneutics.html.

Fallman, D. (2007). “Persuade Into What? Why HumanComputer Interaction Needs a Philosophy of Technology.” In Persuasive 2007. Yvonne de Kort et al. (Eds.). Heidelberg, Springer, pp. 295-306.

Fischer, G. (2001). “User Modeling in Human-Computer Interaction.” In User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 11: 65.doi:10.1023/A:1011145532042, pp 65-86. http://link.springer.com/arti-

cle/10.1023/A:1011145532042.

Iser, W. (1980). The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response, The John Hopkins University Press, 1978, paperbacks edition 1980.

Jones, C., Weber, P. (2012). “Towards Usability Engineering for online Editors of Volunteered Geographic Information: A perspective on learnability.” Transactions in GIS 16(4).

Lafon P. (1980). “Sur la variabilité de la fréquence des formes dans un corpus.“ Mots N°1, pp. 127-165. http://www.persee.fr/doc/mots 0243

6450 1980 num 1 1 1008.

Nielsen, J. (2000). “Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users.” NN/g, Nielsen Norman Group, Evidence-Based User Experience Research, Training, and Consulting. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-

need-to-test-with-5-users.

Massanari, A. L. (2010). “Designing for imaginary friends: information architecture, personas and the politics of

user-centered design.” In New Media & Society, 12(3)

401-416. DOI: 10.1177/1461444809346722, SAGE. http://nms.sagepub.eom/content/12/3/401.fuU.pdf.

Mohamad, Y., Kouroupetroglou, C. (2013). “User modeling”, Research and Development Working Group Wiki, last modified on 10 May 2013, at 05:07. https://www.w3.org/WAI/RD/wiki/User modeling.

Paranyushkin, D. (2011). “Identifying the Pathways for Meaning Circulation using Text Network Analysis”, Nodus Labs. Published October 2011, Berlin. http://no-duslabs.com/research/pathways-meaning-circulation-

text-network-analysis/.

Sosnovsky, S., Dicheva, D. (2010). “Ontological technologies for user modelling”, Int. J. Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies, Vol. 5, No. 1,    pp.32-71.

http://www.dfki.de/~sosnovsky/pa-

pers/IJMSO 5 1 Paper 03.pdf.

USE Questionnaire: Usefulness, Satisfaction, and Ease of use. Based on: Lund, A.M. (2001). “Measuring Usability with the USE Questionnaire”, STC Usability SIG Newsletter, 8:2.

http://garyperlman.com/quest/quest.cgi?form=USE.

Webb, G.I., Pazzani, M.J., Billsus, D. (2001). “Machine Learning for User Modeling.” In User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 11:19-29, 2001. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Printed in the Netherlands. http://www.umuai.org/anniversary/webb-umuai-

2001.pdf.
Pelagios Commons (Pelagios Commons 2017) is a community of practice dedicated to supporting Linked Open Data-related activity within the humanities. Comprising a series of interconnected Special Interest Groups, it operates through the collective establishment of digital conventions for semantic data and produces software to facilitate its production and use. Such data can ultimately be used to interconnect independently maintained and heterogeneous online resources about the past. While Pelagios Commons is engaged in a variety of activities to achieve these ends, this paper focuses on the development of a second generation implementation of its most popular tool, Recogito (Simon et al., 2015). Recogito is a semantic annotation system (Andrews et al., 2012) with similarities in some regards to platforms such as Pundit (Grassi et al., 2012) and Hypothesis (Hypothesis, 2017), but with particular focus on geographic content, and accessibility to humanists without high levels of technical literacy.

Recogito’s origins lie in the earlier Pelagios 3 project cycle dedicated to the semantic annotation of early

geographic documents so as to provide a ‘critical mass’ of content to which other historical materials could be related. The intended goal was to identify place references, and their referents, in as many pre-1500 geographic documents as possible. Such documents, or more specifically their digital surrogates, could take a wide variety of different formats, but are typically represented as texts, images and tables. While the first phases of Pelagios saw annotation carried out by a community of resource curators, much - though not all - of the annotation for Pelagios 3 was conducted within the Investigative Team. As most of the documents to be annotated had no formal structure, it was necessary to develop a tool which allowed us to rapidly produce annotation records (recording a reference, a global gazetteer entry and an annotator). The result was Recogito, a web-based platform which allowed its users to upload digital surrogates and produce annotations pointing back to the original digital version of an online document.

The first version of Recogito offered multiple interfaces for the discrete tasks of: identifying place references (whether in text, image or table); transcribing them where necessary; relating them to an entry in one of multiple possible gazetteers (depending on the period of the document in question). Semi-automated processes based on Natural Language Processing and Named Entity Extraction techniques allowed the software to accelerate these tasks, while ultimately requiring all annotations to be verified by a human individual. Semantic interpretation is always under-determined by a text or symbol, and thus human intervention remains a fundamental principle of the Pelagios methodology. While document surrogates were kept behind a log-in interface to prevent the possibility of copyright infringement, the annotations themselves were made publicly available in real time under a CC0 (public domain license).

Pelagios 3 and Recogito successfully met their aims and have drawn interest from potential stakeholders working throughout the humanities. These range not only across different periods and geographic regions, but between disciplinary fields (such as archaeology, classics and history), in diverse forms of text, and for the production and alignment of gazetteers to boot. Thanks to an Open Knowledge Foundation/DM2E Open Humanities Award, Recogito was also tested with several undergraduate student classes. This not only allowed us to refine its user interface, but also to see the various ways it changed students’ approaches to, and understanding of, the material they were annotating. The very process of annotation, as many digital humanists can attest, forces a level of systematic reflection upon the annotator which might otherwise be elided.

Despite - indeed because of - Recogito’s success, a number of limitations came to light during the course of Pelagios 3. First and foremost was its centralised architecture which provided a single workspace for all users. While well suited to a small team in regular communication with one another, the increasing number of users and documents meant that managing document metadata, preventing errors caused by concurrent edits, and keeping users abreast of changes to documents of interest became increasingly difficult. Furthermore, administrative tasks like uploading documents could only be carried out centrally, creating unnecessary barriers to use. Above all, while document copyright was protected through a restriction on public access, it was clear that if the system user base continued to grow over time, then the risk of copyright abuse would grow with it.

In addition to this central issue were a considerable number of feature requests which were not in the project's original scope of works and which we were unable to introduce within the time available. These include support for various input and output formats (including TEI XML, KML, and GeoJSON); the ability to add non-semantically defined commentary; overlapping annotations; simple points for identifying symbols on images (rather than textboxes for toponyms); competing interpretations of place references; and the ability to make annotated documents publicly available where copyright permits. With renewed financial support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Pelagios initiative has been able to redesign and implement Recogito from the ground up in order to address these deficiencies and introduce additional features as well.

Recogito 2 presents an entirely new interface for the semantic annotation of place references. Users can self-register and are now provided with their own workspace (with an initial storage allowance of 200MB) in which they can upload and annotate documents. Each user's cataloguing page has its own URL and is publicly visible, although any uploaded documents are not. Documents can be uploaded singly or as a batch of related files (such as images of pages within a manuscript). Documents are automatically pre-parsed for possible place references at the upload stage unless the user declines to do so. Currently, Recogito 2 makes use of the Stanford NLP Toolkit (Manning et al., 2014), but we intend to make it extensible so as to support alternative parsing engines, such as the Classical Language Toolkit (Johnson et al. 201417) which may be better suited to specific languages or use cases. Whereas Recogito 1 only supported plain text documents and image files, Recogito 2 also supports TEI XML and images held in IIIF-compliant repositories, as well as JPEG, TIFF and PNG.

Once uploaded, an ‘annotation view', allows the user to confirm automatically identified place references or create new ones (Figure 1). This takes place by means of a pop-up dialog box which determines the type of annotation (currently only places references, with free-text commentary and tags, but future development will include additional support for person references and events). Assuming the reference is to a place, the system proposes a probable gazetteer candidate which can either be confirmed or corrected as appropriate. Where the same place definition has been aligned across multiple gazetteers, these will be merged into a single entity for consideration, but the user is able to select which gazetteer they wish to formally associate the reference to.


Fig. 1. Recogito 2 text annotation view.

A major development in Recogito 2 is the introduction of ‘social tools' for collaborative annotation. Annotators can share their documents with other registered users, allowing them to view, edit and create annotations dependent on the permission settings. Edits effectively act as discussion threads so that the full history of changes and commentary can be seen for each annotation (and where necessary, rolled back by the owner). We are also aware that for many users, producing Linked Open Data is not their primary objective. There are many other benefits to be derived from annotating place references, not least of which is the ability to map content. Recogito 2 offers a simple mapping interface that shows the distribution of place references - where coordinates can be derived from a gazetteer - against a range of possible backing maps. Symbol size reflects the number of references to the place, and selecting one provides the user with the specific references within the text itself (Figure 2).


Fig. 2. Recogito 2 map view.


Manning, C. D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J.,

Bethard, S. J., McClosky, D. (2014) “The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit.” In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 55-60.

Pelagios Commons. 2017. http://commons.pelagios.org

Simon, R., Barker, E., Isaksen, L., and de Soto Cañamares, P. (2015) “Linking Early Geospatial Documents, One Place at a Time: Annotation of Geographic Documents

with Recogito.” In e-Perimetron. 10(2): 49-59. ISSN.

A series of additional features replicate popular functions within Recogito 1. This includes a statistics dashboard, which provides data about both documents (such as place reference frequency, or the proportion of references lacking identification) and places (such as the toponyms by which they are referred to, and tags associated with them). It is our intention to add ‘social statistics' that may allow people to see which of their documents are proving most popular or perhaps to help identify other users with similar interests. We have also extended the annotation download formats from solely CSV and RDF, to include KML, TEI and GeoJSON. This allows for their incorporation within a much wider range of software commonly used by humanists.

Already in public Beta-testing, Recogito 2 offers a next generation approach to semantic annotation of humanities documents with specific emphasis on place references. Nevertheless, we believe strongly that the value of this contribution lies not simply in its technical innovation but in facilitating community contributions to the Web of Linked Open Data.

Bibliography

Andrews, P., Zaihrayeu, I., Pane, J. (2012) “A Classification of Semantic Annotation Systems.” In Semantic Web, 3(3): 223-248.

Grassi, M., Morbidoni, C., Nucci, M., Fonda, Ledda, G.

(2012) “Pundit: Semantically Structured Annotations for Web Contents and Digital Libraries.”In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Semantic Digital Archives (SDA 2012).

Hypothesis. 2017. http://hypothes.is/

Johnson, K. P. et al. (2014-2017). CLTK: The Classical Language Toolkit. DOI 10.5281/zenodo.60021
This panel brings together three projects that explore and analyze annotated texts in digital environments: The Archeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe, The Winthrop Family on the Page, and Derrida’s

Margins: . All three projects seek to give users the experience of how another person read their books (see Notes). While each is fascinating in its own right, collectively these projects span centuries and provide a powerful and instructive lens on data modeling, interinstitutional collaboration, and interoperability.

The connections between these projects, both on a scholarly and an institutional level provide a powerful case study in creating distinct but interoperable digital humanities projects and resources. Both Winthrop and Derrida’s Margins are being built in the Center for Digital Humanities at Princeton University, while AOR is a collaboration between Johns Hopkins, University College London, and Princeton. AOR and the Winthrop project share a co-PI, Anthony Grafton, and two books owned and heavily annotated by John Dee are in the Winthrop library and thus came to New England. However, while the AOR project looks at a single renaissance annotator (Gabriel Harvey in Phase I- the project is heavily indebted to the methods and questions outlined in Jardine and Grafton, 1990-, and John Dee in Phase II), the Winthrop project looks at generators of annotators (men and women) making it as much a prosopographical project as a study of annotation. Like AOR, Derrida’s Margins focuses on a single scholar’s interaction with his library, but Jacques Derrida’s annotation practices differ dramatically from Harvey or Dee, and French copyright law poses serious challenges to representing the book pages online.

All three projects make use of the International Image Interoperability Framework (http://iiif.io/), but differ on the rest of their underlying data structures. AOR uses a custom XML schema to encode a critical edition of the annotations. Winthrop will use a custom prosopographical-bibliographical relational database, implemented in Django. While most of these relationships will be attested through annotation, the system will also record other connections (including purchasing records, books referenced in letters, etc). The annotation data model will most likely be created using a graph database, given the multiple types of annotations and the ways they can be expressed. Derrida’s Margins will be another custom relational database, built in Django, but will be fully bi-lingual, allowing users to search and browse in English and French. The Winthrop and Derrida database will also be exposed as Linked Open Data.

All three projects are committed to interoperability, with a key goal being the ability to search across the three projects once they are complete. The projects are in close contact the IIIF Editors and the W3C Web Annotation Working Group to ensure adherence to and input on best practices and emerging standards.

The Archaeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe
Earle Havens, Matthew Symonds,
Anthony Grafton
The Archaeology of Reading in Early Modern Europe (AOR), is an international collaboration among the Sheridan Libraries at Johns Hopkins University, the Centre for Editing Lives and Letters (CELL) at UCL, and the Center for Digital Humanities at Princeton University Library, with funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. It is also an interdisciplinary collaboration between historians, librarians, software engineers and data scientists.

While the body of scholarship on the history of early modern reading practices has burgeoned during the past several decades—guided in large part by the initial scholarly work of our project partners, the late Professor Lisa Jardine and Professor Anthony Grafton—as a collective body of knowledge the history of reading has nonetheless remained limited to isolated, partial, and impressionistic studies of single texts read by single annotators.

As researchers, we conduct this work in the conspicuous absence of comparative evidence of the larger range of early modern historical reading practices, strategies, and agendas. Scholars also find it physically impossible to effectively penetrate the dynamic array of information preserved in annotated books for the purpose of systematic analysis owing to their sheer density of content, in many instances, relative to the original texts on which the annotations comment.

During the original planning workshop on annotated books that led to the formation of the project, leading scholars, librarians, curators, and technologists agreed collectively that these constraints imposed upon the study of early modern annotated texts in their original analog form could only be overcome satisfactorily when annotations are treated as data sets that can be mined and analyzed effectively in more versatile, enriched, and readily searchable digital forms.

The AOR team has elected to focus on a distinct and roughly contemporary dyad of clearly identified early modern readers: Gabriel Harvey in Phase 1 (20142016) and John Dee in Phase 2 (2016-2018). While the identities of a large majority of early modern annotators remains unknown in extant collections, this focus on known readers will enable the project team to analyze and more precisely situate the processes of reading and annotation within their respective historical contexts.

In order to make these sources more accessible to analysis, the AOR technology team - based at Johns Hopkins University's Digital Research and Curation

Center - is working closely with the International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) protocol and community to develop features and use cases that will enhance AOR within this larger framework.

IIIF features a set of protocols, application programming interfaces (APIs), and shared technologies for the presentation of web-based images. In the case of AOR, these images are digital surrogates of rare book materials containing manuscript annotations by Gabriel Harvey and John Dee, which users interface through AOR's adapted version of the Mirador (version 2.0) viewer. The technical infrastructure for AOR includes a data archive, an image server, a IIIF image service, a corresponding IIIF presentation service, and the IIIF-compliant Mirador viewer.

The data archive for this project provides the framework for long-term access to, and preservation of, all project content: an important contribution to Digital Humanities more generally, insofar as this issue has not yet been unaddressed within IIIF. The technology team has defined an archival data model that can be mapped to other data models for data access and presentation over time. Another layer of the infrastructure that has been developed in Phase 1 of AOR consists of an image server that accesses content from within the data archive. Currently, the team is utilizing a commercial FSI image server, though comparable image server resources (e.g. djatoka) may also be used.

While AOR has been deployed using the versatile Mirador 2.0 API, the AOR technology team has developed IIIF endpoints for any available image service and presentation service, so long as they can be accessed by an IIIF-compliant image viewer. All AOR data can be accessed through our Mirador2 IIIF-com-plaint viewer, which has been specifically enhanced to meet the use requirements identified by the team for both current and future users. Over the course of AOR Phase 1, the technology and scholarly teams have worked together closely to define and implement a set of use cases related to image viewing and manipulation, transcription viewing, and dynamic, query-building search capabilities.

The current AOR viewer is the culmination of this iterative development process, which presents users with a wide-ranging set of functionalities aimed at enabling new forms of research on the history of reading practices. One new method is informed by the use of insights gleaned from the data generated throughout Phase 1 to formulate new research questions for the humanities team to investigate.

By creating a corpus of important and representative annotated texts with searchable transcriptions and translations, we can begin to compare and fully analyze early modern reading, and place that mass of research material within a broader historical context. In so doing, we could also approach—not in isolation but as a dynamic, internally and institutionally complimentary, research team—the traditionally subjective study of reading in a demonstrably empirical, comparative, and systematic way.

All visible interventions by readers in the books -marginal notes, underlining, marks and symbols, et cetera - have been marked up according to a non-TEI XML schema developed by humanities and technology teams working in close cooperation. The Phase 1 corpus of thirteen books owned and annotated by Gabriel Harvey has generated 3,355 XML files, each representing a single page of an annotated book. The data contained within these XML files has allowed us to map the language Harvey used in his own annotations and highlighted in the original printed texts, to find interesting correlations, and to use those correlations to form new investigations into the history of reading, Harvey's own biography, and the wider history of ideas in the early modern period.

Derrida's Margins: Annotations from the Personal Library of Jacques Derrida
Katie Chenoweth
This paper will give an overview of Phase One of the Derrida's Margins project currently underway at the Center for Digital Humanities at Princeton University (CDH).

Derrida's Margins is a longterm project that aims to create a website and online research tool for annotations from the Library of Jacques Derrida, an archival collection housed at Princeton University Library's Rare Books and Special Collections that was first opened to the public in March 2016. Phase One of Derrida's Margins focuses on annotations related to Derrida's landmark 1967 work De la grammatologie, first translated into English in 1976 as Of Grammatol-ogy (hereafter OG, see Spivak's 2016 translation. This corpus will serve as a pilot data set for future work, allowing us to establish protocols, workflow, and a relational database model.

Jacques Derrida is one of the major figures of twentieth-century thought, and his personal library represents a major intellectual archive. The Derrida Library, consisting of about 19,000 published books and other materials, represents a lifetime of reading. But for Derrida, the act of reading was not a passive process: he engaged — even grappled — with what he read, covering pages with notes and cross-references, inserting other handwritten materials, quoting and adapting what he read into what he wrote. As Derrida himself said in an interview later in his life, his books bear "traces of the violence of pencil strokes, exclamation points, arrows and underlining” (for details related to Princeton's acquisition of the Derrida Library, see the article posted by Princeton University Libraries, 2015).

It was in OG that Derrida first articulated a new style of critical reading, which would become the foundation of the philosophy of “deconstruction.” Our online research tool will enable scholars to study the development of this philosophy in an unprecedented way by providing comprehensive digital access to the material annotations, marginalia, bookmarks, and other notes from Derrida's library that correspond to each quotation and citation in OG. Beyond making Derrida's annotations available digitally for the first time, this project seeks to enable researchers to understand the relationship between Derrida's published writing and his reading practices. As we move beyond OG in future phases, the website will also allow researchers to gain new insights into Derrida's library and his published writing as networks of texts, citations, and annotations.

OG was chosen as the pilot text not only because it is a foundational text for deconstructive reading, but for two additional reasons: 1) it is among the most widely read of Derrida’s works and, according to Google Scholar, by far the most frequently cited, constituting more than 10% of the total citations for Derrida as of November 1, 2016; 2) 2017 will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the initial publication OG, and a number of scholarly conferences and events are scheduled to discuss the text and its legacy.

In Phase One, we began by identifying all instances of citation (quotations, references, footnotes, etc.) in OG that lead us back to books and other reading materials from Derrida’s library. Each cited work from OG is entered into a Zotero library, which will eventually form the basis of a public bibliography for OG. We then located these references in Derrida’s copy (or, often, multiple copies—different editions, translations, etc.) of each work. Each instance of citation is given a tag in the Zotero library that indicates the source page from OG, the type of citation, the page number(s) in the cited text, whether or not the volume is present in Derrida’s Library at Princeton, and the presence or absence of annotation (here construed as a mark of any kind, verbal or non-verbal). Next, we will transcribe all marginal annotations and other markings, limiting ourselves to tagged pages, i.e., those that are explicitly referenced by Derrida in OG. Digital images and transcriptions of these annotated pages will form the basis of the website, allowing users to go “behind the scenes” of Derrida's reading practices.

Given that Derrida's work is widely read in the United States, France, and around the world by scholars from numerous disciplines in the humanities and social sciences, we anticipate that the audience for this project will be broad and international. The more targeted audience would be specialists of Derrida and deconstruction, as well as researchers in philosophy, literary studies, and intellectual history.

One major risk this project faces is the question of French copyright restrictions. Due to the fact that the majority of books owned by Jacques Derrida are copyrighted works whose copyright is still in force, there is a question regarding the legality of posting digital images of sections of those books on our website. Despite the fact that the copies of these works in JD's library have been annotated by the philosopher's hand, the works themselves are the intellectual property of their respective publishing houses in France. Pending clarification by the Office of the University Counsel regarding the amount of risk we are at liberty to take in this respect, we will make a decision as to the amount of text from those works that it is acceptable for us to display on our public website.

This project is intended as the first phase in a longterm project. Team members in Phase One will create a manual detailing their work process and workflow to facilitate and standardize the project going forward. At the end of our pilot phase with the CDH, we will have the following

The main outcomes and deliverables of this project are the following:

•    Bibliography of De la grammatologie, made available as public Zotero library

•    Digitization of all relevant pages from the Derrida library

•    Customized grayed-out images, if necessary

•    Annotations transcribed, translated, and tagged

•    Custom designed relational database to record and analyze Derrida's annotation practices and the anchor text they reference

•    Bi-lingual (French and English) Web portal created in Django to allow users to search and browse the annotations

•    Transcriber's manual

The Winthrop Family on the Page
Anthony Grafton, Jennifer Rampling, Christian Flow
“The Winthrop Family on the Page” will employ an extensive database of bibliographic information, biographical data, and marginal annotations to allow digital exploration of early modern lives and learned practices. Centering on the surviving library holdings of the storied Winthrop family, whose representatives included such prominent figures as John Winthrop, a founder and governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony, the final product will be a web platform affording a dynamic sense of how colonial readers interacted with texts and fellow readers. Users will be encouraged to follow the story along multiple axes, both dia-chronically—as family members communicated across decades, even centuries, in the margins of their shared books—and synchronically, as single readers followed references from one text to the other, leaving a bread-crumb trail of notation along the way. The experience will be further enriched by inclusion of information on how the Winthrops' books surface in other historical sources they left us, including journals and correspondence, ensuring once again vivid access not just to the texts, but to the people who read them.

The bulk of the project's database will consist in entries for some 300 books formerly owned by the Winthrops and currently held at the New York Society Library. Aside from bibliographical information for all of these books, the database will include a second module treating the marginalia they reveal. Here, the project will log the location of all manuscript notes in the collection; in addition, for a select, smaller subset of 50-60 books, high-quality digital images will allow users to view the marginal material directly. Several representative notes from the same sub-set will be translated and transcribed along with relevant anchor text, and all of the collected data will be encoded for search. Users will be able to come to the collection with queries about everything from annotations of a particular era, to those of a particular person, to those presenting a specific sign (e.g., the manicule) or handling a specific theme.

The defining characteristic of the project is its deft exhibition of a very particular source-base. The rich surviving Winthrop holdings, coupled with the opportunities for collection and display afforded by a digital platform, offer a rare opportunity to excavate and reassemble an Early Modern book collection, giving a concrete frame to the “intellectual space” within which the family lived and thought. Still more exciting is the chance to fill that space with dialogue: the project's careful curation, transcription, and (when necessary) translation of the marginalia that the Winthrops recorded as they read allows users to follow their intellectual journey between books and between generations. Those generations spanned not just time but space: because the Winthrops were a colonial family, their New England library had its roots and its first readers in Europe. Users of the collection are therefore positioned to pose and answer questions about how Early Modern knowledge made the transition from the Old to the New World. How, we wonder, might our understanding of the Salem Witch Trials be affected when we take into account the fact that Wait Still Winthrop, the Chief Magistrate of Massachusetts, could well have perused the marginal annotations of his European ancestor, Adam Winthrop, in the witchcraft section of the family library? How did reading and annotation practices originally cultivated in England filter into the learned arsenal of later colonial readers?

Queries like these are made actionable by the labors of a highly-skilled team: specialties in book history and annotation, in ecclesiastical history, in alchemical practice, and in the classical tradition will be amply represented. The project itself, which will offer direct access to an array of understudied material, is meant to have wide interdisciplinary appeal. Situated at the nexus of digital humanities and history of the book, straddling Europe and the colonies, the domains of intellectual history and learned practice, it will resonate with historians of Europe, America, and the Atlantic World; book historians; librarians; historians of science, medicine, and religion; and users outside the Academy. And in future years the appeal will only grow more broad-based, for project members hope to build outward from the corpus on which the 2016-17 work is founded. The more material at hand, the richer the web of connections users will be able to make between books and readers. There are several possible modes of expansion: (1) full imaging, transcription and translation of all books in the NYSL corpus (that is, including those beyond the subset currently targeted for the pilot-phase of the project); (2) inclusion of further Winthrop books housed at other major repositories, including items from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (when the Winthrops added hundreds of new books to the library, including a collection of almanacs now housed at the Houghton Library, and the bulk of the collection of Winthrop books at Allegheny College); (3) development into a broader study of Colonial reading practices and knowledge networks, involving other family collections of annotated books, such as the Mather Family Library, now held at the American Antiquarian Society; the library of Thomas Prince, now at the Boston Public Library; and the library of James Logan, now at the Library Company of Philadelphia.

Notes
1. There are a number of projects dedicated to recording annotations or marginalia, notably the

crowd sourced Annotated Books Online and Book Traces. The three projects discussed in this panel proposal differ in that they are specifically grouped by annotator and want to answer specific questions about the worldview and read patterns of known annotators. They are also designed to facilitate more complex queries. These projects are also addressing a different question from other annotation projects such as Annotation Studio which are designed for modern readers to annotate digital texts.

Bibliography
Derrida, J. (1967), De la grammatologie (Paris: Editions du Seuil).

Derrida, J., (2016) Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatari Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).

Jardine, L., and Grafton, A. (1990)“‘Studied for Action': How Gabriel Harvey Read His Livy,” Past & Present, no.

129: 30-78.

Princeton University Libraries (2015). Princeton University Library Acquires Jacques Derrida's Personal Library.

31 March, http://library.princeton.edu/news/2015-03-31/princeton-university-library-acquires-iacques-der-

ridas-personal-library
This poster presents recent work in the visualization of literary correspondence from the TCLLP (Twentieth-Century Literary Letters Project), focusing on the comparative visualization and analysis of digital editions of letters.

How might we begin to compare the collected correspondences of letter-writers? As archival letters are increasingly digitized, either by libraries and special collection or by the large-scale digital correspondence projects now emerging (e.g. the Electronic Enlightenment project, Early Modern Letters Online), we now have the opportunity to investigate authorial correspondence at larger scales. Beyond the usual use of correspondence to fill out the historical or biographical background of a writer, or to provide thematic and social points of linkage between writers, large collections of digital letters allow us to pose a range of new questions and problems: what does the social network of highly interconnected writers look like? What sorts of visual arguments and tools are appropriate to inquire into literary correspondence? How do the forces of class, gender, status, politics and profession manifest in a large correspondence? How do we read the gaps, cracks, elisions, and unseen limitations inherent both in our archival evidence and our digital tools? What are the large-scale shifts in epistolary culture over time, and how might we better understand those shifts in the correspondence of particular writers? To think through those questions more concretely, we visualized and compared the metadata of two well-curated digital correspondences from the early nineteenth and early twentieth century, the Collected Letters of Robert Southey and A Calendar of the Letters of Willa Cather.

We worked with the editors of these letters, and experts in TEI and RDF metadata transformation, to

move the relationship implied by letter metadata - information about personal, political, geographical, and editorial networks of these very different writers -into visual representation. Our work forms part of an ongoing effort to bridge the gap between the Textual Encoding Initiative community, open linked data initiatives, and wider scholarly, library, and public audiences, as well as investigating important issues in data visualization as a hermeneutic activity.

This poster session presents our refined visualizations of these materials, and includes procedural as well as literary-critical findings: we will outline the process by which we move from TEI or less structured correspondence data into graph and network visualization; note some of interpretive and archival issues involved in that transformation; and display the refined visualizations comparing the political, personal, and literary networks of Southey and Cather. We hope to have an interactive conversation with attendees interested in network visualization, literary correspondence, Romanticism and modernism, open linked data, and the new TEI standards for correspondence data. The TCLLP is an open group of scholars interested in new approaches to twentieth-century literary correspondence, across linguistic, national, and disciplinary divides: we look forward to a discussion with Francophone scholars in particular.

Initial visualizations will be available on the project


Figure 1: Willa Cather's major correspondents

Bibliography

Twentieth Century Literary Letters Project (n.d.) . Project Blog. http://www.modmaps.net/tcllp/project-blog/
Textograf is a web-based app for the digitization of

manuscripts. Textograf is intended to automate the work of the textual critic of any handwritten text. Tex-tograf allows you to select a specific set (or “layer”) of edits to a text, to compare different iterations of the text, and ultimately to visualize the correlation between the final text and the process that stood behind it. Textograf is able to work with prose and poetry, with manuscripts and printed sources. A description of the project can be found on the Textograf web page.

The app allows you to upload an image of the manuscript, to enter the transcript of the manuscript, and to match specific parts of the transcript with where they appear on the page of the manuscript. You can also mark on the transcript the different stages of edits that were made. The app also enables you to see and highlight all text that was deleted, all text that was added, and all text that was initially deleted and subsequently restored.

All documents (scanned images and texts) are stored in a so-called “library”. Access to the documents depends on the documents' status - “public” or “private”. Private documents are visible only to the editor, public documents can be accessed by everyone.

Textograf allows its user to create complex documents that include manuscript images and their text versions. Text fields are searchable, allowing the user to find search results in the manuscript itself. Every manuscript image can be archived according to customized categories (whose handwriting, where it is currently stored, size of paper, pen or pencil, published or not published, etc).

Textograf allows you to download documents from the library in TEI format. Texts can then be ordered in accordance with the user's version of the text. Often the text has a number of different versions, and the user has to find the right one and to collect all the corresponding manuscripts. Textograf makes this possible.

Different types of source documents connected to the work (outlines, synopses, the manuscripts themselves, printed editions) can be shown as an info-graphic, demonstrating visually the correlation between the different source documents. For example, this is a map of the early stages of Leo Tolstoy's work on War and Peace displayed on the Textograf site.


The app was initially developed using the manuscripts of Leo Tolstoy: 200 pages (out of 5,000) from War and Peace.

The map has two axes: the real time of Tolstoy's work (starting from 1863) and the fictional place and contents of the novel so you can see which episodes Tolstoy started with and how each part of the text came together.

As of today, the Textograf app is unique. It allows the user to work with manuscripts and texts in automatic or semi-automatic mode, meaning that the user can focus on the creative aspects of this work and become immersed in the manuscripts. Before the creation of Textograf, many of these functions had to be performed manually, such as establishing the link between text and image, and identifying the sequence of writing.

In the process of developing the application, we had to convert the terms and methods of textual criticism in terms of electronic resources. For example, we had to establish the meaning of the word "layer", or "edit", and to show how to visualize it on the screen.

When we talk about the influence different inputs, we mean that any text has a complex history. For example, a poem may obtain its final form as a result of a long history of changes from one version to another. Thus, what stays in the archives will be several manuscripts that contain similar, but not identical versions of the same text. Earlier versions will influence the

later ones. The "text map" shows the full history and evolution of the text.

Textograf is designed to work with any paper-based sources. It could be both manuscripts and printed editions. Textograf is a computer programme editor and is designed to prepare in electronic form both critical and diplomatic editions.

Textograf can work with the manuscripts of any writers, be it Leo Tolstoy, William Faulkner, Oscar Wilde, Marcel Proust or anyone else.

As already mentioned, Textograf is a web-based application and cannot be installed on a computer. Integration with other tools is possible only through the files that can be downloaded from the application.
Background and General Motivation
The HathiTrust Digital Library

The HathiTrust Digital Library (HTDL) comprises digitized representations of 15.1 million volumes: approximately 7.47 million book titles, 418,216 serial titles, and 5.3 billion pages, across 460 languages. HTDL is best described as “a partnership of major research institutions and libraries working to ensure that the cultural record is preserved and accessible long into the future”.

The HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC) develops software models, tools, and infrastructure to help digital humanities (DH) scholars conduct new computational analyses of works in the HTDL. For many scholars the size of the HTDL corpus is both attractive and daunting: many existing DH tools are designed for smaller collections, and many research inquiries are facilitated by more focused, homogeneous collections of texts (Gibbs and Owens, 2012).

Worksets

In many, if not most, DH research endeavours, performing an analytical task across the whole HTDL is neither practical nor productive (Kambatla et al., 2014). For example, a tool trained to identify genre attributes of 18th century English language prose fiction may not be applicable to 20th century French poetry. The first step is to identify the subset -- of works, editions, volumes, chapters, pages -- to set an initial investigative scope and, indeed, subsequent iterative refinements of a subset as research proceeds. In a corpus as large and complex as the HTDL, finding materials and then defining the sought after subset can be extraordinarily difficult.

HTRC has come to call collections of digital items brought together by a scholar for her analyses a “workset”, created to help the researcher build, manipulate, iteratively define and compare their collections. Reflecting upon input and advice from the DH community, Jett (2015) defines a workset as a machine-actionable research collection realised as:

1.    An aggregation of members (volumes, pages, etc.);

2.    Metadata intrinsic to the workset's essential nature (e.g., creator, selection criteria);

3.    Metadata intrinsic to digital architectures (i.e. creation date & number of members);

4.    Metadata supportive of human interactions (i.e. title & description);

5.    Derivative metadata from workset members (e.g. format(s), language(s), etc.); and,

6.    Metadata concerning workset provenance (e.g. derived from, used by, etc.).

Broadly, item 1 identifies the actual data used in an analysis; whereas the remaining metadata items describe the workset itself, aiding workset management throughout the research cycle.

Cross-corpus worksets

As alluded above, numerous criteria can be used to select the constituents of a workset; and several technological implementations could, in theory, realise worksets. In researching the design and realisation of worksets and associated tooling, we are also mindful to remain grounded in their practical application and the needs of scholarly users. We have therefore undertaken our work through discipline-based scenarios in which we can explore the strengths and weaknesses of the HTDL viewed through the prism of worksets.

We report one such exploration here, questioning whether (relatively) small, well explored, and well understood corpora can be superimposed over the HTDL to aid navigation and investigation of the much larger and superficially understood HTDL collection?

From a system perspective, a cross-corpus workset requires exposing compatible metadata (items 2-6 above) from multiple collections, first used to align common elements, and then to assemble worksets. We take a Linked Data approach and achieve compatibility through ontologies, which might initially be bibliographic (and derived from library records) but should be iteratively extensible into the domain of the subject of study.

Examples in early English print

Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) is a partnership with ProQuest and over 150 libraries and universities, led by Michigan and Oxford, to generate highly accurate, fully-searcha-ble texts tracing the history of English thought and learning from the first book printed in English in 1473 through to 1700. Between 2000-2009 EEBO-TCP Phase I converted 25,000 selected texts from the EEBO corpus into TEI-compliant, XML-encoded hand-transcribed texts, subsequently freely released in January 2015.

In the work reported here, we have conjoined EEBO-TCP with a HathiTrust subset consisting of all materials described in their metadata as being in English and published between 1470 and 1700.

To ensure a prototype which simultaneously explored the fit of scholars' needs to the technology and exercised the technical challenges outlined in the previous section, we undertook a ‘complete circuit' through the datasets (Figure 1). We: (i) ran a consultative workshop to choose investigations which might form the basis of worksets; (ii) used these abstract worksets to identify concrete requirements for the conjoined metadata; (iii) generated metadata from both corpora according to these specifications; (iv) aligned elements from both datasets in an overlapping

superset; (v) realised the worksets identified in (i) using this metadata.


Figure 1. Overview of the metadata circuit leading to our cross-corpora workset

Motivating worksets

Following the workshop we identified the following workset selections; we describe their implementation in subsequent sections:

• Find all the works, appearing in both datasets, written by Richard Baxter.

• Find works in both datasets published in Oxford.

• Find works published outside of London (where the bulk were published).

• Find works from both datasets published outside of London in the mid-to late 1600s.

• Find all works in the two datasets for authors who have at least once published on the subject of “Political science”.

• Find all works in these two datasets for authors who have at least once published works which are categorised as “biography”.

Regarding the penultimate workset, it is of particular note that this returns results across both datasets, since our EEBO-TCP import did not contain genre or topic information; this association must be entirely inferred from the semantic links via the technology described below.

Implementation

Metadata requirements and ontology selection

Building on Nurmikko-Fuller et al. (2015) and Jett et al. (2016) we surveyed the addressable resources and the schema expressivity of ontologies that could parameterise these classes of workset. We identified

parsable information structures in the EEBO-TCP TEI

data, appropriate to the test worksets, and selected ontology terms to encode this EEBO-TCP metadata, ensuring compatibility (or at least, for our purposes, comparison) with RDF from the HathiTrust. The resultant ontology collection - the EEBO Ontology, or EEBOO - includes selections from MODS, Bibframe, and PROV, along with custom elements encoding additional structures (e.g. dates).

Creating EEBOO RDF and alignment with HTDL

Python scripts manipulated TEI P5 XML, then the Karma Data Integration Tool mapped EEBO-TCP data structures into the EEBOO ontology. Particular attention was paid to dates encoded within strings, an example of rich semi-structured data that can be extracted into structured RDF. Links to author records in

VIAF and the Library of Congress (LoC), and multimedia pages in the HTDL and ‘JISC Digital Books' website, were generated and added. Finally, author names were aligned between the EEBOO and HTDL triples using a reconfiguration of the SALT tool (Weigl et al. 2016).

24,926 EEBO-TCP Phase 1 records were processed, with 22 distinct types of information in the headers, including 6 different ID types and 3 types of date (publication date of historical work, author associated historical date(s), XML publication/editing dates). EEBOO incorporates 7 of these datatypes, and extends into subcategories for author names and date types. EEBOO contains 713 unique places, 6,489 unique expressions of Person of which 3,588 have VIAF and LoC IDs.


Figure 2. Architecture providing cross-corpus worksets for early English print

Workset construction and viewing
A Virtuoso triplestore (see also, the Virtuoso Github repository) stores the RDF data (totalling 1,137,502 triples) and provides a SPARQL query interface. Figure 2 shows the overall system architecture. The workset constructor user interface (Figure 3) allows the user to select parameters in a web interface which are, in the background, assembled into SPARQL queries used to create a workset. The interface automatically populates valid attributes that are themselves retrieved from the triplestore, using ontological terms having equivalent meaning across datasets. In combination, the generated triples and SPARQL queries are fully sufficient for expressing the motivating workset definitions described earlier.

The workset viewer (also Figure 3) then retrieves RDF workset contents, record metadata, data links, and multimedia links (to the Historic Books collection or the HTDL). Both web applications are written in Python, using the Flask framework, and both rely on the semantic information encoded in RDF and queried using SPARQL.

Current Workset Parameters    Elephant Workset Viewer p«m.u.«r ;    All works published in Oxford g> ® ®


Figure 3. Prototype workset constructor and viewer (example worksets shown)

Conclusion and future work
We have demonstrated the general feasibility of cross-corpus worksets in bringing together HathiTrust content with specialised collections through a specific implementation for early English printed books linking the HathiTrust to EEBO-TCP. Using Linked Data, we see that metadata can be extended in a piecemeal or iterative fashion, potentially moving beyond traditional bibliographic metadata to include semantic structures emerging from scholarly investigation of the worksets themselves; and in doing so support academic motivations and requirements for workset creation.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to our colleague Pip Willcox for her valuable input and organisation of scholars' workshop, and Jacob Jett for his workset ontology. This work was supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation through the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis project award.

Bibliography

Gibbs, F., Owens, T. (2012). Building better digital humanities tools: Toward broader audiences and user-centered designs. Digital Humanities Quarterly 6(2). Accessible via:    http://www.digitalhumani-

ties.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000136/000136.html

Jett, J. (2015). Modeling worksets in the HathiTrust Research Center: CIRSS Technical Report WCSA0715. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Available

via: http://hdl.handle.net/2142/78149

Jett, J., Nurmikko-Fuller, T., Cole, T.W., Page, K.R., Downie, J.S. (2016). Enhancing scholarly use of digital

libraries: A comparative survey and review of bibliographic metadata ontologies. IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL) pp. 35-44, 2016.

Kambatla, K., Kollias, G., Kumar, V., Grama, A. (2014). Trends in big data analysis. Journal of Parallel & Distributed Computing 74(7), pp 2561-2573.

Nurmikko-Fuller, T., Page, K., Willcox, P., Jett, J. Maden, C., Cole, T., Fallaw, C., Senseney, M., Downie, J.S.

(2015). Building Complex Research Collections in Digital Libraries: A Survey of Ontology Implications. ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL) p. 169-172, 2015.

Weigl, D. M., Lewis, D. L., Crawford, T., Knopke, I., Page, K. R. (2017, in press). On providing semantic alignment and unified access to music-library metadata. International Journal on Digital Libraries. Springer.
The German Historical Institute Washington (GHI) is in the development phase of German History-Digital (GH-D), a transatlantic digital initiative to meet the scholarly needs of historians and their students facing new historiographical and technological challenges. In the proposed paper we will discuss the research goals, methodology, prototyping, and development strategy of GH-D as infrastructure to facilitate transnational historical knowledge co-creation for the large community of researchers and students already relying on digital resources of the GHI and for the growing constituency of citizen scholars.

Despite its great progress, the digital humanities have yet to broadly impact research in German history. The past ten years have witnessed the proliferation of online resources relevant to the field, yet these materials largely remain siloed in different systems, with material difficult to discover or gather by scientists into corpora. Historians themselves are today increasingly producing scholarly content in digital form, but there remains no established criteria for the peer review of digital publications and projects. This ultimately limits the time and energy the research community is willing to invest into digital knowledge production and thus confines the Digital Humanities' potential for growth.

Preservation and future access to digital materials is also of critical importance, particularly in the North American context where continental and national digital research infrastructures for digital humanities are lacking; there is currently no equivalent to European research infrastructures like CLARIN or DARIAH. In respect to scientific methodology, there is growing expectation that historians take advantage of an abundance of digital tools, yet there remains insufficient integration between tools for historical research and between tool sets and online resources. The importance of citizen science and knowledge co-creation for the future of historical research is also recognized, yet for these developments to occur there must exist beyond e-lists and other legacy communication technologies scholarly environments for the creation of area-specific research communities, scientific collaboration, and public engagement.

The planning for GH-D involved surveying over four hundred scholars of the many thousands already using digital resources produced by the GHI. The most prominent of these resources is the digital source collection „German History in Documents and Images“ (GHDI), which is widely used at universities in the German and English speaking world. Launched in 2003 and currently undergoing a technical and conceptual revamp in conjunction with GH-D, GHDI currently includes thousands of pages of English-language translations of German historical texts, as well as images and maps, all of which are accessed by approximately 5,000 visitors per day. Our planning for GH-D also continues to involve consultations and workshops with expert historians and digital humanists, and the establishment of partnerships with institutions and major initiatives that share our concern for the future of history in the digital age.

The German History-Digital platform addresses needs of digital scholarship through five goals and integrated work packages concerted to these goals: discovery, analysis, production, preservation, and community.

We believe GH-D provides a new model in the design and development of a social knowledge creation environment for humanities-oriented research. The proposed paper will be structured by providing technical and theoretical explication of the core work packages within relevant DH contexts.

Discovery
A major challenge facing scholarship online is that a vast number of digital resources, particularly those produced independently by scholars or smaller institutions, do not have standardized metadata records and are not accessible via any centralized scientific index. GH-D involves development of a peer-reviewed index of scholarly digital objects using Dublin Core

(DC) and CLARIN's Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) standards via a customized Backlight technology stack.

Preservation
For scholars developing historical digital projects in North America, there exists no inter-institutional infrastructure for preserving their data and making it openly available. With consultative and knowledge support from CLARIN-D, which is part of the European research infrastructure CLARIN, the GH-D project will establish the first portal to CLARIN in North America at GHI Washington. Central to this process is the implementation of a repository that allows a sustainable storage of the content and the inclusion in a digital environment to ease access, search and an interoperable data formats. The content of the repository and the repository itself adheres to international, widely accepted and supported standards. The high quality of the technical solution and the conformance to standards is secured by an independent organization that gives out the Data Seal of Approval. Like the majority of CLARIN centres in Germany, the GH-D will use a Fedora Commons repository with Apache Solr for indexing and search, components included in the technology stack of Project Hydra. Our partnership with CLARIN promotes open access, open science and knowledge co-creation in the North American context, and is an important component in the overall digital humanities research strategy of the GHI. As an institute of the Max Weber Stiftung, we are also in partnership with DARIAH-DE and arrangements have been made for DARIAH to provide long term preservation of GHI digital projects in their entirety, beginning with the first edition of German History in Documents and Images. Beginning with the GHDI project, GH-D is part of the DARIAH-DE Service Lifecycle program. Production and Publication

As a knowledge co-creation platform, GH-D will bring together editors, researchers and citizen scientists in the development of innovative online projects. Three such pilot projects are currently in development based on customization, including support for TEI, and internationalization of the Scalar 2.0 platform. GH-D is using Scalar 2.0 for the baseline content management system, particularly on account of its interface features, support for RDF, connectivity to external repositories, Dublin Core support. Hypothes.is integration, and its multiple path navigation system.

Analysis
Historians are increasingly using digital humanities tools to analyze data and express their research findings. A further advantage of storing digital objects within the CLARIN repository the GHI wants to built up is that the full range of corpus linguistic analytic tools of CLARIN can be applied by scientists to GHI textual content. During the first phase of the project we also look to prototyping connectivity to PARTHENOS, another major European infrastructure project. PAR-THENOS integrates within a virtual research environment (VRE) access to data from numerous national archives and a broad set of digital tools which can be chained together into analytic processing workflows. Community

The GH-D platform integrates blog aggregation, an advanced discussion system, community-oriented tools, and social media, to facilitate collaborative knowledge communities and open research. This is a pioneering aspect of our project that will investigate the adoption by historians of social and community digital tools in their research activities. We also intend to make use of the unique role the GHI plays as a hub of transatlantic scholarly dialogue and a major knot within an international network of historians in order to facilitate connections between different scholarly communities.
Introduction et cadre conceptuel
L'édition critique numérique, part active des Humanités numériques, bénéficie aujourd'hui d'un temps de recul suffisant pour dresser les premiers bilans des travaux édités sur le web. En effet, les premières éditions numériques ont aujourd'hui près de 20 ans : Peter Robinson a entrepris son projet d'édition des Canterbury Tales (Les Contes de Canterbury, au nombre de 24, ont été écrits par Geoffrey Chaucer au XIVe siècle. Le texte est écrit en moyen anglais et en vers) en 1993 pour en livrer une première version sur Cd-rom en 1996. De même, c'est en 1993 que Jerome McGann a lancé son projet The Rossetti Archive, avec l'objectif d'éditer l'ensemble de l'œuvre de l'écrivain anglais Dante Rossetti (1828-1882, peintre et écrivain britannique).

D'ailleurs, les éditeurs numériques eux-mêmes se plient régulièrement à l'exercice d'analyse de leur méthode (McGann, 2010 ; Robinson, 2004, 2010). Leurs réflexions sont nourries par leurs propres expériences et elles tirent également profit des études menées par les chercheurs spécialisés en Sciences de l'Information et en Humanités numériques qui s'appliquent, depuis quelques années, à théoriser l'édition critique numérique (Apollon et al., 2014, Burdick et al., 2012, Pierazzo, 2015, Sahle, 2013, Vanhoutte, 2010).

Au cours de cette présentation, nous allons précisément nous appuyer sur cette littérature analytique pour nous intéresser à la question de la réception et de la prise en compte de publics divers dans les

éditions numériques.

Problématique
De fait, contrairement aux éditions critiques publiées sur papier, les éditions numériques semblent bénéficier d'un avantage certain : il s'agit de la possibilité offerte à l'éditeur de multiplier les voies d'accès au texte qu'il édite.

Dans une édition critique traditionnelle, publiée sur papier, l'éditeur propose une voie d'accès unique, qui prend forme dans son texte final établi, résultat de son interprétation critique des manuscrits témoins étudiés. Il adresse son édition à un public donné et travaille ensuite à rendre son étude conforme aux attentes de ces lecteurs préalablement identifiés. Pour qu'un même texte soit adressé à des publics divers, les éditeurs sont contraints de multiplier les éditions, ciblant un lectorat précis à travers chacune d'elles : les étudiants et leurs professeurs dans le cadre universitaire ; les chercheurs ; un public élargi, intéressé par l'édition savante des grandes œuvres.

Dans l'édition numérique, le format d'encodage XML/TEI permet de multiplier les niveaux d'information dans un même texte. L'éditeur peut ainsi coder des informations analytiques très diverses et choisir ensuite, de les présenter, ou non, aux lecteurs. Ce faisant, il peut décider de cibler plusieurs types de réception en adéquation avec les niveaux d'informations analytiques encodées. Il lui est alors possible de proposer les accès multiples et diversifiés qui répondent le mieux aux attentes des lecteurs ciblés.

Généralement, les projets d'éditions critiques numériques rassemblent, dès leur conception, des philologues pour établir le texte et des informaticiens pour s'occuper de la publication web et de l'élaboration de la plateforme de consultation. Ces équipes interdisciplinaires traitent à la fois les questions de philologie et les aspects liés à l'ergonomie et à l'« utilisabilité » de l'édition critique en cours de préparation. Désormais, dans le monde de l'édition numérique, le travail réalisé sur la réception de l'édition et l'accompagnement du lecteur est tout aussi important que la traditionnelle valorisation des sources philologiques.

La question qui nous occupe est donc celle de la prise en compte réelle de la diversité des publics dans

l'édition numérique. Les outils techniques donnent -théoriquement du moins - la possibilité de multiplier les accès aux textes en fonction des lectorats. Qu'en est-il exactement ? Les éditeurs parviennent-ils réellement à multiplier les voies d'accès aux œuvres proposées ? Comment prennent-ils en compte, dans la préparation de la réception, la diversité des lecteurs et de leurs attentes ?

Méthodologie
L'édition numérique se situe pleinement dans le champ des Humanités numériques et, pour étudier cette question de la réception, nous allons adopter une méthodologie propre à ce champ disciplinaire, qui allie recherche et expérimentation.

Notre présentation se déroulera donc en deux temps. Nous allons tout d'abord mener une étude analytique sur un corpus d'éditions numériques sélectionnées à cet effet. L'objectif est de caractériser le positionnement des éditeurs numériques et d'observer les moyens qu'ils mettent en œuvre pour parvenir à cibler des publics différents sur une même plateforme de consultation des contenus, en proposant pour chacun d'eux des informations propres.

Ensuite, dans un deuxième temps nous présenterons les propositions concrètes que nous avons pu développer sur un petit corpus d'expérimentation. Au cours de la réflexion que nous avons menée sur une édition numérique d'un corpus de textes médiévaux, nous avons en effet cherché à multiplier les niveaux de réception et les modes de présentation des informations analytiques, en fonction de nos publics-cibles.

Résultats attendus
Partie I - analyses d'éditions numériques existantes

Pour étudier cette question, nous allons tout d'abord analyser un corpus d'éditions numériques sélectionnées par choix raisonné. Nous avons constitué un corpus de quatre éditions numériques qui se démarquent, dans le paysage éditorial contemporain, par l'attention portée, par les éditeurs, aux publics multiples. Les éditions critiques numériques retenues pour notre corpus d'observation sont diverses puisqu'elles portent sur des documents d'archives comme sur des œuvres littéraires.

Pour mener notre étude, nous avons élaboré une grille d'observation. Cette dernière est concentrée sur trois pôles : le texte édité, les outils de navigation et recherche, les outils de communication et de travail participatif proposés aux lecteurs. Les éditeurs y manifestent les particularités propres à chacun des publics cibles et y présentent des informations adaptées à chacun d'eux.

Les observations que nous ferons nous permettront alors de dégager des tendances et caractéristiques des éditions numériques afin de comprendre comment les éditeurs organisent, dans les plateformes de consultation de leurs éditions, les réceptions multiples.

Partie II - expérimentation sur un corpus littéraire médiéval

Dans un deuxième temps, nous allons confronter notre réflexion à notre propre travail d'expérimentation. La question des publics a été au centre de nos préoccupations lors de l'élaboration de notre édition numérique, et nous avons développé un schéma d'encodage permettant, précisément, de faire coexister des niveaux de réception multiples. Nous avons encodé et préparé la réception d'un ensemble divers d'informations analytiques : variantes philologiques, informations de critique littéraire, informations contextuelles. Ces informations sont alors présentées de manière coexistante mais distincte : certaines sont préparées en direction du public philologue spécialiste, d'autres en direction d'un public littéraire averti, d'autres en direction du grand public. Nous allons présenter notre édition actuellement en cours de réalisation, et expliciter la mise en place des niveaux de réception tels que nous les avons élaborés dans notre travail.

L'objectif de cette communication est ainsi de participer à une réflexion sur l'accès multiples aux textes ainsi que sur la prise en compte des niveaux de réception dans la préparation des éditions numériques.

Bibliographie

Apollon, D., Belisle, C., Régnier, P. (2014). Digital Critical

Editions. University of Illinois Press.

Burdick, A. et al. f2012). Digital humanities. Cambridge:

MIT Press.

Gold, M (dir.) (2012). Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.

McGann, J. (2010). « Electronic Archives and Critical Editing », Literature Compass, vol. 7, no 2, p. 37-42.

Pierazzo, E. (2015). Digital Scholarly Editing. Ashgate.

Robinson, P. (2010). « Editing Without Walls », Literature

Compass, vol. 7, no 2, p. 57-61.

Robinson, P. (2004). « ... but what kind of electronic editions should we be making? », University of Cologne.

Sahle, P. (2013). Digitale Editionsformen : zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels, Norderstedt, BoD, 3 vol.

Vanhoutte, E. (2010). Defining electronic editions: a histor-

ical and functional perspective. In Text and Genre in Reconstruction. Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 119-144.

Warwick, C., Terras, M., Nyhan J. (2012). Digital humanities in practice. London: Facet Publishing in association with UCL Centre for Digital Humanities.
Introduction
This project uses network graphs to depict musicians' careers in late seventeenth-century Venice. The

current network graph, viewable on the Musicians in Venice web page, demonstrates relationships between musicians and the institutions that employed them. The graph is bimodal, with nodes representing musicians (“people” nodes) and institutions (“place” nodes). Archival texts are incorporated into the visualization, with transcriptions of records that indicate musicians' activity included in the node attributes. The entire project is text-based, with data derived from XML transcriptions of archival records in addition to assigned metadata. The current website is a proof of concept for a larger project that would demonstrate ways of displaying text as part of the network graph and using texts in creating network visualizations.

The current graph focuses on the career of the composer Giovanni Legrenzi. Legrenzi worked for several prominent Venetian institutions from the early 1670s to his death in 1690 and ultimately was appointed to the most prestigious musical posts in the city. The musicians he worked with also served multiple institutions, either simultaneously or in succession, and their relationships with other musicians, patrons, and administrators often facilitated their movement between institutions. Legrenzi's Venetian career presents an excellent case study of these musical connections in late seventeenth-century Venice, and studying these connections demonstrates how networks of musicians functioned in this time period. This study also provides a representative sample of how network visualization effectively demonstrates patterns in musicians' careers in Venice.

The texts in the network graph include transcribed administrative documents, mostly unpublished, from the Venetian institutions where Legrenzi was active between 1670 and 1690. These are primarily payment, hiring, and termination records, which document the activity of the musicians employed by or affiliated with these institutions. Several generations of musicologists have used these documents to identify where different musicians were working, when they were employed, and in what capacity (Bonta, 1964; Moore, 1981; Termini, 1981; and Selfridge-Field, 1994). In this sense, this treatment of the documents is standard to the field, but applies DH methodology and processes to create visual representations the data. This provides a new perspective on the sources. For instance, grouping the “person” nodes by centrality results in multiple sub-groups, and proximity among these nodes demonstrates shared institutions and implied communities. (Hanneman and Riddle, 2005: Chapter 10) (Mary Russell Mitford's text-based network analysis of Robert Southey’s Thalaba the Destroyer provides an excellent example of this. In addition to demonstrating the behavior of agile, well-connected nodes, the graph displays modules of nodes as units of analysis (Wasserman and Faust, 1994: 4). Methodology

The transcriptions of the original documents were encoded in XML with tags and attributes determined by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI). I used the XML markup to tag the information I wanted to include in my data while retaining the complete original text. In general, I tagged the name of the musician, the name of the institution with which they were connected, and the date and location of the connection.

9307

9308    v    <div type=”entry" xml:id=”LD0_17” rt=”17">

9309    v    <dateline>

«date when*"1677-02-04">Adi 4 Feb[ra]ro 1677 Cong[regazion]e

9311    Gent[il]e«/date>

9312    |    </dateline>

9313    v |    «pxnote place*"margin">Legrenzi</note> Intesi li sentiment! del Sig[no]r

9314    |    Maestro «name type=”person" ref=''#GioLeg">Legrenzi«/name>; che accetto di

9315    continuar a far gli Oratorj secondo il solito; fu eletto di nuovo il

9316    Pre[te] D. «name type=“person" ref=”#BarGri">Bartol[ome]o

9317    |    Gritti«/name>; accid passasse I’istesso uffizio col Stg[no]r

9318    |    «name type=”person" ref=”#GioPes”>Giovanni da Resaro«/name>; con

9319    |    q[ue]sto pero; ch’ egli averse solo da ingerirsi nelle funzioni

di «name type="place" ref=”#fava''>Chiesa</name> solam[ertt]e; e fu

9321    |    preso con tutti li voti.</p>

9322    </div>

9323

XML markup of primary document text

I then extracted the information for the network from the XML document using an XSLT. For this project, the stylesheet extracted the data assembled in the person index of the XML document and combined it with the entire text that documented each event. The resultant document was a CSV file of raw data that had to be separated into sets of nodes and edges to be read by the visualization platform. The data visualization for this project was generated using Gephi, which is an open-source platform for exploratory data analysis. For this project, I generated the network graph in Gephi by importing two CSV files: one with the nodes and their attributes and ID numbers, and one with the edges and the source and target data. The online version of the network graph includes all the text associated with a “person” node in the network as a node attribute. When the user selects a person node in the online version, it displays the transcriptions for every document mentioning that person in the Information Pane. (I exported the data using the SigmaExporter

plugin for Gephi. Version 0.9.0 from Gephi Thirdpar-

ties Plugins. The code is available on Github.)

Displaying all the text associated with a person node presented a challenge as the XSLT exported each connection between a musician and an institution as a new line in the CSV. For instance, if a musician was hired by a church in 1674, received a raise in 1678, and retired in 1686, there would be three lines in the CSV. When imported into Gephi, this would create three connecting edges between the person node and the place node. This created a misleading network graph, as the number of documented connections between people and places depended on the nature and availability of the records. To combine all the texts associated with the events for each person in the index, I concatenated the raw data using a PHP script and saved the results as a TSV file that could be imported into Gephi. As a result, the entire context of the decrees and decisions surrounding that musician's activity appears in the Information Pane, which also displays and links to the institutions associated with that musician. The

PHP script also included HTML formatting to better distinguish the entries from one another in the visualization. Once my nodes and edges were imported into Gephi, I used a layout that grouped the nodes by degree of centrality (Algorithm in Gephi based on Blondel, Guillaume, Lambiotte, and Lefebvre, 2008. Resolution in Gephi based Lambiotte, Delvenne, and Barahona, 2009).

• ©•    Gephi 0.9.1 - O829.gephi


Network graph in Gephi

Next steps

The current graph is the foundation of a more extensive project that uses musicians and musical activity in Early Modern Venice to benefit scholars working with TEI in similar for-hire environments. In these environments, hubs of activity define the relationship between individual practitioners in the historical equivalent of a sharing economy. In the long-term, I propose an online data repository and network graph of musicians working in seventeenth-century Venice that would eventually provide a roadmap for scholars embedded in the TEI transcription model, but with an interest in an automated process for applying TEI text analysis to network analysis.

In addition to the bimodal graph that highlights relationships between musicians and their employing institutions, I also hope to create a unimodal graph documenting relationships among the musicians. Creating the unimodal network and a supporting web application will be a challenge as relationships between individuals can be complicated and dynamic. This will take considerable work in effectively diagramming entity relationships and building web applications that go beyond the “out of the box” functionality of the Gephi export plugin. The website for the Six Degrees of Francis Bacon project provides an excellent example of a unimodal graph; here the relationships are de-

fined by circumstances (such as “father to” or “colleague of”) or actions (such as “met” or “wrote to”).

Linked Jazz, which uses documents as node attributes to demonstrate relationships and meaningful connections between jazz musicians in an interactive network graph, is also an excellent example. Both sites feature custom-designed entity relationships and interactive features in their web design that I want to emulate in my own network graph.

For the unimodal version, I would expand the data beyond Legrenzi's Venetian career, increasing the time frame and the number of institutions represented in the graph, and include different kinds of sources, such as periodicals, correspondence, and notarial records. Developing relationship typologies is such a crucial component to the project. This will require creating custom node metadata based on the information from the primary sources and agile development as the number and variety documents expand. The result will be a project that can better serve other scholars of Venetian music and culture.

Bibliography
Bonta, S. (1964). “The Church Sonatas of Giovanni Legrenzi.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University.

Hanneman, R. and Riddle, M. (2005). Introduction to Social Network    Methods.    2005. http://www.fac-

ulty.ucr.edu/~hanneman/nettext/C10_Centrality.html

Moore, J. H. (1981). Vespers at St. Mark's: Music of Alessandro Grandi, Giovanni Rovetta, and Francesco Cavalli. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI Research Press.

Selfridge-Field, E. (1994). Venetian Instrumental Music from Gabrieli to Vivaldi. New York: Dover.

Termini, O. (1981). “Singers at San Marco in Venice: The Competition between Church and Theatre (c1675 -c1725).” Royal Musical Association Research Chronicle 17: 65-96.

Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Introduction
The Woolf Online project, which recently completed its second phase of development at Loyola University Chicago, sought to address the following fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature:

•    how does a literary text come into being?

•    what kinds of influence are at work upon the writer during the process ofinitial composition, and thereafter?

The Woolf Online project sought to investigate various ways in which different recoverable histories of a particular text could be used to illuminate the process of its composition. By recording the history of a particular text, its cultural, political, and autobiographical contexts and their interaction, visually we began to answer some of the following important questions:

•    how is textual history related to other histories of a text?

•    what use does literary criticism make of textual and contextualhistories?

Publication of Digital Scholarly Editions
As part of the development of the Woolf Online project, we developed an extensible development and publication framework, called ‘Mojulem', for editing, publication, and visualisation of digital scholarly editions. We are now continuing this development with the Verne Digital Corpus, which focuses upon the work of Jules Verne, including original French language editions and their myriad, often questionable, English language translations.

Mojulem allows us to build on the concept of ‘knowledge sites', as suggested by Peter Shillingsburg (2006), supplementing a core publication framework with modules/plugins such as OCR, editors, and image viewers.

Mojulem also enables us to host multiple projects within one installed framework, thereby enabling cross-project research, where applicable, and the option to aggregate specified data. Development of Mo-julem, with the Woolf Online project and Verne Digital Corpus as examples of the current ongoing working environments, initially followed the need for four underlying core structures. These structures include Cor-Pix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm, which are detailed as follows.

CorPix
Manuscripts and printed texts materially unite the iconic and lexical, the autographic and allographic, whereas all digital representations separate these constituent elements into images and transcriptions. With Mojulem projects, the common default display reunites the image and transcription by mapping the one to the other at the pixel level. CorPix software currently includes eHinman Transparent, Transparen-tOCR, Magnify, and Zoom. For example, pixel-level positioning and coordinate fixing is an inherent feature of both Transparent and TransparentOCR, within both editor and visualisation tools. eHinman is a digital adaptation of the original Hinman collator, and enables fade from the image of a page from one copy to another, thereby enabling a visual collation of multiple copies. Transparent is used within both the visualisation and editing stages of a project's development, enabling an editor and user alike to view the image as the primary entry consideration for the project.

CorTex
The CorTex is the stable resource containing the merged or compacted plain text transcriptions of the variant expressions of a work. It stores all information about text and variations, ready to be extracted for display of variation amongst versions; it is not necessary to recompute them.

The CorTex is the entity to which all standoff properties (markup, annotations, links, etc.) points, and on whose stability the system depends. It is as the source of each version's text and variation from other texts. The stability and endurance of the CorTex is protected by multiplying duplicate copies locked with a digital signature, which verifies for each user that a CorTex copy is viable. Analysis of the CorTex variable forms provides statistical feedback to guide the production of a conflated text, for example with the English language translations of a given Verne edition. Whilst these statistical results are no guarantee of an ultimately correct translation, they offer a conflated text with the highest viable agreement amongst the provided collated texts. Textual disagreements are currently resolved by assigning probability values, a higher value defining a greater probability of accuracy and agreement amongst the collated texts. Using such probability results, we are currently able to filter problematic passages in each translation to conflate a text with the highest probability of agreement amongst the translations per edition.

These results can then be provided for further research and assessment, and act as a suitable starting guide for further analysis of the conflated text, and translation in the example of Verne's text.

CorCode
CorCode is the add-on value of analysis, argument, and explanation. Mojulem stores markup separately, as standoff properties, applying it as the user invokes it for the rendering of a specific item's image or text within a given visualisation, such as a transparent view of a page of the Initial Holograph Draft of ‘To the Lighthouse'. To do this, Mojulem includes an editor which saves text and encoding separately, and filters for converting legacy, code-embedded transcriptions, including TEI encoded documents, into separate forms with markup analysed into properties, and filters for reversing this process.

CorForm
A CorForm8 is a CSS stylesheet, containing special formatting rules, used to transform the overlapping properties of the CorCode into HTML. Each CorCode has a default CorForm, but other CorForms can be used in combination or as alternatives. Since a CorTex may have many CorCodes, and each CorCode many CorForms, structuring or formatting of the text can be attained by specifying some combination of already available resources, or by supplying new ones.

The CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm are aggregated for a project within the Mojulem framework. Each such item is identified by a unique key, which is used as an index into the repository or database.

In addition to the initial four cores, identified above, we have begun development of CorAssess, allowing effective assessment and analysis of Cor data for the Verne translations and conflated English language texts.

CorAssess
CorAssess works in tandem with the CorTex to provide analysis of statistical and end results relative to the conflated text output. CorAssess allows us to visualise where text has been conflated based upon resolved disagreements, the points of disagreement and resultant probabilities between collated texts per edition, variance between collated texts, and visualise alternative resolution patterns relative to variation distance for given points of disagreements in the conflated text. With Verne texts, for example, we will be able to visualise conflation decisions, and offer alternatives for given decisions and disagreements, where applicable, in our conflated English language translations.

Why Verne?
After Woolf Online, we chose to focus upon the corpus of Jules Verne, including original French language editions and English language translations. We have begun collecting, collating, and preparing digitised copies of as many digitised editions as extant online. We have also been digitising early editions to provide an ever-growing dataset of Verne material.

The nature of early English language translations of Verne's editions is a continuing source of frustration for those interested in the works of Jules Verne. His early categorisation as a predominantly children's author in English language countries, unlike the publishing by Hetzel, coupled with early restricted access to original French language editions, simply compounded the issue.

The corpus of Jules Verne offers an interesting opportunity for literary and contextual analysis coupled with data processing and automated analysis. The myriad existing digitised English language translations, including US and British variant editions, often more prevalent than their counterpart, original French editions in our current digitised corpus, allows us to examine the development of those texts by comparing agreements, disagreements, omissions, and continuing revisions in said translations since a novel's first edition. We are hoping to use this analysis to filter the noise of years of collective translations to collate a unified English translation for each French language edition.

We will then be offering a comparison of French language edition against a filtered, collated English language edition. This will allow further consideration of the requisite merits of the English language translation directly juxtaposed to the original French language edition.

Conclusion
The development and combination of the initial four cores, CorPix, CorTex, CorCode, and CorForm, within the modular and adaptable framework Mo-julem, allowed the second phase of the Woolf Online project to begin to approach the fundamental questions about the nature and development of literature, as briefly outlined in the introduction. With the addition of CorAssess, we are now beginning to address additional issues with the publication, transmission, and development of texts. We are also testing, and proving, the viability of Mojulem beyond the Woolf Online project.

The corpus of Jules Verne provides a particularly fascinating opportunity to test these cores, and provide a resultant conflated, English language translation per extant French language edition.

This paper will briefly introduce the Mojulem framework and its initial four cores, grounded in the example of the Woolf Online project, and detail the ongoing developments to augment this work with the above new work on the corpus of Jules Verne, and the ongoing Verne Digital Corpus

Bibliography
Shillingsburg, P. L.(2006) “From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary Texts.” Cambridge University Press.

Goodman, N. (1976) “Languages of Art.” Hackett Publishing.

Hayward, N. & Shillingsburg. P.L. (2013) Woolf Online. Loyola University Chicago.. http://www.wool-fonline.com
Introduction
The Marianne Moore Digital Archive (MMDA) has

begun to publish digital editions of the 122 manuscript

notebooks of Modernist poet Marianne Moore. The notebooks contain a plethora of materials, include reading notes, recorded conversations Moore participated in or overheard, drafts of poems, travel descriptions, financial records, notes on concerts, lectures, classes, and sermons Moore attended, and other miscellanea documenting an active and increasingly prominent life as part of New York's literary and cultural scene from the 1910s to the 1960s. These unique resources pose significant resistance to accessing the trove of literary and cultural data they contain: they have never been published in any form, can be visited by appointment at a library in Philadelphia for only limited hours during the week, most of the notebooks are written in a cramped, uneven hand with frequent abbreviation and shorthand, Moore repurposed calendars and other cheap or free items that include preprinted material interspersed with her writing, many notebooks are now too fragile for normal handling, and previous attempts at conservation have led to the disordering of many pages. The unfamiliar and sometimes obscure historical and cultural references that are needed to trace the broad scope of Moore's readings and activities present an additional layer of difficulty for most of the potential audience that could take advantage of the notebooks for literary, historical, or cultural research. In response to these challenges, the MMDA has created a team of Moore scholars and scholarly digital editors at three universities and partnered with the Center for Unified Biometrics and Sensors (CUBS), an automated handwriting recognition and machine learning lab at the University at Buffalo.

This paper reflects on our efforts to increase access with respect to the notebooks in several senses: design choices with respect to the digital editorial apparatus needed to make the notebooks usable to non-specialists; the implementation of a HubZero 2.0 collaborative hub platform, designed for use in the sciences and engineering, for a humanities project; and the development of a customized, integrated editor/viewer based on existing digital manuscript editing tools that can enable non-technical editors to participate more directly in the digital workflow. The hub platform and workflow solution are primarily designed to support the specific research needs of the MMDA and its users, however the project code and our methodologies can be readily applied to other digital editing projects and digital humanities collaborations.

Abstract
Marianne Moore (1887-1972) was among the foremost modernist poets of the early twentieth- century. Her work contributed to the revolution in poetic form and conceptions of poetry occurring during the 1910s and 1920s and she remained a poet of profound reflection and innovative design throughout her lifetime. In particular, Moore was among the first to conceive the poem as constructed through both language and visual design on the page and she was the first Anglo-American poet to divorce the poetic line from syntax. While her peers such as T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, William Carlos Williams, Wallace Stevens, and H.D. often excoriated each others' work, all were profound admirers of Moore's thought and poetry (see, for example, Leavell 2014, and Miller, 1995 and 2005). Moore was also significant to modernism in her decades-long reviewing of work by her contemporaries, her publication of essays on aesthetic and cultural topics, and in her editing of one of the premier periodicals of modernist literature and art, The Dial, from 1925-1929. Moore received the Pulitzer Prize, the Bollingen Prize, the National Book Award, and the Gold Medal of the National Institute of Arts and Letters—among other awards. Additionally, she was made Chevalier de l'ordre des Lettres in France and received a Gold Medal Award for Lifetime Achievement from the Poetry Society. Her notebooks constitute a unique and extraordinary resource for understanding the composition, experience, and intellectual alertness of a brilliant thinker and poet to a very broad range of popular, mundane, intellectual, artistic, and historically significant events of her time.

The MMDA is making digital reproductions and transcriptions of Moore's notebooks readily accessible to scholarly, classroom, and non-academic readers for the first time. The transcriptions are supported by annotations contextualizing Moore's writing and life, including citations to the original source texts she invokes, and an image-text linking feature that makes it easy to move back and forth between the facsimile and the transcription. The digital editions of the notebooks are supported by a growing collection of related materials, such as indexes, a glossary, an interactive timeline of Moore's life and publications, searchable reproductions of the now hard-to-find Marianne Moore Newsletter, and faceted text and image search tools currently under development. This site will, we hope, revolutionize criticism on this significant poet; contribute to popular understanding of the modernist period's history and culture; and develop new tools for the digital editing and publication of handwritten materials.

Moore's notebooks offer extraordinary challenges for editors and digital designers because they include multiple genres, images (Moore frequently sketched objects that interested her), genetic layers of text (evidence of Moore's later editing of and additions to earlier notes, sometimes with different writing implements), and references to decades' worth of popular and academic source materials. Fully edited and annotated, Moore's notebooks suggest the deep cultural genesis of her poems: Moore's notebooks constitute not nearly finished drafts of poems and essays (that is, pre-publication texts) but, instead, a rich and varied collection of notes and compilations from which Moore drew the materials that went into her drafts and published work. Part commonplace book, part scrapbook, part sketchbook, part diary, each of Moore's notebooks offers an extraordinary window into the eclectic print and visual culture of the twentieth century and the ways in which one of America's most innovative poets responded to her world.

The MMDA addresses the special challenges and opportunities presented by these documents through a customized version of the Edition Visualization Technology (EVT), an open-source software project directed by Roberto Rosselli Del Turco (Del Turco et al, 2014-15). We have extended the tool significantly to allow for the transcription and facsimile coordinates to be edited directly in the browser, then saved automatically to underlying TEI XML files according to our project's customized TEI schema (Our viewer/ed-itor tool was developed on the basis of the EVT version 1.0, which utilizes XSLT, CSS, and Javascript to generate its viewer. The EVT version 2 recently released utilizes a different method that removes the need for

XSLT and relies on converting the TEI XML documents

into JSON, which we are considering as an alternative

for future development. See the EVT blog for more information about the proposed changes for version 2). This has significantly extended the utility of the EVT, and we will continue to add more advanced editing features for modern manuscript collections. This combination of editing and publishing capacity makes the editing of these manuscripts accessible to any of our registered team members directly in the browser, allowing us to address the needs of the site's editorial team and its users through the development of an integrated web platform, which we are continuing to develop along with manuscript editing tools being developed at the University at Buffalo in collaboration with the Computer Science and Engineering and the Center for Unified Biometrics and Sensors (CUBS) at the University at Buffalo. Our partners in CUBS are also developing automated handwriting recognition software that we are integrating into our platform. We aim to create a complete editorial workflow solution for transcription and annotation of manuscript collections. This is possible through the use of the HubZero 2.0 platform, based on Joomla, which to our knowledge has not previously been used for a digital humanities project.

The MMDA is making a vast quantity of unpublished writing by a major American poet and cultural figure freely available and easily accessible for the first time. Such access will have extraordinary impact. It is already transforming Moore studies and, as the number of publications on the site increases, it will contribute significantly to historical, cultural, and literary studies of modernism and of twentieth-century women's lives. The specialized tools and platforms for collaboration on digital manuscript editions we are developing will, we hope, serve as useful models for making manuscript collections more accessible to scholars and editors in collaboration.

Bibliography
Del Turco, R.R., Buomprisco, G., Di Pietro, C., Kenny, J.,

Masotti, R., and Pugliese, J. (2014-15), "Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-based Digital Editions", Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 8 (December 2014 - December 2015). URL : http://jtei.revues.org/1077 ; DOI : 10.4000/jtei.1077

Leavell, L. (2014) Holding On Upside Down: The Life and

Work of Marianne Moore (Farrar, Straus, Giroux) Marianne Moore Digital Archive. (2015) University of

Buffalo and the Center for Unified Biometrics and Sensors. www.moorearchive.org.

Miller, C. (2005) Cultures of Modernism: Marianne Moore, Mina Loy, and Else Lasker-Schüler (University of Michigan Press, 2005)

Miller, C. (1995) Marianne Moore: Questions of Authority. Harvard UP, 1995.

Ipsum, L. (2017) “Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua”. Lorem Ipsum Quarterly. 13.1: 27-45
Introduction
This half-day tutorial introduces digital humanists at any level of experience to XQuery, a mature, high-level programming language used in many DH projects because it is purpose-built for analyzing, manipulating, and publishing data stored in the XML-based data formats that many DH projects use, e.g., TEI, EAD,

MODS, METS. Prominent XQuery-based projects inelude Carl Maria von Weber Gesamtausgabe, Foreign Relations of the United States and Syriaca.org.

Led by two experts who each have a decade of experience using and teaching XQuery and who have coauthored XQuery for Humanists (forthcoming, Texas A&M University Press), this half-day tutorial introduces the key concepts underlying the XQuery language and the kinds of analysis that it makes possible. The focus will be on exploring TEI-encoded editions with simple XQuery expressions.

Using a free and easy to install XQuery learning environment, participants (who must bring their own laptops) will gain hands-on experience writing queries against open datasets, including a TEI-encoded documentary edition, Foreign Relations of the United States. Participants will gain a basic foundation in the language and be introduced to community resources for further study.

This half-day workshop will cover the basics of XQuery, providing participants with sufficient hands-on experience to start exploring their own scholarly editions and metadata with XQuery. We presuppose that participants will have come with a basic understanding of XML and TEI.

I. Introduction: XQuery for the Digital Humanities

II. Setting up an XQuery environment

III.    Finding data with XPath

IV.    Writing FLWOR expressions

V.    Exploring XQuery Full-Text

Each section (except the introduction) will include hands-on exercises.

Target audience:
Students, scholars, and practitioners who use or are interested in using digital methods in their humanities work in academic departments, libraries, "alt-ac" fields, or their private capacity; no previous programming experience required; some experience XML or an XML-based format (TEI, EAD, MODS, METS) useful but not required. Participants will work with a common dataset provided by the tutorial leaders, but they may bring their own datasets for practice during the lab and consultation period.

Tutorial leaders
Clifford B. Anderson is Associate University Librarian for Research and Learning at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. He has a M.Div. from Harvard Divinity School and a Th.M. and Ph.D. from Princeton Theological Seminary. He also holds a M.S. in Library and Information Science from the Pratt Institute in New York City. Cliff started working with XQuery in 2006 before the first official version of the language was released. In 2014, he served as the project leader of the NEH-funded XQuery Summer Institute at Vanderbilt University. He has also taught sessions on XQuery for iterations of Laura Mandel's Programming for Humanists course at Texas A&M and leads the weekly XQuery working group at Vanderbilt University for digital humanists

Joseph C. Wicentowski is the Digital History Advisor in the Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State. He received his Ph.D. from Harvard University in modern East Asian history. He started using XQuery in 2007 to analyze and publish the Office of the Historian's TEI-encoded publications and datasets. For more on the project, see Wicentowski (2011). All code and data from the project are freely available on GitHub. He recognized XQuery's potential to empower students, scholars, and practitioners to take control of their own data and build their own applications. But he knew that without resources geared toward people with a humanities background, others would struggle

as he first did. He began writing about XQuery in various digital humanities forums, contributing to the XQuery Wikibook online textbook, and giving workshops at the TEI@Oxford and Digital Humanities@Ox-ford Summer School programs. Joe regularly speaks and writes in the fields of history, documentary editing, and open government. He also actively participates in TEI, XQuery, and digital humanities communities, and fosters discussion about XQuery on Twitter at

@XQuery.

Bibliography
Wicentowski, J. (2011) "history.state.gov: A case study of Digital Humanities in Government," Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science, vol. 1 no. 3 , https://let-terpress.uchicago.edu/index.php/jdhcs/arti-

cle/view/80.
Introduction
This half-day tutorial introduces digital humanists at any level of experience to XQuery, a mature, high-level programming language used in many DH projects because it is purpose-built for analyzing, manipulating, and publishing data stored in the XML-based data formats that many DH projects use, e.g., TEI, EAD,

MODS, METS. Prominent XQuery-based projects inelude Carl Maria von Weber Gesamtausgabe, Foreign Relations of the United States and Syriaca.org.

Led by two experts who each have a decade of experience using and teaching XQuery and who have coauthored XQuery for Humanists (forthcoming, Texas A&M University Press), this half-day tutorial introduces the key concepts underlying the XQuery language and the kinds of analysis that it makes possible. The focus will be on exploring TEI-encoded editions with simple XQuery expressions.

Using a free and easy to install XQuery learning environment, participants (who must bring their own laptops) will gain hands-on experience writing queries against open datasets, including a TEI-encoded documentary edition, Foreign Relations of the United States. Participants will gain a basic foundation in the language and be introduced to community resources for further study.

This half-day workshop will cover the basics of XQuery, providing participants with sufficient hands-on experience to start exploring their own scholarly editions and metadata with XQuery. We presuppose that participants will have come with a basic understanding of XML and TEI.

I. Introduction: XQuery for the Digital Humanities

II. Setting up an XQuery environment

III.    Finding data with XPath

IV.    Writing FLWOR expressions

V.    Exploring XQuery Full-Text

Each section (except the introduction) will include hands-on exercises.

Target audience:
Students, scholars, and practitioners who use or are interested in using digital methods in their humanities work in academic departments, libraries, "alt-ac" fields, or their private capacity; no previous programming experience required; some experience XML or an XML-based format (TEI, EAD, MODS, METS) useful but not required. Participants will work with a common dataset provided by the tutorial leaders, but they may bring their own datasets for practice during the lab and consultation period.

Tutorial leaders
Clifford B. Anderson is Associate University Librarian for Research and Learning at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. He has a M.Div. from Harvard Divinity School and a Th.M. and Ph.D. from Princeton Theological Seminary. He also holds a M.S. in Library and Information Science from the Pratt Institute in New York City. Cliff started working with XQuery in 2006 before the first official version of the language was released. In 2014, he served as the project leader of the NEH-funded XQuery Summer Institute at Vanderbilt University. He has also taught sessions on XQuery for iterations of Laura Mandel's Programming for Humanists course at Texas A&M and leads the weekly XQuery working group at Vanderbilt University for digital humanists

Joseph C. Wicentowski is the Digital History Advisor in the Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State. He received his Ph.D. from Harvard University in modern East Asian history. He started using XQuery in 2007 to analyze and publish the Office of the Historian's TEI-encoded publications and datasets. For more on the project, see Wicentowski (2011). All code and data from the project are freely available on GitHub. He recognized XQuery's potential to empower students, scholars, and practitioners to take control of their own data and build their own applications. But he knew that without resources geared toward people with a humanities background, others would struggle

as he first did. He began writing about XQuery in various digital humanities forums, contributing to the XQuery Wikibook online textbook, and giving workshops at the TEI@Oxford and Digital Humanities@Ox-ford Summer School programs. Joe regularly speaks and writes in the fields of history, documentary editing, and open government. He also actively participates in TEI, XQuery, and digital humanities communities, and fosters discussion about XQuery on Twitter at

@XQuery.

Bibliography
Wicentowski, J. (2011) "history.state.gov: A case study of Digital Humanities in Government," Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science, vol. 1 no. 3 , https://let-terpress.uchicago.edu/index.php/jdhcs/arti-

cle/view/80.
Topic

Transkribus is a platform for the automated recognition, transcription and searching of handwritten historical documents. Transkribus is part of the EU-funded Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents (READ) project. The core mission of the READ project is to make archival material more accessible through the development and dissemination of Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) and other cutting-edge technologies.

The workshop is aimed at researchers and students who are interested in the transcription, searching and publishing of historical documents. It will introduce participants to the technology behind the READ project and demonstrate the Transkribus transcription platform. Our team has already conducted 30 similar workshops over the course of 2016, including several sessions with digital humanities scholars and students.

Transkribus can be freely downloaded from the Transkribus website. Participants will be instructed to create a Transkribus account and install Transkri-bus on their laptops in advance of the workshop. They should bring their laptops along to the workshop.

The workshop will consist of five parts:

Introduction to Handwritten    Text

Recognition (HTR) technology

The introduction to this workshop will explain how new algorithms and technologies are making it possible for computer software to process handwritten text. Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) technology works differently from Optical Character Recognition (OCR) for printed texts (Leifert et al., 2016). Rather than focusing on individual characters, HTR engines process the entire image of a word or line, scanning it in various directions and then putting this data into a sequence. This introduction will outline the workings of HTR technology and show examples of the successful automatic transcription and searching of historical documents. It will also explain the possibilities of working with different languages and styles of handwriting. The latest experiments demonstrate that Transkribus can automatically generate transcripts with a Character Error Rate of 5-10%. This means that 90-95% of the characters in the transcript would be correct.

Overview of the READ project

This presentation will give an overview of the READ project and the specific tools it is creating. Computer scientists working on READ are developing HTR technology using thousands of manuscript pages with varying dates, styles, languages and layouts. Testing the technology on a large and diverse data set will make it possible for computers to automatically transcribe and search any kind of handwritten document, from the Middle Ages to the present day, from old Greek to modern English. This research has huge implications for the accessibility of the written records of human history. The READ project is making this technology available through the Transkribus platform but is also developing other tools designed to make it easier for archivists, researchers and the public to work with historical documents. The workshop leaders will present prototypes of some of these tools. These include a system of automatic writer identification, an elearning app to enable users to train themselves to read a particular style of writing, a mobile app to allow users to digitise and process documents in the archives and a crowdsourcing platform where volunteers can transcribe with the assistance of HTR technology. These tools will be open source and are designed to be used and adapted by other institutions and projects.

Introduction to Transkribus

HTR technology is made available through the Transkribus platform, which is programmed with JAVA and SWT (Muhlberger et al.) A transcription of a handwritten document can be undertaken in Tran-skribus for two main purposes. The first is a simple transcription - this allows users to train the HTR engine to automatically read historical papers. The second is an advanced transcription - this allows users to create a transcription of a document which may serve as the basis of a digital edition. This presentation will explain both uses of Transkribus.

HTR engines are based on algorithms of machine learning. The technology needs to be trained by being shown examples of at least 30 pages of transcribed material. This helps it to understand the patterns which make up words and characters. This training material is known as ‘ground truth' (Zagoris et al., 2012, Gatos et al., 2014). The workshop leaders will demonstrate how ‘ground truth' training data can be prepared using Transkribus. Participants can work with images of their own documents, or experiment with test documents already on the system.

Transkribus can also be used simply for transcription. This presentation will explain how to create a rich transcription of a document in the platform, using structural mark-up, tagging, document metadata and an editorial declaration.

Working independently with Transkribus

In the last part of the workshop, the participants will be able to try out the functions of Transkribus on their own laptops. They will be supported by the workshop leaders, who will explain the different elements of the platform and then give participants the chance to practice each function for themselves. The workshop leaders will circulate around the room to answer any questions.

The workshop leaders will demonstrate the following tasks. After each demonstration, participants will be given 10-15 minutes to practice what they have learned.

•    Document management - how to upload, view, save, move and export documents in standard formats (PDF, TEI, docx, PAGE XML)

•    User management - how to allow specific users to view and edit documents

•    Layout analysis - how to segment your documents to create training data for the HTR engines

•    Transcription - how to create a rich transcript with tags and mark-up

•    HTR - how to apply HTR models to automatically generate transcripts, how to conduct a keyword search of your documents, how to assess the accuracy of automatically generated transcripts

Question and Answer

The workshop will close with a Question and Answer session where participants can clarify anything they are unsure about. They will also have the opportunity to provide feedback on the Transkribus tool via our user survey.

Organizers

Louise Seaward
Dr. Seaward received her PhD in History from the University of Leeds (United Kingdom) in 2013. She is currently a research associate at University College London where she coordinates ‘Transcribe Bentham', the scholarly crowdsourcing initiative which asks members of the public to transcribe manuscripts written by the British philosopher Jeremy Bentham (17481832). Outside of digital humanities and Bentham, her research interests relate to the history of censorship and the Enlightenment.

Maria Kaiiio
Maria Kallio works as a Senior Research Officer at the National Archives of Finland where she is responsible for collections, crowd-sourcing and dissemination within the READ project. Currently she is also finishing her PhD in History at the University of Turku (Finland). In addition to digital humanities, her research interests include medieval literacy and written culture in all its diversity.

Proposed audience

Humanities and digital humanities scholars, archivists, librarians, computer scientists

Guidelines for Participants

Participants should register to attend the workshop by sending an email to Louise Seaward. Participants will need to bring their own laptops and install Transkribus before attending the workshop. If participants are interested in working with their own documents, they should bring a selection of digital images to the workshop. Otherwise, it will be possible to work with test documents already on the platform.

Bibliography

Leifert, G., Strauß, T., Grüning, T., and Labahn, R. (2016). ‘Cells in Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks’, https://arXiv.org/abs/1412.2620v02

Mühlberger, G., Colutto, S., Kahle, P., (forthcoming) ‘Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) of Historical Docu-

ments as a Shared Task for Archivists, Computer Scientists and Humanities Scholars. The Model of a Transcription & Recognition Platform (TRP)' (pre-print)

Gatos, B., Louloudis, G., Causer, T., Grint, K., Romero, V.,

Sánchez, J.A., Toselli, A.H., and Vidal, E. (2014). ‘Ground-Truth Production in the tranScriptorium Project', Document Analysis Systems (DAS), 2014 11th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, 237-244

Stamatopoulos, N., and Gatos, B. (2015). ‘Goal-oriented performance evaluation methodology for page segmentation techniques', 13th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), 281285.

Konstantinos, Z., Pratikakis, I., Antonacopoulos, A., Gatos, B., and Papamarkos, N. (2012). ‘Handwritten and Machine Printed Text Separation in Document Images Using the Bag of Visual Words Paradigm", in: Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), 2012 International Conference,    Bari,    103-108.    DOI:

10.1109/ICFHR.2012.207.
Introduction
In this half-day tutorial we will offer a full-fledged, implemented and tested workflow that has been developed in the interdisciplinary Center for Reflected

Text Analytics (CRETA, a research center connecting both scholars from Humanities/Social Sciences and Computational Linguistics at the University of Stuttgart). Our focus is the valid and reliable identification of various kinds of entities and segments from raw, un-annotated texts and the extraction of specific relational information via network visualizations. Given the recent interest in networks for data representation and visualization (e.g., Gephi-tutorial at DH 2016), we argue that the following three-step-workflow is applicable to many research questions in the Social Sciences and Humanities:

1.    Detection of entity references in texts of different genres (e.g. references to chancellor Merkel in parliamentary debates),

2.    Segmentation of the texts guided by research questions (e.g. parts of a parliamentary speech dealing with the Greek financial crisis), and

3. Creation of networks of entities that co-occur within a segment (e.g. references to national or international organizations in a parliamentary debate dealing with the issue of wars and military interventions).

This workflow is one example of modularizing complex research questions into concrete steps and can moreover be combined with computational methods for the semi-automatic analysis of very large text corpora. The concepts of “entity” and “segment” are sufficiently generic to allow the same set of tools to be employed in different research questions originating from different fields of research. The tutorial is therefore not aimed at a specific Humanities or Social Sciences discipline and instead open to all researchers interested in the analysis of entity relations in large amounts of textual data.

In our tutorial we will make use of the web-based annotation tool CRETAnno developed to support semi-automatic annotation. CRETAnno provides tools for annotation and continuous assessment of inter-annotator agreement, thereby facilitating the production of reliable and valid data. Our tool facilitates the annotation of large text corpora: After some training instances are annotated, a machine learning model can be trained to predict new instances on additional texts, which can then be corrected and used as additional training material. This way, large texts can be annotated (relatively) quickly, given systematic manual annotation and clear annotation guidelines. This 3-step approach is currently investigated within the Center for Reflected Text Analytics (CRETA) on four distinct text corpora, connected to diverse research questions in different disciplines. Although establishing broadly applicable workflows has its merits (Kuhn & Reiter, 2015), we believe it is important to be able to “parameterise” them to take into account the specificities of a concrete research question. Research questions should govern the definition of entities, segments and weighting criteria in the network. In the tutorial, participants will be free to bring in (and work on) their own research questions (within the time limits of the tutorial).

Entity Reference Detection
Every concept of interest within a real or fictional world can be considered as an entity. Words in a text refer to th ese entities and are therefore called entity references. We have established annotation guidelines that distinguish six entity classes, oriented at the research questions within CRETA: Person, Location, Organization, Work (e.g., a piece of art), Event and Abstract Concept (e.g., art).

While these entities are semantically diverse, their linguistic representation in texts is similar: References are either proper nouns (Hillary Clinton/EU), pronouns (she/it) or appellative noun phrases (an American politician / the international organisation).Most of the entity references consist of a few words, but we generally opt for annotating full noun phrases (e.g., the British people after having voted for the Brexit). In order to be able to link entities semi-automatically, we focus on appellative noun phrases and proper nouns, and ignore pronouns (see below).

The notion of “entity reference” we are aiming for differs from what is known in Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Coreference Resolution (CR). In NER, only proper nouns are detected, while CR also aims to resolve pronouns. Our notion of entity reference detection is aiming for the middle ground. By excluding pronouns, we also exclude the most ambiguous words, whose co-reference properties typically can only be judged in context of their appearance. Appellative NPs contain enough information such that we can establish their identity with proper nouns with relatively simple lists and rules.

Text Segmentation
Researchers from Humanities or Social Sciences generally want to inquire either the interaction between entities (within certain contexts) or between entities and the contexts themselves. Text segmentation is our way of operationalising this context. The notion of segment -- again -- is a generic one, to be adapted to specific research questions and/or theoretical assumptions made within a discipline or research area. Different kinds of segmentation are distinguishable: A segmentation according to structural units like chapters (narratives), speeches (minutes of parliamentary debates) or acts (dramatic texts) relies on the proper detection of such segments in the original texts and is therefore highly intertwined with the concrete text format at hand. Although machine learning models can be trained to perform such tasks, they likely do not generalize well to new texts. Even in TEI-encoded dramatic texts (which are strongly structured), there are a lot of options how to encode acts. We therefore aim for making it easy for researchers from Humanities and Social Sciences to detect such segments using metadata (e.g. dates of publication of a newspaper article or a parliamentary debate), text-specific regular expressions and/or rules.

A second kind of segmentation is segmentation according to content criteria. Depending on text genre and research question, this can mean segmentation by topic, narrative level, plot, time, location etc. One possible application is the segmentation of newspaper content according to various topics (Kantner & Overbeck 2017, forthcoming).

Structurally, segment annotations differ from entity reference annotations by being longer and thus sparser within a text. This has consequences for the semi-automatic support, because annotating a sufficient number of training instances requires more text to be read (and analysed with respect to its segmentation) and thus takes more time. CRETAnno therefore supports a number of unsupervised segmentation algorithms that can be used directly. In addition, researchers can specify text patterns using regular expressions and simple rules and thus focus the segmentation on the specific research question they have. Entities + Segments = Networks

Given entity reference and segment annotations, it is only a small step to extract network-like data based on co-occurrence. As the entity reference annotation does not include links between annotations referring to the same entity, we developed a small tool to mark co-reference, given the annotated entity references. Currently, this has to be done manually, but we will explore automatisation possibilities in the future. Given that we can already identify string-identical entity references automatically, it is a manageable workload.

CRETAnno offers an interface to the graph exploration

software Gephi, which can be used to edit, explore, inspect and visualise the network (the tutorial covers the annotation, ex- and import, but only basic functionality of Gephi.).

Tutorial
Participants will have the opportunity to work on texts of their own choosing within the first half of the workshop. To that end, they will be asked to submit their texts before the workshop. We will supply hands-on material to participants that do not submit. The tutorial focuses on hands-on sessions and active participation.

Appendix
Tutorial Instructors

All submission authors work jointly in the Center for Reflected Text Analytics (CRETA) at Stuttgart University, Germany.

Sandra Murr

Sandra Murr , is a PhD candidate in the Department of modern German literature at the University of Stuttgart. Within CRETA, she analyzes literary works of the productive reception of J. W. v. Goethe's Sorrows of the Young Werther, the so-called Wertheriaden, focusing on the analysis of the central character constellation with respect to emotions.

Maximilian Overbeck

Maximilian Overbeck is a PhD candidate in Political Science at the Chair of International Relations and European Integration at the University of Stuttgart. In his PhD he analyses Western debates on religion in the context of wars and armed conflicts where he uses highly innovative computational-linguistic approaches for the valid and reliable analysis of large newspaper corpora.

Nils Reiter

Dr. Nils Reiter works at the Department of Natural Language Processing and coordinates the scientific work in CRETA. Since his PhD thesis with the title Discovering Structural Similarities in Narrative Texts using Event Alignment Algorithms ( Link ), he is working in and for the Digital Humanities area, with a particular focus on literary texts, annotation and the operationalisation of Humanities research questions.

Target Audience

Any student or scholar interested in qualitative and quantitative text analysis is invited. Prior knowledge in text analysis techniques is not obligatory but might be helpful. Programming skills are not necessary, but familiarity with Gephi is helpful. We welcome 20 to 30 participants.

Acknowledgements
We at CRETA are grateful to the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for its generous funding in the years 2016 until 2018 (project ID: 01UG1601).

Bibliography
John, M., Lohmann, S., Koch, S., Worner, M., Ertl, T. (2016)

Visual Analytics for Narrative Text: Visualizing Characters and their Relationships as Extracted from Novels. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and Applications (IVAPP '16). SciTePress, 2016.

Kuhn, J., and Reiter, N. (2015). A Plea for a Method-Driven Agenda in the Digital Humanities. In Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2015, Sydney, Australia, June 2015.

Kantner, C., Overbeck, M. (2017, forthcoming): „Die Analyse ,weicher‘ Konzepte mit ,harten‘ korpuslinguistischen Methoden. In: J. Behnke, A. Blaette, J.-U. Schnapp & C. Wagemann (eds.) Big data? New Data. Baden-Baden: Nomos Verlag.

Overbeck, M., (2015). Observers turning into participants: Shifting perspectives on religion and armed conflict in Western news coverage. The Tocqueville Review/La revue Tocqueville, 36, 95-124.

Reiter, N. (2015) Towards Annotating Narrative Segments. Proceedings of the 9th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 34-38, Beijing, China, July 30, 2015.
What is CATMA?
This hands-on tutorial introduces humanists to CATMA (Computer Aided Text Markup and Analysis), a tool developed at the University of Hamburg and currently used by over 60 research projects worldwide. CATMA offers a unique combination of three main features found in no other text analysis tool:

CATMA supports collaborative annotation and

analysis - a text or text corpus can be investigated individually, but also jointly by a group of students or researchers.

CATMA supports explorative, non-deterministic practices of text annotation - a discursive, debate-oriented approach to text annotation based on the research practices of hermeneutic disciplines is the underlying conceptual model.

CATMA integrates text annotation and text analysis in a web-based working environment - which makes it possible to combine the identification of textual phenomena with their investigation in a seamless, iterative fashion.

What sets CATMA apart from other digital annotation methods is its ‘undogmatic' approach: the system does neither prescribe defined annotation schemata or rules, nor does it force the user to apply rigid yes/no, right/wrong taxonomies to texts (even though it allows for more prescriptive schemata as well). Rather, CATMA's logic invites users to explore the richness and multi-facettedness of textual phenomena according to their needs: Users can create, expand, and continuously modify their own individual tagsets - so if a text passage invites more than one interpretation, nothing in the system prevents assigning multiple, or even contradictory annotations. Despite all this flexibility, CATMA does not produce idiosyncratic annotations: All markup data can be exported in TEI/XML-format and reused in other contexts.

Since CATMA is a highly intuitive tool, it is also suitable for humanists with little technical knowledge: the GUI allows for a quick kick-off, and CATMA's query builder (a step-by-step dialogue-based widget) helps users retrieve complex information from texts without having to learn a query language. Another plus on the easy-to-use side is the fact that CATMA's automated distant-reading functions are continuously enhanced and extended - the current version 5.0 already features a number of automated annotation routines, among others the identification of basic narrative features in texts.

The aim of the tutorial
In our half-day tutorial, we will introduce the core annotation and analysis functionalities of CATMA and show how they can be combined with the annotations provided automatically. Participants will be taken in a step-by-step, hands-on approach through the full cycle of a CATMA-based text investigation:

•    From text upload to initial textinvestiga-tions,

•    then to annotation and specification of annotation categories,

•    from there to combined text queries that consult the source text and its annotations in combination,

and finally to the visual output of queryresults.

In a later phase of the tutorial, participants will

have the opportunity of testing the tool with regards to their own research interests: They can annotate their own texts or annotate collaboratively a text we will provide. We would also like to engage participants in a critique of CATMA's design and components as well as a general discussion about requirements for text analysis tools in their fields of interest.

The primary users of CATMA are literary scholars, as well as graduate and undergraduate students of Literary Studies. Nevertheless, this tutorial is likely to be of interest also to:

humanities scholars of ALL fields concerned with text analysis (with and without experience in digital text analysis),

software developers in the humanities interested in non-deterministic text analysis and automated annotation.

Participants need no prior knowledge of digital text annotation and can work with their own laptop computers and their own digital texts. CATMA runs on Laptop or PC (Windows, Unix or MacOS) with a current web browser (MS Explorer or Edge; Firefox, Chrome, Safari) with a mouse or touchpad. Touchscreen navigation is not yet supported (but in the pipeline!). The

room in which the workshop takes place should accommodate 25-30 people and provide WLAN and a projector.

Tutorial Instructors
All tutorial instructors come from the developing team of the CATMA project and/or the forTEXT project that is building a platform starting from CATMA. We have been presenting and teaching CATMA on various national and international occasions in the last years.

Evelyn Gius

Evelyn is working in the field of Digital Humanities as a researcher and has been involved in the creation of CATMA from the very beginning. Her research focus is on manual and automated text analysis. For her PhD project in Literary Studies she has explored with CATMA the benefits of applying narratological categories from literary studies to the analysis of narrations of labor conflicts.

Jan Horstmann

Jan uses CATMA as a tool for textual analysis in literature studies and narratology. Currently he is investigating works of Goethe with a combination of distant and digital close reading methods. His focus is to improve the usability of digital tools for people with little or no prior knowledge of computing or programming, i.e. researchers from classical literature studies.

Janina Jacke

Janina Jacke has worked in the heureCLEA project (2013-2016) that was aimed at developing automated annotation routines for CATMA. Since her research focuses on narratology and theory of interpretation, her main interest in the DH-context lies in working out the theoretical prerequisites for automated literary annotation.

Jan Christoph Meister

Chris is Professor of German literature with a main research focus in the Digital Humanities. As original inventor of CATMA, he has led several projects concerned with the annotation and visualization of literary data and the development and enhancement of DH-tools.

Marco Petris,

Marco is a computer scientist with a strong affinity for the humanities and has been engaged in the creation of CATMA from the very beginning. As a research developer he is involved in all aspects of the design and implementation of tools for the Digital Humanities.

        
            This workshop introduces 
                
                    Recogito 2
                , a tool developed by Pelagios Commons that enables annotation of geographic place references in text, images and data through a user-friendly online platform. Perhaps the most notable feature of Recogito 2 is the ability to produce semantic data without the need to work with formal languages directly, while at the same time allowing the user to export the annotations produced as valid RDF, XML and GeoJSON formats.
            
            The availability of born digital data as well as digitised collections, is changing the way we study and understand the humanities. This amount of information has even greater potential for research when semantic links can be established, and relationships between entities highlighted. The work of Pelagios Commons has shown that connecting historical data according to their common reference to places (expressed via URIs stored in gazetteers) is a particularly powerful approach: information about material culture, archaeological excavations, ancient texts and related scholarship can be connected and cross referenced through the geodata. 
            Producing semantic annotations usually requires a certain amount of knowledge of digital technologies such as RDF, ontologies and/or text encoding. These techniques can sometimes act as a barrier for users that are not already familiar with Semantic Web theory. The Recogito annotation tool aims to facilitate the creation and publication of Linked Open Data by dramatically reducing some commonly encountered obstacles. First developed in 2014, the community-oriented philosophy behind Pelagios Commons has made users an active agent in shaping its functionality and interface. A dedicated forum on the Pelagios Commons website gathers feedback and suggestions. Recogito code is Open Access and available through 
                GitHub where discussions of Recogito’s more technical aspects are held. After a year of intensive redevelopment from the ground up, Recogito 2 was launched in December 2016 and now has almost 1,500 registered users. 
                Introductory documentation is available in English, Spanish, German and Italian with the interface itself being translated into multiple languages in February 2018.
            
            Recogito now supports both additional image standards (such as 
                IIIF) and text standards (TEI export). This allows researchers to use the annotation tool as either a starting or intermediate point for their workflow in the production of semantic annotations that can be then built upon with other technologies. While the initial release already enabled collaboration among users, Recogito 2 features a more refined series of options to manage degrees of collaboration, from private annotations that can only be accessed by their creator, to collaborative and public ones that anyone can see and download. These options offer the opportunity to collaborate, but leaves users free to choose the degree of openness that best suits their materials at different stages of research. 
            
            Originally conceived for data related to the ancient world, Recogito 2 has become a valuable tool for annotating many other kinds of historical and modern sources, especially (but not confined to) those containing geographical information. Recogito 2 facilitates the annotation of any named entity. Where applicable, they can be resolved against a number of aligned digital gazetteers, including the ancient world (
                Pleiades) and modern (
                Geonames). Although the annotation of geographical information is its most principal focus, Recogito 2 also allows “people” and “event” references to be annotated (currently without semantic resolution), and the opportunity to add tags and comments to disambiguate and refine later searches. Two different colour-coding options makes it easy to identify the different kind of annotations (places, people or events) or different status of the geographic annotations. 
            
            This workshop walks participants through all stages of using Recogito 2 to annotate different types of source documents: from uploading a file to the online platform, through annotation, to the download of the annotations in the available data formats. More specifically, the workshop will show practical examples of:
                
                
                Annotation of sources in text format
                Attendees will learn how to benefit from Recogito’s automatic recognition of named entities, and how to refine it manually. They will create annotations ex novo, and check or modify those identified by Recogito. The geo-annotations produced on the text can then be plotted on a digital map, through a user-friendly visualisation mode. The relevance of each place is displayed on the map proportionally to the number of annotations that the place has received. Places are linked, via a pop-up window, to all their annotations in the same document, and users are able to browse each annotation in a short, essential context, or to see them in the full text.
            
            
                Annotation of images and tables 
                After beginning with text files, attendees will work on the semantic annotations of images. Maps are especially well suited to geo-annotation but Recogito 2 can also be used for the annotation of other types of image, such as photographs or even textual sources in the form of digitised manuscripts. Users will upload images to the Recogito platform and be able to select, transcribe, annotate and, georesolve toponyms within the image. Workshop attendees will also see how Recogito can import and annotate or align tabular (CSV) data such as that derived from spreadsheets, databases or gazetteers.
            
            
                Exporting data from Recogito
                Finally, participants will learn how to export data from Recogito in a variety of formats suitable for visualizing and analysis in other tools, such as spreadsheets, databases or GIS.
            
            To maximise the benefit of the workshop, participants are invited to bring their own data and documents to annotate. Recogito currently has greatest support for ancient and modern sources (including most languages). Materials from other periods can also be annotated but the level and quality of georesolution may vary. The workshop will provide sample texts, imagery and data for attendees without their own datasets. The workshop will show examples of annotations of different kind of sources, and discuss their specific challenges. Throughout the workshop there will be opportunities for participants to discuss how Recogito 2 might be used to support their own research. 
            Visualising and contextualizing geographical information within documents can be an important step in reaching a deeper understanding of their content, potentially highlighting phenomena that would have been otherwise difficult to identify. It is also an effective tool for engaging students when encountering historical texts and collections. The design of Recogito 2 is intended to make the production of semantic annotations easy and intuitive, opening the door of the Linked Open Data ecosystem to a wide range of users, including without prior experience of semantic technologies.
        
    

        
            
                Overview
                Our half-day tutorial proposed for DH2018 concerns the semi-automatic alignment of different witnesses in complex textual traditions, with demonstration of specific use cases, a discussion of the relevance of the implemented system to particular textual problems relevant to the participants as well as a hands on discovery of the system. Alignment is a relatively simple task for modern languages with orthographic stability and relatively similar texts, but when there is a degree of instability of textual transmission as in oral literatures, popular music or poetry, or other complex texts with partial repetition the task becomes more difficult. Whereas methods of hand aligning and visualizing texts exists in TEI, we focus on the possibility of computational alignment for the purpose of exploratory textual visualization. Scholars who are interested in visualizing scaled forms of reading will be interested in this tutorial. 
                Our visual analytics environment 
                    iteal supports the computational alignment of textual similarities and is not English-specific. It was originally implemented using orally inflected medieval French poetic texts (with test cases of the fabliaux and epic) and so is known to work on texts in Latin alphabets with inconsistent orthography.
                
                This half-day tutorial aims at introducing 
                    iteal to the DH community for which the questions of multi-text problems, spelling variance and debates about distant forms of reading are currently quite salient. Many language processing and visualization tools do not work well with languages beyond English. Our environment is known to work with languages beyond English will be of interest those interested in expanding innovative techniques in the textual humanities across the North/South divide. Participants of the tutorial will be led in a step-by-step, hands-on approach through the full cycle of an 
                    iteal-based text alignment workflow, and they will finally have the opportunity of testing the tool with their own data. Although proven to be effectively useful for text variants of medieval poetry, we will not focus only on this type of text as 
                    iteal can be used to determine alignments among texts of a different kind in any language and in multiple genres. Currently, 
                    iteal works with plain text in utf8.
                
                
                    iteal consists of two major modules:
                
                
                    First, it automatically determines line-to-line alignments pairwise between all given text editions based on user-configurable parameters including:
                
                
                    
                        Edit distance: Variant spellings are taken into account by this function. We define two words as spelling variants if they have the same first letter, and if the string similarity of the remaining substrings is higher than a user-configurable threshold. 
                    
                    
                        Coverage: In order to ensure that a specific proportion of words of both lines are aligned, the user can configure a minimum coverage value of the line. 
                    
                    
                        N-grams: The user can configure the minimum required n-gram size n that is the largest number of subsequent word matches of both lines. 
                    
                    
                        Broken n-grams: Quite often, the only difference between two lines is a single word in the middle of a line that is either inserted, synonymous, or a transposed stopword. Large n-grams, from this perspective are not achieved. Thus, we allow the user for considering broken n-grams, which is the total number of word matches among both lines. 
                    
                
                
                    Second, for the purpose of analyzing the determined alignment we provide interactive visualizations for different text hierarchy levels (examples for all three views can be found in Figures 1, 2 and 3, and a teaser outlining a brief workflow with 
                    iteal can be found at 
                    ):
                
                
                    
                        Distant Reading: In order to get a rough overview of alignment patterns throughout the observed text versions, we draw a miniature representation for each version in the form of a vertical bar reflecting its number of verse lines in contrast to the other shown versions. For us, this is the most distant form of reading, where the text itself is not visualized, but rather abstract depictions of textual similarity point to patterns worth discovering.
                    
                    
                        Meso Reading: Since multiple texts are displayed in synoptic views, the visualization is able to convey more complex patterns of textual relationship. We call this a meso reading that might be said to connect multiple close readings all the while transmitting information that lies beyond the scope of a close reading. Here, we use the intuitivity of stream graphs to connect aligned verse lines among different versions. For a more detailed inspection of an individual alignment, clicking on a stream opens a popup window for line-level close reading. 
                    
                    
                        Close Reading: Next to plain text, the close reading view provides word level alignments for the corresponding verse lines in the form of two Variant Graph visualizations. Within the close reading view, individual alignments can be confirmed with user input, so that it gets persistently stored in the backend. 
                    
                
                
                    Target audience: Anyone studying variance in the textual digital humanities and its visualization would be interested in our tutorial. It will be offered in English, but can accommodate data in a variety of languages. Potential participants in the tutorial are encouraged to be in touch with the presenters in advance of DH2018 to provide some sample data that can used to provide a mashup. Required for this step is a version of at least two documents sharing some text in common, of at least 20 lines.
                
            
            
                Tutorial Schedule
                
                    Part I (1 hour + break time)
                
                
                    – 
                    iteal
                     
                    introduction
                    : purpose, functionality, configuration, visualization (Stefan Jänicke)
                
                
                    – 
                    Medieval French poetry as an 
                    iteal
                     
                    use case 
                    (David J. Wrisley)
                
                
                    – 
                    Further use cases, future work, questions 
                    (Stefan Jänicke &amp; David J. Wrisley)
                
                Break
                Part II (2 hours - break time)
                
                    – 
                    Step-by-step hands-on session with texts brought by tutorial participants
                
                
                    – 
                    wrap up, feedback and steps forward
                
            
            
                
                    
                    Sample images from 
                    iteal
                
                
                    
                        
                        Aligning two editions of the Chanson de Roland with iteal
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Aligning two editions of La vie de saint Marie l’Egyptienne with iteal
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Aligning two editions of Perceval with iteal
                    
                
            
            
                Biographies of the Tutorial Organizers
                
                    Stefan Jänicke (
                    
                        stjaenicke@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
                    
                    ):
                     
                    Dr. Stefan Jänicke is a post-doctoral researcher at the Image and Signal Processing Group at Leipzig University, Germany, where he leads a text visualization group focusing on applications in the digital humanities. Over the last years, he has gained experience in developing information visualization and visual analytics techniques within a number of digital humanities projects. His PhD thesis investigates the utility of visualization techniques to support the comparative analysis of digital humanities data, and his current research relates to information visualization with a focus on applications for text- and geovisualization in digital humanities. 
                    Homepage: 
                    
                        http://stjaenicke.vizcovery.de
                    
                
                
                    David Joseph Wrisley
                     
                    (
                    
                        djw12@nyu.edu
                    
                    ):
                     Dr. David Joseph Wrisley is Associate Professor of Digital Humanities at New York University Abu Dhabi. His research interests include the creation of open, inclusive corpora in medieval studies, corpus-based geovisualization as well as visual exploration of variance in poetic traditions. Furthermore, he is interested in the challenges in humanities data stemming from 
                    both multilingual environments and social data creation. 
                    Homepage: 
                    
                        http://djwrisley.com
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        S. Jänicke, A. Geßner, G. Franzini, M. Terras, S. Mahony and G. Scheuermann (2015). TRAViz: A Visualization for Variant Graphs. In: Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 30, suppl 1, pp i83–i99.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke, G. Franzini, M. F. Cheema and G. Scheuermann (2015). On Close and Distant Reading in Digital Humanities: A Survey and Future Challenges. In: Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) - STARs. The Eurographics Association.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke and D. J. Wrisley (2017). Visualizing Mouvance: Towards a Visual Analysis of Variant Medieval Text Traditions. In: Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 32, suppl 2, pp ii106–ii123.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke, A. Geßner, M. Büchler and G. Scheuermann (2014). Visualizations for Text Re-use. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and Applications (VISIGRAPP 2014), pp 59–70.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke and D. J. Wrisley (2017). Interactive Visual Alignment of Medieval Text Versions. In: IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, IEEE VAST 2017.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke, A. Geßner, M. Büchler and G. Scheuermann (2014). 5 Design Rules for Visualizing Text Variant Graphs. In: Conference Abstracts of the Digital Humanities 2014.
                    
                    
                        S. Jänicke and D. J. Wrisley (2016). Visualizing Mouvance: Towards an Alignment of Medieval Vernacular Text Traditions. In: Conference Abstracts of the Digital Humanities 2016.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Outline
            The application of computing methods to scholarly editing was one of the first major areas to be explored in the nascent discipline of “Humanities Computing”: the direct ancestor of what we now know as “Digital Humanities”. The highly-structured nature of scholarly editions, with their formal links between text and carefully crafted apparatus, and the promise that complex patterns in historical texts might be usefully explored by computer methods, made them obvious targets for the early application of computer methods to humanities materials (Hockey; see also early work by Dearing and Petty and Gibson). The first formal attempt at systematic computer representation of texts, the Text Encoding Initiative, analyzed these structures into a formal encoding scheme, itself building on the principles set out in De Rose et al’s landmark 1990 publication, “What is Text, Really”.
            While the TEI encodings created from 1990 onward proved a solid foundation for many scholarly editions in digital form, from the very beginning scholars recognized a fundamental problem in the TEI encodings when applied to scholarly editions. At its most basic: one wants to see the text of a manuscript on screen as it appears in the manuscript: page by page, line by line. But also one wants to see that text not as it appears in the manuscript, but according to its logical structure as an act of communication: that is, as composed of segments (Acts and scenes; or stanzas and lines; or chapters, paragraphs and sentences). Because these two views almost never correspond, we have what is usually termed the problem of “overlapping hierarchies”: paragraphs cross page boundaries; manuscripts contain multiple works, distributed in complex ways across the pages. 
            Many papers have addressed this issue of the “overlapping hierarchy” (De Rose; Sperberg-McQueen and Huitfeldt), and this author has wrestled with this issue across multiple editions and operating systems. In 2010, the author commenced work on a new system for collaborative online scholarly editing, “Textual Communities”. A key aim was that this system would seek a robust and fundamental solution to the problem described as “overlapping hierarchies”. Accordingly, the first task was to rethink exactly what we mean by the terms “document”, “work” and “text”. For this, the author went to textual scholarship, which has been considering the meaning of these terms for centuries. In a series of articles (2013a, 2013b, 2017) the author has explored their meaning, with the 2013a article most clearly anchoring his perceptions in the traditions of textual scholarship. In summary, these terms are defined as follows:
            
                A text is an act of communication instanced in a document
                The act of communication is composed of an ordered hierarchy of objects (Acts and scenes; or stanzas and lines; or chapters, paragraphs and sentences): hence, a tree
                The document is composed of an ordered hierarchy of objects: the volume, divided into quires, divided into leaves, divided into recto and verso pages, divided into columns, divided into lines (or, surfaces, divided into zones, etc): hence, a tree
            
            In this analysis, every text is composed of two distinct and independent hierarchies: one tree for the document, and one for the act of communication. Both trees are essential. An act of communication cannot exist unless it is physically instantiated in a document. If the document does not present an act of communication, then it is simply marks on paper, without lexical meaning.
            Textual communities formalized these definitions in an ontology. The naming system used by this ontology is based on the well-known Kahn-Wilensky system (1995), commencing with a naming authority (in this example, TC:CTP) and then using a sequence of property/value pairs to specify each object. In this case, we are describing that part of paragraph 291 of the Parson’s Tale (“PA”) which appears in line 40 of folio 232v of the Hengwrt manuscript of the Canterbury Tales:
            
                The document hierarchy: TC:CTP/Document=Hg:Page=232v:Line=40
                The act of communication hierarchy: TC:CTP/Entity=CTP:Part=PA:ab=291
                The text, combining both hierarchies: TC:CTP/Entity=CTP:Part=PA:ab=291: Document=Hg:Page=232v:Line=40
            
            In this formulation, every text is composed of a sequence of leaves, with every leaf shared by two distinct trees. Thus the “leaf” of text contained in line 40 of folio 232v occupies TC:CTP/Document=Hg:Page=232v:Line=40; that same text is part of TC:CTP/Entity=CTP:Part=PA:ab=291. The power of the system can be readily appreciated. First, one may travel through the document hierarchy to show the text page by page, line by line. Second, one may travel through the act of communication (“entity” in our system) hierarchy to find the different versions of paragraph 291 in multiple manuscripts and compare them. In this analysis, what we term “overlapping hierarchies” is a symptom, a result of the underlying system of distinct trees sharing leaves.
            Theory is one thing; implementation is another. We wanted a system that could be updated in real time. (Here, I speak of “we” as the progressing work became more and more a collaborative project). That is: a manuscript page could be transcribed, the order and structure of the text on the page rearranged, deleted, replaced, and the results written near-instantly to a storage system and available immediately to others. Over a long text (20,000 lines of the Canterbury Tales) in many manuscripts (88 for the Tales, some 30,000 pages in total) this is rather challenging. One may compare this with removing leaves from the trees, rebuilding the branches to which they were attached, and then reattaching the leaves, all in a howling gale. A brief attempt to use an XML database (in this case, XML DB, now maintained by Oracle) revealed substantial performance problems. For several years, we used a MySQL relational database. But the tables linking the distinct trees rapidly became so complex, and the queries required to manipulate them so unwieldy, that we abandoned it. Finally we moved to representing all documents in JSON form, and then storing and retrieving them through a JSON document store (MungoDB). This has proved complex, but very fast and effective. We are able to represent the two hierarchies precisely, in a manner which permits realtime updating and retrieval, within the JSON store. Indeed, one could extend the model we apply beyond two hierarchies: a text could be composed of as many hierarchies as one likes.
            The first public version of Textual Communities (after seven years of work) will be released in the first half of 2018, and the author will propose a workshop on the system at the conference. This paper will show the full system briefly. It is designed to be easy to use, to the point that a textual scholar with no special computer expertise will be able to use it to create an edition. Further, the implementation of the underlying database in JSON, and of javascript throughout the system, should make it possible for computer programmers expert in Javascript (and with no expertise in XML) to make complex critical editons. The system also contains tools to allow management of a large collaborative edition, with management of transcription page by page. The sophisticated Collation Editor, developed by the New Testament Greek edition projects in Birmingham, England and Munster, Germany, itself built on CollateX, is also integrated.
            This work raises many questions. XML is currently used for basic document input, and for transcription page-by-page. However, the inability of XML to fully represent more than a single hierarchy in a single document is a serious impediment to Textual Communities. In essence, the textual model we implement in Textual Communities is more powerful than XML can provide. Our hope is that others will take up this challenge, to find ways to move past this weakness in XML. Indeed, we offer Textual Communities not as, in any sense, a definitive system. It is a first attempt to implement the ontology of text and document upon which it is built. We hope and expect others will do better than this system.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Dearing, Vinton A. 1962. “Methods of Textual Editing”. Clarke Library Lecture. University of California.
                    DeRose, S., David Durand, Elli Mylonas, and Allen Renear, 1990. “What is Text, Really?” 
                        Journal of Computing in Higher Education, pp. 3-26.
                    
                    DeRose, S. 2004. Markup overlap: A review and a horse. 
                        Proceedings of the extreme markup languages 2004. Rockville: Mulberry Technologies.
                    
                    Hockey, Susan. 1980.  
                        Guide to Computer Applications in the Humanities, Duckworth and Johns Hopkins.
                    
                    Kahn, Robert E., and Robert Wilensky, 1995. A Framework for Distributed Digital Object Services. Available at http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/home/cstr/arch/k-w.html.
                    Petty, George R. and William M. Gibson, 1970. 
                        Project OCCULT: The Ordered Computer Collation of Unprepared Literary Text. New York: New York University Press.
                    
                    Robinson, P., 2013a. “The Concept of the Work in the Digital Age.” In Barbara Bordalejo (ed.), 
                        Work, Text and Document in the Digital Age. 
                        Ecdotica, 10, 13- 41.
                    
                    Robinson, P., 2013b. “Towards A Theory of Digital Editions.” 
                        Variants 10, 105- 132.
                    
                    Robinson, P. 2017. ‘Some principles for making collaborative scholarly editions in digital form.’ Digital Humanities Quarterly 11.2.
                    Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Claus Huitfeldt, 2004 “GODDAG: A Data Structure for Overlapping Hierarchies”. In DDEP/PODDP, pp. 139-160.
                
            
        
    

        
            Science fiction has been theorized as a laboratory in which text serves as the medium for experimentation with perspective and epistemology.
                
                     Jones, Gwyneth, 
                        Deconstructing Starships: Science, Fiction and Reality (Liverpool UP, 1999) 4.
                        
                    
                 Yet scientific methods are more practicably applicable to the systematic efforts of textual scholars. Computationally assisted collation demands continual refinements to verify the accuracy of textual data and metadata and challenges a singular view of any documentary edition. Moreover, collation can test hypotheses about change over time, and the output of machine collation can serve as an experiment to identify, quantify, survey, and analyze the data of textual change. Digital collation of science fiction seems to combine the practical with the theoretical in its lab space.
            
            An early form of modern science fiction, the 19th-century novel 
                Frankenstein has itself been the subject of digital variorum experiment since the mid-1990s production of the Pennsylvania Electronic Edition (PAEE) by Stuart Curran and Jack Lynch, a daring effort to prioritize the critical apparatus, pulling it from the obscurity of small type at the bottom of printed pages to make it front and center on screen displays.
                
                     See a representative page at 
                        
                            http://knarf.english.upenn.edu/Colv1/f1101.html
                        . Curran, Stuart and Jack Lynch. 
                        Frankenstein; or, the Modern Prometheus. The Pennsylvania Electronic Edition. Est. 1994. 
                        
                            http://knarf.english.upenn.edu/
                        .
                        
                    
                 The PAEE challenges us to find new ways to tell the variorum narrative of change over time. Much like Victor Frankenstein's composition of the Creature from multiple bodies, the effort to aggregate the distinct versions of this novel into a variorum might succeed in communicating a multi-dimensional narrative of its own composition and decomposition, inviting the reader to evaluate its successive stages just as the reader is invited to evaluate the three storytellers within the novel. 
            
            In the history of preparing digital texts with markup languages, whether in early HTML, SGML, or XML, markup standards tensed between two poles: a) the acknowledgement of a coexistence of multiple hierarchical structures and b) the need to prioritize a single document hierarchy in the interests of machine-readability, while permitting signposts of overlapping or conflicting hierarchies as of secondary importance.
                
                     See for example, P. M. W. Robinson, "
                        The Collation and Textual Criticism of Icelandic Manuscripts" 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing
                        , Volume 4, Issue 2, 1 January 1989, 99–105, 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/4.2.99
                        
                        ; Dekker, Ronald Haentjens, Dirk van Hulle, Gregor Middell, Vincent Neyt, and Joris van Zundert, "Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project"
                    
                    
                        Volume 30, Issue 3, 1 September 2015, 452–470, 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu007; 
                        
                        Eggert, Paul, "
                        
                            The reader-oriented scholarly edition" 
                        
                        
                            Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                        
                        
                            , Volume 31, Issue 4, 1 December 2016, 797–810, 
                        
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw043; 
                        
                        and Holmes, Martin, "
                        
                            Whatever happened to interchange?" 
                        
                        
                            Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                        
                        
                            , Volume 32, Issue suppl_1, 1 April 2017, 163–168, 
                        
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw048
                        .
                        
                    
                 In this paper we present a view of texts that emerges from the experience of comparing documents encoded in conflicting ways. Like the makers of 
                
                    the genetic 
                
                
                    Faust
                
                
                     edition
                , we find that multiple encoding structures must co-exist and correlate to achieve a meaningful comparison of editions.
                
                     See Gerrit Brüning, Katrin Henzel, and Dietmar Pravida, "Multiple Encoding in Genetic Editions: The Case of 'Faust'", Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (4: March 2013)
                        . 
                    
                 Further, hierarchies need to be reconceived in dynamic terms—where are their flex points for conversion from containment structures to 
                loci of intersection? In the process of collation, hierarchies must be dismantled and flattened in order for meaningful multiplicity to be represented, and in order for us to understand a dialogic relationship among textual variants. To study variation over time vexes the organizing principle of any singular hierarchy, but hierarchy in the context of collation may nevertheless build a robust architecture that 
                bridges distinct encodings rather than isolating them. In this architecture, arches and connecting spans are more viable than monoliths.
                
                     An inspiration for the bridging concept are the visualizations in 
                        Haentjens Dekker, Ronald, and David J. Birnbaum, “It's more than just overlap: Text As Graph,” Balisage: The Markup Conference 2017, Washington, DC, August 1 - 4, 2017; in 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2017
                        : 
                        
                            https://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol19/html/Dekker01/BalisageVol19-Dekker01.html#d11284e1180
                         . The authors conceptualize an ideal model of texts in a graph structure organized primarily by their semantic sequencing and in which structural features are a matter of descriptive annotation rather than elemental hierarchy. 
                    
                
            
            This paper addresses the serious issues of collating digital editions made at different times by different editors, and it discusses the bicentennial 
                Frankenstein variorum project as a challenging, illustrative case in point. We are preparing a variorum edition of Frankenstein in TEI P5 based on the 1818 and 1831 
                Frankenstein digital texts due to be released in 2018 in celebration of the bicentennial of 
                Frankenstein's first publication. Our collation source documents are adapted from the 1990s encoding of the PAEE (for the 1818 and 1831 editions), and the Shelley-Godwin Archive's diplomatic edition of the manuscript notebooks.
                
                     The Shelley-Godwin Archive's edition of the manuscript notebooks of 
                        Frankenstein builds on decades of intensive scholarly research to create TEI diplomatic encoding: 
                        
                            http://shelleygodwinarchive.org/contents/frankenstein/
                        . 
                    
                 We are also newly incorporating a little-known edition of 1823 produced from corrected OCR. Our collation should yield a meta-narrative of how 
                Frankenstein changed over time in four versions that passed through multiple editorial hands. It is widely understood that the 1831 edition diverges sharply from the first print edition of 1818, adding new material and changing the relationships of characters. Less known is how the notebook material compares with the print editions, and how much we can identify of the 
                persistence of various hands involved in composing, amending, and substantially revising the novel over the three editions. For example, to build on Charlie Robinson's identification of Percy Bysshe Shelley's hand in the notebooks,
                
                     See Charlie Robinson's Introduction to the Frankenstein Notebooks (Garland 1996), reproduced here: 
                        
                            http://shelleygodwinarchive.org/contents/frankenstein/the-frankenstein-notebooks-introduction/
                        .
                        
                    
                 our collation can reveal how much of Percy's insertions and deletions survive in the later print editions. Our work should permit us to survey when and how the major changes of the 1831 text (for example, to Victor Frankenstein's family members and the compression and reduction of a chapter in part I) occurred. We preserve information about hands, insertions, and deletions in the output collation, to serve as the basis for better quantifying, characterizing, and surveying the contexts of collaboration and revision in textual scholarship. 
            
            The three print editions and extant material from three manuscripts are compared in parallel, to indicate the presence of variants in the other texts and to be able to highlight them based on intensity of variance, to be displayed like the highlighted passages in each visible edition of 
                The Origin of Species in Darwin Online.
                
                     Barbara Bordalejo, ed. 
                        Darwin Online. See for example the illumination of variant passages in 
                        The Origin of Species here: 
                        
                            http://darwin-online.org.uk/Variorum/1859/1859-1-dns.html
                        
                        
                    
                 Rather than any edition serving as the lemma or grounds for collation comparison, we hold the collation information in stand-off markup, in its own XML hierarchy. That XML "bridge" expresses relationships among the distinct encodings of diplomatic manuscript markup in which the highest level of hierarchy is a unit leaf of the notebook, with the structural encoding of print editions organized in chapters, letters, and volumes. While the apparently nested structure of these divisions might seem the most meaningful way to model 
                Frankenstein, these pose a challenge to textual scholarship in their own right. As Wendell Piez has discussed, 
                Frankenstein's overlapping hierarchies of framing letters and chapters have led to inconsistencies in the novel's print production. Piez deploys a non-hierarchical encoding of the novel on which he constructs an SVG modeling (in ordered XML syntax) of the overlap itself.
                
                     These hierarchical issues provided an application for Piez’s invented LMNL "sawtooth" syntax to highlight overlap as semantically important to the novel; see Wendell Piez, "Hierarchies within range space: From LMNL to OHCO" 
                        Balisage: The Markup Conference Proceedings (2014): 
                        
                            https://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol13/html/Piez01/BalisageVol13-Piez01.html
                        
                        
                    
                 Our work with collation depends on a similar interdependency of structurally inconsistent encoding. 
            
            Our method involves three stages of structural transformation, each of which disrupts the hierarchies of its source documents: 
            
                Preparing texts for collation with CollateX
                    
                         CollateX software applies a graph-based model of text to locate variants in documents. See 
                            
                                https://collatex.net/doc/
                            
                        
                    , 
                
                Collating a new "braided" structure in CollateX XML output, which positions each variant in its own reading witness. 
                Transforming the collation output to survey the extents and kinds of variation, and to build a digital variorum edition. 
            
            In the first stage, we adapt the original code from the Shelley-Godwin Archive and from the PA-EE to create new forms of XML to carry predictable markers to assist in alignment. These new, pre-collation editions are resequenced (as when we move marginal annotations from the end of the XML document into their marked places 
                as they would be read in the manuscript notebook). They are also differently "chunked" than their source texts, resizing the unit file so that each represents an equivalent portion small enough to collate meaningfully and large enough that each document demonstrably aligns with the others at its start and end points. 
            
            Stage two weaves these surrogate editions together and transfers information from tags that we want to preserve for the variorum. Interacting with the angle brackets as patterned strings with Python, we mask several elements from the diplomatic code of the ms notebooks so that they are not processed in terms of comparison but are nevertheless output to preserve their distinct information. In CollateX's informationally-rich XML output, these tags render as flattened text with character entities replacing angle brackets so as not to introduce overlap problems with its critical apparatus. In Stage three, we work delicately with strings that represent flattened composite of preserved tag information and representations of the text, using XSLT string-manipulation functions to construct new files for analysis. We can then study, for example, where the strings associated with Percy Shelley are repeated in the later editions, and how many were preserved by 1831. We also build a scaffolding in stand-off markup for the digital variorum that bridges multiple editions, as modelled in Figure 1. 
            
                
            
            
                Fig. 1 An example variant with two different readings, showing Percy Bysshe Shelley's hand in the ms notebook. While the print editions of 1818, 1823, and the manuscript agree (yellow reading), the print edition of 1831 introduces new text (blue reading). The pointers are expressed according to the TEI XPointer Schemes defined in Chapter 16 of the TEI Guidelines and are subject to change.
            
            This example shows how the stand-off collation identifies variant readings between texts by grouping pointers as opposed to grouping strings of text according to the parallel segmentation technique described in Chapter 12 of the TEI Guidelines.
                
                     See especially the TEI P5 Guidelines, 12.2.3 and 12.2.4: 
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/TC.html#TCAPPS
                        
                        
                    
                 The TEI offers a stand-off method for encoding variants, called “double-end-point-attachment”, in which variants can be encoded separately from the base text by specifying the start and end point of the lemma of which they are a variant. This allows encoders to refer to overlapping areas on the base text, but despite its flexibility, this method still requires choosing a base text to which anchor variant readings. While choosing a lemma for each variant may be necessary for a critical edition, it is not ideal for a variorum edition that, by design, does not choose a base text.
                
                     For a related example, see Viglianti, R. Music and Words: reconciling libretto and score editions in the digital medium. 
                        “Ei, dem alten Herrn zoll’ ich Achtung gern’”, ed. Kristina Richts and Peter Stadler, 2016, 727-755. 
                    
                 Our approach, therefore, simply identifies variance and groups readings from multiple sources without conflating them into one document and with accommodation of multiple hierarchies. 
            
            Though we think of XML as a stable sustainable archiving medium, the repeated collapsing and expansion of hierarchies in our collation process makes us consider that for the viability of digital textual scholarship, ordered hierarchies of content objects might best be designed with leveling in mind, and that building with XML may be optimized when it is open to transformation. Preparing diversely encoded documents for collation challenges us to consider inconsistent and overlapping hierarchies as a tractable matter for computational alignment
                —where alignment becomes an organizing principle that fractures hierarchies, chunking if not atomizing them at the level of the smallest meaningfully sharable semantic features. 
            
        
    

        
            My research is multi- and interdisciplinary focusing on electronic literature and cybercultures in/of Latin America. My latest articles and book manuscript explore the divide and convergence in literature and technology. This project lends itself well to the application of those theories and the evaluation of how they can best be implemented in classroom practices and complemented with co-curricular modules. I will therefore present my research findings on the use of Digital Humanities components specifically for the teaching of Latin American Studies. The presentation would thus serve as a report of: 1) initial research findings and best practices found at other institutions; 2) work accomplished at the DHSI 2018 Workshop (Victoria, Canada) “Critical Pedagogy and Digital Praxis in the Humanities”; 3) feedback gained from presentation at the DHSI 2018 Conference &amp; Colloquium; and, 4) samples of syllabi to foster a lively discussion on the application of such a course with co-curricular components for Latin American Studies programs.
            The goal of this project is to do a detailed study of program and curriculum design at other institutions on the use of DH modules specifically for Latin America/US Latino culture with a focus on pedagogical methodologies that engage critically about the problems that DH platforms do and do not resolve in Latin American Studies. The course design and the co-curricular components complement and intersect each other. This project will facilitate the assessment of various curriculums and specialized courses for the digital humanities and would ultimately lead to develop a course for all students interested in DH Latin American Studies.
                
                     Students in this course would include (but not limited to) those in the Latin American Studies Minor Program, International Business, International Studies (BAIS and GPIS), Humanities, Political Science, Spanish majors and Minors, World Cultural Studies majors and minors.
                 Course components will include developing language proficiency, learning and using DH tools, and analyzing the effectiveness and drawbacks of such technologies specifically to Latin American Studies.
            
            The interactive, systematic, and innovative features of digital humanities have been proven to advance language learning both in and outside of the classroom. Through exploring different forms of digital humanities, including multi-media, online archives, as well as existing web tools like Google Earth and Twitter, instructors and scholars of foreign languages not only facilitate collective and immersive language learning, but also broaden and deepen students’ exposure and knowledge of foreign culture. These projects break the traditional geographical and cultural boundaries in learning a foreign culture and/or language. Therefore, it is essential for instructors to reflect on how best to incorporate digital humanities in language/culture learning, and to determine to what extent digital learning complements and even replaces traditional ways of teaching and learning. 
            Students will be encouraged to adapt these new tools of analysis to their own future career objectives. The field of Digital Humanities is collaborative and very interdisciplinary as it produces new scales of analysis with varying modules (texts, maps, audio-mapping and networks) which may include experiments across modalities with: distant reading alongside close reading techniques, programming language, audio creation, geotagging, speech recognition encoding documents in TEI (Text Encoding Initiative
                
                     Text Encoding Initiative Markup Language at the University of Virginia, 
                        https://dh.virginia.edu/tool/text-encoding-initiative-markup-language-tei (for my future reference)
                    
                ), learning the basics of computational text analysis, programming chatbots using the Python programming language, etc. The course will also note the drawbacks or pitfalls of the use of technology.
            
            However, the skills needed in DH have less to do with a particular hardware or commercial software and more about engaging in digital literacy (train interpretative methods necessary for critical analysis), and showcase how digital humanities is valuable to better understand Latin America’s transformations in the production, circulation and reception as well as its impact on culture, politics, history, literature, music, etc. The course will encourage students to develop more analytical projects from the use of such modalities. The focus will also be to analyze and address 
                why this method of learning is complementary or even superior to traditional methods, specifically addressing the impact and implications that technology involved on ideologies, ethics and ideas. For example, a more involved topic would approach the idea of “mapping” as interpretation of geospatial data in GIS, georectify historical maps in 
                Map Warper, manage digital archival objects in 
                Omeka, and use 
                Neatline to build “deep maps” of particular neighborhoods or landmarks in a city, layering historical photographs, maps, geospatial data, literary texts, and other elements to build analysis about their city. 
            
            Additionally, the course will attempt to link to public libraries (Slover in Norfolk), museums (Chrysler, Mariners, Living Museum), research centers, community groups (Norfolk Chamber of Commerce, Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Hispanic Community Dialogue) or other campus-level initiatives (ODU’s Institute of Humanities “Mapping Lambert’s Point Project,” for instance). The goal is to build projects that make use of the University and community’s collections. These public projects can energize students to work that much harder, as they can create materials with a chance of life beyond the classroom itself. The course will draw on resources from, participate in and continue their learning with the Regional, National and International Network
                
                     To be featured in the Latin American Studies Program website
                 aimed to promote digital humanities initiatives to Old Dominion University faculty and to learn from and collaborate with external groups.
                
                     I already have established contacts and am in current collaborations with: Centro de Cultura Electrónica in Mexico City; the project Cultura Digital Chile (Universidad Diego Portales, Chile); the Latin American and Digital Humanities/Cybercultures at University of Georgia; the Digital Latin American Cultures Network: Researching the Cultural Dimensions of New Media in the United Kingdom; I am also a board member of the organization Lit-e-Lat: Red de Literatura Electrónica.
                 This network would be dedicated to exploring, analyzing, and sharing the cultural and visual modalities of digital humanities in the research and teaching of Latin America. The network would engage in these discussions through symposia for faculty and students with guest speakers or virtual conferences, virtual exhibitions, and online or hybrid workshops.
                
                     For example, “Tecnoestética y sensorium contemporáneo: arte, literatura, diseño y tecnología” in September 2017 in Córdoba Argentina; 
                 The network and initiatives that I foresee fostering and/or facilitating may include: 
            
            
                K-12 Service Education: Working with the College of Education and the Licensure Students in the World Languages and Cultures Department to: Expand on its longstanding educational outreach commitments with K-12 educators and students at the local and state level; and, serve as a resource to K-12 educators working to meet Virginia Performance Standards as they relate to Latin American content in the social, natural, and life sciences by 
                Language Without Borders Initiative: Create the next generation of global professionals through innovative language education, with Superior level proficiency in Spanish and overseas internship experience.
                DH and Latin/o American Cybercultures Initiative: Exposure to the digital culture of Latin America through seminars, symposia, courses, exhibitions, and workshops.
            
        
    

        
            Giacomo Leopardi (1798-1837) was a significant Italian romantic poet best known for 
                a volume of poetry, 
                Canti
                , published in 1835 in Naples, one copy of which he manually corrected shortly before his death. 
                Among his poems, the series entitled 
                Idilli
                 ‘Idylls’ (1819-1821) comprises 
                Alla Luna, L’infinito, Lo spavento notturno, La sera del giorno festivo, Il sogno
                 and 
                La vita solitaria
                . In the earliest extant form in
                 the Naples Notebook the poems were
                 written in three separate phases (Idylls 1-3, 4-5 and 6), then corrected 
                by the author in identifiably different pens
                , before being copied into the Visso manuscript, where they were again revised. Their first publication was in the review ‘Nuovo Ricoglitore’ in 1825/1826, then in the Bologna edition of 
                Versi 
                (
                1826). Except for the third Idyll: 
                Lo spavento notturno
                , the other poems were collected in the Florence edition of the 
                Canti 
                (
                1831), then reprinted in the Naples edition (1835), in which 
                Lo spavento notturno
                 appears as one of the 
                Fragments
                 (n. XXXVII).
            
            
                 This textual history of Leopardi’s
                Idilli
                 is interesting because much of Italian Philology of the Author (
                Variantistica
                ) has been based upon it. After Francesco Moroncini’s first critical edition of the 
                Idilli
                 (1927), three other editions have appeared: Peruzzi (1981), De Robertis (1984) and the latest by Franco Gavazzeni, printed by Accademia della Crusca 
                (
                Leopardi
                , 2009). This is both a critical edition of the manuscripts and the print-versions. It contains detailed textual notes recording all handwritten changes including marginal alternative readings, which are characteristic of Leopardi’s method of correction. Four different pens have been identified in ‘Naples notebook’ of the 
                Idilli, before their copying into the Visso manuscript: A, B, C and D, which were used both for writing the new texts and for correcting the earlier idylls. For example, Leopardi wrote idylls 4 and 5, then corrected idylls 1, 2 and 3. With pen C he then wrote idyll 6, and then finally corrected all the preceding ones.
            
             A wiki edition of Leopardi was also produced as part of an advanced course in Italian Literature in
                 2016-2017 at the University of Rome La Sapienza (Giuffrida and Nieddu, 2017; Caterino and Nieddu, 2017) and was based on Gavazzeni’s critical print edition of the 
                Canti.
            
             The technical limitations of the wiki software used (MediaWiki), led the group of editors to seek better ways to encode and present the text. They were also interested in producing editions of other authors, and to have the capacity to expand the Leopardi edition in future. As a result of a lecture given by Paul Eggert in October 2017 at the University of Bologna, Eggert suggested the use of the Ecdosis editing system which had already been developed for the Australian romantic poet Charles Harpur. Other tools, such as Tapas (Bauman et al., 2017), EVT (Rosselli Del Turco et al., 2014), CollateX (Dekker and Middell, 2017) and Juxta (n.d.) had also been considered but in spite of their individual strengths none provided the comprehensive web-based editing system for modern manuscripts that the editors were seeking.
             Leopardi’s Idylls were chosen as the basis for the pilot project. Although it was designed as a general set of web-tools, this was the first time that Ecdosis had been applied to another editorial project. Conversion of the print and wiki editions into Ecdosis took only 12 days of part-time work. Since Ecdosis’s own WYSIWYG editor was still incomplete it was decided to encode the text in XML and import it. The XML files were created by copying from the wiki edition and from a PDF of the print edition (Italia, 2018). The detailed textual notes of the print edition were used to create separate files for each of the identifiable versions. Within each version changes were encoded with the usual &lt;add&gt; and &lt;del&gt; codes and our own &lt;undeleted&gt; code for earlier alternatives that were not cancelled. The importation process split the corrections and their contexts into separate layers, amalgamating local levels of correction into coherent sub-versions. Although these layers were never written by the author they are still useful as a storage mechanism to record local changes within a version. In this way individual layers remain simple, needing only a few codes to denote changes in format, such as lines, headings and stanzas, since all deletions and insertions have already been converted into layers. Figure 1 shows an example of how this process works for a segment of Idyll 3, La Luna, from the Naples notebook. Finally, the separated versions and layers of each poem were stripped of their remaining markup, which in Ecdosis is stored separately and only recombined with the text for display, so reducing each version/layer to a readable plain text file. This greatly simplifies all subsequent text processing such as searching, comparing and hyphenating when compared to the complexity of the original XML.
             Hyphenation of XML encoded texts is quite difficult due to the variety of tags that may occur between two halves of a word. (Bauman, 2016).Our tests of search engines on major digital scholarly editions revealed that literal searches (often more useful than keyword searches) do not work across internal variant boundaries (&lt;add&gt;,&lt;del&gt;,&lt;rdg&gt; etc). Comparison between TEI-XML files containing inline variants is still an open problem that requires human intervention (Bleeker, 2017).
            
                
                    
                
            
            Figure 1: Falsely colourised portion of Naples notebook showing pen A (red) and pen B (blue)
            During importation the page-images were also linked to the text. The manuscript images are copyright to the National Library, Naples, but it is anticipated that permission to publish these with the edition will be obtained soon. For the moment the site is protected by the same passsword as for the wiki. The linking produces a list of images which scrolls in sync with the text to keep the top and bottom of each page-image aligned with its corresponding position in the text. To provide a smooth transition and accurate alignment between text and image when scrolling all other possible alignment positions are calculated in proportion to these fixed points. Changing the version loads the relevant images on the left hand side of the screen and the corresponding text on the right. Layers within a version can be changed by clicking on a tab above the text, and changes between layers are highlighted. This removes altogether the need for a ‘diplomatic’ display where changes are displayed awkwardly above or below the line using inline formats.
             In Compare View differences between versions and layers are shown at the character level: deletions on the left-hand version/layer in red and additions on the right-hand version/layer in blue. When displaying a layer the invariant text is shown in grey to indicate that this is not a true version, but true versions and final layers are displayed in black. Scrolling is also synchronous and aligned left to right, regardless of differences in length between the two currently displayed versions.
             Table View resembles the traditional critical apparatus. Differences and similarities between versions/layers are arranged in columns. Versions/layers can be excluded from comparison and the table rebuilt. Also versions can be moved up or down the display to explore specific clusters of variation for editorial purposes. The establishment of a reading text from this information could be encoded as another version and added to each poem as a default text.
             The pilot edition has mostly been a success (Leopardi, 2018). There is still some difficulties with the encoding of marginal alternatives which cannot be placed with certainty in the text. These will probably be encoded as annotations instead. Another problem is that the modules in Ecdosis and the website itself currently resemble too closely those of the Charles Harpur Critical Archive (Eggert, 2018) and will therefore need significant customisation. The possibility to export the entire contents of the edition to a simple collection of files in nested folders, encoded in standard HTML and plain text, has mitigated initial concerns about ‘lock-in’. It is hoped to use other Ecdosis tools to expand the edition in future by increasing the number of poems and placing them in the context of research into the issues and people of Leopardi’s day.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bauman, S. (2016). The Hard Edges of Soft Hyphens. 
                         Accessed 2 May 2018).
                    
                    
                        Bauman, 
                        S.,
                         Clark, 
                        A., 
                        Quinn, 
                        B,
                         Flanders, 
                        J.,
                         Hamlin, 
                        S. and 
                        Zoller, 
                        E. (2017). Tapas Project. 
                         (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Bleeker, E. (2017). Scholarly Intervention in Automated Collation Software, ESTS Book of Abstracts 2017 
                        (accessed 2 May 2018).
                    
                    
                        Caterino, 
                        M.
                         and Nieddu, 
                        S. (2017). 
                        Wiki Leopardi. 
                        , user: wiki_leop, password: leopardi (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Dekker, R. and Miiddell, G. (2017). 
                        CollateX – Software for Collating Textual Sources. 
                         (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Eggert, P. (2018). Charles Harpur Critical Archive, 
                        http://charles-harpur.org (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Italia, P. (2008). I tre tempi degli «Idilli» Leopardiani (con un’edizione del quaderno napoletano), Filologia Italiana, 4, 173-213.
                    
                        Juxta.
                        .
                    
                    
                        Leopardi, G. (2009). 
                        Canti e Poesie disperse, edizione diretta da Franco Gavazzeni, edited by Paola Italia, Florence: l’Accademia della Crusca.
                    
                    
                        Giuffrida, 
                        M. 
                        and
                         Nieddu, 
                        S. (2017). Wiki Critical Editions: a sustainable philology, in AIUCD 2017 Conference, 23-28 January, pp. 257-258. 
                         (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Rosselli Del Turco, R., Buomprisco, G., Di Pietro, C., Kenny, J., Masotti, R. and Pugliese, J. (2014). 
                        Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-based Digital Editions, JTEI 8. 
                         (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                    Leopardi, G. (2017). Idilli di Giacomo Leopardi. 
                        http://giacomo-leopardi.me (accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Objetivo. La meta de esta presentación es describir el potencial y las limitaciones de las humanidades digitales para la enseñanza sobre la experiencia social de colectivos multilingües poco estudiados. Basamos nuestro argumento en el caso de la construcción de un archivo digital que reúne la correspondencia y otros documentos personales de una familia que emigró de Zacatecas, México, a Colorado y a Nebraska, Estados Unidos, en la primera mitad del siglo XX. Durante los últimos cuatro años, el repositorio que aquí se describe ha servido como espacio de aprendizaje activo para estudiantes de licenciatura y posgrado de una universidad pública del Midwest. Mediante su participación en el proyecto, los estudiantes aprenden sobre la experiencia sociolingüística de las comunidades hispanohablantes en EU transcribiendo, traduciendo, digitalizando, marcando y analizando estos objetos. 
            
            
                Contexto. Varios autores han destacado la necesidad de sortear el abismo entre la investigación y la enseñanza en las humanidades digitales (Hawkins, Mannan, Iantorno y Bistline, 2014; Hirsch, 2012). En su introducción a un número especial dedicado a la pedagogía y las humanidades digitales, Iantorno (2014) se pregunta: ¿Cómo enseñar habilidades en humanidades digitales a estudiantes de licenciatura en un curso tradicional? ¿y a estudiantes de posgrado en un seminario de literatura? (140). Nuestra respuesta es un modelo que intenta servir como puente entre la investigación y la enseñanza, y que proporciona a los estudiantes la oportunidad de aprender haciendo.  
            
            Este archivo digital difiere de otros proyectos basados en la experiencia de las comunidades hispanohablantes en Estados Unidos porque va más allá de la preservación y descripción (Iowa, 2004); de la historia oral (Foulis); del uso de audio y video para la enseñanza del español (Spanish in Texas); y de la inclusión de monografías dentro de colecciones mayores (Kansapedia). Es un esfuerzo deliberado por integrar tres componentes: la investigación lingüística, social e histórica; una cara abierta a los miembros del público general interesados en saber más sobre los latinos en el Midwest, y una sección con materiales, actividades y guías de clase para maestros de español interesados en usar los objetos de la colección en su salón de clase. 
            
                Descripción.
                Family Letters es un proyecto interdisciplinar y bilingüe que surgió a partir de una búsqueda aparentemente sencilla. Lo que originalmente se pensó como un trabajo de traducción, terminó expandiéndose a un proyecto digital colaborativo entre el Centro para la Investigación Digital en las Humanidades y el Departamento de Lenguas y Literaturas Modernas de la Universidad de Nebraska-Lincoln, y la comunidad local. Esta colección, que cuenta con 713 objetos digitalizados y marcados en TEI en su mayoría (225 cartas, 199 documentos, 270 fotografías y 19 objetos personales de diversa naturaleza), supone una excelente fuente de información sobre la vida diaria de una familia de inmigrantes en Estados Unidos. Puesto que los artefactos fueron escritos tanto en español como en inglés, la colección nos permite examinar fenómenos de contacto lingüístico, rasgos de lengua no estándar, y procesos de pérdida y mantenimiento lingüístico cultural descritos en voz de sus protagonistas.  
            
            
                Aspectos técnicos. A pesar de que el enfoque de nuestra presentación es el potencial pedagógico de un archivo digital de este tipo, mencionaremos de manera breve algunos aspectos técnicos que son de particular importancia para un proyecto de este tipo. Por ejemplo, los detalles de codificación y la construcción de la personografía, entre los que se incluyen los retos que presenta la codificación de nombres personales que a veces aparecen en la colección hasta con 27 iteraciones que cambian por idioma, nivel de escolaridad, inestabilidad ortográfica o convención social.
            
            
                Lo que se vale y no se vale preguntar. Este proyecto posibilita la construcción de un conocimiento amplio sobre la experiencia de migración mexicana en el Medio Oeste. Los materiales permiten el desarrollo de investigaciones interdisciplinarias, desde la microhistoria hasta la sociolingüística. Es posible observar la potencialidad del proyecto para la elaboración de una pedagogía en tres niveles. El primer nivel, centrado en la manipulación más inmediata de los objetos digitales, permite al estudiante de licenciatura que es hablante de español como lengua de herencia reconocer elementos de su propia experiencia  y desarrollar habilidades lingüísticas de forma comparada. El segundo nivel, enfocado en la sistematización de los materiales de la colección, permite que los estudiantes de licenciatura y posgrado hagan investigación en una primera aproximación a las Humanidades Digitales. El tercer nivel, enfocado en la creación de materiales pedagógicos permite a los maestros usar los materiales de la colección en el aula. 
            
            
                El uso de un archivo digital para la enseñanza del español. Los materiales pedagógicos diseñados a partir de los materiales de la colección tienen como enfoque a los estudiantes de español de nivel intermedio/avanzado de high school y universidad. El objetivo de este esfuerzo es permitir que los estudiantes utilicen los recursos de la colección para desarrollar sus habilidades lingüísticas y su competencia cultural mientras aprenden más sobre la experiencia de las familias mexicano-americanas a principios del siglo XX. Estas actividades fueron pensadas para utilizarse en todo o en parte en el salón de clase con el fin de ayudar a los estudiantes a fortalecer sus habilidades de escritura, desarrollo de vocabulario, ortografía y gramática. Adicionalmente, estas actividades permiten a los maestros abordar temas centrales en la experiencia sociolingüística de las comunidades latinas en EEUU, tales como la pérdida y el mantenimiento intergeneracional del español, la variación dialectal y los fenómenos de contacto lingüístico (Beaudrie y Potowski, 2014).
            
            Al trabajar directamente con los documentos de una familia mexicano-americana, los estudiantes no solo están expuestos a la lengua: se abren aquí las puertas a una experiencia que posibilita la construcción de una identidad social concebida de manera compartida. El principal objetivo pedagógico es que al manipular estos objetos digitales, los estudiantes establezcan una conexión que les permita reflexionar en su propio papel como actores sociales. A partir de la historia particular de esta familia, los estudiantes pueden dimensionar los eventos cotidianos en la escala más amplia de la experiencia de los inmigrantes en Estados Unidos. 
            
                Invitación a la colaboración, direcciones futuras. Uno de nuestros principales objetivos es garantizar el acceso a estos materiales a aquellos investigadores interesados en la inmigración, el contacto de lenguas y temas afines. Por otro lado y, sobre todo, ofrecemos nuestro proyecto a aquellos profesores en México, Estados Unidos y otros países que estén interesados en compartir con sus alumnos una faceta de la experiencia mexicano-americana de principios del XX. Por descontado, pretendemos la ampliación de este proyecto digital en el futuro, con colecciones de familias provenientes de otros países de Latinoamérica y residentes hoy en día en Nebraska.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    Beaudrie, S.M., Ducar, C. and Potowski, K., 2014. 
                        Heritage language teaching: Research and practice. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education Create.
                    
                    Foulis, E., 2017. HISTORIAS: LATIN@ VOICES IN OHIO. 
                        alter/nativas, latin american cultural studies journal, (7).
                    
                    Hawkins, A.R., Mannan, J., Iantorno, L., Bistline, E. and Haileselassie, S., 2014. Perspectives on Work and Workflow in Digital Humanities.
                    Hirsch, B.D., 2012. : Digital Humanities and the Place of Pedagogy.
                    Iantorno, L.A., 2014. Introducing Digital Humanities Pedagogy. 
                        CEA Critic, 
                        76(2), pp.140-146.
                    
                    Kansapedia nd, Kansas Historical Society, accessed 23 April 2018, &lt;http://www.kshs.org/kansapedia/kansapedia/19539&gt;
                    Spanish in Texas Project, 2010, University of Texas at Austin, accessed 23 April 2018, &lt;http://spanishintexas.org/&gt;
                    The Mujeres Latinas Project nd, Iowa Women’s Archives, The University of Iowa, accessed 23 April 2018, &lt;https://www.lib.uiowa.edu/iwa/mujeres/&gt;
                
            
        
    

        
            Digital Humanities, and by extension digital humanists, tend towards a culture of open access, interdisciplinary collaboration, and a maker ethos. These disciplinary values position the digital humanities for high impact reaching beyond disciplinary boundaries into more public fora. One might argue that this public-facing ethos is a natural extension of web-based scholarship.
                 
            
            Yet, simply putting resources on the web does not necessarily engage the public or publics they wish to reach. With institutions, research bodies, and funding agencies expecting greater impact from research (see, for example, 
                Watermeyer, Ozanne, Reale), digital humanities scholarship is increasingly being viewed as an answer to that perpetually thorny crisis in the humanities. In his 2010 article, ‘The Engaged Humanities: Principles and Practices of Public Scholarship and Teaching’, Gregory Jay believes that public scholarship and community engagement will become central to revitalizing the humanities in the 21st century. He argues that the future of the humanities depends upon two interrelated innovations: the organized implementation of project based engaged learning and scholarship, and the continued advancement of digital and new media learning and scholarship (51)
            
            Further, he writes, ‘efforts to connect humanities research and teaching with projects to advance democracy, social justice, and the public good might take advantage of the latest episode of the crisis in the humanities and even represent a new direction for revival (51). A means for advancing new values within our teaching and research is through the development of projects of social relevance which engage the public in their design and implementation. These go by various names: crowdsourcing, participatory engagement, and social engagement. 
            Crowdsourcing is a popular term that has been used for over a decade. Defined by Mia Ridge in 
                Crowdsourcing our Cultural Heriage as ‘…the act of taking work once performed within an organisation and outsourcing it to the general public through an open call for participants’ (1). Crowdsourcing structures public participation more as what the public can do for my project as opposed to understanding why the public might choose to spend their creative capital on my research. This may lead to a framing of public participation as project work that gets outsourced to those with lesser skills than individuals within the academy and/or on the project team. This can lead to a bifurcation of a them vs us mentality, with the ‘them’ (the public) not as educated, talented, or resourceful as the ‘us’ within the academy. 
            
            This very point was articulated in a thread on the Text Encoding Initiative list in February 2016. After some 15 positive responses about successful crowdsourced projects, one respondent asked why were we not hearing about failures. This quickly morphed into another thread with the subject line ‘Crowdsourcing Transcription Failures’. In this thread respondents posted a number of issues and challenges in carrying out these projects (as well as some advice by others on the list in how to address these). One respondent, however, indicated that it was not feasible to think about public participation at the same level as that from those on the project team. And while in principle, this is a reasonable assumption, the articulation of this particular post starkly drew the us vs them line with the us not having the ‘patience’ to clean up the mess left by the them: 
            what we call ‘failure’ may simply be a matter of impatience. If we expect to do the equivalent of a ‘barn-raising’ in digital humanities, where a large number of people come together and do a lot of tedious work quickly, we have to expect a lot of ‘mopping up’ to do afterwards. And we're limited by our level of patience, in how far we want to go to train people to mark texts in thoughtful, observant, well-informed ways. (Beshero-Bondar). 
            This attitude reinforces public perceptions of academics existing in an ivory tower in which research can only be undertaken by a scarce, specialised work force. Participatory engagement projects, on the other hand, begin to debunk notions of us (the experts) against them (the amateurs [or the public]). Participatory engagement, on the other hand, frames involvement on the project differently. It is a political and a design issue, in addition to being a research decision. The participatory process is one that generates new thinking about the research process, audience, and value while a vehicle to challenge limiting beliefs of who our scholarship is for and the role of the humanities as a public good in society. The National Centre for Public Engagement identifies the public as not simply an extended work force, but active players in the design process: 
            
                
                    Public engagement describes the myriad of ways in which the activity and benefits of higher education and research can be shared with the public. Engagement is by definition a two-way process, involving interaction and listening, with the goal of generating mutual benefit.
                
                
                     https://www.publicengagement.ac.uk/explore-it/what-public-engagement
                
            
            In his 2010 book 
                Cognitive Surplus: 
                Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age Clay Shirky observes how the Internet changes the way we spend our spare time. The so-called ‘cognitive surplus’ that used to be spent on passive activities (notably watching television) can now be used in a profoundly different way, for new kinds of creativity and problem-solving. He writes, ‘the wiring of humanity lets us treat free time as a shared global resource, and lets us design new kinds of participation and sharing that can take advantage of that resource’. (39)
            
            Participatory Engagement projects provide us with opportunities to rethink our roles as researchers and as teachers, about our obligations to those in society who have not had the same opportunities as we have, and last, but not least, how to build meaningful, socially relevant, digital collections for our own and future generations.
            Yet, these types of projects have different lifecycles, require different staffing and skills, and come with different obligations than more traditional DH projects, and many project teams are not prepared for this. This talk will explore the motivations of the public in participating in our scholarship,
                 our responsibilities in inviting them as collaborators, and new ways to think about the goals, motivations, and audiences for our research.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Boshero-Bondar, Elisa. (2016) ‘Crowdsourcing Transcription Failures. TEI-L@Listserv.brown.edu . 
                        https://listserv.brown.edu/archives/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind1602&amp;L=tei-l&amp;F=&amp;S=&amp;P=86710
                    
                    Jay, Gregory. (2010) ‘The Engaged Humanities: Principles and Practices of Public Scholarship and Teaching’ 
                        Imagining America. 3:1 p.51-63. http://surface.syr.edu/ia/15
                    
                    Ozanne, J.L. et al. (2017) ‘Assessing the Societal Impact of Research: The Relational Engagement Approach’. ^Journal of Public Policy and Marketing. 36:1. P1-14. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.14.121
                    
                    Reale, E, eta al. (2017) ‘A review of literature on evaluating the scientific, social and political impact of social sciences and humanities research’. 
                        Research Evaluation. P1-11. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/reseval/rvx025
                    
                    Ridge, Mia. (2014) 
                        Crowdsouring our Cultural Heritage. Farmham. Surrey: Ashgate. 
                    
                    Shirky, Clay.
                         (2010) 
                        Cognitive Surplus: 
                        Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age. New York: Penguin Books. 
                    
                    Watermeyer, Richard. (2014) ‘Impact in the REF: issues and obstacles’
                        . Studies in Higher Education. 41:2. p199-214.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Artificial Intelligence has unlocked the access to the text of medieval manuscripts! The partners of the European research project HIMANIS implemented, for the first time, the indexing and plain text querying of thousands of pages of medieval manuscripts. The large scale of the corpus and the possibility to search in plain text for handwritten sources are unheard of in medieval studies, so that the results present a major shift for historians. The challenge of multilingualism, script variation and abbreviations, which are crucial for HTR on medieval sources, has been successfully met.
            
            
                Context
                Millions of medieval manuscripts, charters and archival documents are preserved worldwide, and centuries of scholarship and text editions could naturally not exhaust the wealth of these resources. Digital libraries (
                    BVMM, 
                    Gallica, 
                    e-Codices, 
                    Manuscripta Mediaevalia, etc.) and archives (
                    Monasterium) are amassing 
                    reproductions of medieval manuscripts and archives, often with scarce metadata. However, while Optical Character Recognition technologies allow to easily “distant read” several millions of books (Moretti, 2013; Crane, 2006; Clement et al., 2008; GDELT Project, 2015), 
                    medieval manuscripts and archives remain difficult to access, read and understand. Handwritten Text Recogni
                    tion (HTR) systems cannot offer sufficiently accurate transcripts on historical documents. Therefore 
                    continuous efforts are made in Europe. After 
                    tranScriptorium
                     (McNicholl and Miles-Board, 2015)
                    , the EU has funded HIMANIS and also funds 
                    Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents
                     (READ, 2016-2019) under the H2020 program, with few medieval sources. 
                    MONK
                    , developed by the University of Groningen, is also a well-known infrastructure, including some medieval resources as those from Stadsarchiev Leuven.
                
            
            
                HIMANIS: consortium, corpus, method, and evaluation
                Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) 
                    is the focus of the European cross-disciplinary research project HIMANIS (Historical MANuscript Indexing for user-controlled Search), funded by the JPI Cultural Heritage. The partners applied HTR technologies for
                     multilingual medieval manuscripts and demonstrated the feasibility of an accurate and meaningful automated text indexing of large collections of hitherto untranscribed text images
                    . 
                
                The partners build a 
                    cross-disciplinary consortium. The principal investigator is a researcher in the Humanities (Institut de Recherche et d’Histoire des Textes, CNRS) and the project gathered several research teams in engineering sciences, both in the private and public sectors : A2iA (France), University of Groningen (The Netherlands) and Polytechnic University of Valencia (UPVLC, Spain). Cultural Heritage institutions provided support and datasets: Archives Nationales (France), Bibliothèque nationale de France. UPVLC and University of Groningen are partners in or host institutions for the above mentioned READ and MONK developments.
                
                
                    As a challenging
                     and particularly interesting corpus, the partners chose the large collection of registers and formularies produced by the French royal chancery in the 14
                        th and 15
                        th c., encompassing 
                        199 volumes, representing 83’000 pages, with 64’830 royal charters in 175 registers, and 24 
                    
                    formularies and related resources. This large and iconic collection bears witness to the rationalization of late medieval administration and is a key source to our understanding of medieval Europe and the rise of centralized nation states on the continent as consequence of the long lasting wars between France and England. While HTR on medieval sources is 
                    notoriously highly difficult given the greatly variable handwriting styles, this corpus is even more challenging because of its multilingual content and the large number of abbreviated words. 
                
                
                    A first work package consisted in creating the corpus, formatting available metadata, and authority data. The Archives Nationales digitized the corpus in several batches during the project. The metadata on French chancery registers are diverse. In increasing order of information quality, there are: (1.) medieval tables of content copied in autonomous inventories in the 18
                        th and 19
                        th c.; (2.) index cards with reference to shelfmarks (and rarely folio number) containing person and place names; (3a.) printed systematic inventories, including some already converted to EAD without their indexes, as well as (3b.) handwritten systematic inventories which were only accessible 
                        in situ, and (3c.) printed geographic or thematic inventories; (4.) partial, rarely scholarly, editions. The partners devised an integrated TEI format to accommodate all four types of metadata, and converted all metadata to this format, including the handwritten inventories on which the partners applied HTR-technologies to recognize the text abstracts and the index entries 
                    (Stutzmann et al., 2017)
                    . In total, after more than 150 years of systematic research, inventories only covered 28’000 charters, that is ca. 43% of the register corpus and only one formulary was edited (Odart Morchesne, 2005; Guyotjeannin and Lusignan, 2011)
                    . Authority data encompass linguistic dictionaries and gazetteers, which were used to produce a lemmatized search engine. 
                
                
                    A second work package consisted in training and applying a robust “optical model”, capable of dealing with the variability and abbreviations in medieval, multilingual handwritings. The existing editions were first “aligned” on the available “text images” at a line level, applying techniques developed by the partners in the project Oriflamms (Leydier et al., 2014; Stutzmann et al., 2015; Bluche et al., 2016; Oriflamms, 2017)
                    . 
                    Basing on this alignment and using deep neural networks (CNN/RNN), machines could learn to “read”
                     (Bluche et al., 2017)
                    . Learning on the monumental, modernizing, and very regularizing edition by P. Guérin (normalized punctuation, expanded abbreviations) (Guérin and Celier, 1881)
                    , the system created so-called “character lattices” which included abbreviations, so that the system was also able to read and expand abbreviations (fig. 1). 
                
                
                    
                    Figure 1: Text indexing. The query “[Saint Omer]” retrieves both abbreviated and unabbreviated strings in different volumes and different handwritings. Images: Paris, Archives Nationales, JJ 35 and JJ 164. 
                
                The decoding process produces different “hypotheses” for each spot on the image (typically from one to ten variant readings) and rated them according to their confidence levels according to inner statistical models and linguistic ones. The index has been “pruned” (i.e. reduced by removing) from the most unlikely readings, but still contains more than 28 bn index entries, 3 bn lines, 44 bn “words” and “pseudo-words”. 
                
                    The search engine was published online as a beta version (
                    http://prhlt-kws.prhlt.upv.es/himanis/
                    ) and is being transferred to 
                    https://himanis.org/
                     where images and texts are accessible through the IIIF protocol and as IIIF annotations (fig. 2).
                
                
                    
                    Figure 2: Indexed words as IIIF annotation in the IIIF compliant viewer Mirador (image: Paris, Archives Nationales, JJ 137, page 14)
                
                Like in the tranScriptorium model, the users can set the confidence level for the search to reduce the noise or maximize the hit list value, a functionality that is the information science equivalent to the performance measure in computer science through “precision” (number of correct occurrences in the hitlist) and “recall” (number of correct occurrences compared to an error-free edition). 
                
                    Qualitative and quantitative measures demonstrates that the HIMANIS system has obtained a very high level of precision, more than 85%, even increased to 99% through lemmatization (Stutzmann, 2017a-c)
                     (fig. 3).
                
                
                    
                    Figure 3: Measuring the performance of text indexing (Recall/Precision Evaluation)
                
            
            
                Additional challenges: writer identification, granularity, crowdsourcing…
                
                    In parallel to HTR, another focus was automated writer identification.  It allows a preliminary, nonetheless novel, analysis on the organization of the French chancery. These are among the first measured and convincing results produced for medieval handwritings, not represented in international competitions (Fiel et al., 2017; Andreu Sánchez et al., 2017)
                    . Based on the Quill feature (Brink et al., 2012)
                     and validated on a partial ground-truth established by a paleographer, the system clustered hitherto unstudied page images, attributing them to 204 hypothetical writers. Fig. 4 illustrates the calculated presence of writers in each volume, giving a first insight into possible collaborations between scribes within the chancery across time.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 4: Writer Identification: Visualization of the different “hands” and their likeliness in the different volumes (representation of Gaussian standard deviation for style clustering, with 204 clusters)
                
                The partners tackle additional challenges. The text and structure of registers containing multiple charters impose to combine different granularities and intertwined both physical (page) and intellectual levels (one/several charter(s) on one/several page(s)). The integration of authority data and gazetteers allows new access, but with possible errors in text indexing and identification of named entities, measuring the applicability and usefulness of text indexing is an important methodological new task. Crowdsourcing results are currently negatively biased, because of the implemented ergonomics and users’ strategies. They tend to “suggest corrections” in order to improve their future search experience, rather than to validate correct spots (fig. 4). Nevertheless, it helps measuring impact, adequacy, precision, and usefulness. 
                
                    
                    Figure 5: Crowdsourcing as biased feedback
                
            
            
                Perspectives
                
                    The results of HTR are setting a new standard and make the digitized images a new source. Yet, they must obviously not be mistaken for a scholarly edition. HIMANIS participated in the current trend of Digital Humanities and uses images as data, both for text and for writer identification (Kestemont et al., 2017)
                    . Deep indexing represents new challenge for “distant reading” addressing topics and charter contents, because there is not an even number of hypotheses for all image spots. In new funded projects HOME (History Of Medieval Europe) and HORAE (Hours: Recognition Analysis, Editions), the partners are working on a methodology to create truthful and trustworthy results from uncertain and uneven, automatically generated data.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andreu Sánchez, J., Romero, V., Toselli, A. H., Villegas, M. and Vidal, E. (2017). ICDAR2017 Competition on Handwritten Text Recognition on the READ Dataset. 
                        14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition. ICDAR 2017. Kyoto: CPS, pp. 1383–88 doi:DOI 10.1109/ICDAR.2017.226.
                    
                    
                        Bluche, T., Hamel, S., Kermorvant, C., Puigcerver, J., Stutzmann, D., Toselli, A. H. and Vidal, E. (2017). Preparatory KWS Experiments for Large-Scale Indexing of a Vast Medieval Manuscript Collection in the HIMANIS Project. 
                        14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition. ICDAR 2017. Kyoto: CPS, pp. 312–17 doi:DOI 10.1109/ICDAR.2017.59.
                    
                    
                        Bluche, T., Stutzmann, D. and Kermorvant, C. (2016). Automatic Handwritten Character Segmentation for Paleographical Character Shape Analysis. 
                        2016 12th IAPR Workshop on Document Analysis Systems (DAS). pp. 42–47 doi:10.1109/DAS.2016.74.
                    
                    
                        Brink, A. A., Smit, J., Bulacu, M. L. and Schomaker, L. R. B. (2012). Writer identification using directional ink-trace width measurements. 
                        Pattern Recognition, 
                        45(1): 162–71 doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2011.07.005.
                    
                    
                        Clement, T., Steger, S., Unsworth, J. and Uszkalo, K. (2008). How Not To Read A Million Books Harvard University, Cambridge, MA http://www.people.virginia.edu/~jmu2m/hownot2read.html (accessed 25 March 2017).
                    
                    
                        Crane, G. (2006). What Do You Do with a Million Books?. 
                        D-Lib Magazine, 
                        12(3) doi:10.1045/march2006-crane. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march06/crane/03crane.html (accessed 25 March 2017).
                    
                    
                        European Commission (2016). CORDIS : Projects &amp; Results Service : Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents 
                        CORDIS Community Research and Development Information Service http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/198756_en.html (accessed 14 October 2016).
                    
                    
                        Fiel, S., Kleber, F., Diem, M., Christlein, V., Louloudis, G., Stamatopoulos, N. and Gatos, B. (2017). ICDAR2017 Competition on Historical Document Writer Identification (Historical-WI). 
                        14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition. ICDAR 2017. Kyoto: CPS, pp. 1377–82 doi:DOI 10.1109/ICDAR.2017.225.
                    
                    
                        GDELT Project (2015). Google BigQuery + 3.5M Books: Sample Queries 
                        GDELT Blog https://blog.gdeltproject.org/google-bigquery-3-5m-books-sample-queries/ (accessed 23 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Guérin, P. and Celier, L. (1881). 
                        Recueil des documents concernant le Poitou contenus dans les registres de la chancellerie de France. 14 vols. (Archives historiques du Poitou). Poitiers: Société des archives historiques du Poitou http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k209478j (accessed 25 April 2014).
                    
                    
                        Guyotjeannin, O. and Lusignan, S. (2011). Introduction au formulaire d’Odart Morchesne 
                        Le Formulaire d’Odart de Morchesne http://elec.delisle.enc.sorbonne.fr/morchesne/ (accessed 23 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M., Christlein, V. and Stutzmann, D. (2017). Artificial Paleography: Computational Approaches to Identifying Script Types in Medieval Manuscripts. 
                        Speculum, 
                        92(S1): S86–109 doi:10.1086/694112.
                    
                    
                        Leydier, Y., Eglin, V., Bres, S. and Stutzmann, D. (2014). Learning-Free Text-Image Alignment for Medieval Manuscripts. 
                        2014 14th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR). pp. 363–68 doi:10.1109/ICFHR.2014.67.
                    
                    
                        McNicholl, R. and Miles-Board, T. (2015). tranScriptorium : Computer-Aided, Crowd-Sourced Transcription of Handwritten Text (for Repositories). 
                        10th International Conference on Open Repositories (OR2015).
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). 
                        Distant Reading. London ; New York: Verso.
                    
                    
                        Odart Morchesne (2005). 
                        Le Formulaire d’Odart Morchesne : Dans La Version Du Ms BnF Fr. 5024. (Ed.) Guyotjeannin, O. &amp; Lusignan, S. (Mémoires et Documents de l’École Des Chartes 80). Paris: École des chartes.
                    
                    
                        Oriflamms, C. (2017). Compte-rendu final du projet ORIFLAMMS / ORIFLAMMS Final report Billet 
                        Écriture Médiévale &amp; Numérique | Écritures Médiévales et Lecture Numérique. Carnet Du Projet ORIFLAMMS (Ontology Research, Image Features, Letterform Analysis on Multilingual Medieval Scripts) http://oriflamms.hypotheses.org/1592 (accessed 25 May 2017).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2017a). 99 pilgrimages / 99 ‘pelerinage(s)’: accuracy and historical research Billet 
                        Himanis https://himanis.hypotheses.org/171 (accessed 23 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2017b). Saint-Omer in the registers of the French royal chancery (99.6% precision!) Billet 
                        Himanis https://himanis.hypotheses.org/195 (accessed 23 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2017c). The Royal Highness / L’altesse royale / regalis celsitudo : une thématique de préambule pour mesurer l’utilité d’HIMANIS Billet 
                        Himanis https://himanis.hypotheses.org/246 (accessed 23 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D., Bluche, T., Lavrentiev, A., Leydier, Y. and Kermorvant, C. (2015). From Text and Image to Historical Resource: Text-Image Alignment for Digital Humanists. Sydney http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/STUTZMANN_Dominique_From_Text_and_Image_to_Histor/STUTZMANN_Dominique_From_Text_and_Image_to_Historical_R.html (accessed 29 June 2015).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D., Moufflet, J.-F. and Hamel, S. (2017). La recherche en plein texte dans les sources manuscrites médiévales : enjeux et perspectives du projet HIMANIS pour l’édition électronique = Full Text Search in Medieval Manuscripts : Issues and Perspectives of the HIMANIS Project for Electronic Publishing. 
                        Médiévales : Langue, Textes, Histoire, 
                        73.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The research presented here concerns methodological issues surrounding Zeta, a measure of distinctiveness or keyness initially proposed by John Burrows (2007). Such measures are used to identify features (e.g. words) that are characteristic of one group of texts in comparison to another (Scott 1997), a fundamental task that many standard tools support, e.g. WordCruncher (Scott 1997), AntConc (Anthony 2005), TXM (Heiden et al. 2012) or stylo (Eder et al. 2016). Widely used methods include the log-likelihood ratio (where observed frequencies are compared to expected frequencies; see Rayson and Garside 2000) and Welch's t-test (where two frequency distributions are compared; see Ruxton 2006). Zeta, by contrast, is based on a comparison of the degrees of dispersion of features (see Lyne 1985, Gries 2008). Zeta appeals to the Digital Literary Studies community because it is mathematically simple and has a built-in preference for highly interpretable content words. Indeed, Zeta has been successfully applied to various issues in literary history (e.g. Craig &amp; Kinney 2009, Hoover 2010, Schöch 2018). However, its statistical properties are not well understood, as important work on evaluating measures of distinctiveness (Kilgariff 2004, Lijfijt et al. 2014) has not included Zeta. Therefore, we submit two key aspects of Zeta to exploration and evaluation: (a) variations in the way Zeta is calculated and (b) variations of key parameters. We gain a more precise understanding of how Zeta works and propose a new variant, “log2-Zeta”, that shows more stable behavior for different parameters than Burrows’ Zeta.
            
            
                Deriving Zeta variants and key parameters
                Zeta is calculated by comparing two groups of texts (G1 and G2). From each text in each group, a sample of n segments of fixed size with m word tokens is taken. For each term (t) in the vocabulary (e.g., consisting of lemmatized words), the segment proportions (sp) in each group are calculated, i.e. the proportion of segments in which this term appears at least once (binarization). Zeta of t results from subtracting the two segment proportions:
                
                    
                        
                    
                    From this formalization, we can derive several variants of Zeta: applying division instead of subtraction; using relative frequencies (rf) instead of segment proportions (sp); and applying a log-transformation to the values rf and sp instead of using them directly. This results in eight variants of Zeta (Table 1).
                
                
                    
                        
                        segment proportions
                        relative frequencies
                    
                    
                        normal
                        log2
                        normal
                        log2
                    
                    
                        subtraction
                        sd0
                        ds2
                        sr0
                        sr2
                    
                    
                        division
                        dd0
                        dd2
                        dr0
                        dr2
                    
                
                Table 1: The eight variants of Zeta with their labels; “sd0” corresponds to Burrows’ Zeta.
                The formalization also points to two major parameters of Zeta: segment sampling strategy (using all possible consecutive segments, or sampling n segments per text to overcome text length imbalances) and segment size (segments with m tokens, influencing the granularity of the dispersion measure). We expect the segment size to be of particular importance, as choosing extreme values affects the calculations very strongly: using a segment size of 1 token is equivalent to relative term frequencies; using unsegmented texts is equivalent to document frequencies. Because Burrows (2007) gives no theoretical justification for his particular formulation of Zeta, a systematic exploration and evaluation is called for.
            
            
                Text collection, code and raw data
                Experiments have been performed using two very different text collections:
                
                    A collection of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama (1630-1788): 150 comedies and 189 tragedies (from the Théâtre classique collection; Fièvre 2007-2017).
                    A collection of Spanish novels (1880-1940): 24 novels from Spain and 24 from Latin America (from the CLiGS textbox: Henny 2017 and Calvo Tello 2017). 
                
                For reasons of space, we only report results for the Spanish novels. Texts, metadata, code, results and figures are available on Github: 
                    .
                
            
            
                Methods and hypotheses
                To obtain a better understanding of Zeta and its variants, we first visually explore the relation between segment size and the resulting zeta scores. We expect both Zeta variants and segment size to have visible consequences in this setting. Secondly, we evaluate the distinctiveness of words selected by different Zeta variants by using the highest ranked words as features in a classification task for distinguishing texts into two previously defined classes. This captures the degree to which the different Zeta variants and parameters identify words distinctive of these two classes. Note that we calculate Zeta scores from the complete set of documents. While this is not valid for a real-world classification task, it allows us to better judge the level of distinctiveness of the selected words. We expect better performance in the classification task with some of the new variants, compared to the classic “Burrows Zeta” (sd0). We also expect extreme segment lengths to significantly impact classification performance. We primarily aim at a methodological contribution here, so we do not attempt include a discussion of our results from a literary perspective (but see Schöch 2018 for such a contribution).
            
            
                Exploratory approaches to Zeta variants and parameter variation
                First, we take a closer look at the relationship between overall frequency and Zeta scores as it evolves with increasing segment size.
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Distribution of Burrows Zeta (sd0) scores depending on segment size. Each dot is one word, ordered by descending frequency. The x-axis is log-scaled.
                        
                    
                
                Figure 1 shows that when using very short segments, only highly frequent words (such as function words) can get high Zeta scores. With longer segments, words that are somewhat less frequent overall (well-interpretable content words) can also reach high Zeta scores; a desirable effect.
                Additionally, we explore the influence of segment length and Zeta variant on the relation between segment proportions and zeta scores. 
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Segment proportions and Zeta scores for two Zeta variants (left: Burrows Zeta; right: log2-Zeta) and three segment sizes (100, 1000, 5000). Each dot is one word, 500 top Zeta words are shown. Colors indicate the words with the 40 highest (green) and lowest (blue) Zeta scores.
                        
                    
                
                Figure 2 shows that with increasing segment size, Zeta scores generally increase because segment proportions increase. It also shows that in Burrows’ Zeta (left), terms with low segment proportions can never gain high Zeta scores. This limitation motivates the log2 and division variants that alleviate this effect: here, words to the bottom and left of the plots can also obtain extreme Zeta scores. 
            
            
                Evaluation of Zeta variants and parameters
                Evaluating the performance of Zeta variants and different parameters is non-trivial, because it is impossible to define a human-annotated gold standard for distinctive words. Therefore, we use a classification task (with a Linear-SVM classifier and 3-fold cross-validation) for evaluation (the Spanish novels have to be classified by their continent of origin: America and Europe). The baseline of classification performance is F1=0.49 on average across all conditions and has been obtained using the top-80 most frequent words weighted with TF-IDF (see Robertson 2004).
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Classification performance depending on Zeta variant, segment size and number of segment-samples. We report mean F1-score over 15x3 folds.
                        
                    
                
                Figure 3 shows that, as expected, most Zeta variants outperform the baseline. Segment size also influences performance: Burrows Zeta (“sd0”) performs particularly poorly with small segments (50, 100) and particularly well with large segments (&gt;10000). Contrary to our expectation, large segment sizes do not generally have a negative impact on performance. The log2-Zeta variant (“sd2”) performs better than Burrows’ Zeta and is more robust with respect to segment size. In addition, we evaluate the parameter sampling size (number of segments randomly sampled for each document). For Burrows’ Zeta (“sd0”), we observe a better classification performance for small samples.
            
            
                Discussion: Interpretability
                While improved performance and robustness are welcome, another important characteristic of Burrows’ Zeta should not be forgotten, namely the high interpretability of the most distinctive words it identifies. The question is whether the gain in performance obtained with log2-Zeta comes at the expense of interpretability of the most distinctive words. Currently, we can merely offer some preliminary observations on this issue: First, the interpretability of distinctive words could be operationalized in a first approximation as the proportion of content words (nouns, verbs and adjectives) in the list of the most distinctive words, as opposed to function words and named entities. Second, segment size and Zeta variant both appear to influence the types of words Zeta that determines to be distinctive: for example, very small segment sizes favor highly frequent function words, while very large segment sizes lead to place and person names taking up a considerable space in the word list. Also, some Zeta variants, including log2-Zeta, produce lists of words containing high proportions of place and person names even at intermediate segment lengths, that is wordlists that are less interpretable (see annex). These preliminary observations point to a possible trade-off between performance and interpretability that requires further, systematic investigation.
            
            
                Conclusions and Future Work
                Our experiments have allowed us to gain a much more detailed understanding of how Zeta works, mathematically and empirically. Additionally, we have identified at least one Zeta variant (“log2-Zeta”) that selects more distinctive words with regard to our classification task and is more robust against variation in segment length than Burrows Zeta. 
                As future work, we plan to conduct an investigation into the notion of “interpretability” and its relation to classification performance. Also, we plan to build an interactive visualization for our results to support a dynamic exploration of Zeta variants, key parameters and their influence on classification accuracy and distinctive words obtained. A larger agenda item is the evaluation of a substantial number of measures of distinctiveness, including Zeta, in a common framework.
            
            
                Annex
                For reasons of space, the wordlist annex can be found at: 
                    . 
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Anthony, L. (2005). AntConc: A learner and classroom friendly, multi-platform corpus analysis toolkit. 
                        Proceedings of IWLeL 2004: An Interactive Workshop on Language e-Learning. 7–13.
                    
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2007). All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 22(1): 27–47 doi:10.1093/llc/fqi067.
                    
                    
                        Calvo Tello, J. (ed.) (2017). Corpus of Spanish Novel from 1880-1940. (CLiGS Textbox). Würzburg: CLiGS. https://github.com/cligs/textbox/tree/master/spanish/novela-espanola.
                    
                    
                        Craig, H. and Kinney, A. F. (eds). (2009). 
                        Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of Authorship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2016). Stylometry with R: A package for computational text analysis. 
                        The R Journal, 16(1): 1–15. https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2016/RJ-2016-007/index.html.
                    
                    
                        Fièvre, P. (ed). (2007). 
                        Théâtre classique. Paris: Université Paris-IV Sorbonne. http://www.theatre-classique.fr.
                    
                    
                        Gries, S. T. (2008). Dispersions and adjusted frequencies in corpora. I
                        nternational Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 13(4): 403–37. doi:10.1075/ijcl.13.4.02gri.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In Otoguro, R., et al. (eds), 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation - PACLIC24. Sendai: Waseda University, 389–98. https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00549764/en.
                    
                    
                        Henny, U. (ed.) (2017). Collection of 19th Century Spanish-American Novels (1880-1916). (CLiGS Textbox). Würzburg: CLiGS. https://github.com/cligs/textbox/tree/master/spanish/novela-hispanoamericana.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2010). Teasing out Authorship and Style with t-tests and Zeta. 
                        Digital Humanities Conference. London http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab-658.html.
                    
                    
                        Kilgarriff, A. (2001). Comparing Corpora. 
                        International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 6(1): 97–133. doi:10.1075/ijcl.6.1.05kil.
                    
                    
                        Lijffijt, J., Nevalainen, T., Säily, T., Papapetrou, P., Puolamäki, K. and Mannila, H. (2014). Significance testing of word frequencies in corpora. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 31(2): 374–97. doi:10.1093/llc/fqu064.
                    
                    
                        Lyne, A. A. (1985). 
                        Dispersion. The Vocabulary of French Business Correspondence. Paris: Slatkine / Champion, pp. 101–24.
                    
                    
                        Rayson, P. and Garside, R. (2000). Comparing corpora using frequency profiling. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Comparing Corpora. Hong Kong: ACM, 1–6.
                    
                    
                        Robertson, S. (2004). Understanding inverse document frequency: On theoretical arguments for IDF. 
                        Journal of Documentation, 60(5): 503–20.
                    
                    
                        Ruxton, G. D. (2006). The unequal variance t-test is an underused alternative to Student’s t-test and the Mann–Whitney U test. 
                        Behavioral Ecology, 17(4): 688–90. doi:10.1093/beheco/ark016.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C. (2018). Zeta für die kontrastive Analyse literarischer Texte. Theorie, Implementierung, Fallstudie. In Bernhart, T., et al. (eds.), 
                        Quantitative Ansätze in der Literatur- und Geisteswissenschaften. Berlin: de Gruyter. 77-94. https://www.degruyter.com/viewbooktoc/product/479792.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C., Calvo Tello, J., Henny-Krahmer, U. and Popp, S. (under review). The CLiGS textbox: Building and Using Collections of Literary Texts in Romance Languages Encoded in XML-TEI. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative. Preprint: http://cligs.hypotheses.org/files/2017/09/Schoech-et-al_2017_Textbox.pdf.
                    
                    
                        
                        Scott, M. (1997). PC Analysis of Key Words and Key Key Words. System, 25(2): 233–45.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                The Research Environment for Ancient Documents (READ) is an integrated Open Source web platform for epigraphical and manuscript research. It may be configured as the underlying engine for a text repository or as a complementary research toolset to an existing repository. The defining innovation of this software is the atomization of text into orthographic subunits (as opposed to lines or words). This enables mapping across all layers of textual analysis, from factual data (the location of a character on a surface) through contestable (the transcription of a character) to the purely interpretive (a semantic annotation). This data architecture enables:
            
            
                The integration of physical, textual, and interpretive aspects of research
                The transformation of conventional editing practice into optimized workflows
                Granular attribution of components of a text, which allows for alternative interpretations and flexible collaboration
            
            This poster outlines the workflows and outputs supported by version 1.1 (2017) of READ. The first release is optimized for use with Indic languages using akṣara-based writing systems (abugida). We will demonstrate the platform using documents in Gāndhārī language. We will also demonstrate the ability to generalize READ to support other languages and writing systems, e.g., Aramaic, Chinese, English, Italian, and Mayan.
            The core workflows of the READ are:
            
                
                    Creating a new item for study and inputting a text transcription
                    A researcher creates a new item in READ and adds basic metadata and enters a transcription of the item in free text. Once entered, the researcher can immediately access two types of reports: a wordlist generated from the text; and alternate presentations of the text edition (diplomatic, reconstructed, and hybrid). These reports are available via READ’s web interface, as well as the following downloadable export formats: HTML export, RTF, TEI (EpiDoc).
                
                
                    Uploading images of the source text and linking to the text transcription
                    READ provides tools to mark segment boundaries around the graphical units of the writing system depicted in the images. These segments are then automatically linked to the transcription entered in step 1. At this point the researcher can view the edition side by side with the image using synchronized scrolling provided by READ’s web interface. In addition, the researcher can access a paleographic report generated from the image segments using the linked transcription. The TEI (EpiDoc) export includes the image as Facsimile element. All image segments can be exported as distinct files for paleographic processing using external tools.
                
                
                    Creating a text glossary by adding lexicographical data to the generated wordlist
                    The researcher uses tools provided by READ to add lexicographical data to the wordlist that was generated in step 1. At this point, a glossary can be generated and exported (HTML, RTF) or viewed in READ’s web interface. Also, the edition viewer in READ’s web interface integrates glossary data in flyouts associated with each word in the edition.
                
                
                    Completing the glossary
                    The researcher views the glossary created in step 3 in the READ’s web interface and adds compound analysis to any compounds occurring in the text. At this point, glossary generation includes cross-reference entries for compound members.
                
                
                    Annotating the edition
                    The researcher uses annotation tools provided by READ to add footnotes and tags to the edition. The researcher can add text-structural information as well as textual parallels, translation, and alternate transliteration forms. These annotations can be viewed in the web interface, as footnotes in exported RTF and HTML output.
                
                
                    Cubing the edition
                    A researcher can integrate alternate editions of the same text using tools provided by READ. Any alternate editions so integrated, will be linked to the same image added in Step 2. Alternate editions can be viewed side-by-side in READ’s web interface to support comparison between alternate editions of a text.
                
                
                    Sharing the research
                    READ has been designed as a collaborative tool from the outset. Researchers can choose to share visibility and editing rights to any of the elements in their work. Work can also be published in mutable and immutable forms via the READ viewer interface, as well full text editions in TEI, exported HTML, and RTF that can be opened in common word processing and desktop publishing software applications. 
                
            
            The READ project began in 2013 and has been funded by Ludwig-Maximilians Universität, Munich, Germany; the University of Washington, Seattle, USA; Université de Lausanne, Switzerland; University of Sydney, Australia; and Prakaś Foundation, Sydney, Australia.
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Digital literary studies advance in their research, requiring more specific metadata about literary phenomena: narrator (Hoover 2004), characters (Kastorp et al. 2015), place and period, etcetera. This metadata can be used to explain results in tasks like authorship attribution or genre detection, or to evaluate digital methods (Calvo Tello 2017). What could be the most efficient way to start annotating this information in corpora of thousand of texts in languages, genres and historical periods for which many NLP tools are not trained for? In this proposal, the aim is to identify specific literary metadata about entire texts with methods that are either language-independent or easily adaptable for humanists.
            
            
                Two Ways from Text to Metadata
                The two approaches to classify unlabeled samples applied here are rule-based classification and supervised machine learning. In rule-based classification (Witten et al. 2011), domain experts define formalised rules that correctly classify the samples. For example a rule based on a single token can be defined for each class to predict whether a text is written in third person (83% of the corpus) or first person using tokens for the two values are the Spanish words 
                    dije ('I said') and 
                    dijo (‘he said’), and the rule:
                
                
                    if 
                        dijo appears 90% more than 
                        dije, the novel is written in third person
                    
                    if 
                        dijo appears less, in first person
                    
                
                The results of applying this rule can be presented as a confusion matrix:
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig 1. Confusion Matrix of rule-based results about narrator
                For supervised methods (Müller and Guido 2016; VanderPlas 2016), we need labeled samples to train and evaluate the method. In the following table, the different classifiers and document-representations achieve different accuracy scores:
                
                    
                        
                        raw
                        relative
                        tfidf
                        zscores
                    
                    
                        SVC
                        0.90
                        0.83
                        0.83
                        0.88
                    
                    
                        KNN
                        0.83
                        0.88
                        0.81
                        0.81
                    
                    
                        RF
                        0.88
                        0.88
                        0.86
                        0.90
                    
                    
                        DT
                        0.84
                        0.83
                        0.84
                        0.82
                    
                    
                        LR
                        0.88
                        0.83
                        0.83
                        0.17
                    
                    
                        BN
                        0.72
                        0.72
                        0.72
                        0.82
                    
                    
                        GN
                        0.72
                        0.80
                        0.80
                        0.81
                    
                
                Fig 2. Accuracy (F1-score) for narrator
            
            
                Corpus and Metadata
                The data is part of the 
                    Corpus of Spanish Novels of the Silver Age (1880-1939) (used in Calvo Tello et al. 2017), with 350 novels in XML-TEI by 58 authors. Each text has been annotated manually with metadata and its degree of certainty has been assigned. 262 texts with either high or medium certainty have been used to create a gold-standard with the following classes:
                
                
                    protagonist.gender
                    protagonist.age
                    protagonist.socLevel
                    setting.type
                    setting.continent
                    setting.country
                    setting.name
                    narrator
                    representation
                    time.period
                    end
                
            
            
                Modelisation and Methods
                The scripts have been written in Python (available on GitHub)
                     &lt;https://github.com/cligs/projects2018/tree/master/text2metadata-dh&gt;. The features have been represented as different document models (Kestemont et al. 2016):
                
                
                    raw frequencies
                    relative frequencies
                    tf-idf
                    z-scores
                
                Different classify algorithms (cross validation, 10 folds) and amount of Most Frequent Words have been evaluated. For each class a single token was used to represent each class value and a ratio was assigned for the default class value (see repository in GitHub for rules). Both approaches were compared to a “most populated class” baseline, quite high in many cases. 
            
            
                Results
                The results of both approaches are as following:
                
                    
                        Class
                        F1 baseline
                        F1 Rule
                        F1 Cross Mean
                        F1 Cross Std
                        Algorithm
                        Model
                        MFW
                        Winner
                    
                    
                        end
                        0.60
                        0.54
                        0.60
                        0.02
                        LR
                        tfidf
                        100
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        narrator
                        0.83
                        0.80
                        0.91
                        0.04
                        RF
                        tfidf
                        1000
                        ML
                    
                    
                        protagonist.age
                        0.55
                        0.25
                        0.55
                        0.01
                        LR
                        tfidf
                        100
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        protagonist.gender
                        0.80
                        0.68
                        0.80
                        0.01
                        BN
                        tfidf
                        100
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        protagonist.socLevel
                        0.63
                        0.49
                        0.64
                        0.07
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        5000
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        representation
                        0.88
                        0.80
                        0.88
                        0.01
                        LR
                        tfidf
                        100
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        setting.continent
                        0.95
                        0.94
                        0.96
                        0.01
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        5000
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        setting.continent.binar
                        0.95
                        0.95
                        0.95
                        0.19
                        LR
                        zscores
                        500
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        setting.country
                        0.93
                        0.38
                        0.94
                        0.01
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        1000
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        setting.country.binar
                        0.87
                        0.47
                        0.88
                        0.03
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        1000
                        Baseline
                    
                    
                        setting.name
                        0.64
                        0.85
                        0.71
                        0.02
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        1000
                        Rule
                    
                    
                        setting.type
                        0.48
                        0.46
                        0.71
                        0.05
                        SVC
                        zscores
                        5000
                        ML
                    
                    
                        time.period
                        0.95
                        0.95
                        0.97
                        0.01
                        BN
                        zscores
                        5000
                        Baseline
                    
                
                Fig 3. Results
                In many cases the baselines are higher than the results of both approaches. The rule outperformed the baseline in the case of name of the setting with very good results. In two cases (narrator and setting's type), Machine Learning is the most successful approach and its F1 is statistically higher than the baseline (one sample t-test, ɑ = 5%). The algorithms Supported Vector Machines, Logistic Regression and Random Forest are most successful, while tf-idf and speacilly z-scores got the best results, the last one a data representation “highly uncommon in other applications” different from stylometry (Kestemont et al, 2016).
            
            
                Conclusions
                In this proposal I have used simple rules and simple features in order to detect relatively complex literary metadata in many cases with high baselines. While Machine Learning showed a statistically significant improvement in detection for two classes (type of setting and narrator), rules worked better for the name of the setting. This is a promising point to continue researching in order to annotate the rest of the corpus.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Calvo Tello, J. (2017). What does Delta see inside the Author?: Evaluating Stylometric Clusters with Literary Metadata. III Congreso de La Sociedad Internacional Humanidades Digitales Hispánicas: Sociedades, Políticas, Saberes. Málaga: HDH, pp. 153–61 &lt;
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Calvo Tello, J., Schlör, D., Henny-Krahmer, U. and Schöch, C. (2017). Neutralising the Authorial Signal in Delta by Penalization: Stylometric Clustering of Genre in Spanish Novels. Montréal: ADHO, pp. 181–83 &lt;
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Hoover, D. L. (2004). Testing Burrows’s Delta. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19(4): 453–75.
                    
                    
                        Kastorp, F., Kestemont, M., Schöch, C. and Bosch, A. Van den (2015). The Love Equation: Computational Modeling of Romantic Relationships in French Classical Drama. Sixth International Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative. Atlanta, GA, USA. &lt;https://zenodo.org/record/18343&gt;.
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M., Stover, J., Koppel, M., Karsdorp, F. and Daelemans, W. (2016). Authenticating the writings of Julius Caesar. Expert Systems with Applications, 63: 86–96 &lt;http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.06.029&gt;.
                    
                    
                        Müller, A. C. and Guido, S. (2016). Introduction to Machine Learning with Python: A Guide for Data Scientist. Beijing: O’Reilly.
                    
                    
                        VanderPlas, J. (2016). Python Data Science Handbook: Essential Tools for Working with Data. First edition. Beijing Boston Farnham: O’Reilly.
                    
                    
                        Witten, I., Frank, E. and Hall, M. (2011). Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. 3rd edition. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            18thConnect.org es una comunidad en línea de académicos que realizan revisión por pares de materiales digitales obteniendo metadatos de los mismos para colocarlos en nuestro buscador que está disponible de forma gratuita. Los materiales patentados, tales como Early English Books Online (EEBO) y Eighteenth-Century Collections Online (ECCO) también se pueden buscar a través de nuestro asistente de búsqueda. Además, los libros y documentos de las colecciones EEBO y ECCO de la literatura moderna temprana están disponibles en 18thConnect para que los usuarios corrijan sus transcripciones mecánicas, a través de nuestra herramienta TypeWright. Cualquier persona que corrige un documento puede, entonces, tenerlo tanto en formato de texto plano como en XSLT. Exhortamos a los especialistas a corregir textos, crear ediciones digitales en GitHub o enviarlas al TEI Archiving and Publishing Access Service (TAPAS), así como a enviar sus ediciones a 18thConnect para su revisión por pares y para publicarlas en acceso abierto.
            Mientras que 18thConnect ha estado en línea desde el 2009, la idea de crear Hispanic 18th Connect, resultó de la necesidad de ayudar en el proyecto 
                Primeros Libros de la Texas A &amp; M University, financiado por la NEH, para desarrollar OCR para documentos históricos escritos en español. Dados los resultados positivos en el proyecto 
                de Primeros Libros creemos que es momento de extender nuestros recursos para su uso en otras bibliotecas hispanas y para hacer disponibles sus colecciones en nuestro sitio.
            
            Para comenzar este proceso, elegimos traducir y adaptar nuestra interfaz al idioma español y a la cultura hispana. Nuestra justificación es que el español es la segunda lengua materna más hablada en el mundo, así mismo, el 18% de los habitantes en los Estados Unidos habla español y se estima que para el 2060, E.U. sea el segundo país con mayor número de hispanohablantes después de México (Llorente, 2017). Además, la cultura hispana permea en múltiples países, donde también se puede observar una especial motivación por conocer más de esta cultura. Esto último, se ve reflejado en el creciente interés por hacer investigación y desarrollar proyectos relacionados a la lengua y cultura hispanas desde las humanidades digitales (Gutiérrez y Ortega, 2014 y AtlasCSHD, 2015).
             El proyecto de Hispanic 18th Connect consiste en 6 etapas: 1) traducción al español; 2) revisión del funcionamiento de la interfaz; 3) prueba piloto con colegas humanistas cuyos intereses sean en estudios hispánicos con y sin experiencia previa en la interfaz de 18th Connect en inglés; 4) análisis de los resultados de la prueba piloto; 5) adición o modificación de contenidos de acuerdo a las respuestas y comentarios de la prueba piloto; 6) presentación oficial de la interfaz de Hispanic18th Connect. 
            La presentación del póster de Hispanic 18th Connect tiene varios aspectos a cubrir: por un lado, dar a conocer que la plataforma 18thConnect será más accesible para la comunidad hispanohablante por tener la opción de navegar en su sitio en español; presentar los retos que implicó la traducción de esta plataforma tanto en cuestión de términos, como en relación a los aspectos culturales que creemos pueden impactar (resultados de la etapa 4) y es dónde se pudiera visualizar cómo las características de la comunidad podrían modificar las instrucciones y/o las herramientas con las que cuenta 18thConnect para que pueda ser relevante en el estudio del siglo 18 hispano.
            El principal objetivo para este primer momento, es ofrecer esta plataforma traducida al español, y darla a conocer con el material de las colecciones existentes, y en un segundo momento, que es nuestro objetivo a mediano plazo, incluiremos nuevas colecciones y buscaremos identificar las posibles necesidades de nuevas herramientas que sirvan al estudio del siglo 18 hispano. 
            Nuestro póster mostrará el trabajo realizado en las 6 etapas, los retos, los hallazgos, los cambios y las diferencias respecto a la interfaz en inglés. Así mismo, contendrá la información más importante de la interfaz y ejemplos que demuestren la manera en que se realizarán las búsquedas de documentos en español (provenientes de EEBO y ECCO), la forma en que se corrigen documentos con TypeWright, y cómo se crean las ediciones digitales para que puedan ser sometidas a revisión por pares en Hispanic 18th Connect.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        18thConnect Eighteenth-century Scholarship Online (2009). Available at: 
                        http://www.18thConnect.org (Accessed 17 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        AtlasCSHD (2015). Atlas de Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades Digitales. Available at: 
                        http://medialab.ugr.es/proyectos/atlas-de-ciencias-sociales-y-humanidades-digitales/ Mapa: 
                        http://grinugr.org/mapa/#
                    
                    
                        Llorente, A. (2017). ¿En qué países se habla español fuera de España y América Latina? 
                        BBC Mundo. Available at: 
                        http://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-america-latina-38021392 (Accessed 17 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Ortega, É. y Gutiérrez, S. (2014). MapaHD. Una exploración de las Humanidades Digitales en español y portugués. In Romero, E. y Sánchez M. (eds), 
                        Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades Digitales Técnicas, herramientas y experiencias de e-Research e investigación en colaboración. CAC, Cuadernos Artesanos de Comunicación, pp. 101-128.
                    
                    
                        TAPAS, TEI Archiving and Publishing Access Service (2014). Available at: 
                        http://tapasproject.org/ (Accessed 30 April 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Arts and Humanities research has to address new challenges raised by the increasing amount of digital sources, contents and tools. New digital practices and protocols, new digital methodologies and services, new software and databases, offer a completely renewed framework for research, and encourage the emergence of a next generation of digitally-aware scholars. 
            Digital infrastructures, such as PARTHENOS, aim at supporting and accompanying the rise of this new generation of scholars by offering innovative solutions to connect digital tools and contents to Arts and Humanities researchers’ needs. PARTHENOS has thus acknowledged the growing importance to develop a data-centered strategy for the management of scientific data (European Commission, 2010), and is currently developing the Standardization Survival Kit (“SSK”) to help Arts and Humanities scholars understand the crucial role that proper data modelling and standards have to play in making digital contents sustainable, interoperable and reusable. 
            Accompanied by a live demo of the website
                
                     The beta-version of the website can be found here: 
                        
                            https://ssk-application.parthenos.d4science.org/ssk/#/scenarios
                        
                    
                , the poster will be composed of three parts: introducing the Standardization Survival Kit or “SSK”, using the SSK, customizing the SSK.
            
            Even if it is not obvious that the Arts and Humanities would be well-suited to taking up the technological prerequisites of standardization, it is yet essential that standardization takes a crucial role in the management of Arts and Humanities data. In this framework, this poster will present the Standardization Survival Kit, an overlay platform dedicated to promote a wider use of standards within Arts and Humanities. This comprehensive interface aims at providing documentation and resources concerning standards (especially authoritative references for each standard such as sources, Standard Development Organizations), and at covering three types of activities related to the deployment and use of standards in the Arts and Humanities scholarship: documenting existing standards by providing reference materials, supporting the adoption of standards, and communicating with all Arts and Humanities research communities.
            The SSK is designed as a comprehensive interface for guiding Arts and Humanities scholars through all available resources (collected within a dedicated Zotero library
                
                    
                        
                            https://www.zotero.org/groups/427927/parthenos-wp4
                        
                    
                ), on the basis of reference scenarios identified since the beginning of the project (PARTHENOS, 2016). The interface intends to provide a single entry point for both novice and advanced scholars in the domain of digital methods, so that they can have quick access to the information needed for managing digital content, or applying the appropriate method in a scholarly context. Users will be able to explore the platform according to their needs, thanks to precise research criteria: disciplines, standards, research activities and research objects. The poster will show how an Arts and Humanities scholar can navigate the Standardization Survival Kit website, by taking the example of an actual reference scenario. A live demo of the interface will also accompany the presentation, so that those interested in the poster will be able to search the website according to their needs.
            
            To stress the importance of standards for Arts and Humanities scholarly work, let us take the example of a sociologist who is a novice in digital methods, but who wants to disseminate a collection of field survey data online, so that they could be used by other researchers in the long-term. By browsing in the SSK, she or he will find a standardized scenario that could be perfectly suited to her or his needs: “Encode and modelize field surveys for their online dissemination”. The poster will follow this researcher exploring this reference scenario, and going through its nine steps
                
                     1. Obtain the informed consent of the participants, 2. Collect and Classify, 3. Select and digitize, 4. Anonymize, 5. Convert into sustainable formats, 6. Transcrive the interviews, 7. Add metadata, 8. Contextualize the research, 9. Disseminate and archive.
                 with the associated resources. Let us take some of the scenario’s steps as examples:
            
            
                the fourth step “Anonymize” offers a curated and up-to-date list of resources to help the researcher respect ethical practices and adopt proven techniques for anonymizing the collected data.
                the second and sixth steps stress on the importance of using tested standard - such as EAD to “Collect and classify” the data, and TEI to “Transcribe the interviews” -, highlight the importance of proper data modelling before disseminating them, and give access to appropriate resources on the subject.
            
            More advanced users will also be able to edit the scenarios themselves, by submitting new resources or adding new steps. They can also create new scenarios. The SSK scenarios and steps can be easily extended, reused and customized, thanks to their flexible data model in TEI
                
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/ParthenosWP4/SSK/spec
                        
                    
                . A dedicated interface in the Standardization Survival Kit will enable users to make suggestions, automatically converted in TEI according to the appropriate schema. The poster will present this interface and the associated functionalities. And for those who will be eager to test it, a live demo will be provided.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Romary, L., Banski, P., Bowers, J., Degl’Innocenti, E., Ďurčo, M., Giacomi, R., Illmayer, K., et al. (2017). 
                        Report on Standardization (Draft). Technical Report Inria https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01560563 (accessed 27 April 2018).
                    
                    
                        Romary, L., Degl’Innocenti, E., Illmayer, K., Joffres, A., Kraikamp, E., Larrousse, N., Ogrodniczuk, M., Puren, M., Riondet, C. and Seillier, D. (2016). 
                        Standardization Survival Kit (Draft). Research Report Inria https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01513531 (accessed 27 April 2018).
                    
                    (2018). 
                        SSK: Development of the Standardization Survival Kit. XSLT ParthenosWP4 https://github.com/ParthenosWP4/SSK (accessed 26 April 2018).
                    
                    Riding the Wave. How Europe can gain from the rising tide of scientific data, 
                        FOSTER FACILITATE OPEN SCIENCE TRAINING FOR EUROPEAN RESEARCH https://www.fosteropenscience.eu/content/riding-wave-how-europe-can-gain-rising-tide-scientific-data (accessed 26 April 2018a).
                    
                    Standard Survival Kit https://ssk-application.parthenos.d4science.org/ssk/#/ (accessed 26 April 2018b).
                
            
        
    

        
            1. Initial situation and target group
            Our target group are (digital) humanities scholars who want to present small, non-funded projects on their own website but have little or no experience with web design and development. Always the same questions have to be asked at the beginning of a website project to find out how complex or easy it is to implement the project. These circumstances are excellent conditions to offer a “how to”-flowchart with different applications as decision support. The poster is therefore designed as a decision flowchart and gives an overview of the possibilities and limitations of certain applications. All applications are differentiated according to whether static, dynamic or semi-dynamic websites can be built with them. Depending on which content should be presented and how, even beginners with little or no previous knowledge can create a website or get a feeling for when the support of a web developer is necessary. The questions that are answered in the flowchart concern...
            
                … the complexity of the site (see 2.1. for details).
                … the reason why the website is build, e.g. to publish a digital edition or to present research.
                … the format of the texts to be published: Do they have a uniform format? Can they be read dynamically?
                … the level of knowledge / technical affinity of the person creating the website, but also the capacity in terms of time and/or manpower and/or budget, i.e. for example whether it is possible to employ a student assistant or even a professional web developer.
                … the scalability: is it possible to estimate how the project will develop, e.g. with regard to complexity? To what extent can the website be expanded and where are the limits, e.g. how far can you get with the individual technology stacks?
                … hosting (see 2.2. for details).
                … sustainability.
            
            2. Questionnaire
            Of all the relevant questions, two are presented here as examples. Nevertheless, the flowchart is made available on 
                
                    github
                 so that as many scholars as possible can benefit from it
                .
            
            
                What kind of data should be published?
            
            If it is data that can be copied and pasted onto the website, a static website can be created with the website generator 
                
                    jekyll
                , 
                
                    omeka
                 or the content management system 
                
                    wordpress
                . This can look like this, for example: 
                
                    http://www.germanliteratureglobal.com/
                
            
            If it is data, that requires several tabs and contains recurring queries, it is a dynamic website. This type of website is also required if data is to be made available for downloading (a database is required for larger amounts of data). This can look like this, for example: 
                
                    http://www.berliner-intellektuelle.eu/
                
            
            If your data is available in TEI format, the 
                
                    TEIpublisher
                 or the 
                
                    EVT
                 are good choices for publication. If you are moving in the dynamic area, the effort can quickly become very high and extensive knowledge of website development is necessary. In this case you should contact a web designer.
            
            2.2 How can the website be published (Hosting)?
            If you have chosen 
                jekyll, hosting is very easy via 
                
                    github
                 or 
                
                    githubpages
                . There are no additional costs. If you have access to a webserver, you can always use it. Often universities offer such server systems for its employees or even students.
            
            Discussion
            In the course of this project, we were confronted with various issues that all revolve around sustainability in the broadest sense: 
            What if the formats presented here are obsolete? This risk exists for any technology application. This project is meant to be a pragmatic guide. We cannot solve the problem, but we use tools that are freely available and extendable. 
            If a website should be sustainable, i. e. available in the long term, where should it be hosted to guarantee long-term accessibility? Again, there is no guarantee how long the services presented here are available. As far as the sustainability of humanities websites, i. e. cultural knowledge in any form is concerned, we see it as universities, libraries and archives duty to provide and maintain the corresponding infrastructure.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Baillot, A. (Ed.). (n.d.). Briefe und Texte aus dem intellektuellen Berlin um 1800. Retrieved April 27, 2018, from 
                        http://www.berliner-intellektuelle.eu/
                    
                    Edition Visualization Technology. (2013). Retrieved April, 27, 2018, from 
                        http://evt.labcd.unipi.it/
                    
                    
                        GitHub. (2018). Retrieved April 27, 2018, from 
                        https://github.com/
                    
                    GitHubPages. (2018). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        
                            https://pages.github.com/
                        
                    
                    Jekyll. (2018). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        
                            https://jekyllrb.com/
                        
                    
                    Omeka (n.d.). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        https://omeka.org/
                    
                    Richter, S. (Ed.). (2017). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        http://www.germanliteratureglobal.com/
                            index.php/Hauptseite
                        
                    
                    TEIpublisher. (n.d.). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        
                            https://teipublisher.com/index.html
                        
                    
                    
                        Wordpress (n.d.). 
                        Retrieved April 27, 2018, from
                        https://wordpress.org/
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                In this poster, we introduce a digital edition of the Altan Tobchi, a Mongolian historical manuscript written in traditional Mongolian script. The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) guidelines were adopted to encode the named entities. A web prototype was developed for digital humanities scholarship for utilizing digital representations of ancient Mongolian historical manuscripts as scholarly tools. The proposed prototype has the capability to display and search TEI encoded traditional Mongolian text and its transliteration in Latin letters along with the highlighted named entities and the scanned images of the source manuscript. This poster discusses how to develop a digital edition of Mongolian historical documents.
            
            
                Mongolian manuscripts
                Mongolian historical documents have been written in numerous scripts, i.e., the traditional Mongolian script, Square or Phags-pa script, Todo or Clear script, Soyombo script and Horizontal square script (Shagdarsuren, 2011). Among them, the traditional Mongolian script is the most popular and longest-surviving script for over 800 years. This research focuses on the traditional Mongolian script.
                In 1946, Mongolia has made language reforms to eliminate a difference between written and spoken Mongolian language, and the Cyrillic script was adapted to Mongolian. The spelling of modern Mongolian was based on the pronunciations in the Khalkha dialect, the largest Mongol ethnic group (Sečenbagatur et al., 2005; Svatesson et al., 2005). Such a radical change separated the Mongolian people from their historical archives written in traditional Mongolian script. Reading traditional Mongolian documents by using literacy in modern Mongolian is not a simple task. Thus, a digital text representation that explains a given manuscript in a modern Mongolian is helpful for users who want to read, search and browse ancient Mongolian manuscripts.
                
                    Mongolian manuscripts in the digital age
                    To the best of our knowledge, there are a small number of digital texts of ancient Mongolian manuscripts. A few ancient Mongolian manuscripts including (1) ‘Qad-un ündüsün-ü quri-yangγui altan tobči neretü sudur’ (The Golden Summary: Short history of the Origins of the Khans) a.k.a. “Little” Altan Tobchi and (2) the ‘Asaraγči neretü-yin teüke’ (The Story of Asragch) have been converted to digital texts and made publicly available (Batjargal et al., 2012).
                
                
                    Information processing of Mongolian manuscripts
                    Batjargal et al. have developed the traditional Mongolian script digital library (TMSDL) (Batjargal et al., 2012), which can be used to access and retrieve historical manuscripts written in traditional Mongolian script using a query in modern Mongolian (Cyrillic). Moreover, Batjargal et al. also proposed a named entity extraction method (Batjargal et al., 2016), which extracts proper nouns from digitized text of ancient Mongolian documents using Support Vector Machine with 0.6993, 0.5679 and 0.6268 of precision, recall and F-measure respectively. These researches have motivated us to create a digital edition that reflects ancient Mongolian historical manuscripts.
                
            
            
                Digital edition of Mongolian manuscripts 
                We utilized Edition Visualization Technology (EVT) for creating a digital edition of Mongolian manuscripts, which is encoded according to the TEI XML schemas and guidelines (Del Turco et al., 2014). As shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, all the personal names and place names (Figure 3) in the Altan Tobchi are highlighted by using the results of a named entity extraction method (Batjargal et al., 2016) and the named entities’ indices obtained from the “Qad-un ündüsün quriyangγui altan tobči –Textological Study” (Choimaa, 2002). We made the following customizations in EVT to make it suitable for Mongolian manuscripts in traditional Mongolian script.
                
                    
                    
                        Figure 1. Image-to-text link and personal names’ highlights
                    
                
                
                    Parallel-text editions with transliteration
                    The proposed prototype can present scanned image-based editions with two edition levels: (1) diplomatic interpretative and (2) transliteration. Transliteration is helpful for those who are not familiar with a script of a certain language but understands that language. Transliteration in Latin letters of Mongolian historical documents is popular among scholars.
                    There is a limited recommendation to encode transliterations in TEI. Soualah and Hassoun (Soualah &amp; Hassoun, 2012) proposed to implement transliteration by using a specific model, which uses the 
                        &lt;ref&gt; element with the 
                        @xml:lang, 
                        @target, and 
                        @type attributes. However, we consider transliteration as a separate edition and use it as parallel-text editions as shown in Figure 2.
                    
                
                
                    Supporting the traditional Mongolian script
                    A unique feature of traditional Mongolian script is displaying vertically, from top to bottom, in columns advancing from left to right. Due to poor support for traditional Mongolian script at the EVT, we customized it to display the scanned images at the top and the corresponding text in traditional Mongolian script below with the direction top to bottom and left to right (Figure 1). We also set to display text in traditional Mongolian script on the left, and the corresponding transliteration in Latin letters on the right that can be used to compare them. 
                    Additionally, we added a simple virtual keyboard composed of 22 traditional Mongolian letters and their corresponding Latin letters to help users to input a Mongolian keyword to benefit free-text search and keyword highlighting (Figure 4).
                    
                        
                        
                            Figure 2. Parallel-text editions with transliteration
                        
                        
                        
                            Figure 3. List of personal names in traditional Mongolian script
                        
                        
                        
                            Figure 4. A simple virtual keyboard in parallel-text editions with transliteration
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Summary and future directions 
                In this poster, we discussed our development of creating a digital edition (http://www.dl.is.ritsumei.ac.jp/AltanTovch/) of Mongolian historical manuscripts of the 13-16th century. The proposed method could be applied to other documents in Todo, Manchu, and Sibe, which are the derivative scripts of traditional Mongolian. We will further improve the proposed prototype by adding features to support critical editions.
                We believe the proposed digital edition will enable users to search and browse ancient Mongolian manuscript with the highlights of historical figures and ancient place names.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Batjargal, B., Khaltarkhuu, G. and Maeda, A. (2016). 
                        Named Entity Extraction from digitized texts of Mongolian Historical Documents in Traditional Mongolian Script, Conference Abstracts of Digital Humanities 2016, pp. 734-735.
                    
                    
                        Batjargal, B., Khaltarkhuu, G., Kimura, F. and Maeda, A. (2012). Developing a Digital Library of Historical Records in Traditional Mongolian Script, 
                        International Journal of Digital Library Systems, 
                        3(1): 33–53.
                    
                    
                        Choimaa, Sh. (2002). 
                        Qad-un ündüsün quriyangγui altan tobči (Textological Study). vol. 1. Ulaanbaatar: Centre for Mongol Studies, National University of Mongolia, Urlakh Erdem, 2002. (in Mongolian).
                    
                    
                        Del Turco R. R., Buomprisco G., Pietro C. D., Kenny J., Masotti R., and Pugliese J. (2014) Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-based Digital Editions. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 8, DOI: 10.4000/jtei.1077.
                    
                    
                        Sečenbagatur Q., Tuyag-a B., and Ying U. (2005). 
                        Monggul kelen-ü nutug-un ayalgun-u sinǰilel-ün uduridqal, Hohhot: Öbür Monggul-un arad-un keblel-ün qoriy-a.
                    
                    
                        Shagdarsuren, T. (2011). 
                        Study of Mongolian Scripts (Graphic Study of Grammatology), National University of Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar: Urlakh Erdem Khevleliin Gazar.
                    
                    
                        Soualah M. O., and Hassoun M. (2012). A TEI P5 Manuscript Description Adaptation for Cataloguing Digitized Arabic Manuscripts. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 2, DOI: 10.4000/jtei.398.
                    
                    
                        Svantesson J., Tsendina A., Karlsson A., and Franzén V. (2005). The Phonology of Mongolian, New York: Oxford University Press.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                
                    Introduction: Sharing text libraries and data collections for teaching and research in the humanities
                    Source text collections and other complex datasets can be very difficult to share and reuse, and especially difficult to aggregate and disaggregate. CEX, CITE Exchange is a plain-text, self-documenting, technology-agnostic format for capturing citable texts, data collections, and arbitrary relationships among citable data at any level of granularity. CEX is based on the CITE/CTS architecture
                        
                            
                                http://cite-architecture.github.io.
                            
                         and it positions itself as an alternative and complement to TEI XML and relational database schemas. TEI XML is a great archival format for storing textual information and metadata of individual editions. Managing and sharing text collections, however, can be cumbersome, especially if you only want to share a collection of excerpts based on hundreds of individual TEI XML files. When teaching text-heavy humanities disciplines, such as history, literature or classics, scholars are constantly faced with the problem of creating a source-text collections (that is, a corpus of excerpts of a bigger corpus that is deemed a representative sample able to answer a scholarly investigation), and the challenge of easily sharing this newly generated collection with students and colleagues. Based on current forms of data exchange, scholars and their students facing this task needed to have intimate knowledge of either database solutions like eXistDB
                        
                            
                                http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html.
                            
                         or of API-calls
                        
                            
                                http://capitains.org.
                            
                        . CEX circumvents this problem by simplifying the format of exchanging texts and related objects following the OCHO2 principles laid out in the CITE/CTS architecture
                        
                            
                                http://cite-architecture.github.io.
                            
                        .
                    
                    Likewise, data collections (coins, geo-spatial data, manuscript folios, etc.) are efficiently served intact by relational databases. Extracting subsets, sharing datasets in whole or in part, and aggregating disparate collections with schemas can be very difficult. CEX, as an exchange format, simplifies this.
                    This paper is directed to two types of scholars: technology-savvy colleagues who want to discuss simple interchange formats for data-sets and colleagues who want to build, analyze, and exchange soure text collections with fellow researchers and students. The paper will introduce CEX, its design, utilities, and code libraries for creating, validating, and manipulating it, and examples of two types of end-user applications: applications that help to build CEX collections and applications that enable students and scholars to perform natural language processing on exchanged CEX collections. In the first part of the paper we will describe the format and structure of CEX, while the second part showcases sample applications.
                
                
                    The CEX format
                    CEX is based on clearly defined data models for texts and data collections. These data models define semantics of scholarly primitives. CITE and CTS URN citations capture the semantics of the objects they identify. CEX defines catalogs documenting repositories of texts and collections, and blocks of data capturing the data of the texts and collections themselves.
                    A CEX file is a plain text, UTF-8 file, containing blocks for distinct types of data. The CEX specification provides blocks for:
                    
                        Text Catalogs
                        Textual Data
                        Collection Catalogs
                            
                                Collection Property Definitions
                                Collection Data
                            
                        
                        Extensions to Collections, e.g. "Image Collections"
                        Relations among citable objects
                        Data models formally specifying further aggregation of primitives
                    
                    Each text-block consists of a header line, followed by data records. Each line is a record, and fields within the lines are separated by a delimiting character ("#" is the default, but this is configurable).
                    Blocks are optional. A CEX file may contain only textual data, only collection data, or a combination of these. We will demonstrate using CEX files that contain millions of words of textual data and hundreds of thousands of data-records for collections.
                    In this paper, we will present these blocks, and the clearly defined abstract generic data models that they implement. ## Sample applications
                    We will demonstrate a sampling of utilities, services, and applications for creating, valdating, browsing, and analyzing scholarly data from CEX-formatted text files. All of these are openly licensed, with source code freely available on GitHub.
                    
                        Corpus building software: Brucheion and TEItoCEX
                        TEItoCEX
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/ThomasK81/TEItoCEX.
                                
                             is a CTS TEI XML parser. It is written in Go and can be compiled to any operating system, including OS for Raspberry Pi 
                            
                                
                                    https://www.thepolyglotdeveloper.com/2017/04/cross-compiling-golang-applications-raspberry-pi/.
                                
                            . It can be copied to the parent folder of multiple TEI CTS XML files. Once executed it will produce a valid CEX collection from all the XML files. 
                            screenshot1
                        
                        Brucheion is a browser-based transcription desk written in Go and based on ICT2. 
                            screenshot2 While the backend is based on the fast BoltDB, users can export and import CEX files to share transcriptions or feed them into analytical applications, such as (Meletē)ToPān v.0.3. 
                            screenshot3 and screenshot4
                        
                    
                    
                        Microservices based on CEX: Citemicroservices written in Go and Scala
                        There are currently two implementations of CEX-based microservices. The first implementation we created is a prototype that helps the end-user retrieve textual nodes from CEX files via an HTTP API by simply using the barebone file system of the server as a backend.
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/cite-architecture/citemicroservices.
                                
                             It is written in Go and can be compiled to any operating system. The gitHub repository also includes executables for all major operating systems and documentation for usage.
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/cite-architecture/citemicroservices.
                                
                             A useful feature is that one can also retrieve textual nodes from remote CEX repositories by modifying 
                            config.json. Simplicity of implementation and usage was the driving force in developing this prototype. The work on this prototype spawned another implementation in Scala that could make use of all the features of the already existing Scala CTS/CITE library.
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/cite-architecture/scs-akka.
                                
                            
                        
                        Another implementation written in Go is currently under development. This implementation includes features of the Scala library and some additional natural language processing capabilities and that make use of BoltDB in its backend.
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/ThomasK81/Nucleus.
                                
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Exploring CEX collections through Topic Modelling: (Meletē)ToPān v.0.3 and Metallō
                        (Meletē)ToPān is a GUI for topic modelling introduced at DH2016 in Krakow. It was written in R and is published on Zenodo
                            
                                
                                    https://zenodo.org/record/556708#.WhhosLbMwlI.
                                
                             and Github
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/ThomasK81/ToPan.
                                
                            . Initially ToPān supported the predecessor of CEX, 82XF, which was developed in discussion at DH2016.
                            
                                
                                    http://neelsmith.github.io/2016/07/13/82xf_v2/.
                                
                             Since v.0.3, it also supports CEX. Using the CEX files for topic modelling gives users easy but precise control over which documents should be included in the analysis. It has become possible for any scholar to build a source text corpus with TEItoCEX and then feed it into ToPān. The researchers can then use Metallō
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/ThomasK81/TopanTerminalBrowser.
                                
                            , a commandline based topic model exploration tool, to have a closer look at the created result.
                        
                        The paper will include a live demonstration of TEItoCEX, ToPān, and Metallō. Scholars visiting this talk will be able to use and build CEX collection for analysis, teaching, and research.
                    
                    
                        Browsing Integrated Text &amp; Data Libraries with the CiteApp
                        CiteApp is a "zero-config" web application written in ScalaJS that allows browsing and searching of libraries of text, collection data, and images. CiteApp itself consists of a single HTML file and can run locally or on a server. CiteApp reads data in the form of CEX files (with, optionally, an accompanying directory of image files). CiteApp allows browsing texts in a library, browsing parallel texts and translations, querying texts for strings, tokens, and NGrams, browsing data-collections and querying their records, and browsing collections of images, querying metadata, and interacting with zoomable views of high resolution images. Images may be local or hosted remotely.
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/cite-architecture/CITE-App.
                                
                            
                        
                        The audience for this talk will be able to take home a copy of CiteApp with sample libraries in CEX format of byzantine manuscript images and editions of the texts they contain.
                    
                
                
                    Screenshots of CEX-Capable Applications
                    TEItoCEX: Converting libraries of TEI documents to easily shared CEX files
                    
                        
                        TEItoCEX
                    
                    (Meletē)ToPān: Topic Modeling files in CEX format
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    Brucheion: Integrated Image and Textual data
                    
                        
                        Brucheion
                    
                    CiteApp: Browsing a multilingual text library
                    
                        
                        CiteApp
                    
                    CiteApp: Searching for NGramsTEItoCEX
                    
                        
                        CiteApp
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Smith, D. Neel, and Gabriel Weaver. “Applying Domain Knowledge from Structured Citation Formats to Text and Data Mining: Examples Using the CITE Architecture.” Text Mining Services, 2009, 129.
                    Blackwell, C., and D.N. Smith. “A Gentle Introduction to CTS &amp; CITE URNs.” Homer Multitext Project Documentation, November 2012. 
                        http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-doc/guides/urn-gentle-intro.html.
                    
                    DeRose, Steven J., David G. Durand, Elli Mylonas, and Allen H. Renear. “What Is Text, Really?” ACM SIGDOC Asterisk Journal of Computer Documentation 21, no. 3 (August 1997): 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/264842.264843.
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                This poster presents the textbox
                    
                        .
                     published by the CLiGS
                    CliGS (Computational Literary Genre Stylistics) is an early career research group funded by the German Federal Ministry for Research and Education (BMBF). 
                        http://www.cligs.hypotheses.org.
                     group both from the perspective of creating the textbox and of using it for research. The poster will highlight key aspects of the manner in which the collections of literary texts included in the textbox have been compiled, annotated and published. Furthermore it suggests several ways in which the text collections can be used for research in literary studies. This poster aims to showcase the unique XML-TEI-based collections we make available and to encourage their re-use by others.
                
            
            
                What is the textbox?
                The CLiGS textbox is dedicated to making collections of literary texts in Romance languages freely available. It currently contains novels, novellas and short stories published between 1830 and 1940 in France
                    The French collection was partly compiled and annotated by Stefanie Popp., Spain, Italy, Portugal, and Spanish-America as well as plays published between 1640 and 1680 in France with a total of 357 texts or about 14 million words. The texts are published in XML-TEI as well as in plain text versions and include detailed document-level metadata. All texts are in the public domain and the XML-TEI markup including the metadata is published with a Creative Commons Attribution license (CC-BY) or in case of the Italian novels with a NC-SA-BY. The text collections are curated and published using a public GitHub repository. In addition, main releases are automatically archived on Zenodo.org, a long-term data and publications archiving service for researchers across Europe managed by OpenAire and supported by CERN (see Nielsen, 2013). Each release receives a DOI (Digital Object Identifier), providing the unambiguous identification and long-term availability of the resource.
                
            
            
                Text selection
                The individual text collections were created with various usage scenarios in mind, and each collection has been compiled in a slightly different manner. For example, the two collections of Spanish novels, the 
                    Corpus of Spanish Novels (1880-1940) and the 
                    Collection of 19th century Spanish-American Novels (1880-1916), have been prepared to be used for authorship attribution. Accordingly, the two collections have been balanced with regard to the number of texts from different authors. The poster will give an overview of the sub-collections of the textbox and also about the principles guiding their compilations.
                
            
            
                File Formats
                Independently of their original source format (e.g. html or EPUB), the texts are prepared (with Python scripts or XSLT) according to a common TEI schema established by the CLiGS group
                    
                        .
                    . In addition to that reference format, each collection is made available in a simple plain text format automatically derived from the XML-TEI version, containing only the text included in the body of the novels and plays (in particular, excluding prefaces, other paratext, or notes) and with external metadata provided in tabular format.
                
                Moreover, the collections of French, Spanish, Spanish-American, and Portuguese novels as well as the Italian short stories are made available in a version combining basic structural markup (chapter and sentence divisions) with token-level linguistic annotation, including lemma, part-of-speech, morphology, and basic semantic annotation using Freeling (cf. Padró and Stanislovsky, 2012) and WordNet (see Figure 1). Finally, the collection of French plays is not only available in XML-TEI, but also in the “Zwischenformat” developed by the DLINA group (Kampkaspar et al., 2015).
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Linguistic annotations in an XML format that is a minimal departure from the TEI standard to allow multiple token-level annotations
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Metadata
                Besides the administrative metadata like license, responsibility etc. the collections focus on descriptive metadata. There are four main areas about which information is documented: metadata concerning the authorship (VIAF, name, country, gender), metadata concerning the literary work and editions (VIAF or other identifier, extent of the texts, print and the digital source), and finally metadata concerning the genre: Since the main focus of the project is literary genre, a considerable part of the metadata is directly connected to it. Any reference to genre in the title of the work is collected as a genre label. Besides that, a hierarchical system is used, comprising supergenre (e.g. “narrative” or “drama”), genre (that is, novels or novellas), subgenre (the subtype of the novel, for example “adventure novel” or “political novel”) and subsubgenre (optional, used for further differentiations like “war novel”).
            
            
                Usage Scenarios
                There are many possible use cases for the textbox collections. The poster will demonstrate some results of these methods from the areas of authorship attribution (using the stylo package for R; Eder et al., 2016), network analysis (using NetworkX in Python), and topic modeling (using MALLET with “tmw” for Python). These scenarios are intended not only as examples of analyses conducted within the CLiGS group, but also as suggestions for potential users of the CliGS textbox, Figure 2 and 3 demonstrate some results for authorship attribution and network analysis.
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Authorship attribution, results of cosine delta on the Corpus of Spanish Novels (cf. Smith and Alridge, 2011; Evert et al., 2017)
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Character network based on number of words spoken in mutual presence (represented by the thickness of the lines), for Jean Racine's tragedy Britannicus (1669)
                        
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        E
                        der, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2016). Stylometry in R: A package for computational text analysis. In 
                        The R Journal, 16 (1): 1-15.
                    
                    
                        E
                        vert, S., Proisl, T., Jannidis, F., Reger, I., Pielström, S., Schöch, C. and Vitt, T. (2017). Understanding and explaining Delta measures for authorship attribution. In 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 32 (suppl_2): ii4-ii16. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqx023 
                        (accessed April 26 2018).
                    
                    
                        K
                        ampkaspar, D., Fischer, F. and Trilcke, P. (2015). Introducing Our ‘Zwischenformat’. In 
                        Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts. 
                        (accessed April 26 2018).
                    
                    
                        Nielsen, L. H. (2013). ZENODO – An innovative service for sharing all research outputs. In 
                        Zenodo. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.6815 
                         (accessed April 26 2018).
                    
                    
                        Padró, L. and Stanislovsky, E. (2012). FreeLing 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. In 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012). Istanbul, Turkey: ELRA. 
                         (accessed April 26 2018): 2473-2479.
                    
                    
                        Smith, P. W. H. and Alridge, W. (2011). Improving Authorship Attribution: Optimizing Burrows’ Delta Method. In 
                        Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 18(1): 63-88. doi: 10.1080/09296174.2011.533591.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This poster presents the technical redesign of the web resource 
                German History in Documents and Images/Deutsche Geschichte in Dokumenten und Bildern (GHDI) as a transatlantic knowledge production and conveyance model for community-engaged public history. It is a multilingual project led and based at the German Historical Institute Washington (GHI) in partnership with DARIAH-DE, the Max Weber Foundation, and the University of Southern California. It was awarded a three-year development grant from the German Research Foundation/Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in 2017. We display the project’s theoretical foundations and aims, the resulting technical design, and report on the proof-of-concept phase and first-year of development.
            
            GHDI was first conceived in 2002 by a group of academic historians who sought to make a large collection of German historical documents openly available online in German and English translation. GHDI would consist of ten chronological volumes to cover German history from 1500 to 2009, each of which includes an introduction and a selection of historical documents, images, and maps, accompanied by interpretations. The site currently contains 1,784 German documents (along with an equal number of English translations), 2,374 images, and 55 maps (for a total of 16,068 pages), with content being expanded in the revamp. The project has developed a large and diverse international community of users, registering approximately 100,000 unique visitors a month.
            The reconceptualization and revamp of the GHDI includes the encoding of original and new materials in TEI P5, Dublin Core metadata for all content, a site-wide co-created bibliography, and a scholarly annotation system. The integration of, and project development contributions to, 
                Scalar—a robust open-source authoring, editing, and publishing platform with support for RDF content—allows users to navigate content in diverse ways and along various critical historiographical paths, challenging “master narrative” approaches to German history. The Scalar adapters developed by the project will link a number of important German archives to English-speaking scholarly communities for the first time, and the GHDI platform will ultimately allow users to use and “mix” this and other content to produce their own and collaborative scholarly outputs.
            
            Data resources of the project are being described using Dublin Core metadata vocabulary.  Sources with annotations or other semantic enhancement adhere to TEI (Text Coding Initiative) P5 using the DTA base format.  Linked-open data representations are being be stored in RDF-XML.  Using Scalar’s built-in API, all content will be made available directly via URL-based requests in RDF-XML.  This is also the technical basis for user content "remixing" and user publication facilitation being developed within the GHDI environment. Authority control for personal names and other entities, both in consumption and publication, will be assured through GND and similarly broadly accepted standards.  Resources suitable for language analyses tools conform to Component MetaData Infrastructure (CDMI) as prescribed by CLARIN-DE data centers.   Geographic data is being encoded in GeoJSON.   All data will be published to prioritize permissiveness of use under Creative Commons licensing. 
        
    

        
            This poster offers a playful introduction to network analysis as a means to study and compare dramatic texts. Its more serious purpose is a didactic intervention in the now well-established methods of literary network analysis, which are not always applied with sufficient reflection. The calculation of complex network metrics is often not followed by a leap to meaningful interpretation. What does it really mean, for example, that the average path length of the social network extracted from Shakespeare’s 
                Hamlet is 1.69 and the density of the same network is 0.34? However, when we look at these values in relation to the corresponding values of other dramatic texts, such network statistics become much more meaningful.
            
            In order to cultivate comparative sensitivity in the context of literary network analysis, we build on a gamification approach. Unlike other experiments in this direction – such as the Android and web app 
                Play(s) presented at the DHd2016 (Göbel/Meiners 2016), which encouraged the playful correction and enrichment of literary TEI corpora – we produce a true card game that invites players to explore network-analysis data in a new way.
            
            The poster format is applied in two ways: On the one hand, the poster is a data visualisation based on a minimal canon of European drama. On the other hand, it is a card game that playfully acquaints audiences with the meaning of basic network metrics. This approach is not new in the arts and humanities and reaches back to card games like 
                Plattenbauten. Berliner Betonerzeugnisse (Mangold et al. 2001), where technical data of different types of prefabricated concrete buildings had to be compared (cf. Richter 2006).
            
            Our drama card game serves to instruct players in literary history, quantitative approaches, and network theory, based on a collection of 32 dramas ranging from the ancient Greeks to the modern age. Instead of a lexicon-like description of such a collection, the descriptive instrument here consists of visual and quantitative values that produce comparability – a type of card game known to English speakers as 
                Top Trumps – see 
                 –, or as 
                Supertrumpf in the German context.
            
            Each card presents a visualisation of a social network extracted from one of the 32 plays (very much along the lines of Fischer et al. 2016 and Fischer et al. 2018). Additional information on the cards consists of metadata (author, title, subtitle, year of publication/premiere) and static and dynamic network data (network size, network density, clustering coefficient, average path length, maximum degree incl. the name of the corresponding character, number of scenes). The front card contains an introduction to the project and its background as well as short definitions of network-theoretical terminology.
            The poster is generated with the all-in-one drama analysis script 
                dramavis, which has received a corresponding function in the new version 0.4 (Kittel/Fischer 2017). The collection of 32 plays used for the conference poster is in no way meant to be definitive or canonical, but is intended to present a diverse collection of plays from the history of European drama that feature comparably interesting social network data. Our collection ranges from antiquity (Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophokles, Aristophanes) to modern times (Marlowe, Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Calderón de la Barca, Racine, Molière, Aphra Behn, Goldoni, Goethe, Mitford, Victor Hugo, Pushkin, Gogol, Grabbe, Ibsen, Strindberg, Schnitzler, Chekhov, Lasker-Schüler, Shaw, Pirandello, García Lorca, Brecht, and others).
            
            The 
                dramavis tool can be fed with a customisable canon file to create your own deck of cards.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Fischer, 
                        F., 
                        Göbel, M., Kampkaspar, D., Kittel, C., Trilcke, P. (2016): Distant-Reading Showcase. 200 Years of Literary Network Data at a Glance. Proceedings of DHd2016, Leipzig. DOI: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Fischer, 
                        F., 
                        Kittel, C., 
                        Milling, C., Schultz, A., 
                        Trilcke, P., 
                        Wolf, J. (2018): Dramenquartett. Eine didaktische Intervention. Proceedings of DHd2018, Cologne. DOI: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Göbel, M., Meiners, H.-L. (2016): Play(s): Crowdbasierte Anreicherung eines literarischen Volltext-Korpus. Proceedings of DHd2016, Leipzig.
                    
                    
                        Kittel, C., Fischer, F. (2017): dramavis v0.4. On Github, 2017. Repo: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Mangold, C. et al. (2001): Plattenbauten. Berliner Betonerzeugnisse. Ein Quartettspiel. Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Richter, P. (2006): Der Plattenbau als Krisengebiet. Die architektonische und politische Transformation industriell errichteter Wohngebäude aus der DDR am Beispiel der Stadt Leinefelde. Hamburg, Univ., Diss. URL: 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This poster (with accompanying downloadable dataset and application) will demonstrate as a proof-of-concept a comprehensive image-based publication and analysis of a text bearing artifact, [catalog number redacted for anonymous review], a hitherto unpublished 10th Century palimpsest fragment of the Gospel According to Matthew. The fragment contains most of the “Parable of the Sower”.
            In editing this text, we sought to be as comprehensive as possible, capturing:
            
                Natural light and UV images, both overview images and details
                A diplomatic transcription of the overwritten text of Matthew and any legible characters from the undertext
                A word tokenization of the diplomatic transcription, mapping to each token:
                    
                        a normalization
                        editorial status
                        lexical status
                        morphology, part of speech, and syntactic relations
                        alignment to the image data
                    
                
                A character tokenization, aligned to the image data
                An edition of the whole Gospel according to Matthew from a critical edition, for comparison and context
                Translations aligned to the text
                Editors’ comments
            
            In publishing it, we sought simplicity, longevity, and clarity. While we use TEI XML as a format for capturing an initial transcription, the overlapping analytical categories, many-to-many alignments of text and image, and open ended possibilities for commentary precluded implementing a coherent data model fully in XML. At the same time, we wanted a concise and integrated publication.
            By using the CEX format
                
                     CEX (CITE Exchange Format) is a plain text format for capturing data about texts and collections, based on the CITE/CTS architecture and developed by C. Blackwell (
                        Homer Multitext), T. Köntges (University of Leipzig), and N. Smith (
                        Homer Multitext). For implementations and projects using CEX, see: T. Köentges, (Meletē)ToPān (topic modelling environment): https://thomask81.github.io/ToPan/; C. Blackwell, N. Smith, CEX Library (Scala): https://github.com/cite-architecture/cex; C. Blackwell, N. Smith, CEX Dataset Repository: https://github.com/cite-architecture/citedx
                    
                , a plain text, self-documenting format based on the CITE/CTS architecture, we are able to bring together these many levels of analysis in a form that is at once disaggregated, with each scholarly primitive explicitly and unambiguously citable, while still united in a single file. CEX allows us to distribute a fully integrated dataset in the form of a single plain text file and a single directory of images.
            
            Our publication, a CEX file and a directory of images, is technology-agnostic readable by humans, but also able to serve as the data for an end-user application. We will describe, and have available for download and on USB thumbdrives, a lightweight, zero-configuration single page web application (SPA), fully usable offline, that integrates the data and images for this publication for end-users.
                
                     This application is based on the ScalaJS implementation of “CITE App” by C. Blackwell and N. Smith: https://github.com/cite-architecture/CITE-App
                
            
            Finally, we will outline the low cost, low technology, collaborative work behind the digitization and editing of this manuscript fragment: off-the-shelf cameras, simple handheld UV lighting, readily available FOSS software.
            We believe that this work will be of interest to the international Digital Humanities research community both as a new publication of a Byzantine Greek text and as a demonstration of a replicable and sustainable combination of technology and workflow. We think this approach provides a compelling alternative to XML or RDF editions and complex database-driven end user applications, offering advantages both on the back end (a flexible, scalable, and self-documenting format for implementing diverse data models), and on the front end (lightweight and portable presentation for readers). At the same time the data we present as CEX and images is easily transferrable to other standard formats.
                
                     Existing code libraries for working with CEX include a microservice framework that delivers textual and other data from CEX files as JSON objects, via HTTP requests (see https://github.com/cite-architecture/scs-akka ) and libraries that export CEX data into other formats, such as 2-column tabular data or 82XF (see https://github.com/cite-architecture/scm ).
                
            
            All project data is under version control in a public GitHub repository, and licensed under a CC-BY license. All source code is under either a GPL or MIT public license.
        
    

        
            
                Introducción
                Encabalgamiento es el desajuste entre la pausa métrica y la sintáctica 
                    (Domínguez Caparrós, 2000: 103) que ocurre cuando una unidad de sentido se rompe entre dos versos. Este fenómeno, desde siempre utilizado con distintos fines expresivos (énfasis, ambigüedad, etc.) es difícil de delimitar formalmente. 
                
                El estudio más sistemático realizado para su caracterización en español sigue siendo el realizado en su tesis por Quilis 
                    (1964). El estudioso experimentó con lecturas de prosa, buscando demostrar qué unidades sintácticas no permiten pausa de sentido en su interior. Basándose en los resultados definió una serie de categorías gramaticales y sintácticas cuya separación en versos distintos produce encabalgamiento. La tipología allí establecida se considera ya clásica. El estudio de Quilis proporciona una definición formal y empírica del fenómeno. Con base en sus reglas se ha creado una herramienta capaz de detectar el encabalgamiento y sus tipos. 
                
                Este póster presenta la interfaz ANJA para el análisis automático del encabalgamiento desde una sencilla aplicación web: 
                    http://prf1.org/anja/index/, desarrollada dentro del proyecto ERC POSTDATA GA- 679528
                    
                         Este trabajo se enmarca dentro del proyecto de investigación Starting Grant Poetry Standardization and Linked Open Data: POSTDATA (ERC-2015-STG-679528), financiado por el European Research Council (ERC) bajo el programa: European Union´s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, dirigido como Investigador Principal por la profesora Elena González-Blanco, LINHD UNED (
                            http://postdata.linhd.es/).
                        
                    .
                
            
            
                Estado del arte
                La naturaleza formal del análisis métrico lo hace un campo propicio para su tratamiento computacional 
                    (Birnbaum and Thorsen, 2015;
                     Delente and Renault, 2015). El procesamiento del lenguaje natural (PLN) ofrece muchas posibilidades para la métrica, pues las reglas de definición lingüística permiten llevar a cabo análisis y extracción automática de grandes cantidades de información de corpus textuales. 
                
                Para la automatización del análisis métrico en español destacamos los estudios de escansión silábica y acentual de Navarro-Colorado 
                    (2017), Agirrezabal 
                    (2017) y Gervás 
                    (2000). También los trabajos de generación automática de poesía con patrones métricos 
                    (Gervás, 2000b) y 
                    (Gervás, 2015). 
                
                En el campo de las interfaces cabe distinguir entre aquellas que exploran datos de textos ya analizados, recogidos en una base de datos, y aquellas que permiten la entrada y análisis de cualquier poema. Del primer tipo destacamos For Better For Verse
                    
                        
                            http://prosody.lib.virginia.edu/
                        
                    
                    (Tucker, 2011) y Database of Czech Metre
                    
                        
                            http://versologie.cz/v2/web_content/
                        
                    
                    (Plecháč and Kolár, 2015). Entre las que permiten introducir textos destacamos, en español, la ligada a la herramienta de Navarro-Colorado
                    
                        
                            http://adso.gplsi.es/index.php/es/demostracion/
                        
                    , que analiza versos endecasílabos. Otros sitios con interfaz de entrada para análisis métrico son Separarensílabas
                    
                        
                            http://www.separarensilabas.com/index.php
                        
                     o Lexiquetos
                    
                        
                            http://lexiquetos.org/silio/
                        
                    . En otras lenguas destacamos Metricalizer
                    
                        
                            https://metricalizer.de/en/metrikanalyse/poem
                        
                    
                    (Bobenhausen and Hammerich, 2015) para alemán, Aoidos
                    
                        
                            http://aoidos.ufsc.br/
                        
                    
                    (Mittmann, 2016) para portugués y español, y RhymeDesign
                    
                        
                            http://www.sci.utah.edu/~nmccurdy/rhymeDesign/
                        
                    
                    (McCurdy et al., 2015) especializado en rima en inglés.
                
                Una interfaz para el análisis del encabalgamiento representa, sin embargo, una novedad en el campo.
            
            
                 Herramienta y resultados 
                El programa de detección del encabalgamiento en español, basado en PLN, se desarrolló en 2016-2017 y fue evaluado sobre dos corpus de test de distintos periodos 
                    (Ruiz et al., 2017). ANJA proporciona una interfaz web simple para este programa. El sistema consta de tres componentes: módulo de preprocesado para uniformar el formato de los poemas, pipeline de PLN (basada en IXA Pipes 
                    (Agerri et al., 2014) para POS-tagging, constituyentes y dependencias sintácticas) y módulo de detección de encabalgamiento (basado en reglas y diccionarios) y ampliamente documentado en el sitio web
                    
                        
                            
                                https://sites.google.com/site/spanishenjambment/
                            
                        
                    . Se ha utilizado esta herramienta para etiquetar un corpus de más de 4000 sonetos alojado y documentado en
                    
                        https://github.com/postdataproject/disco
                    .
                
                El código de la herramienta de detección de encabalgamientos está disponible en 
                    https://bitbucket.org/pruizf/anja_public/.
                
            
            
                Interfaz gráfica de usuario
                ANJA es una interfaz pública y gratuita, alojada en: 
                    http://prf1.org/anja/index/. Permite cargar los poemas que el usuario decida y analizarlos en el momento. También ofrece la carga de archivos ZIP que contengan archivos en texto plano.
                
                La interfaz de usuario está construida con el framework Django (Python), con las plantillas de Bootstrap 3. Las vistas de Django se llaman con AJAX para poblar los elementos de la UI. Para el análisis de PLN, Django accede a servicios web Java (IXA Pipes) implementados en nuestro servidor.
                ANJA presenta dos ventanas de navegación (Fig. 1), la principal, para introducir poemas, a la derecha y, a la izquierda, una mínima guía de uso que explica su funcionamiento y enlaza a la web del proyecto.
                
                    
                    Captura de ANJA
                
                Los resultados se ofrecen dos formatos: 
                    Standoff (tipo de encabalgamiento y línea), e 
                    Inline (etiquetado gramatical y tipo de encabalgamiento por línea, ver Fig. 2 para 
                    Inline). Las anotaciones PLN en que se basa en sistema se ofrecen en las pestañas 
                    PosTags (etiquetas gramaticales) y 
                    FullNLP (pipeline completa). 
                
                El enlace 
                    legend
                    
                        
                            https://sites.google.com/site/spanishenjambment/legend
                        
                     da acceso a la leyenda que explica los tipos de encabalgamiento, las etiquetas gramaticales y otras convenciones de representación: 
                
                
                    
                    Anotaciones de encabalgamiento en formato 
                        Inline
                    
                
                La existencia de una aplicación web simple para la utilización esta herramienta la hace accesible para una gama mucho más amplia de usuarios.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        Agerri, R., Bermudez, J. and Rigau, G. (2014). IXA pipeline: Efficient and Ready to Use Multilingual NLP tools. 
                        Proceedings of LREC 2014, the 9th International Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, vol. 2014. Reykjavik,Iceland, pp. 3823–3828 http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/775_Paper.pdf (accessed 20 April 2017).
                        
                    
                    
                        Agirrezabal, M. (2017). Automatic Scansion of Poetry San Sebastián/Donosti: Universidad del País Vasco.
                    
                    
                        Birnbaum, D. J. and Thorsen, E. (2015). Markup and meter: Using XML tools to teach a computer to think about versification. 
                        Balisage: The Markup Conference http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol15/print/Birnbaum01/BalisageVol15-Birnbaum01.html (accessed 22 April 2017).
                    
                    
                        Bobenhausen, K. and Hammerich, B. (2015). Métrique littéraire, métrique linguistique et métrique algorithmique de l’allemand mises en jeu dans le programme Metricalizer2. 
                        Langages(3): 67–88.
                    
                    
                        Delente, É. and Renault, R. (2015). Outils et métrique: un tour d’horizon. 
                        Langages(3): 5–22.
                    
                    
                        Domínguez Caparrós, J. (2000). 
                        Métrica Española. Madrid: Síntesis.
                    
                    
                        Gervás, P. (2000a). A Logic Programming Application for the Analysis of Spanish Verse. 
                        Computational Logic—CL 2000. Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1330–44.
                    
                    
                        Gervás, P. (2000b). Wasp: Evaluation of different strategies for the automatic generation of spanish verse. 
                        Proceedings of the AISB-00 Symposium on Creative &amp; Cultural Aspects of AI. pp. 93–100 https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Pablo_Gervas/publication/228609235_Wasp_Evaluation_of_different_strategies_for_the_automatic_generation_of_spanish_verse/links/00b4952aada6407047000000.pdf (accessed 22 April 2017).
                    
                    
                        Gervás, P. (2015). Tightening the Constraints on Form and Content for an Existing Computer Poet. 
                        AISB Convention 2015 http://eprints.sim.ucm.es/37000/ (accessed 22 April 2017).
                    
                    
                        McCurdy, N., Srikumar, V. and Meyer, M. (2015). Rhymedesign: A tool for analyzing sonic devices in poetry. 
                        Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature. pp. 12–22.
                    
                    
                        Mittmann, A. (2016). Escansão automática de versos em português. https://repositorio.ufsc.br/handle/123456789/175819.
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B. (2017). A metrical scansion system for fixed-metre Spanish poetry. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities doi:10.1093/llc/fqx009. https://academic.oup.com/dsh/article-abstract/doi/10.1093/llc/fqx009/3064339/A-metrical-scansion-system-for-fixed-metre-Spanish (accessed 19 April 2017).
                    
                    
                        Plecháč, P. and Kolár, R. (2015). The Corpus of Czech Verse. 
                        Studia Metrica et Poetica, 
                        2(1): 107–118.
                    
                    
                        Quilis, A. (1964). 
                        Estructura Del Encabalgamiento En La Métrica Española. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, patronato‘ Menéndez y Pelayo,’ Instituto‘ Miguel de Cervantes,’.
                    
                    
                        Ruiz Fabo, P., Bermúdez Sabel, H., Martínez Cantón, C. I., González-Blanco, E. and Navarro-Colorado, B. (2018). The Diachronic Spanish Sonnet Corpus (DISCO): TEI and Linked Open Data Encoding, Data Distribution and Metrical Findings. Humanidades Digitales 2018 (DH 2018). Ciudad de México, México. 
                    
                    
                        Ruiz Fabo, P., Bermúdez-Sabel, H., Martínez Cantón, C. I. and Calvo Tello, J. (2017). 
                        Diachronic Spanish Sonnet Corpus (DISCO). Madrid: UNED. Madrid https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1012567.
                    
                    
                        Ruiz, P., Martínez Cantón, C., Poibeau, T. and González-Blanco, E. (2017). Enjambment Detection in a Large Diachronic Corpus of Spanish Sonnets. 
                        Proceedings of the Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 27–32.
                    
                    
                        Tucker, H. F. (2011). Poetic data and the news from poems: A for better for verse memoir. 
                        Victorian Poetry, 
                        49(2): 267–281.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Digital scholarly editions and archives are typically published on the web, which makes it possible to create interactive and reading experiences with the potential of reaching worldwide audiences. When text is encoded with care, for example by adopting the Text Encoding Initiative standard, it becomes possible for the same encoded content to be delivered in other formats and media, such as e-book and PDF for print. Web-based interactive digital editions, however, are the most efficient in utilizing the interactive and interconnected features of the web for presenting both text and the editorial scholarship that produced it. Ongoing scholarship around minimal computing and minimal editions has pointed out some important, yet addressable, flaws of many TEI digital editions. Bloatedness of infrastructure, for example, particularly when paired with rapid technical obsolescence and changes in funding, can hamper long-term preservation efforts; weighty resources may not be easily accessible from slower connections; and online-only access to a digital edition can be an obstacle to the world-wide access potential highlighted earlier.
             The Shelley-Godwin Archive (S-GA) has taken steps to reduce its infrastructure footprint by generating a static site: in its production form, with the exception of its search index, S-GA is a collection of TEI, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript that can be hosted on any server without needing to set-up any server-side component (see Fig. 1).
            
                
            
            
                Fig. 1 The architecture of the S-GA website, built using Jekyll and static assets. Images are served primarily by the Oxford Bodleian Library using the International Image Interoperability Framework API.
            
            This approach also makes it possible to bundle resources together for off-line use. This poster will show three potential approaches to creating off-line resources for an on-line publication: a one-document HTML bundle, a compressed archive of resources and an Electron desktop application. Unlike a PDF or e-book version, these downloadable resources will preserve the functionality of S-GA’s website (with the exception, for now, of full text search), thus making the archive more usable in a potentially greater number of cases, including increasing access for users with slow or no internet connections.
        
    

        
            For developers of TEI-based projects, linked data is often much-desired but nonessential, an added output that would be nice to have, but that is not critical to ultimate success of the project. The recent catalyzation of interest in linked open data in the context of TEI (including the revitalization of ADHO’s LOD SIG and the TEI’s Ontologies SIG) is, however, a promising sign of our field’s engagement with linked data, and our readiness to join international efforts to produce and publish linked data (Huber et al.; Pattuelli et al.; Lehmann et al.; Shadbolt et al.; Hellmann et al). Currently linked data only makes up 1% of the web, and much of that 1% is used for commercial rather than scholarly purposes (Simpson and Brown). The conversion of existing digital humanities data into linked data offers humanities scholars an opportunity to intervene in the semantic web as it is being built. It allows the power of the semantic web to be harnessed for more than just commercial purposes, and offers rich and readily accessible information about the research topic of the liberal arts: the human record. The underlying assumption of the semantic web is the same as the underlying assumption of humanities research—we can never assume ourselves to be in a full state of knowledge; there is always new information that may come to light. The creation and exposure of linked data from the vast number of existing authoritative TEI projects could enable scholars to embrace linked cultural data at scale. But what is the path to success? Our poster reflects on the technical and institutional challenges to linked data creation, and proposes a workflow and toolset for the creation of linked data from TEI.
            Despite calls in the digital humanities for TEI-linked data compatibility (Simpson and Brown, Ciotti and Tomasi), scholars have yet to develop best practices for creating linked data from richly encoded TEI resources. For many projects, the production of linked data is an ancillary goal, one that would be gratifying to achieve, but one that is secondary to the encoding itself, or only necessary to facilitate aggregation. We propose the development of XSLT-backed tools to convert and connect otherwise incommensurable data sets. The tools will require human checks, since mapping the unique usages of hierarchical elements by TEI-based projects onto existing ontologies—including CIDOC-CRM, FOAF, SKOS, schema, dcterms, and others—is hardly one-to-one. Furthermore, the historical primary source material that the TEI permits encoders to so diligently represent requires significant contextualization, since the conditions of its production were often underpinned by historical worldviews that today may be read as racist, sexist, ableist, or homophobic. Without machine and human-readable contextualization, historic intents, biases, and worldview may be reified by the inferencing that linked data permits. The ideal outcome would instead be an understanding, without valourization, of those worldviews. We are testing our tools and workflow against data sets that present exactly these challenges. We are working with four sample TEI-based data sets representing four hundred years of Atlantic cultural production, including manuscripts, books, periodicals, biographies, art works, legislation, places, and events, representing 45,000 entities. The data spans four hundred years, two regions (Europe and the Americas), five religions, three languages, all with particular historical-contextual specificity. The upcoming phases of our work will involve testing the tools against more diverse TEI sets. We are especially interested in the poster format, as we are keen to solicit feedback from peers on the balance between granularity and generality in the representation of people, places, time, and cultural production as linked data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    References
                    
                        Ciotti, F., Tomasi, F. (2016). Formal Ontologies, Linked Data, and TEI Semantics. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative. https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.1480
                    
                    
                        Hellmann, S., et al. (2014). Knowledge Base Creation, Enrichment and Repair, in: Auer, S., Bryl, V., Tramp, S. (Eds.), Linked Open Data — Creating Knowledge Out of Interlinked Data, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer International Publishing, pp. 45–69.
                    
                    
                        Huber, J., Sztyler, T., Noessner, J., Murdock, J., Allen, C., Niepert, M. (2014). LODE: Linking Digital Humanities Content to the Web of Data. IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries. http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.0216.
                    
                    
                        Pattuelli, M.C., Miller, M., Lange, L., Fitzell, S., Li-Madeo, C. (2013). Crafting Linked Open Data for Cultural Heritage: Mapping and Curation Tools for the Linked Jazz Project. The Code4Lib Journal.
                    
                    
                        Shadbolt, N., O’Hara, K., Berners-Lee, T., Gibbins, N., Glaser, H., Hall, W., Schraefel, M.C. (2012). Linked Open Government Data: Lessons from Data.gov.uk. IEEE Intelligent Systems 27, 16–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2012.23
                    
                    
                        Simpson, J., Brown, S. (2014). Inference and Linking of the Humanist’s Semantic Web, in: Implementing New Knowledge Environments. Presented at the Building Partnerships to Transform Scholarly Publishing, Whistler, BC.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Overview
                This panel intervenes in debates about interpretative methods that are often lumped under “reading,” and often measured by metaphors of scale, from close to distant. Mining data in vast corpora promises to transform literary history, and all scholars in the humanities rely upon online materials and tools. Yet many humanists stand aloof from DH because of its presumed hyperbolic claims, its apparent blurring of the detailed artifact (the domain of humanities), and to some, its collusion, post-critique, with neo-liberal globalization. Four panelists, collaborating for the first time, have encountered provocative concepts in each other’s work that moderate such stark oppositions between the humanist and the computational. The panelists’ previous studies have demonstrated the “payoff” or mutual instruction of DH and other recognized standards of scholarship. At the same time, in meticulous capture of language, style, form, and cultural production, the panelists highlight the limits that some champions of algorithms might want to leap in a single bound. Technological approaches to literary studies require highly curated corpora and modulation, often excision, of noisy results. Each paper addresses the loss inherent in categories and models, and the gain in tracing discarded, fuzzy, or inaccessible data. While our fields span centuries of Anglophone culture, our work advocates diversity, women’s history, and the DH community’s values of open access and collaborative technological innovation.
                Our papers address disruptions as well as continuities in observational scale as the tools and materials shift. Each panelist speaks from experience with a different dataset and her or his innovative approach to interpretation, touching on both language and technology. The first two speakers propose forms of mid-range reading to describe imaginative and interpretive leaps that scholars make between individual documents/texts and broader social forces; the second two address the reductions and abstractions that are necessary to the research project, themes common to all papers. As an archeologist of technologies, Wythoff rediscovers the concept of the gadget as an instance of human-inanimate interaction mirrored in DH. Booth expands on her response in 
                    PMLA to Franco Moretti’s 
                    Distant Reading, highlighting typologies as well as specific textual features in biographical nonfiction that enforce communal narratives. Allison, co-author on Stanford Lit Lab pamphlets associated with distant reading, proposes reductive reading, or explicit acknowledgment of necessary simplification, even of such ambitious problems as the nature of fictionality, which has been differently framed in studies by Piper, Underwood, and Eliot. While concepts of scale pervade claims for methods, Shore offers the approaches of construction grammar and corpus linguistics for particular insights into abstractions and categorizations. Shore, like Allison, calls on us to acknowledge the motivated reductions that are necessary to the research process. Our talks reflect on the history of technology and biographical representation, the forms of fiction and nonfiction, and the preconditions of selection and labeling of data—enduring issues in the humanities that become more telling with the expanding digital capacity to “read” at large and at speed.
                
                Grant Wythoff, Tacit computing and method in the humanities
                Humanistic research has always involved imaginative and interpretive leaps from the person to "the social," from the text to "the historical." Think for instance of the Annales school and its emphasis on the history of collective mentalities, or how Foucault described "discourse" by reverse-engineering historical ways of constituting knowledge. Today however, with the availability of big data, many of these forms of humanistic interpretation have become second nature. The search for broad cultural formations is implicit in the earliest steps we take in a research project, from keyword searches to frequency analyses. To what degree are certain kinds of historical argumentation baked into these mundane, day-to-day research activities, and what other kinds of cultural formations might we be overlooking?
                In my current book project, 
                    Gadgetry: A History of Techniques, I reconstruct the history of a discourse on technology. The book focuses on the many kinds of objects that were described as "gadgets" across the twentieth century, from dashboard gauges to atomic bombs, can-openers to smartphones. While “gadget” can be a placeholder for any kind of object, even imaginary ones, I argue that its evolving application to particular tools and techniques reveals important lessons about our relationship to technology.
                
                In this book, I explore the user's imagination of how their gadgets work. For example, a single iPhone contains over half the elements of the periodic table, extracted from almost every continent on the planet and compressed into a thin slab that allows the user to dip her toes into a river of collective affect generated by the social network of everyone she's ever met. This is a fantastically science-fictional experience that is now part of our everyday lives. But the emergence of new digital cultures, political movements, and forms of intimacy are all predicated on the unique habits each user adopts in order to understand these complex gadgets.
                For this book, I text mine archives of novels, magazines, and newspapers in order to explore the distinctly vernacular philosophies––the media theories from below––that emerge from users and their everyday practices. Using databases like the Corpus of Historical American English, Historical American Newspapers, and the Media History Digital Library, I proceed by collecting as many instances of the word "gadget" as possible and plugging them into categories of my own making based on how the term is applied: is the gadget handmade or mass produced, seen as important or a trinket, does the word refer to the entirety of the tool or a component within it, and so on. Because I have hand-coded this "dataset" and designated myself the categories into which I sort each instance of the word, the portrait that emerges of a discourse on technology could be described as entirely of my own making, as opposed to algorithmically-generated. But what really is the distance between these two categories of interpretation? In this talk, I will compare my digital methods to other methods throughout the history of the humanities that have attempted to paint a portrait of collective feeling.
                Alison Booth, Mid-Range reading: typologies, events, and discourse in a network of women’s biographies
                Although many investigate fictionality, scholars have attended much less to nonfiction and biography than to imaginative forms such as novels or film. Digital humanities (DH) expand the scale of literary history while building on existing maps of period, genre, and notable authors, with finding aids shaped by previous scholarship. Thus Andrew Piper’s impressive textual analysis, “Fictionality,” neglects life narrative. Collective Biographies of Women (CBW) accesses a corpus of 1270 English-language biographical collections published across centuries, in a feminist historical study of a “hidden collection” of nonfiction. CBW developed before Google Books glimmered on the horizon; we worked with WorldCat and analogue materials to rediscover such publications as 
                    Noted Negro Women (1893). Reversing the usual DH phases, I published the book before collaborating on an online resource. What could we learn about the trends in gender ideology already constructed by biographers and publishers, publication data, and contents? Biography is a model (i.e. reduction) of a life within networks of typologies based on social difference. Distant reading is not best adapted to ramifications within curated corpora, where there is no mystery of author or genre. We capture the distinctive form and rhetoric of biography (and changing meaning of words such as “noble”) in relation to such scenarios as inter-class contact or recognition of genius. Sentiment analysis or word vectors developed for large corpora of novels or newspapers would miss the mark. The actual dynamics of gender representation, for example, can hardly be captured as a grammatical binary or by rates of male or female agents per 300 words, while nationality is a shifting attribute across geopolitical and individual transformations.
                
                This paper extends Booth’s “Mid-range reading: not a manifesto” and builds on the findings from CBW’s method of mid-range reading as well as from the typologies and networks of women in the CBW database. CBW researchers are tagging discourse in biographies, such as first-person plural and plural proper names, and quantifying the distribution of types of events across versions of the same person or occupational types. Both scales of reading and typologies press upon ethics as well as epistemology: how to classify the individual text, or the character/person. Attention must be paid, yet cognition and knowledge depend on generalizations. CBW has focused on sets of books that document the ways women’s lives have been typologically interpreted. Our “sample corpora” range from all the books that include a short life of the saintly Victorian nurse, Sister Dora, and the distinct set of books that feature the famous adventuress, Lola Montez; other networks cluster around Queen Cleopatra, Frances Trollope, African Americans, women in medicine, Latinas, presenters (publishers, biographers), and others among the 8500 persons. A method we call mid-range reading uses the Biographical Elements and Structure Schema (BESS), a stand-aside XML schema (not TEI editing within the text file) that links element types (of stage of life, events, discourse, persona description, topos) to numbered paragraphs. BESS analyses, then, measure rates and distributions of element types across versions of lives sorted typologically by the contents of interrelated books. In 2018 we will obtain TEI files of remaining texts, with non-consumptive use of the copyright materials, through the HathiTrust Research Center. Becoming in this sense an archive as well as a testing ground for narrative theory of biography and network analysis across centuries of representation of women, CBW can demonstrate the comparative rewards of large-scale textual analysis and mid-range reading, and add to the understanding of biographical representation in many forms.
                Sarah Allison, Harnessing Pegasus: On Setting Reasonable Limits
                This paper takes up a theoretical question in digital humanities practice: how we understand the borders or boundaries of projects. “Reductive reading” is my term for critical methods that call attention to how they subordinate, or reduce, textual complexity. I argue that the explicit way with which DH research acknowledges this act of simplification creates an ethos of critical frankness. As Stephen Ramsay argues, code must “assert its utter lack of neutrality with candor, so that the demonstrably non-neutral act of interpretation can occur.” “Harnessing Pegasus” focuses on the poignant question of setting limits. How do researchers establish the right distance from the texts under consideration, or reduce the scope of their inquiry? Here, I consider how researchers set limits in three projects that aim to understand what we might take to be the constitutive feature of the novel: fictionality.
                It is axiomatic that the most irritating questions after a talk--but often also the best--are those that deal with a project’s limits. Researchers announce what they have done, and the members of the audience say, Ah, but why didn’t you do something else? This practice can help establish that one has taken a reasonable approach to a legitimate question in the field or open up future possibilities for research. It can also bring home the importance of narrowing one’s approach in order to answer a specific question, as in We 
                    didn’t do something else. We did the thing we did. In sharing work publically, researchers are called to account for the boundaries they have set--or, as it is often framed, that they have been forced to set.
                
                It is the latter attitude that interests me here, the moment when the scalar ambitions of distant reading meet pragmatic reality and intellectual justification. Mid-range reading leaves space to account for both. In this paper, I will consider three approaches to fictionality in literary history: by Andrew Piper in 
                    Cultural Analytics,
                     by Ted Underwood, Michael L. Black, Loretta Auvil, and Boris Capitanu in their work on genre in the HathiTrust Digital Library, and by Simon Eliot in his bibliographic work on trends in publishing, 1800-1914. In considering the way each project treats its limitations, I seek to create connections--bridges--across them. How do their definitions of fictionality intersect with Catherine Gallagher’s theoretical treatment of the topic, and what that that tell us about nonfictionality? In each of these three studies, non-fiction is represented by a discrete collection of texts. How does limiting the generic canon change the way we understand fictionality?
                
                Dan Shore, Other than Scale
                This paper explores the limits of the concept of scale in digital inquiry. Quantitative scholars in particular have naturally chosen scale as what sets their approach apart from other established methods. They speak of the computer as a “macroscope” that permits “macroanalysis.” Scholars counted things before computers, but computers let them count and compute lots of things. Contrasting themselves with close readers, distant readers propose, with the help of machines, to step back from the page to see more and see bigger. Claims of scalar difference are often quite quantitatively precise. Instead of offering a reading of a single novel, distant readers study the titles of 7,000 British novels from 1740-1850, or ask how not to read a million books, or search through the 60,237 full texts in EEBO TCP I and II. For nearly all quantitative analyses of texts, the authors could tell the reader exactly how many words they count in how many documents, in light of sophisticated metrics and models.
                Talk of scale in the digital humanities has not been simply ill advised. In spite of quantitative precision, we don’t really know what we talk about when we talk about scale. Individual texts are much bigger than are usually acknowledged. Even when bag-of-words approaches are forthright about discarding word order and syntax, they rarely itemize what they are discarding. What has been characterized as an increase in scale can be more accurately described as the sacrifice of one sort of information for another. The point is not to oppose reductionism, but to be fully aware of what is being reduced.
                Scalar conceptualization of digital tools and methods has tended to crowd out other, non-scalar distinctions. Some, like experimental design, theories of evidence, and falsifiability (an account of what it would mean to be wrong) should be more prominent in the conversation. I’ll focus on concepts - abstraction, categorization, hierarchy - that are central to meaning and linguistic creativity across languages. Here I turn to the insights of construction grammar and corpus linguistics to suggest further possibilities for investigation. The bigram 
                    thought leader is two words, but it is also a single compound noun, the meaning of which can’t be fully predicted from the meaning of its parts. How big is it? An abstract construction like 
                    Once upon a time… [] and they lived happily ever after may be only ten words, and yet as big as the fairy tale that fills its blank. How long is it? The relevant distinctions in these examples are not scalar in any simple sense, and the methods for understanding them cannot be captured by distance or proximity. I start with linguistic examples at the level of the utterance, propose a few ways forward for qualitative and quantitative inquiry, and close by suggesting how the non-scalar distinctions at work in construction grammar might be relevant for specifically literary questions such as genre and narrative form.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Allison, Sarah. 
                        Reductive Reading: A Syntax of Victorian Moralizing. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, forthcoming 2018.
                    
                    Allison, Sarah. “Other People’s Data: Humanities Edition,” 
                        Cultural Analytics, Dec. 8, 2016. 
                        
                    
                    Bode, Katherine. “The Equivalence of ‘Close’ And ‘Distant’ Reading; Or, toward a New Object for Data-Rich Literary History.” 
                        Modern Language Quarterly 78, no. 1 (March 1, 2017): 77–106,
                         
                        .
                    
                    Booth, Alison. 
                        How to Make It as a Woman: Collective Biographical History from Victoria to the Present. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
                    
                    Booth, Alison. “Mid-Range Reading: Not a Manifesto.” 
                        PMLA 132: 3 (May 2017): 620-27.
                    
                    Burguiere, Andre. 
                        The Annales School: An Intellectual History. Trans. Jane Marie Todd. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2009.
                    
                    Eliot, Simon. “Some Trends in Book Publishing, 1800-1914” in John O. Jordan and Robert L. Pattern (eds.), 
                        Literature in the Marketplace. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
                    
                    Eliot, Simon, and Jonathan Rose, eds. 
                        A Companion to the History of the Book. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
                    
                    Gallagher, Catherine. 
                        Nobody’s Story: The Vanishing Acts of Women Writers in the Marketplace, 1670-1820. Berkeley, U. of California P, 1994. 
                    
                    Gallagher, Catherine. “The Rise of Fictionality.” 
                        The Novel. Ed. Franco Moretti, Vol. 1. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2006. 336-63. 
                    
                    Goldberg, Adele E. 
                        Constructions at Work: The Nature of Generalization in Language. New York: Oxford UP, 2006.
                    
                    Goldberg, Adele E. 
                        Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995.
                    
                    Hancher, Michael. “Re: Search and Close Reading,” in 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016. University of Minnesota Press, 2016. 118–38.
                         
                        .
                    
                    Langacker, Ronald W. 
                        Cognitive Grammar: A Basic Introduction. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008.
                    
                    Nunberg, Geoffrey, Ivan A. Sag, and Thomas Wasow. “Idioms,” 
                        Language 70 (1994): 491–538.
                    
                    Piper, Andrew. “Fictionality.” 
                        Journal of Cultural Analytics, December 20, 2016.
                         
                        .
                    
                    Robertson, Stephen, and Lincoln Mullen. “Digital History &amp; Argument White Paper – Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media.” November 13, 2017. https://rrchnm.org/argument-white-paper/.
                    Shore, Daniel. 
                        Cyberformalism: Histories of Linguistic Forms in the Digital Archive. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, forthcoming 2018.
                    
                    Shore, Daniel. “Shakespeare’s Constructicon,” 
                        Shakespeare Quarterly 66.2 (2015): 113-136.
                    
                    Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. “What Was Close Reading? A Century of Method in Literary Studies,” 
                        Minnesota Review 87 (2016): 57–75.
                    
                    Underwood, Ted. “Distant Reading and the Blurry Edges of Genre. ” 
                        The Stone and the Shell. 22 Oct. 2014.
                    
                    Underwood, Ted. “Understanding Genre in a Collection of a Million Volumes, Interim Report.” Figshare.
                         
                        
                    
                    Wythoff, Grant. 
                        Gadgetry: A History of Techniques, in progress.
                    
                    Wythoff, Grant. 
                        The Perversity of Things: Hugo Gernsback on Media, Tinkering, and Scientifiction. University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The French TGIR Huma-Num, whose mission is to facilitate the digital turn in Humanities and Social Sciences research, offers services dedicated to the production and reuse of data. These services aim at avoiding loss and facilitating the reuse of scientific data in Social Sciences and Humanities. To do this, Huma-Num supports research teams and disciplinary consortia throughout their digital projects to allow the sharing, reuse and preservation of data thanks to a chain of devices focused on interoperability. Through these processes, Huma-Num also encourages compliance with the FAIR data principles.
            Huma-Num’s tools connect normalised metadata to the Linked Open Data cloud and give them an extended visibility. By labelling consortia (through scientific, financial and technical support when needed), Huma-Num drives and supports them in this initiative: data producers are encouraged to clean and normalise their data, they benefit from Huma-Num’s services to store, share, expose, signal and enrich their data. What’s more, at the end of the chain, these processes also allow the data to be “ready” or, at least, “prepared” for archiving, which is a real issue for research data.
            But what is the effect induced on the data producers by sharing their resources, particularly on the metadata? Do they realize that the metadata produced for a specific project are not suitable for more generic needs and need some polishing?
            Does this virtuous circle produce in turn better metadata and also better practices?
            The panel will try to answer these questions by presenting feedback from different disciplines and communities in order to trigger discussion. More specifically, through the panel, four of Huma-Num’s consortia - in archaeology, ethnology, literature and linguistics – will present their experience, practices and some tools they have produced in order to measure the impact of this supposedly virtuous circle on the quality of the data and metadata they have produced and exposed in the LOD. Additionally, this will allow us to discuss the role of a national research infrastructure like Huma-Num in France and the collaborative and expert networks developed through the creation of Huma-Num’s consortia.
            By sharing the points of view of various disciplinary but multi-approach consortia in Social Sciences and Humanities, the panel will aim at proposing a reflexive approach to the impact of the FAIR principles.
            The panelists will present the status of the different subdomains with very brief talks (15 minutes each), highlighting opportunities, consolidated approaches and open issues. The different perspectives and experiences presented, on various types of data and in different disciplines, will build a common space for the further Q&amp;A discussion with the audience on the application of the FAIR principles in the DH domain.
            
                Panelists
                - Michel Jacobson, CORLI consortium, CoCOon, https://cocoon.huma-num.fr/exist/crdo/
                    - Fatiha Idmhand, CAHIER consortium, CNRS/Huma-Num, http://cahier.hypotheses.org/
                    - Xavier Rodier, MASA consortium, CNRS/Huma-Num, https://masa.hypotheses.org/
                    - Véronique Ginouvès, AdE consortium, CNRS/Huma-Num, https://ethnologia.hypotheses.org/
                
            
            
                Chairs
                - Adeline JOFFRES, TGIR Huma-Num, CNRS, France
                    - Nicolas LARROUSSE, TGIR Huma-Num, CNRS, France
                
            
            
                Panelists - Talks abstracts
                
                    Talk 1 by Véronique Ginouvès, MMSH/CNRS, “Archives des Ethnologues” Consortium, France.
                        Anthropologists, Archivists and Fieldwork Materials: Best Practices of a French Consortium
                    
                    For the resource centers that compose it, the creation of the Consortium "Archives des ethnologues" within the Huma-Num TGIR in 2012 was key to the acquisition of new methodological reflexes in the digital domain. The aim of its eight partners is to store, process, share and publish the documents produced by anthropologists in their fields. The scientific and heritage importance of these survey materials, the richness and diversity of the societies studied, oblige us to take the singularity of these data better into account.
                    We will show how the consortium is working towards greater convergence of the practices of description, structuring and access to ethnological data, notably through the FAIR Data principles ("findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable").
                    These practices give us the opportunity to adapt these data to documentary projects or scientific research and their objectives.
                    Thus, in order to enhance the discovery and availability of these archives, the metadata used to describe them are not only produced in DC (Dublin Core) but also, for example, in EDM (Europeana data model) or EAD (Encoding archival description).
                    Similarly, their transfer to different data archives (ODSAS, Kinsources, Portal of oral heritage, MediHal, ...) and their access via different platforms (Calames, Clarin, Europeana, Isidore) are essential for their availability, research, identification and increased interoperability.
                    We will also focus more specifically on the use of vocabularies, which are essential to improve the search for these data on major platforms.
                    The first example will be that of the authorities. We will show how the use of tools such as ISNI, VIAF or IDREF "propel" the members of the societies studied by ethnologists into international standard name systems. These witnesses, who have remained anonymous for a long time, then become truly authors of their word and their families can thus find traces of their names through the devices put in place.
                    The second example of a vocabulary that will be presented is the creation of a thesaurus (in SKOS format and produced with OpenTheso software) on uniform titles of tales in order to enrich the research on oral literature.
                    Finally, we will also address the issues of data access and reuse.
                    From the beginning of the Consortium, discussion has been ongoing to address the ethical and legal issues related to the dissemination of humanities and social sciences data. A blog (https://ethiquedroit.hypotheses.org) provides answers to the concrete questions that arise during online publication and a guide of good practices will be published in September 2018. We will also present some examples of the re-use, on our platforms, of some of the data processed by the different centers: a crowdsourcing project with Transcrire, a work space for research with ODSAS or the provision of specific data (the kinship data) with Kinsources.
                    These principles are also the strength of national institutions (TGIR Huma-Num, CINES) that support the implementation of projects over the very long term. They provide us with a solid framework for organizing data life, access and sharing.
                
                
                    Talk 2 by Xavier Rodier, UMR CITERES-LAT, Tours University/CNRS, “MASA” consortium, France.
                        What is the Cost and the Efficiency of Exposing Archaeological Data in the LOD?
                    
                    There is a very great disparity in the organization of archaeological data and their management and archiving systems, when they exist. The immediate consequence of this state of affairs is the risk of the irreversible loss of a significant amount of inaccessible archaeological data. The MASA consortium has therefore set itself the objective of digitally sharing archaeological data by proposing guidelines to the archaeological community. There is an urgent need both to safeguard existing archival collections and ensure the re-use of old databases, and to ensure that emerging new databases use sustainable systems that will provide interoperability and the long-term reuse of data. The consortium's work therefore focuses on the classification and digitization of old archaeological archives, the documentation of its collections according to an appropriate structure, the re-use of old databases, the alignment of vocabularies used with standards, the matching of archaeological information systems with the domain ontology for cultural heritage (CIDOC-CRM, ISO 21127:2014), on the online publication of archives, data and syntheses linked with data.
                    The difficulties to be overcome are many, depending on whether structured databases or more informal batches are being processed, and must reconcile various situations such as:
                        - The digitization of old archives (often resulting from the work of only one archaeologist) which must be classified, safeguarded, made available and documented according to the archaeological value added. This involves producing an overlay to compensate for the absence of a data structure.
                        - The transformation of old databases developed with systems and in formats that are no longer accessible or disappearing, in order to preserve the data themselves and their structure when it exists.
                        - The interoperability of old, structured and still maintained systems, whose redeployment in standard and open formats is necessary but beyond the means available. While this may seem simpler, it is not the case and care must be taken not to delay those who have had advance notice.
                        - The development of new systems which must be designed directly in accordance with existing interoperability standards so that they do not have to be rethought in mid- term.
                    
                    All the experiments carried out show the heuristic value of the operations necessary for the digital sharing of data, which is a reflective step in terms of both content and information structure. However, the final quality of the information shared according to these four processes varies. The creation of metadata on loosely structured corpora is a definite added value but never achieves the finesse of description of structured information systems. In addition, the use of metadata description standards alone does not offer the semantic enrichment that can be achieved by mapping with reference ontologies, which constitutes a production of knowledge in itself. In fine, exposing archaeological data in the LOD will help to build bridges with other heritage data but also with other themes.
                    These different processes and their consequences will be explored using a few examples.
                
                
                    Talk 3 by Fatiha Indman, PoitiersUniversity, “CAHIER” Consortium, France. 
                        CAHIER: "Bridges / Puentes" Between Text Sciences
                    
                    CAHIER is a French consortium whose mission is to promote good digital practices in text sciences and to build a network of expertise in the SSH scientific community. The particularity of CAHIER is that it does not bring together research centers but projects. Project members aim at collectively finding or sharing solutions to digitize, edit, display and process their data. The purpose of the consortium is not to register data in a specific field but to create links between disciplines that use texts as their scientific objects and subjects: Literature, Linguistics, History, Philosophy, ICT, Computer science, etc.
                    CAHIER's approach propagates and disseminates practices that comply with the "FAIR principles", by acting upstream of the projects, in order to guarantee and promote the quality of the data and metadata that are produced.
                    Through the example of the "WebOai" metadata exhibit tool, developed by the Cahier consortium with the help of Huma-Num, we will show how the Cahier consortium prepares its digital corpus of sources (teiHeader) for dissemination, exhibition and research. WebOai implements an OAI-PMH repository from XML-TEI encoded data sources. We will show how the confrontation of methods and the exchange of solutions, within the consortium, have allowed researchers to reflect on their data quality and how we are contributing to building the "Digital humanities" community in France.
                
                
                    Talk 4 by Michel Jacobson, BNF-COCOon Platform-”CORLI” Consortium, France.
                        The Benefits of Data Linking and Use of the CoCOon Repository.
                    
                    The first advantage of data linking is that it requires cleaning the data to make them sufficiently homogeneous for mass treatment, either automatic or assisted. In a repository where the applicant provides the description with little or no help and with little moderation, it leads quite quickly to alternative forms for the same resource. For instance, the identification of a person by name is not always normalized but is often subject to variants (case variant, order of elements, changes in civil status, use of a pseudonym, abbreviation, typing error, etc.). Moderation is sometimes made difficult also because of the use of foreign scripts or conventions.
                    Linking to a repository means that identification and description needs can be separated. For example, in a documentary resources repository, the actors involved in creating the document have to be identified in the document description. It will be advantageous to describe the actors in a distinct and specialized repository since the description templates for actors and documents won’t necessarily be the same. Moreover, an actor exists independently of his documentary production and other repositories (of events, of objects, etc.) may have the same requirement for identification, making it interesting to share the service.
                    The criteria of coverage, governance and interoperability need to be taken into account when choosing a vocabulary. This choice is important because linking the data also means in some cases, deporting the task of description. In particular, the "collaborative" modes of governance of projects such as Geonames or Dbpedia have the advantage that one can directly enrich the repository to cover missing needs. One can also, as we have tried to do with the CoCOon (https://cocoon.huma-num.fr) platform dedicated to digital oral corpora, make producers or depositors responsible for enriching these vocabularies themselves. The choice of repositories rapidly proves to be strategic because they will be the linchpin in decompartmentalizing the data: either the repositories share common vocabularies, or their separate vocabularies are interlinked.
                    As part of the work on the CoCOon platform, for example, we have indexed a collection of speech recordings ("Speech Treasures") by aligning the themes present in their metadata with a Thesaurus (RAMEAU). This allowed us to 1) offer a new axis of navigation in the data, 2) bring these records closer to other cultural data (those of the BnF) which are indexed with the same thesaurus, 3) potentially bring together other cultural data through the alignment of RAMEAU with other reference systems such as the Dewey classification, the thesaurus of the German National Library, the National Library of Spain and the Library of Congress, 4) envision multilingualism with no added cost by exploiting this alignment between repositories, 5) facilitate the reuse of data and their discovery.
                    Normalized vocabularies are a bridge between repositories, making it possible to bring together isolated data and thus to give them a richer context, improving their readability. For example, the use of the Lexvo vocabulary - which includes all the codes of the ISO-639-3 standard - makes it possible to reconcile recordings, scientific documentation, geopolitical information, etc. for a given language.
                
            
        
    

        
            This panel brings together practitioners of digital humanities with backgrounds in history, anthropology, and film to discuss projects that embrace interdisciplinary perspectives in exploring cross-cultural conversations about the role of expert knowledge and digital technologies in community and tourism development, indigenous cultural heritage protection, and learning pedagogies. Using digital technologies and interfaces, the four projects bring to light historical and contemporary indigenous experience in various communities in Yucatán, Mexico. 
            The first makes use of an interactive website that documents historical and contemporary rural Yucatecan community experiences to explore evolving individual and communal identities through interviews with elderly community residents remembering social reform, economic restructuring, and state-building in the decades following the Mexican Revolution, as well as owners of current businesses and young adults. Of interest is how such identities are affected by globally-driven economic development, as the Yucatán is increasingly defined by commodity production for global export, and as historical haciendas that once served as the center of communal economic production are converted into luxury hotels to serve foreign tourists. The website aims to capture the voices of and facilitate communication between community members, visitors, scholars, and interested parties. 
            The second project employs an online format that allows diverse audiences ranging from lay people to academic specialists to explore the calendric, iconographic, hieroglyphic, and thematic content of prehispanic Maya screenfold books using a sophisticated search engine to perform queries. This tool enables contemporary speakers of Mayan languages to engage, either on their own or as participants in instructor-led workshops, with valuable historical objects that constitute part of their cultural heritage, but ones that they would otherwise lack the means to access. Use of the website in Latin American and U.S. communities with large Maya populations helps to foster discussions across borders about Maya identity in the past and today.
            The third presentation discusses 
                Co’ox Mayab, an organization dedicated to sustainable tourism in Yucatán through practices that promote collaboration and solidarity, with a focus on social consciousness and justice. The organization has several goals, including the promotion of intercultural dialogue through the interaction of visitors and indigenous hosts. Digital technologies—comprising a webpage, documentary, and promotional videos—play an important role in evaluating the effectiveness of 
                Co’ox Mayab as an organization, and in understanding how sustainable tourism practices are achieved in Yucatán. 
            
            The final presentation describes the preliminary steps in creating an ethnographic documentary that charts changes in the socio-cultural organization of the former henequen town of Tekit in inland Yucatán. The town has recently been transformed into a domestic factory town, and it produces textile souvenirs and uniforms for the hospitality industry in the region and beyond. The documentary aims to show how the domestic 
                maquila (workshop) system of production has led to its differentiation from other Yucatecan communities that cannot provide enough work for their inhabitants, leading to extensive migration. This ethnographic documentary is part of a collaborative effort to link the social sciences and the humanities, digital media technologies, and documentary film through multimedia storytelling as a pedagogical practice.
            
            These four projects each engage with and facilitate discussion about the role of digital interfacing, multimedia initiatives, databases, and documentary film in fostering more inclusive and participatory community development projects, cultural heritage protection practices, and learning pedagogies across the Americas.
            The panel consists of the following presentations:
            
                1. Pueblos Yucatecos: Building an Interactive Website to Create, Exhibit, and Examine Indigenous Community (Hi)stories
            
            Sarah Buck Kachaluba, University of California, San Diego
            This presentation details the creation of a website exhibiting materials to tell community stories that originated with oral history work the presenter undertook in 2000 in villages in the state of Yucatán, Mexico. The interviews themselves (both audio versions and textual transcripts) and selected photographs will be archived in an academic digital library with the website pointing to such digital objects, while simultaneously providing access to supplemental material, including additional photographs, maps, records, and eventually interactive features such as chat and TEI-enabled tools that will facilitate further content creation, editing, and commentary. This project has expanded and changed significantly from the original oral history project defined by the goal of charting the experiences of women who were the members of women’s leagues that played a role in securing Mexican women the right to vote and expanding the definition of Mexican female citizenship in the decades following the Mexican Revolution. The current project explores rural communal identities in the face of economic development driven by globalization, as the Yucatán is increasingly defined by commodity production for global export and historical haciendas that once served as the center of communal economic production are converted into luxury hotels (funded by multinational corporations such as Banamex, Citibank, and Sheraton) to serve foreign tourists. The website aims to capture the voices of community members, as well as other visitors, scholars, and interested parties. The project is simultaneously an exhibit of and a tool to shape community, community histories and contemporary stories, and identity formation. It also reveals and explores the use of various kinds of screen technologies, including smart phones and social media, to enable cross-cultural, multilingual, and North-South communication.
            
                2. The Online Maya Codices Database: Fostering Community Conversations about Maya Heritage and Identity
            
            Gabrielle Vail, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
            The Maya Codices Database, developed with funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, provides an online format for exploring the calendric, iconographic, hieroglyphic, and thematic content of the prehispanic Maya screenfold books dating to the Late Postclassic period (c. 1250-1521 CE). It was developed with dual user interfaces to maximize its utility for reaching a variety of audiences—the general public, students in grades 4-12 and above, codical specialists, and academics in other fields of study. The database is used as a teaching tool in hieroglyphic workshops held in both the U.S. and Latin America, often for Maya-speaking audiences consisting primarily of educators, students, and ritual specialists. The visual representations of rituals and daily activities enacted by ancestors of contemporary Maya people, along with the written hieroglyphic texts describing what is pictured, generally trigger a series of recollections among indigenous participants, who then relate their stories, reminiscences, and descriptions of ritual activities, tying this information into the almanacs depicted in the codices.
            The database was recently introduced to students of Maya descent in western North Carolina as part of an exchange program to build bridges of cultural understanding among international participants (in this case, with Yucatec Maya students of a similar age attending school in Valladolid, Yucatán). The North Carolina students, despite having parents who grew up in Maya communities in the highlands of Guatemala, felt that they knew little about their indigenous roots and were eager to participate in the workshops being offered and to interact with the archival material made available to them as part of the program. One of the primary goals of the “Maya from the Margins” project was to provide access to resources highlighting prehispanic and more recent indigenous history to give students an opportunity to explore their heritage and what it means to their understanding of their identity. As part of the workshops held with the students, the codices database served as an important avenue for initiating discussions about these topics within the communities involved. Exhibit panels created by the students further served this goal.
            The many “born digital” materials from the Maya from the Margins exchange program will form the basis for a forthcoming digital humanities project that explores the lives of Maya descendant populations living in communities far from where they originated, as well as those (the Yucatec students) who still live in their natal communities while attending university in Valladolid. We envision this digital project as a way to continue to link communities whose members share a common heritage, despite the divides of distance and of shifting cultural norms and expectations.
            
                3. Co´ox Mayab
                : Multimedia Experiences to Create Bridges 
            
            Samuel François Jouault, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán
            The results of the 
                Atlas de turismo alternativo en la Península de Yucatán carried out by a group of social entrepreneurs dedicated to sustainable tourism in the state of Yucatán revealed the difficulties that individuals and groups providing alternative forms of tourism face in promoting and commercializing their services and attracting a sufficient market to support their business. 
            
            The term 
                Co´ox Mayab means “Let’s go to the Land of the Maya” (“Vamos al Mayab”). Today, 
                Co’ox Mayab is also the name of a union of ten social entrepreneurs committed to sustainable tourism in Yucatán, who aim to demonstrate the value of responsible tourism while promoting solidarity and collaboration, social consciousness, and justice across public, private, and commercial sectors through the promotion, commercialization, and practice of alternative, community tourism in Yucatán. Such alternative tourist practices can be described as:
            
                     
                responsible tourism that reduces the impact of tourist activity 
            
                     
                supportive and 
                reciprocal encounters that allow visitors to engage with social reality and coexist with their hosts, promoting intercultural dialogue
            
                     a 
                just commercial industry in which public and private institutions cooperate with local organizations to ensure an equitable division of the benefits generated by tourism
            
                     
                conscientious travel experiences contributing to personal growth through shared living experiences between visitors and local hosts, while also remaining sensitive toward natural and cultural heritage and resources
            
            This presentation will focus on the role that various digital technologies, including a webpage, documentary, and promotional videos, play in facilitating and evaluating the 
                Co’ox Mayab organization itself, as well as the experience and practice of alternative and sustainable tourism in Yucatán. 
            
            
                4. An Ethnographic Documentary on Sewing for Tourism at Home: Kinship Frictions, Souvenirs, and Debt in Inland Yucatán 
            
            Matilde Córdoba Azcárate, University of California, San Diego
            This paper discusses how Tekit, a former henequen village in Yucatán, Mexico has become invisibly but densely entangled with the tourism reality of the region through its specialization in the manufacture and distribution of 
                guayaberas and work uniforms for the hospitality industry. Tekit’s transformation has enforced the spatial and social re-organization of the village around a fragmented domestic 
                maquila system of small factories and intermediaries working for major national and international textile corporations, mimicking the US-Mexico border 
                maquila system of production.
            
            The paper shows how this system of production has transformed Tekit into a modern factory town, or 
                desakota, an in-between space, neither urban but not rural, with an extremely economically and socially vulnerable and fragile population but also, and paradoxically, into a space that is home to a thriving young population with increasing material wealth and a generalized sense of well-being. I follow the stories of three different families in the town and discuss how this system of production has deeply differentiated Tekit from nearby communities in which the lack of work has resulted in massive migration to Cancun, Mérida, and the United States. By comparing and contrasting the narratives and livelihood strategies of these families, the paper evinces how internal forms of kinship obligations, dependencies and reciprocities are reconfigured through external forms of debt. Individuals with weaker or smaller kinship networks are more prone to face liquidity constraints and remain in the lowest steps of the production chain while those with larger ones are more likely to perform better. In all the cases, however, this domestic 
                maquila system of production allows families to embrace urban cosmopolitan imaginaries, to redefine traditional gender roles while not migrating and practicing traditional Maya land and parenting practices in a region deeply marked by migration.
            
            This paper is part of both the author’s academic book manuscript in progress on the social, political, and ecological effects of tourism development in Yucatán, as well as part of a more recent collaborative educational ethnographic documentary on uneven forms of globalization in the region developed between the University of California San Diego and the Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán. This ethnographic documentary, still in its preliminary phases, will be part of a larger interdisciplinary and collaborative effort between the social sciences and the humanities, digital media technologies and documentary film and media to translate concepts and ethnographic research on global-local relations, uneven geographical development and cultural life into the world of audiovisual storytelling for research and pedagogic purposes. Our aim is to put together a grant proposal to fund an examination of historical and contemporary forms of everyday life in rural communities in the state of Yucatán, Mexico, using a combination of experimental media and historical and anthropological approaches to the study of culture.
        
    

        
            The Maya K’iche’ book of creation, known today as the 
                Popol Wuj (Council Book), challenges some of the foundational categories of literary, historical, and anthropological studies: the stories reflect a decidedly Mayan way of understanding the world and one’s place in it (Lepe Lira 2016, Florescano 2002), but the history of the book cannot be disentangled from Spanish colonial power (Quiroa 2011, 2017) or contemporary national ideologies (González 2014). The 
                Popol Wuj invites and resists analysis precisely because it defies a series of binary oppositions that underlie received frames of interpretation – indigenous and Spanish, print and image, spoken and written, sacred and secular, literary and theoretical.
            
            Researchers on this panel – graduate students, teaching and research faculty, and librarians – have experimented with different methods of digitizing the 
                Popol Wuj. In 2007, a collaborative team from Marshall University, the Newberry Library, and the Ohio State University Library created the
                
                    first digital facsimile of the 
                    Popol Wuj
                 so that Mayan people could electronically access the oldest surviving written version of their 
                tzijs. In 2017,
                
                    Multepal
                , which began in a
                
                    graduate seminar
                 at the University of Virginia and continues in development with colleagues in Guatemala and the US, aims to create a thematic resource collection that reveals the story’s multiple layers of meaning and remediation.
            
            Each paper on this panel analyzes some of the diverse intellectual, ethical, and technical challenges and opportunities that we face in trying to represent the graphic, oral, and narrative complexities of the 
                Popol Wuj. Papers #1-#3 (Espinosa de los Monteros, Hansen, Bigelow and Alvarado) examine issues of access and artifact preservation in digitization, using TEI to mark up non-Western texts, and vexing ethical questions of how DH scholars can tell a story that is not ours. Papers #4 and #5 (Addington and Baptista) present original research on literary genre and colonial encounter that emerged from the digitization projects. Taken together, these five papers suggest how digitization efforts enable new possibilities for humanistic inquiry and dissertation projects in indigenous and Latin American studies. Because these projects are ongoing, we hope that our panel will create a space for brainstorming ideas with colleagues from other fields, universities, and countries. Our panelists are bilingual English/Spanish speakers, and we will present examples in both languages (see sample thematic entries that point to each other en 
                castellano e 
                inglés).
            
            Following Gallon’s (2016) model of a “technology of recovery,” we aim to “bring forth the full humanity of marginalized peoples through the use of digital platforms and tools” in order to address issues of diversity (McPherson 2012) and the question of whether “information can be unfettered” (Earhart 2012). This is an especially complex issue in indigenous studies, where debates about data sovereignty are informed by a history of state-sponsored appropriations of Native knowledges (Gaertner 2017). The intellectual, multilingual, transnational community of scholars at DH 2018 would be an ideal platform to tackle these questions and identify new 
                puentes in digitizing cultural legacies and acquiring a decolonized consciousness.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Earhart, Amy E. (2012). “‘Can Information Be Unfettered?’ Race and the New Digital Humanities Canon.” In Gold and Klein, eds. 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minnesota, pp. 309-318.
                    
                    Florescano, Enrique. (2002). “Los paradigmas mesoamericanos que unificaron la reconstrucción del pasado: el mito de la creación del cosmos; la fundación del reino maravilloso (Tollán), y Quetzalcóatl, el creador de estados y dinastías.” 
                        Historia mexicana 52(2): 309-359.
                    
                    Gaertner, David. (2017). “Why We Need to Talk About Indigenous Literature in the Digital Humanities.” 
                        Novel Alliances: Allied Perspectives on Art, Literature, and New Media, 20 paragraphs. January 26, 2017. Accessed 20 December 2017. Available at: 
                        https://novelalliances.com/2017/01/26/indigenous-literature-and-the-digital-humanities.
                    
                    Gallon, Kim. (2016). “Making a Case for the Black Digital Humanities.” In Gold and Klein, eds. 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. 2
                        nd ed. Minnesota, 15 paragraphs. 
                        http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/55.
                    
                    González, Ann. (2014). “The 
                        Popol Vuh for Children: Explicit and Implicit Ideological Agendas.” 
                        Children's Literature Association Quarterly 39(2): 216-233.
                    
                    Lepe Lira, Luz María, ed. (2016). 
                        Oralidad y escritura: Experiencias desde la literatura indígena. Michoacán.
                    
                    McPherson, Tara. (2012). “Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation.” In Gold and Klein, eds. 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minnesota, pp. 139-160.
                    
                    Quiroa, Néstor. (2017). “Friar Francisco Ximénez and the Popol Vuh: From Religious Treatise to a Digital Sacred Book.” 
                        Ethnohistory 64(2): 241-270.
                    
                    ---. (2011). “The Popol Vuh and the Dominican Religious Extirpation in Highland Guatemala: Prologues and Annotations of Fr. Francisco Ximénez.” 
                        The Americas, 67(4): 467-494.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                In this paper, we present the collaboration between the pilot project 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna – Wisdom encoded
                    
                        E-Learning/E-Research project, located at and funded by Freie Universität Berlin, homepage 
                            
                            
                            
                        
                     and LERA.
                    Information and a demonstrator can be found at 
                        
                        https://lera.uzi.uni-halle.de
                        
                     In the project’s first phase, devoted to experimenting with existing tools and identifying necessary adjustments, we adopted and generalized LERA for the classical Arabic language. This modification worked well and thus will become a cornerstone for future research within the ERC-Advanced Grant Project “AnonymClassic” (Gruendler 2017).
                    No. 742635, “The Arabic Anonymous in a World Classic,” PI Beatrice Gruendler, Freie Universität Berlin, see 
                        
                        
                        
                     The benefit is already apparent, yielding first observations of the text’s development, and the tool was successfully applied in an undergraduate academic course at the Seminar for Semitic and Arabic Studies of FU Berlin.
                
            
            
                
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna
                     – Wisdom encoded
                
                Using Sanscrit sources, 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna was composed in Middle Persian (version lost) in the 6
                    th century CE and ultimately translated into in forty languages worldwide. Its key phase is the Arabic translation from the 8
                    th century, from which all later translations derive. But this version has proliferated in many variants, which prevents a conventional critical edition by stemma (Gruendler 2013). This project seeks to assess via a (partial) synoptic critical edition the range of variation between selected Arabic manuscripts of this work. These derive from the 13
                    th to the 19
                    th century CE.
                
            
            
                
                    LERA
                     – 
                    Locate, Explore, Retrace and Apprehend complex text variants
                
                LERA is an interactive, digital tool for analyzing variations between multiple versions of a text in a synoptic mannerwith several differences to other well known collation tools (Schütz and Pöckelmann 2016). It was first developed for printed texts of the French Enlightenment (Bremer et al. 2015) within the SaDA-project
                    See the project’s homepage: 
                        
                        https://sada.uzi.uni-halle.de
                        
                     at Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg and since then adopted to other texts and languages.
                
                The tool follows three major steps for generating the synopsis. The first is a segmentation of the given manuscripts. In the case of 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna, the text-units are narrative steps. Second, an automatic alignment of these segments is doneby the built-in algorithm. The researcher can intervene afterwards by moving, cutting or merging the segments if necessary. The final step is the detailed comparison of the aligned segments’ words by the system. The identified variants are highlighted with colors depending on the kind of difference. Besides, a variety of filters are available, e.g., hiding all changes that purely concern punctuation. On this basis, a comprehensive and easily readable apparatus is generated. The proto-edition thus produced can be downloaded in several formats.
                
                Moreover, LERA provides further assistance for the analysis of the variants. Most prominent is CATview (Pöckelmann et al. 2015), a graphical representation of the alignment that facilitates overviewing and navigating within the synopsis.
                    Further information on CATview is also available at 
                        https://catview.uzi.uni-halle.de
                     It is also associated with the word clouds and search functions of LERA.
                
            
            
                
                    Modification of LERA for 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna
                
                In this project, LERA made its debut in classical Arabic, which has required some language-specific adoptions. Processing the Arabic alphabet was rather uncomplicated, because the system already uses Unicode. Regarding the backend, the processes for tokenizing, indexing (for search) and language recognition were extended. On the other hand, modifications for the frontend included adding a font for the alphabet, displaying the correct writing direction, and revising the download function.
                More important, some specific needs for the 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna project have already been implemented. LERA now allows the manual alignment by experts using unique segment identifiers, which are encoded within the manuscripts’ XML/TEI files. On this basis, we also added identifiers for the segments that can be edited and displayed in the synoptic view. On major improvement is the visualization of transposed segments. They occur if the order of the segments within one manuscript was changed or when similar segments appear somewhat distant to each other, but aligning them is blocked due to other aligned segments. We included an option to display copies of them in the synopsis that will be shown grayed and are linked to their actual position. They will also appear in CATview.
                
                In respect to the project’s goal to investigate the interrelation of the manuscripts of 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna, we developed two new modes for coloring the variants. The first one only highlights passages that are unique to one manuscript, which points to some independence of the copyist-redactor regarding the other manuscripts. The second mode only highlights those passages that appear in exactly two manuscripts. Finding such pairs is important evidence that suggests that both manuscripts are related to each other.
                
                Another helpful extension is the so called 80%-filter, which leads to treating words as identical if they share at least 80% of their letters. This approximating similarity measure is grounded in the property of the Arabic language that words with identical roots tend belong to one semantic field.
            
            
                Benefits
                LERA could be adjusted for the first phase of this interdisciplinary collaboration. Based on this, we already made interesting observations: against our assumption, the first analysis shows that there are no distinct groups of manuscripts. Instead, variations fluctuate, forming continua in which some manuscripts cumulatively assemble reformulations that appear scattered among others.
                Furthermore, in the summer semester of 2017 the project was integrated into an
                     undergraduate
                     academic course on 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna at Freie Universität Berlin. The students used the synopsis to explore the variants of five aligned manuscripts in class and wrote papers applying this method individually.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                With the work presented here, we established a foundation for a comprehensive analysis of 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna. Owed to the text’s complex history and manifold variants, this ambitious project is planned for a timespan of ten years. With the ongoing research, more features of analysis will be needed. This includes an advanced utilization of language specific information for the comparison, e.g., a root extraction for Arabic words. Moreover, the comparison and visualization of manuscripts of 
                    Kalīla wa-Dimna in other language is being considered. Finally, the functionality to comment on the identified variants is crucial for their scientific investigation.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bremer, T., Molitor, P., Pöckelmann, M., Ritter, J. and Schütz, S. (2015). “Zum Einsatz digitaler Methoden bei der Erstellung und Nutzung genetischer Editionen gedruckter Texte mit verschiedenen Fassungen - Das Fallbeispiel der 
                        Histoire philosphique des deux Indes von Guillaume Thomas Raynal.” In 
                        v. Nutt-Kofoth, R., Plachta, B. and Woesler, W. (eds), 
                        Editio, 29(1)
                        , pp. 29–51. 
                    
                    
                        Gruendler, B. (2013). “Les versions de 
                        Kalīla wa-Dimna: une transmission et une circulation mouvantes.” In 
                        Ortola, M. (eds), 
                        Énoncés sapientiels et littérature exemplaire: une intertextualité complexe. Nancy, pp. 385-416.
                    
                    
                        Gruendler, B. (2017). “The Arabic Anonymous in a World Classic (Acronym: AnonymClassic). Presentation of a Research Project.” 
                        Geschichte der Germanistik, 51/52, pp. 156-57.
                    
                    
                        Pöckelmann, M., Medek (*Gießler), A., Molitor, P. and Ritter, J. (2015) “CATview - Supporting the Investigation of Text Genesis of Large Manuscripts by an Overall Interactive Visualization Tool Digital Humanities.
                        ”
                        
                        
                            Digital Humanities 2015: Conference Abstracts
                        
                        . Sydney: UWS. 
                        
                        
                        [accessed 11/27/2017]
                    
                    
                        Schütz
                        , 
                        S
                        . and
                         Pöckelmann
                        , 
                        M. (2016) “LERA - Explorative Analyse komplexer Textvarianten in Editionsphilologie und Diskursanalyse.” In: 
                        Book of abstracts of the third 
                        annual conference of Digital Humanities for German-speaking regions 
                        (
                        DHd 2016
                        ), pp. 249-253.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Our inquiry considers the speech interactions of characters within plays as a proxy for broad narrative structures. We analyze computationally-generated social networks of 37 plays by Shakespeare to see whether, and how, they can be used to distinguish between Shakespeare’s comedies, tragedies, and histories.
                Because dramatic performances enact social encounters, social network analysis translates surprisingly well to fictional societies. Stiller et al. have shown that social networks in Shakespeare’s plays mirror those of real human interactions, particularly in size, clustering, and maximum degrees of separation (2003). However, as fictions, these networks are shaped not only by sociological principles, but also by narrative structures. Moretti uses social networks to examine the plots of three Shakespearean tragedies, and to contrast the structure of chapters in English and Chinese novels (2011). Alberich et al. (2002) and Sparavigna (2013) also discuss the interplay between social and narrative constraints on networks. We emphasize this distinction to look for specifically literary features of our networks.
                Recent papers presented at DH2017 sought ways to richly quantify the details of one or two plays (Fischer et al., 2017; Tonra et al., 2017). At another scale, Algee-Hewitt examined 3,439 plays by looking only at the Gini Coefficient of each play’s eigenvector centrality (2017). With our three dozen plays, we attempt to strike a fruitful middle ground in the inevitable balancing act between detail and scale. Each play is considered individually, but at a level of abstraction which allows rapid and direct comparisons.
            
            
                Creation of social network graphs
                Our parser tracks characters present on stage during speech. This approach is highly extensible: it can parse any play that follows TEI P5 guidelines for performance texts. Each speaking character is connected to all characters currently present on stage. These connections are recorded in a network graph, with characters as nodes and shared speech as edges. Edges are directional, and weighted based on the number of lines spoken.  In future, we plan to extend our parser to identify the specific addressees of a character’s speech, allowing us to model more detailed interactions.
                To verify that our parser is accurate, we compare our generated network of Hamlet to Moretti’s well-known handmade model of that play (2011). Despite some minor differences in peripheral characters like “Servant”, and our less-minor difference of including the play-within-the-play, the two networks are highly similar. Our network graph supports Moretti’s reading. Our tool also improves on Moretti’s model by adding direction and weight to each connection. Although this level of detail turned out not to be necessary for the basic task of using network graphs to distinguish between Shakespeare’s genres, it may be useful in future work examining a less homogenous corpus of plays, or in work asking different questions about this corpus.
            
            
                Using networks to identify genre
                We then use our generated network graphs to test our central question: whether the social network enacted by a play’s characters can be used as a proxy for features of the play’s narrative content. More specifically, we ask whether social networks can be used to distinguish between the dramatic genres of tragedy, comedy, and history. Using a support vector machine with fivefold validation, we tested 17 different mathematical features of the networks. No single feature was independently sufficient to identify the genre, though graph density came closest (83% accuracy). However, if features are used in combination, the network graphs can indeed achieve full accuracy. One combination of features which does achieve 100% accuracy is edges, words, and degree. We are currently exploring other combinations that might also be capable of accurately identifying genres.
            
            
                Discussion
                
                    History, comedy, tragedy
                    The potential utility of graph density in distinguishing genres is visually obvious when individual comedy and history networks are compared. Histories feature highly dispersed networks, with large numbers of very minor characters, such as “First,” “Second,” and “Third” members of groups like soldiers and ambassadors, who each interject briefly in a single scene. Connections form chains of acquaintance with little overlap, so even the monarchs have low eigenvector centrality.
                    
                        
                        Social network graphs of the histories 
                            Henry VI, Part 2 and 
                            Henry V.
                        
                    
                    Comedies, in contrast, feature networks with far fewer characters, in which nearly everybody speaks to nearly everybody else at some point. Although comedies often have multiple subplots, these separate stories do not result in highly-separated networks. We theorize that comedic networks are strongly shaped by the plays’ final “resolution” scenes, which bring together the full cast. The average eigenvector centrality of the characters in comedies is much higher than in tragedies or histories; this suggests that many more of the characters in a comedy are “important,” reflecting a focus on ensemble stories.
                    
                        
                        Social network graphs of the comedies 
                            The Comedy of Errors and 
                            A Midsummer Night’s Dream.
                        
                    
                    Graph density is insufficient, however, to fully distinguish the tragedies, which feature networks somewhere between history and comedy in their density. They often have a dense core with a secondary ring of more peripheral characters. What seems to distinguish them is the existence of the central tragic hero, whose influence directly touches more of the network than the protagonists of histories, but whose connections are less interconnected than the ensembles of comedies. These subtleties are better captured, it seems, by the combined metric of “edges, degree, and words.”
                    
                        
                        Social network graphs of the tragedies 
                            Othello, 
                            King Lear, 
                            Macbeth, and 
                            Hamlet.
                        
                    
                
                
                    The "problem plays"
                    We then use our preliminary identification of each genre’s features to examine Shakespeare’s various contested genres. Training our model only on the plays for which there is strong consensus, we applied it to the “Roman plays,” the “problem plays,” and the “romances” in turn. Of the Roman plays, all but 
                        Antony and Cleopatra are identified as tragedies by every metric; 
                        Antony and Cleopatra is identified by “edges, words, and degree” as a history and by “degree, modularity, and density” as a comedy. Of the problem plays, 
                        All’s Well that Ends Well is always identified as a comedy; 
                        Troilus and Cressida and 
                        Measure for Measure are both identified as a comedy by all metrics except for “edges, criticality, and degree”, which identify them as tragedies. The four romances, despite visually unusual networks which support literary arguments that Shakespeare’s writing had grown more experimental at the end of his career, are identified as comedies by every mathematical metric. We treat none of these identifications as definitive declaration of the plays’ “real” genres, but use them to distinguish between plays whose generic ambiguity lies in their subject matter, and plays whose ambiguity lies in their structure.
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                Our parser successfully and rapidly produces sophisticated social network graphs of TEI plays that can be used to computationally identify theatrical genre in Shakespeare’s plays. Thirty-seven plays is a small scale for this approach: since the parser is highly extensible and can be used with any plays encoded in TEI, future work need not be restricted to the Early Modern period. It need not even be restricted to works written in English. Our networks of the well-studied works of Shakespeare can provide a baseline against which to contextualize analysis of these elements in works for which there is far less critical consensus.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alberich, R.,Miro-Julia, J., and Rosselló., F. (2002). Marvel Universe Looks Almost Like a Real Social Network. arXiv:cond-mat/0202174v1
                    
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt, M. (2017). Distributed Character: Quantitative Models of the English Stage, 1500-1920. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Book of Abstracts. Montreal: McGill University and Université de Montréal, pp. 119–21.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F., Göbel, M., Kampkaspar, D., Kittel, C., and Trilcke, P. (2017). Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis: Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Book of Abstracts. Montreal: McGill University and Université de Montréal, pp. 437–41.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        New Left Review, 68: 80–102.
                    
                    
                        Sparavigna, A. C. (2013). On Social Networks in Plays and Novels. 
                        International Journal of Sciences, 2: 20–25.
                    
                    
                        Stiller, J., Nettle, D., and Dunbar, R. I. M. (2003). The Small World of Shakespeare's Plays. 
                        Human Nature, 14(4): 397–408.
                    
                    
                        Tonra, J., Kelly, D., and Reid, L. (2017). Personæ: A Character-Visualisation Tool for Dramatic Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Book of Abstracts. Montreal: McGill University and Université de Montréal, pp. 627–30.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The history and context of the development of Digital Humanities in Russia as outlined in this paper shows that there are various influences at play which have led to the forming of the Russian DH field. We link the quantitative methods used to previous trends in scholarship, including mathematics, Russian editorial practices, and the development of museum computing in the country. By doing so we can consider the individual societal contexts which encourage a field to emerge, and although that field may look similar to outsiders, identify the lineage of intellectual approaches which still influence methods and cultures within the discipline. 
            The connection between Russian Formalism and the Digital Humanities (Allison et al., 2011; Moretti, 2013; Jockers, 2013; Stanford University, 2015) relates to the tradition that originated following the strengthening of Russian mathematics at the turn of the nineteenth century after the Moscow Mathematical Society was established in 1864. The influence of this school on literary studies can be traced through the twentieth century from Andrey Bely’s experiments at the threshold of mathematics and poetry (Akimova, Shapir, 2006; Giansiracusa and Vasilieva, 2017) to the Moscow Linguistic Circle with Roman Jacobson as its chair (Akimova, Shapir, 2006; Pil’shchikov, 2015), to the Prague Linguistic Circle and further to the Tartu-Moscow School (Uspensky, 1998). Boris Jarkho’s ‘Research Methods for Literary Studies’ written in 1936 anticipated the approach of Stanford Literary Lab not only in its ‘quantitative interpreting’ (Underwood, 2017) but also in a skill of a scholar able to see wider contexts and make bridges across disciplines. The traditions are currently developed at the Centre for Digital Humanities at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow via digital tools (Skorinkin, 2017; Bonch-Osmolovskaya and Skorinkin, 2016; Orekhov and Tolstoy, 2017; Kuzmenko and Orekhov, 2016; Fischer et al, 2017).
            Another tradition related to building the National Corpus of the Russian Language
                 The National Corpus of the Russian Language (http://www.ruscorpora.ru) includes over 600 million words. It was published online in 2004 and developed by the linguists from the Russian Academy of Sciences (Sitchinawa, 2006).  can be traced back to Alexei Lyapunov (Sitchinawa, 2006), another famous Russian mathematician. The point here is not that mathematics sustained and influenced all the Russian humanities (Bakhtin’s famous studies can provide an opposite example
                 See, for example (Gasparov, 2002; Sedakova, 1992), for the discussion of the difference between Bakhtin and the Russian Formalism. ) or that quantitative approach as a trendy international methodology was also present in this part of the world in the 1960s-1970s but that it provided the rigor and method to the field which was disconnected from the international research methods and standards. This disconnection resulted in a dramatic difference in academic cultures.
            
            A recent paper (Underwood 2017) discusses distant reading as a part of the digital humanities project aimed at coping with confirmation bias. Underwood shows that (social) sciences provide the ‘experimental structure’ and help us build research design around hypothesis, samples and results. A specific Russian feature was that research methodology of this type was provided via mathematics, linguistics, and sciences. Social science and anthropology played a minor role in the interplay of influences (Gasparov, 2016).
            A major part of the current Russian digital humanities project is connected to linguistics. However, linguistics did not only provide a set of formal features and a methodology to trace a formal technique in a literary work. It was an important initial influence, a novel method to do literary studies as a part of a new scientific perspective (Tynjanov, 1971; Jarkho, 2006) in the early twentieth century. The Moscow Linguistic Circle active from 1915 to 1924 held its meetings in Roman Jacobson’s flat in Moscow and its members were over 60 linguists and scholars working in text analysis and literary studies
                 Tynaianov and Schklovsky, famous for their contribution to Russian Formalism, were members of the Moscow Linguistic Circle (Shapir, 1996). . Apart from its significant international influence, the society had an important impact on how Russian scholarship developed (Akimova, Shapir, 2006; Shapir, 1996; Pil’shchikov, 2015). Its traditions were continued in applying quantitative methods to studying poetry in the second half of the twentieth century (Akimova, Shapir, 2006; Bodrova, 2017). Its influence can be traced in a highly influential approach of applying structural linguistics to interdisciplinary cultural studies at Tartu University
                 Tartu University in Estonia, a part of Russia at that time, was home for the literary studies done in the tradition of the methodology looking at formal structural features.  also in the second half of the twentieth century (Gasparov, 2016).
            
            A part of current projects in Russian digital humanities are connected to this tradition. The project of creating a semantic edition of Leo Tolstoy’s complete works
                 A project that is currently developed at the Higher School of Economics and Leo Tolstoy museum. Apart from using a representational mark-up in TEI standards, the project includes experiments towards an interpretive component (Bonch-Osmolovskaya, 2016; Bonch-Osmolovskaya and Skorinkin, 2016). (Bonch-Osmolovskaya, 2016) includes representative and interpretive components. The edition’s interpretive part works with a humanistic data model of the characters’ roles in 
                War and Peace validated through the digital tools of natural language processing and extracting semantic roles (Bonch-Osmolovskaya and Skorinkin, 2016), this approach also includes a classification of characters using character networks (Skorinkin, 2017). The connection of digital approaches to the previous trends of scholarship (Russian Formalism and structural interdisciplinary studies initiated by scholars from Tartu and Moscow) is explicitly proposed and maintained through the Moscow-Tartu Summer School annually organized at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow.
            
            Quantitative approaches to studying poetry has been a path traditionally pursued by Russian mathematicians or people related to mathematics. Andrey Bely who was closely related to Nikolai Bugaev
                 Boris Bugaev’s (Andrey Bely’s) relations with his father and the influence of the academic environment on Bely’s development have been widely discussed in literature (see, for example, Janecek, 2015 and Giansiracusa and Vasilieva, 2017)., one of the first chairs of the Moscow Mathematical Society, developed a quantitative approach to studying poetic rhythm in 1910 and initiated a society where scholars were taught to use statistics to study poetry (Semyonov, 2009). Andrei Kolmogorov, a famous Russian mathematician, organized a seminar and published several papers in this field in the early 1960s (Semeyonov, 2009; Kolmogorov, 2015).
            
            The tradition has been continued via digital tools where the authors show the limitations of digital analysis (Orekhov, 2014) or integrate mapping poetry in interdisciplinary cultural studies following the Tartu tradition (Kuzmenko and Orekhov, 2016). 
            Russian editorial practices in the second half of the twentieth century were focused on publishing complete works of the authors from the canon of the time. Thorough editorial work was limited by the editors’ attempts to combine international standards of scholarly apparatus and the requirements of the moment. Twentieth century’s attempts to create scholarly editions using interpretive practices of the time (Bonch-Osmolovskaya, 2016) resulted in a current need to build new epistemological foundations for contemporary scholarly editions. Digital methods and digital scholarly standards are probably the best possible option to cope with epistemological difficulties in the field. 
            While editing textual materials was complicated by interpretive practices, visual editions in the 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s were introducing new standards of metadata and data models. Their editors made an important step towards digital practices and museum computing.
            The editorial practices of printed visual editions of artworks related to the standards of publishing museum images (Kizhner et al, forthcoming), the quality of images and the scholarly apparatus accompanying visual editions in the 1970s and 1980s prepared the anticipations of standards for digital publishing and placing images in a wider context via digital tools (Polulyakh, 2009; Sher, 2006). 
            A specific Russian feature was looking for formal (structural) components to interpret a literary work, bringing a wide interdisciplinary context to interpretation. The tradition was sustained during the twentieth century before Russian scholars turned to digital humanities. The influence of social science, gender and race studies, enlarging or changing a canon did not leave significant traces even if (when) the ideas reached the community of scholars. A current exception are projects aimed at studying the nineteenth century literary canon and future developments seeking to compare it with contemporary canons (Vdovin and Leibov, 2013). The authors propose to build a canonical corpus and study the changes using a mark-up. The idea relates to Moretty’s evolutionary theories (ibid) and the Russian traditions of observing the dynamics of a formal feature that can be traced back to Boris Jarcho’s papers written in the 1930s. 
            The paper will demonstrate, using evidence from various sources that Russian traditions of quantitative interpreting, the influence of strong mathematics and a trend of placing cultural objects within a broader context were crucial for our understanding of how digital humanities, as a quantitative methodology, developed in the country, in a different way than it did elsewhere. Understanding these alternative histories will help us understand the range of activities taking place in Digital Humanities worldwide, by looking at the social, scholarly, and cultural contexts, helping the community to navigate and bridge differences. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Akimova, M. and Shapir, 
                        M. (2006) ‘Boris Isaakovich Jarkho and the Strategy of Research Methods for Literary Studies’, in Jarkho Boris, 
                        Research Methods for Literary Studies (ed. Maxim Shapir
                        ), Moscow: Pholologica. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Allison, S., Heuser R., Jockers, M., Moretti, F., Witmore, M. (2011) 
                        Quantitative Formalism as Experiment, Pamphlet 1.
                         Stanford Literary Lab.
                    
                    
                        Bonch-Osmolovskaya, A., (2016) ‘Digital Edition of Leo Tolstoy Works: Contributing to Advances in Russian Literary Scholarship’. 
                        Journal of Siberian Federal University. Humanities and Social Sciences 7 (9), pp. 1605-1614.
                    
                    
                        Bonch-Osmolovskaya, A. and Skorinkin 
                        D. (2017) ‘Text Mining War and Piece: Automatic Extraction of Character Traits from Literary Pieces’,
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, Vol. 32, Supplement 1.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F., Orlova, T., Skorinkin, D., Palchikov, G., and Tyshkevich, N. ‘Introducing RusDraCor - A TEI-Encoded Russian Drama Corpus for the Digital Literary Studies, in 
                        International Conference Corpus Linguistics 2017: Book of Abstracts, June 27-30, 2017, Saint Petersburg, pp. 28-32.
                    
                    
                        Gasparov, M., (2002) ‘Michael Bakhtin in the Russian Culture of the 20th Century’, in 
                        Michael Bakhtin: Pro and Contra: Mikael Bakhtin’s Heritage in the Context of the World Culture (ed. Konstantin Isupov), Vol. 2, Saint Petersburg. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Gasparov, B., (2016) ‘Between Methodological Strictness and Moral Appeal: Questions of Language and Cultural Theory in Russia’, History of Humanities, vol.1, number 2.
                    
                    
                        Giansiracusa, Noah and Anastasia Vasilyeva, ‘Mathematical Symbolism in a Russian Literary Masterpiece’, arXiv: 170902483v1 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1709.02483.pdf
                    
                    
                        Janecek, G., (2015) 
                        Andrey Bely: A Critical Review, Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky.
                         
                    
                    
                        Jarkho B., (2006) 
                        Research Methods for Literary Studies (ed. Maxim Shapir
                        ), Moscow: Pholologica. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M., ‘Microanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL.
                    
                    
                        Kizhner, Inna, Melissa Terras, Maxim Rumyantsev and Kristina Sycheva, ‘Accessing Russian Culture Online: The scope of digitization in museums across Russia’, forthcoming.
                    
                    
                        Kolmogorov, A., (2015) 
                        Studies in Poetry, Moscow Centre for Mathematical Education Press, 2015. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Kuzmenko, Elisaveta and Boris Orekhov, (2016) ‘Geography of Russian Poetry: Countries and Cities Inside the Poetic World’, in 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University, Kraków, pp. 830-832.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F., (2013) 
                        Distant Reading, London: Verso. 
                    
                    
                        Orekhov, Boris and Fekla Tolstoy, (2017) ‘Textograf: A Web Application for Manuscript Digitization’, in 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Conference Abstracts. McGill University &amp; Université de Montréal, Montréal.
                    
                    
                        Pil’shchikov, I., (2015) ‘The Legacy of the Moscow Linguistic Circle and the Digital Humanities Today’, in 
                        Russian Formalism and the Digital Humanities: Abstracts, Stanford University. https://digitalhumanities.stanford.edu/russian-formalism-digital-humanities-abstracts
                    
                    
                        Polulyakh, A., (2009), Photo capturing and digital technologies in museums: following traditions, In 
                        Proceedings of 'ICT fro Regional Development' 
                        Conference, 5-6 February 2009, Smolensk Regional Administration, Smolensk, pp. 217-222. In Russian
                    
                    
                        Sedakova, O., (1992) ‘Michael Bakhtin: An Alternative Interpretation’, http://www.olgasedakova.com/Moralia/267 In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Semyonov, V., (2009) ‘Methods of Statistics for Studying Russian Poetry: Andrey Bely and Andrey Kolmogorov’, 
                        Journal of Moscow State University, series 9, number 6.
                    
                    
                        Sher, J., (2006). ‘Department of Museum Informatics at the Hermitage Museum (1975 - 1985), 
                        Information Technology for Museums, No 2, Saint Petersburg. http://kronk.spb.ru/library/sher-yaa-2006.htm In Russian. 
                    
                    
                        Sitchinawa, D., (2005) ‘The National Corpus of the Russian Language: a Brief Prehistory’, in 
                        The National Corpus of the Russian Language: 2003-2005, Moscow: Indrik, pp. 21-30. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Skorinkin, D., (2017) ‘Extracting Character Networks to Explore Literary Plot Dynamics’, in Proceedings of 
                        Dialogue: Conference on Linguistic Computing, Moscow, 31 May - 3 June, Issue 16 (23), Vol.1, pp. 257-270.
                    
                    
                        Shapir, M. (1996) ‘An editorial note to Jacobson, Roman ‘The Moscow Linguistic Circle’, Philologica 3. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Stanford University, (2015) 
                        Russian Formalism and the Digital Humanities Conference: Book of Abstracts, Stanford University. https://digitalhumanities.stanford.edu/russian-formalism-digital-humanities-abstracts
                    
                    
                        Tynjanov, J., (1971) ‘On literary revolution’, in 
                        Readings in Russian Poetics (ed. Ladislav Matejka and Kristina Pomorska), MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Underwood, T., (2017) ‘A Genealogy of Distant Reading’, Digital Humanities Quarterly, Vol.11, No 2, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000317/000317.html
                    
                    
                        Uspensky, B., (1998) ‘On the origin of the Tartu-Moscow School’, in ‘The Tartu-Moscow School: History, Memoirs, Reviews’ (ed. Sergey Neklyudov), Moscow: Languages of the Russian Culture, pp. 34-44. In Russian.
                    
                    
                        Vdovin, Alexey and Leibov, Roman (2013) ‘Canonical texts: Russian poetry and teaching literature in the 19th century’, in 
                        Canonical Texts: Russian Pedagogical Practice in the 19th Century and Poetical Canon, Tartu University Press. In Russian.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The Research Environment for Ancient Documents (READ) project commenced in 2013 with development support from a consortium of institutions (University of Washington in Seattle, Ludwig Maximillian University in Munich, University of Lausanne, University of Sydney and Prakaś Foundation) involved in the study and publication of ancient Buddhist documents preserved in Gāndhārī.
            READ has been developed as a comprehensive multi-user platform for the transcription, translation and analysis of ancient Sanskrit, Gāndhārī, Pali and other Prakrit texts: manuscripts, inscriptions, coins and other documents. It is based on open source software (Postgres, PHP and JQuery), supports the TEI standard and provides an API for integration with related systems. READ is positioned as a research environment, complementary to existing textual repositories and integrated with existing dictionaries. Existing transcriptions can be imported, elaborated upon, analyzed, and then published as research output in standards-based formats. The defining innovation of READ is atomization to a semantically linked network of objects; a paradigm shift in data structure from strings of marked-up text to sequences of linked objects.
            The underlying design and entity model was presented at both the Digital Humanities conference in 2015 and the 2016 Australian Digital Humanities Conference. READ has been publicly released and is supporting a wide range of corpus development projects. Whilst this presentation will follow on to briefly precis the range of research projects currently supported by READ, the focus will be on a related platform. READ Workbench (Workbench) is a server portal hosted at the University of Sydney since 2016 to ‘harness’ READ. Developed using the same technology stack as READ, it is a comprehensive management framework to support the integration of people and processes in the collaborative development, maintenance and publishing of textual corpora.
            The design of Workbench evolved organically as the implementation requirements of READ expanded from a single researcher working on a single text, to the capacity to support multiple projects, each with a team of researchers collaborating on the development of an integrated corpora, with widely divergent research objectives. The fundamental objective was to design a supporting framework with which manage the balance between autonomy and collaboration in large scale projects. The approach adopted was to implement strategies, models and workflow patterns consistent with those applied in the IT consulting industry to digital content design, development and migration projects.
            Workbench is a software as a service (SaaS) platform managing multiple READ installations, each with project and language specific configurations, supporting researcher collaborations across multiple institutions. It provides a self-service portal for researchers to develop, maintain, manage and publish texts without requiring technical support or the mediation of a database administrator; critical to the longer-term sustainability of corpora projects. Workbench’s three facets (configuration management, database management and corpus workflows) provide a scalable implementation architecture for READ and instantiate a comprehensive corpus development methodology.
            Whilst the configuration management services might be bracketed as conventional for a SaaS platform, database management is predicated upon an architectural innovation that enables researchers to build, share, manage, maintain and publish their own texts. The adoption of a single text/single database (TextBase) as the fundamental object of development, collaboration and portability is quite a departure from conventional models where a centralized administrator manages a single monolithic corpus database. 
            This TextBase architecture underpins a corpus development, analysis and publishing methodology that provides significant flexibility in terms of the iteration and synchronization of three fundamental workflows: text alignment, analysis registration and text aggregation.
            The text alignment process integrates image, text and model configuration data to automatically generate a database. This approach allows for the distribution of responsibility to specialists and integration of their research output to align the image and the transcription at their most atomized to generate a ‘substrate’. Rather than requiring researchers to command exacting mark-up schemas, substrate databases can be automatically generated from Word processing and Spreadsheet inputs. Workbench enables each of the specialist roles to work independently and their contributions be separately managed and integrated, ameliorating project risk by minimizing dependencies and bottlenecks.
            The analysis registration process synchronizes analysis data with an existing substrate. This approach allows a researcher to work independently and externally to READ in developing their own analysis ‘strata’ and then register that strata on a substrate. Grammatical analysis, translation, semantic, syntactic and structural analysis can all be independently developed and iteratively registered. Researchers from other disciplines can develop and register their own analysis (archaeological, historical etc.). Each stratum is registered on a particular substrate (an edition) of the text within a TextBase, is separately owned and attributed, and its visibility is controlled by the researcher registering it.
            The text aggregation process allows individual researchers to work and innovate in private to the point where they elect to participate in research collaborations or their text is ready for publishing. A TextBase might be aggregated with others to form a ‘sequenced’ collection, a ‘mapped’ collection or a ‘merged’ corpus; a continuum expressing an increasing degree of synthesis and harmonization of analysis ontologies and methodological standards. Researchers may contribute their TextBase to any number of aggregates. This approach allows a researcher to align a TextBase with the analysis standards of an established corpus as a predicate to participation as a constituent of that merged aggregate. In parallel, that same TextBase might be mapped to the analysis ontology of an entirely different collection. The potential exists for the same TextBase substrate to manifest as a constituent of separate aggregates, with alternative configurations of registered analysis strata, supporting widely divergent (aggregate specific) research objectives; the emanation of multiple TextBase avatars.
            The strategy adopted with Workbench was to design a solution architecture within which to reframe some of the ubiquitous issues in the conventional corpus development model; ownership, control, confidentiality, innovation, standardization, portability, resourcing and support. The critical innovation in maximizing development flexibility and in balancing autonomy and collaboration across the range of individual, collection and corpora development projects is the TextBase; the target of text alignment, the substrate for registration of analysis and the object aggregated.
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                    
                The Center for Digital Research in the Humanities (CDRH) at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln is home to digital collections such as 
                    The Walt Whitman Archive, 
                    The Willa Cather Archive, 
                    The Journals of Lewis and Clark, and 
                    O Say Can You See. These projects contain overlap between subjects, individuals, and locations, yet are siloed, and many are built in aging, unsupported technologies with no interoperability or common search. In order to address this, the Center has developed an API (“Henbit”) as part of a modular software stack to index and display data and content.
                
            
            
                Challenge
                Over the past twenty years, the Center has created over 30,000 TEI files in addition to other data sets such as VRACore documents, spreadsheets, and databases. Sites showcase the content and metadata of these files using a variety of technologies, many of which are no longer maintained. In addition, some sites used commercial software which became unsustainable when costs went up, cementing a commitment to open source. This experience informed and reinforced our adopted design philosophy, which can be summed up as:
                
                    Keep it simple, stable, and sustainable
                    Embrace modularity by writing software for one purpose
                    Avoid over-engineering solutions (i.e. graphical interfaces where command-line will do)
                    Provide comprehensive documentation 
                
                    The Center has been inspired to think bigger about what can be accomplished by including existing data in a new framework. An exciting next step is creating a site to search all Center data, find commonalities between projects, and read materials across sites for comprehensive research. This approach will also help solve accessibility issues of older project sites which do not meet modern requirements. As projects become unsustainable, the Center may retire them while keeping all content available.
                While having one place to view and search the Center’s data is important, it’s also critical to allow the creation of independent sites which utilize unique organization and include special features requested by principal investigators for new and evolving projects. Quickly creating bare bones sites to view in-progress TEI is essential, as it allows metadata experts and PIs to refine their data and arguments. Such sites should be written for ease of maintenance, freeing future developer time to work on new projects rather than sustaining old ones. 
            
            
                Solution
                The Center explored the possibility of using existing software to address these challenges, such as XTF, Blacklight, and Fedora. These packages did not fit the Center’s needs; though comprehensive, they were not flexible enough to accommodate the variety of document types and project site requirements. Additionally, many solutions would lock the API into using Solr instead of allowing an interchangeable search engine (Blacklight, 2017; DuraSpace, 2017).
                Instead of heavily customizing existing software, The Center decided to create a modular solution. The system consists of several components:
                
                    data repository for project files and scripts for transformation
                    document datastore and search engine (Elasticsearch)
                    Ruby on Rails (Rails) API to serve data (Henbit)
                    media retrieval system for associated images, audio, and video
                    template generator for rapid website creation (Orchid) 
                
                    With a modular software stack, future changes in technology and project needs can be accommodated with independent upgrades rather than massive redesigns and rewrites.
                
                    
                
            
            
                Project Files and Scripts
                    The data repository houses original files for projects, such as TEI-XML, VRACore, CSV, and Dublin Core. The repository also contains CLI scripts which create HTML and populate search indexes with document content and metadata (CDRH, 2017a). New projects use generalized scripts, which are organized to allow overriding functionality in individual projects. Older websites may continue to use existing XSLT and populate legacy Solr indexes while their existing sites are supported, as well as populate Elasticsearch using the standardized script. Static HTML files derived from this process are used to create a document which can be viewed in a browser, regardless of the original data format. 
                    
            
            
                Henbit (Public Endpoint)
                    Henbit is a Rails powered API (application program interface) which creates appropriate requests for the backend index, and returns JSON. Currently, Henbit uses Elasticsearch as a backend, but most of its features (sorting, filtering, aggregating on ranges, etc) could be ported to a different backend. The OpenAPI specification was used during Henbit's creation to fit current design practices (CDRH, 2017b).
            
            
                Media Retrieval
                    In legacy sites, associated media lived inside the website directory. The Center has created a standard URL path for media files. It will be easier to optimize serving specific file types with this common retrieval structure. In the near future, the CDRH will be implementing a IIIF image server to serve images of varying sizes and resolutions.
            
            
                Orchid (Rails Engine)
                    Orchid is a Rails engine which connects Rails 5 applications and Henbit. Orchid and a supporting gem, api_bridge, provide a template website that allows users to browse, search, filter, and view documents. This template is highly customizable, and can be altered to allow different URLs, search behavior, and anything possible in Rails (CDRH, 2017c).
            
            
                Current Implementation and Future Plans
                    Beta versions of all components were released in 2017. In late 2017 the framework was used to build 
                    The Complete Letters of Willa Cather (launched January 2018). 
                    The Complete Letters demonstrates the customization which can be accomplished with this modular system. The CDRH is currently developing another project, 
                    Family Letters, which will also take advantage of the data repositories, scripts, Henbit, and Orchid template.
                
                    In the meantime, older websites are being converted for the new system. Updated documents and original XSLT have been reorganized into the structure required by the data repository scripts and are being posted to the Elasticsearch index. Once a site for Centerwide projects has been created, older sites can be retired as needed, replaced by content now available through the new API and supporting website.
                    The decision to use custom built software rather than an existing, out of the box solution, was not easy. Though at times it felt like reinventing the wheel, our highly customizable and flexible implementation prepares for future technological developments and enables flexibility in meeting project requirements.
            
            
                Notes
                
                    
                        
                            https://cdrh.unl.edu
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            http://whitmanarchive.org
                        , 
                        
                            http://cather.unl.edu
                        , 
                        
                            https://lewisandclarkjournals.unl.edu
                        , and 
                        
                            http://earlywashingtondc.org
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://xtf.cdlib.org
                        , 
                        
                            http://projectblacklight.org
                        , and 
                        
                            http://fedorarepository.org
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/CDRH/data
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/CDRH/api
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            http://iiif.io
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/CDRH/orchid
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            https://github.com/CDRH/api_bridge
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            http://cather.unl.edu/letters
                        
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blacklight (2017). "Project Blacklight." 
                        http://projectblacklight.org.
                    
                    
                        CDRH (2017a). "CDRH Data Repository." 
                        GitHub. 
                        https://github.com/CDRH/data.
                    
                    
                        CDRH (2017b). "Henbit." 
                        GitHub. 
                        https://github.com/CDRH/api.
                    
                    
                        CDRH (2017c). "Orchid." 
                        GitHub. 
                        https://github.com/CDRH/orchid.
                    
                    
                        DuraSpace (2017). "Fedora Repository." 
                        http://fedorarepository.org.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                As anyone, who has worked with medieval manuscripts, will know, sometimes more than half of the words are abbreviated. For example, in a forthcoming paper on Middle English and Latin manuscripts of the 
                    Polychronicon, we found that in the most heavily abbreviated Latin sections as many as 59 percent of the words could be abbreviated, while the number for Middle English was 21 per cent (Honkapohja and Liira, in preparation). Studies comparining Latin and Romance have met with similar results (Hasenohr, 1997; Careri et al., 2011). Nevertheless, in digital scholarship, abbreviations are typically seen as something to get rid of rather than useful data to mine.
                
                 A major reason for lack of attention given to manuscript abbreviations can be found in editorial practices inherited from printed editions. It is a standard practice for editors to expand abbreviations as “a service to the reader” (cf. Driscoll, 2009). Twentieth-century editorial theory often treats abbreviations as scribal variation as “accidentals” (see e.g. W. W. Greg, 1950), not relevant for the authorial “work” contained in the manuscripts, as much scholarship focuses either directly on the work or uncovering the work under layers of scribal copying and errors. The outcome is an editorial tradition in which silently expanding abbreviations is very much the norm. 
                Digital approaches for making use of abbreviations as data are available, but are often not used. TEI P5 guidelines introduced the possibility of encoding both the abbreviations and their expansions using the &lt;choice&gt; elements with &lt;abbr&gt; and &lt;expan&gt; (cf. Driscoll, 2006, 2009; Honkapohja, 2013). Still, many digital resources continue the practice of silently expanding abbreviations. Reasons may range from considering encoding abbreviations to be too labour intensive to basing the digital resources on printed editions which expand the abbreviations (cf. Honkapohja et al., 2009). Moreover, text retrieval systems are typically unable to recognize different forms of the same word and the problem is usually solved by normalisation (cf. Kestemont, 2015: 160). Furthermore, some research questions, including investigations into syntax or stemmatology, also require normalisation. However, while normalisation may be necessary for some research questions, it also discards large amount of potentially useful data, which makes other types of research impossible. 
                The fairly few scholars who do work with abbreviations have identified a number of potentially interesting lines of enquiry. Abbreviations can be used, for example, for identifying change of scribe in the text (cf. Kestemont, 2015) or in historical dialectology for identifying regional characteristics in scribal language (see e.g. Smith, 2016), or studying the effect of right-margin justification on scribal spelling (Shute, 2017), or hiding endings in multilingual business writing (Wright, 2011). Consequently, the practice of expanding abbreviations is discussed and criticised by a number of scholars (Driscoll, 2006; Kyt
                    ö et al., 2011; Rogos 2011, 2012; Stutzman, 2014, Lass, 2004). 
                
                 Even though the problems related to the prevailing practice of silently expanding are well known, and some resources such as the 
                    Medieval Nordic Text Archive (MENOTA) do encode them, there have been relatively few studies which would have attempted to use them as data (e.g. Camps, 2016; Honkapohja, 2018; Kestemont, 2015; Rogos, 2012; Smith, 2016; Shute, 2017), especially in comparison to fields such as stemmatology and stylometry. 
                    My proposal for short paper presents project plan and early results for a project, called 
                    Corpus Approaches to Manuscript Abbreviations
                     (CAMA), funded for September 2017- February 2020. 
                
                 The current project focuses on applying methodologies developed for corpus linguistics on abbreviations in the spelling system of Early Middle English, 1150-1350. The period is of interest as it was a formative one for the writing systems of English. Linguistic situation in England changed dramatically after the Norman Conquest of 1066, which introduced a new ruling class and relegated English to a tertiary role after Latin and Anglo-Norman French. When Middle English texts become more numerous in the 13
                    th century, we find a very diverse dialect landscape in which the lack of a prestigious vernacular has led to the proliferation of local varieties, with almost every text appearing to represent a separate linguistic system.
                
                 Within the Early Middle English period, my project focuses on four research questions: 
                (Q1) Does each scribe have an individual scribal profile of abbreviations?
                (Q2) Are some abbreviation usages connected to certain geographic areas?
                (Q3) How are Latin and Old English abbreviations distributed in Germanic and Romance vocabulary?
                (Q4) What is the function of abbreviations in the spelling system(s) of Middle English?
                The data comes from the 
                    Linguistic Atlas of Early Middle English (LAEME), a corpus of ca. 650,000 divided into scribal samples of localised Middle English. Each text in LAEME is based on a diplomatic transcription from manuscript facsimiles, not editions, and using a mark-up system that encodes the expansions of abbreviations, but in a way which makes identifying the abbreviation easy and workable (LAEME: 3.3.1). Consequently, it can be used to compile a dataset, which can be analysed quantitatively.
                
                 The methodology is based on corpus linguistics, statistical analysis and historical dialectology. I will use corpus enquiries to compile a dataset of the findings, then subject the dataset to statistical analysis using R and tried and tested techniques such as linear regression, linear correlation, principal component analysis, chi square test and cluster analysis which have yielded results in previous studies of abbreviations and spelling variation (cf. Kestemont, 2015; Smith, 2016). 
                 Compiling the dataset consists of three steps:
                
                    Corpus enquiries, using the web interface and scripts of LAEME. 
                    Corpus enquiries for unabbreviated forms of the abbreviated words found in stage 1 in each text, in which a particular abbreviation is used. These can be localised, using the lemmas tagged in the LAEME (see 2.3.2: E).
                    Compiling a dataset the results, which will include 
                        a) results of the corpus enquiries, i.e. the abbreviation type, the abbreviated word, non-abbreviated variant(s), frequencies, 
                        b) information included in the LAEME metadata, i.e. text, lemma, grammatical tag, manuscript, date, script, place, co-ordinates in the LAEME localisation grid, and 
                        c) additional variables needed for research questions Q1 and Q3, i.e. word origin: Germanic/Romance/Latin (12), content vs. function word (13). 
                    
                
                The dataset will be subjected to further analysis, using:
                
                    The inbuilt mapping function in LAEME, which allows dynamically creating feature maps, based on the distribution of any form, its lemma, or grammatical tag.
                    Statistical analysis, 
                        
                            linear correlation and linear regression, using the form of the abbreviation as the dependant variable, and the results encoded in the dataset (2.3.3: 3) as independent variables, calculating which of them interact with the type of the abbreviation in a certain specimen (cf. Smith, 2016),
                            Principal component analysis common in stylometry (cf. Kestemont, 2015: 168-70).
                        
                    
                
                As I am giving the presentation fairly early in the funding period, I hope to receive valuable feedback on the methodology and also to build a bridge between corpus linguistics and stylometry, creating discussion on the value and potential of scribal 'accidentals' as data.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Camps, J-B.
                         (2016). 
                        La `Chanson d’Otinel’: édition complète du corpus manuscrit et prolégomènes à l’édition critique. Paris-Sorbonne.&lt;
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1116735
                        
                        &gt;
                    
                    
                        Careri, M., de Saint-Pol Ruby, C. and Short, I. (2011). 
                        Livres et écritures en français et en occitan au XIIe siècle: catalogue illustré, 
                        Scritture e libri del Medioevo 8, Viella.
                    
                    
                        Driscoll, M. (2006). Levels of transcription. In Burnard, L., O’Brien O’Keeffe, K. and Unsworth, J. (eds), 
                        Electronic Textual Editing, Modern Language Association, pp. 254–261. 
                    
                    
                        Driscoll, M. (2009). Marking up abbreviations in Old Norse-Icelandic manuscripts. In M.G. Saibene, M. and Buzzoni, M. (eds), 
                        Medieval Texts – Contemporary Media: The Art and Science of Editing in the Digital Age. Ibis, pp. 13–34.
                    
                    
                        Greg, W. W. (1951/1951). 
                        The Rationale of Copy-Text. 
                        Studies in Bibliography Vol. 3, pp. 19-36. 
                    
                    
                        Hasenohr, G. (1997). Écrire en latin, écrire en roman: réflexions sur la pratique des abréviations dans les manuscrits français des XIIe et XIIIe siècles. In Banniard, M. (ed.), 
                        Langages et peuples d’Europe: cristallisation des identités romanes et germaniques (VIIe-XIe siècle). 
                        Toulouse-Conques, pp. 79-110.
                    
                    
                        Honkapohja, A. (2018). “Latin in Recipes?” A corpus approach to scribal abbreviations in 15
                        th-century medical manuscripts. In Pahta, P, Skaffari, J. and Wright, L. (eds), 
                        Multilingual Practices in Language History: English and beyond. De Gruyter, pp. 243-271.
                    
                    
                        Honkapohja, A. (2013). "Manuscript abbreviations in Latin and English: History, typologies and how to tackle them in encoding." 
                        Studies in Variation, Contacts and Change in English Volume 14: Principles and Practices for the Digital Editing and Annotation of Diachronic Data.  
                        
                            &lt;http://www.helsinki.fi/varieng/series/volumes/index.html&gt;
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Honkapohja, A., Kaislaniemi, S. and Marttila, V. (2009). Digital Editions for Corpus Linguistics: Representing manuscript reality in electronic corpora. In Jucker, A., Schreier, D. and Hundt, M. (eds), 
                            Corpora: Pragmatics and Discourse. Papers from the 29th International Conference on English Language Research on Computerized Corpora (ICAME 29). Ascona, Switzerland, 14–18 May 2008. Rodopi, pp. 451–474.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Honkapohja, A. and Liira, A. (in preparation). Abbreviations and Standardisation in the 
                            Polychronicon: Latin to English, and Manuscript to Print. In Wright, L (ed.), 
                            The Multilingual Origins of Standard English (MOSTE). De Gruyter.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Kestemont, M. (2015). A Computational Analysis of the Scribal Profiles in Two of the Oldest Manuscripts of Hadewijch’s Letters, 
                            Scriptorium, 69: 159-75.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Kytö, M., Grund, P. and Walker, T. (2011). 
                            Testifying to Language and Life in Early Modern England: Including CD-ROM: An Electronic Text Edition of Depositions 1560-1760 (ETED). Benjamins.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            LAEME = 
                        Laing, M. (2013). 
                        A Linguistic Atlas of Early Middle English, 1150–1325, Version 3.2. Edinburgh: © The University of Edinburgh.
                        : &lt;
                        
                            http://www.lel.ed.ac.uk/ihd/laeme1/laeme1.html
                        
                        &gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            Lass, R. (2004). Ut Custodiant Litteras: Editions, Corpora and Witnesshood. In Dossena, M. and Lass, R. (eds), 
                            Methods and Data in English Historical Dialectology. Peter Lang, pp. 21-48.
                        
                    
                    
                        MELD = Stenroos, M., Thengs, K. and Bergstrøm, G. 
                        A Corpus of Middle English Local Documents, v. 2017.1. University of Stavanger. &lt;http://www.uis.no/research/history-languages-and-literature/the-mest-programme/a-corpus-of-middle-english-local-documents-meld/&gt;
                    
                    
                        
                            MENOTA = 
                            Medieval Nordic Text Archive. &lt;http://www.menota.org/EN_forside.xhtml&gt;
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Rogos, J. (2011). On the pitfalls of interpretation: Latin abbreviations in MSS of the Man of Law’s Tale. In Fisiak, J. and Bator, M. (eds), 
                            Foreign Influences on Medieval English. Peter Lang, pp. 47–54.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Rogos, J. (2012). Isles of systemacity in the sea of prodigality? Non-alphabetic elements in manuscripts of Chaucer’s ‘Man of Law’s Tale. &lt;
                        
                        
                            http://www.isle-linguistics.org/resources/rogos2012.pdf
                        
                        &gt;
                    
                    
                        Shute, R. (2017). Pressed for Space: The Effects of Justification and the Printing Process on Fifteenth-Century Orthography. 
                        English Studies 98 (3): 262–82.
                    
                    
                        
                            Smith, D. (2016). The predictability of {-S} abbreviation in Older Scots manuscripts according to stem-final littera. AMC Symposium. Conference paper.
                        
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, D. (2014). Conjuguer diplomatique, paléographie et édition électronique : les mutations du XIIe siècle et la datation des écritures par le profil scribal collectif. In Ambrosio, A., Barret, S. and Vogeler, G. (eds), 
                        Digital Diplomatics. The computer as a tool for the diplomatist?, Archiv für Diplomatik. Beiheft 14, 271‑90.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Wright, L. (2011). On Variation in Medieval Mixed-Language Business Writing. In Schendl, H. and Wright, L. (eds.), 
                            Code-Switching in Early English. De Gruyter, pp. 191-218.
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Starting in Buenos Aires with Eloísa Cartonera in 2003, Cartonera publishers emerged as a reaction to the over commercialization of the book industry and its ever-growing conglomerates. With their unique hand embellished covers and their peculiar aesthetics, these publishers have challenged how books and literature are produced and distributed. Their collective manual process is equal to the intellectual one, resulting in a more democratic mode of production. 
            For thirteen years, the Cartonera Publishers Database has been documenting and preserving the diverse initiatives that stem from these grassroots projects which use recycled cardboard as book covers. The database is comprised of more than 1,200 entries which include Dublin Core metadata, scanned images of the back and front covers, copyright pages, and title pages, and audio files of interviews of several members of Cartonera publishing houses. An electronic crosswalk connects these entries to local cataloging of the Cartonera Book Collection. The audio files and an online full-text book “Akademia Cartonera: A primer of Latin American Cartonera Publishers” are additionally indexed and marked using TEI. This database is the only digital reference tool on these multi-pronged publishing initiatives. The ultimate goal is to connect this locally focused digital humanities project with cartonera books held at other institutions around the world in an interinstitutional Cartonera Catalog.
            In the past year, I have been studying the possibility of using crowd sourcing and/or folksonomies to supplement the current content with the goal of providing a deeper understanding of the variety of contexts in which these books are created while also offering a space for the Cartonera publishers to contribute other content created directly by them. My proposed papers addresses the database and initial efforts to expand our work.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Cartonera Publishers Database, 
                        http://digital.library.wisc.edu/1711.dl/Arts.EloisaCart (accessed 20 November 2017).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The role of women in industrial development is now largely recognized in sociological and economic studies on developing countries during the first industrial revolution in Europe. Yet data on their remuneration, schedules and domestic work, and that of men working in the same sectors, remains deficient for many regions, especially for France. The Time-Us project aims to reconstruct the remuneration and time budgets of women and men working in the textile trades in four French industrial regions (Lille, Paris, Lyon, Marseille) in a long-term perspective, by bringing together a multidisciplinary team of historians, natural language processing (NLP) experts and sociologists. It will create comparable series on the remuneration and time allocation of employed men and women (i) through classical sources and company and trade association archives, and (ii) by piecing together a series of qualitative sources identifying words and actions associated with work in both domestic and non-domestic activities. The project will provide keys to understanding the gender gap by analyzing changes in work and time uses during the first industrialization process.
            The Time-Us team works on a heterogenous corpus of French handwritten and printed sources spanning from the seventeenth to the twentieth century. These documents are mainly preserved in French local archives, from the four industrial regions that have been mentioned above (for instance, Archives municipales de Lyon, Bibliothèque municipale de Lyon, or Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris, etc.). The analyzed corpus brings together numerous historical sources, and includes court decisions, petitions, police reports and files, and sociological surveys on living conditions of the working class (especially 
                Les monographies de famille de l’École de Le Play or Le Play’s families’ budgets (Hincker, 2011)). Many of these documents are manuscripts, written by various hands over long periods of time (more than a hundred years for the “Registre de contraventions aux règlements des métiers" that begins in 1670 and ends in 1781 (Lyon, Archives municipales). 
            
            This unpublished set of documents constitutes an important corpus of historical sources that is well-suited for applying computational analysis. In this paper, we will present the approach adopted by the Time-Us team to analyze this corpus. We will also discuss the prospects opened up by this project for historical research in terms of digital research workflow.
            Our goal consists in applying NLP methods to heterogeneous historical documents, in order to identify and analyze the relevant semantic or syntactic patterns that describe work, remuneration and time budgets. The application of such methods, mainly parsing, will facilitate the analysis of the corpus by creating series of comparable quantitative and qualitative data:
            Quantitative data on remunerations, household budgets and time spent for domestic (or unpaid) and non-domestic (or paid) work by women and men.
            Qualitative data on paid and unpaid tasks realized by women at home and at work, namely information on the type of the task, its description, its duration and its results. Computational methods will also be used to extract statements describing the women performing these tasks (occupation, social status, age, marital status, family composition), and the relationships between the actors involved in these tasks, especially between men and women (family relationships such as husband and wife, brothers and sisters mothers and sons, or working relationships such as employers and employees).
            The analyzed sources can take a number of varied forms. Thus, we chose to work closely with economic and labour historians in the data modelling process. As the corpus gathers together diverse historical sources, the definition of a light and flexible annotation schema, bringing together the history and language processing experts, is a major step to create “gold data” to train parsing models. This gold data take the form of annotated texts encoded in TEI (
                Text Encoding Initiative). TEI can be seen as a bridge representation for historians and NLP experts: in this approach, historians annotate a first set of documents in TEI, in order to create training data that can be easily processed and analyzed by NLP experts. Besides, the choice of the TEI allows for the creation of sustainable data, that can be reused in the long term by other projects and researchers. Our aim consists also in creating a flexible TEI data model that will be relevant to modelize differents types of data, and that will enable NLP experts to extract comparable information such as quantitative data (amounts of money, period of time…). In this way, this model could be reused by other research projects especially, but not only, projects of economic and labor history. 
            
            A first step is the transcription of the manuscripts into a simple TEI representation, covering the text and a set of metadata. This task is nothing but trivial, due to the diversity of sources mentioned above, but it is not the scope of this paper. Then, the representation is enriched by annotation layers. The first annotation layer is the recognition of tasks and occupations, linked to their associated amounts of money, and the actors of the transaction. The extraction of Named Entities such as person and place names is also necessary in order to properly analyse how gender and localization influence remuneration.
            The annotation process will start as a collaborative effort, in order to get a first dataset that could possibly be used to train/configure NLP tools, but also to help designing a precise annotation guide between the NLP people and historians. At a later stage, we will progressively deploy more automatic NLP tools to create these annotations. In this regard, we plan to identify the elements of vocabulary (tasks, products) and the interesting phrases (e.g. “
                someone was paid (this amount) for (this product) for a (given amount of time)”), using knowledge acquisition techniques based on the distributional hypothesis and syntactic analysis of the corpus. The knowledge of the domain will allow us to define syntactic extraction pattern to be applied on the corpus to detect and annotate specific instances of tasks, products, money, people and relationships between these pieces of information. Some human validation will still be needed to filter the vocabulary, refine the patterns, and propose missing elements (vocabulary and patterns). Language processing will be conducted with the French processing chain developed by the INRIA Almanach team, and in particular with the FRMG parser (Morardo and de La Clergerie 2014). Parsing produces dependencies between words, allowing us to identify who does what, when, how for some event. The processing chain has already by used several times for knowledge acquisition over specific domains (legal, medical). In our case, specific issues may arise because of the quality of the transcriptions and the peculiarities of the language used, which contains archaic constructions, whereas our parser was designed for contemporary French.
            
            
                
            
            Example of a parse for one sentence of the corpus
            The annotation task is therefore mainly collaborative, so the need for a shared framework has emerged. Several digital projects have already taken into account the specific needs of historians in terms of image visualization, transcription and collaboration. For instance, the 
                Transkribus interface enables Humanities scholars to transcribe handwritten and printed historical sources, and offers a very powerful Handwritten Text Recognition engine. The project 
                Transcribe Bentham takes account the collaborative dimension in transcribing historical documents. The 
                Old Bailey transcription project uses a combination of hand encoding an automatic recognition and extraction systems. Nevertheless, they do not address all the requirements of Humanities scholars working on primary sources, and the need of comprehensive Digital Humanities-based publishing systems is emerging. We have chosen to setup a specific digital workflow enabling historians and NLP experts to work together. We will present the solution that has been put in place, and especially a customized wiki with:
            
            the Transcribe Bentham transcription desk, adapted to our needs,
            and a TEI toolbar, specifically customized for tagging named entities and measures.
            
                
            
            Customization of the TEI toolbar
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clergerie, É. D. L., Sagot, B., Stern, R., Denis, P., Recourcé, G. and Mignot, V.
                    
                    (2009). Extracting and Visualizing Quotations from News Wires. vol. 6562. Springer, pp. 522–32 doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20095-3_48. https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00607463/document (accessed 24 April 2018).
                    
                        Hincker, L. (2001). Les monographies de famille de l’École de Le Play. Les Études sociales, n 131-132, 1er et 2e semestres 2000. 
                        Revue d’histoire du XIXe siècle. Société d’histoire de la révolution de 1848 et des révolutions du XIXe siècle(23): 274–76.
                    
                    
                        Morardo, M. and Clergerie, É. V. de L. (2014). Towards an environment for the production and the validation of lexical semantic resources. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01005464/document (accessed 24 April 2018).
                    
                    
                        Seaward, L. and Kallio, M. (2017). Transkribus: Handwritten Text Recognition technology for historical documents. Montréal https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/649/649.pdf (accessed 24 April 2018).
                    
                    
                        Thomasset, F. and Clergerie, É. D. L. (2005). Comment obtenir plus des Méta-Grammaires. 
                        Proceedings of TALN’05. Dourdan, France.
                    
                    
                        University College London UCL Transcribe Bentham http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/ (accessed 24 April 2018).
                    
                    Old Bailey Online - The Proceedings of the Old Bailey, 1674-1913 - Central Criminal Court https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/ (accessed 26 April 2018).
                
            
        
    

        
            What is a literary character made of? To this question, a pragmatic answer is to say that it exists as a result of a chain of different linguistic elements, scattered throughout the text. The aim of this paper is to propose a digital method for collecting these elements, so as to analyse their nature, to observe their repartition in texts, and, ultimately, to contribute to a deeper understanding of the functions the literary device called “character” assumes in a text.
            Projects dedicated to named-entity recognition put a great deal of effort into using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques for identifying names of people, places and organisations mentioned in various types of discourses, especially political ones, as well as the co-referential chains built on the basis of these names. However, in spite of important advances in the field, much remains to be done in order to train the computer to link correctly various phrases referring to the same entity, as well the pronouns pointing to it (see Schnedeker and Landragin, 2014). In our case, we are interested in such elements of a co-referential chain that bear characterization features, and this is, inevitably, a supplementary complication. In addition, we are interested in certain elements (eg. “his brother” in the phrase “John is his brother”) that are often left aside in named entity recognition, as performing another functions than strictly pointing towards an entity. Therefore, NLP techniques did not appear adapted to our needs.
            We will therefore resort to “crowd-reading”, as another means, offered by the explosion of the digital sphere, to make sense from texts. Very similar to the crowdsourcing, the crowd-reading asks to benevolent contributors to annotate a document, bringing in their own view and understanding, instead of transcribing, or adding in information based on a (sometimes external) form of authority. Considering the nature of the work to be done, the crowd-reading appeared as a valid technique in our case. 
            In a first stage, we submitted a short text (Julio Cortazar “Continuidad de las parques”) to the manual annotation of a hundred students from our universities. This brought to the fore the sheer variety of elements considered to be participating to the characterization of a literary “person” (nouns and adjectives, of course, but verbs and adverbs too), as well as the need to dispose of a controlled vocabulary allowing to understand what kind of characterization each respondent attached to the various strings of characters selected as participating to this function. 
            In a second phase, we have decided to build an interface, offering a more ergonomic experience to our respondents, and allowing us to extract automatically the linguistic elements selected, as well as to group them by categories. Built with XML Mind, this interface is in fact based on a text lightly encoded with TEI tags, in which our respondents add, every time they select a string of characters, an &lt;rs&gt; tag, bearing in addition two attributes:
            a @key attribute, defined by each respondent every time he or she encounters a new character. The keys are subsequently available for reuse in the rest of the text. We expect the number of keys to vary considerably from a reader to another.
            an @ana attribute, with a set of constrained values. Based on another project of character analysis, these values have been defined in Galleron, 2017, and cover aspects such as the ontological type of a character, its sex, age, family position, nationality, occupation, and so on.
            The text submitted to annotation has been changed for this second experience: it concerns now the “Jardin aux sentiers qui bifurquent” (“Jardín de los senderos que se bifurcan”) by Jorge Luis Borges. At the date of this proposal, the second campaign of crowd-reading has not started yet. We'll have a significant number of answers before the DH conference. Our respondents will be recruited again amongst the students enrolled in literary studies in our universities: while they have a certain level of training in linguistics, literature and poetics, so as to be able to recognise the type of linguistic elements we look for, their reading still remains close of the “non-informed”, “amateur” reading of the "man in the street" (see Dufays, 205). 
            The results will be analysed so as to observe what kind of linguistic units have been identified most often, and what kind of values of the @ana attribute have been mobilised most often. We will further discuss the divergences between the selected elements, and those we were expecting to be selected. This will allow us, on the one hand, to suggest a possible use of our interface as a remediation tool in literary studies, for students with difficulties in extracting pertinent information from a text, so as to respond a specific task. On the other hand, we will advance an hypothesis about the observed distribution of the most frequent elements of characterization, that are far to appear where, intuitively, one would expect them to be grouped together (so as to “introduce” the character) as shown by our first campaign of crowd-reading, and by our own annotation endeavours.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dufays, Jean-Louis, Gemenne, Louis, et Ledur, Dominique (2005). 
                        Pour une lecture littéraire. Histoire, théories, pistes pour la classe, Bruxelles: De Boeck – Duculot.
                    
                    
                        Galleron, Ioana (2017). Conceptualisation of theatrical characters in the digital paradigm: needs, problems and foreseen solutions. 
                        Human and Social studies, De Gruyter. 6: 1 (
                        Published Online
                        : 2017-04-18 | 
                        DOI: 
                        https://doi.org/10.1515/hssr-2017-0007).
                    
                    
                        Schenedeker, Catherine; Landragin, Frédéric (2014). Les chaînes de référence: présentation. 
                        Langages, 3:145, 3-22.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The transcription of handwritten historical documents into machine-encoded text has always been a difficult and time-consuming task. Much work has been done to alleviate some of that burden via software packages aimed at making this task less tedious and more accessible to non-experts. Nonetheless, an automated solution would be a worthwhile pursuit to vastly increase the number of digitized documents. As part of a continuing effort to expand the footprint of digital humanities research at our institution, we have embarked on a project to automatically transcribe and perform automated analysis of Medieval Latin manuscripts of literary and liturgical significance. Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is the process of converting images containing text into a machine encoded document. Recent advances in artificial neural networks have led to software that can transcribe printed documents with near human accuracy (LeCun et al., 2015). However, this level of accuracy breaks down when working with handwritten, and especially cursive, documents except when applied to restrictively specific domains.
                Neural networks that are trained for this task require thousands of labeled examples so that their millions of parameters can be optimized. While there are thousands of high-quality scans of manuscripts available on the Internet, very few of these documents have been annotated for OCR tasks, and there is only a limited selection of ground-truth data which is annotated and segmented at the word-level (Fischer et al., 2011; Fischer et al., 2012) . There is no data available that provides annotations at the character-level. Normally, machine learning researchers would outsource the production of this ground-truth data to a platform such as Amazon's Mechanical Turk service, which allows crowdsourcing of human intelligence tasks. This is not an option for transcribing Medieval manuscripts, because it requires domain specific expertise. We put together a team of expert Medievalists and Classicists to generate the ground-truth data, and we have been developing a software platform that breaks the tedious task of producing pixel-level training data into more tractable jobs. The goals of this software go beyond just Latin manuscripts: it can be used to generate source data for any machine learning task involving document analysis. We are releasing it publicly, as free and open source software, in hopes that others can also use it to generate data, and help bring further advances in machine learning for handwritten text recognition.
            
            
                Related work
                State-of-the-art solutions to handwritten digit recognition on the MNIST dataset have achieved accuracies greater than 99% and have led some to declare handwritten OCR a solved problem (Wan et al., 2013). However, Cohen et al. have shown that adding the English alphabet to the dataset drops accuracy by more than 20% even when using the same methodology (Cohen et al., 2017). Some of the difference can be attributed to the fact that characters like ‘‘I’‘, ‘‘l’‘, and ‘‘1’‘ are often ambiguous without context --- especially when handwritten. To combat this, many handwritten text recognition algorithms will often use recurrent neural networks that look at the whole word and utilize a language model to overcome ambiguities (Fischer et al., 2009; Sánchez et al., 2016). Additionally, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been shown to have promise in segmenting biomedical images, which are also difficult to ground truth (Ronneberger et al., 2015). A similar approach could be used to segment individual letters in manuscripts. Incorporating human performance information into the machine learning process has been shown to improve the accuracy of tasks like face detection (Scheirer et al., 2014). We hypothesize that incorporating a human weighted loss function will lead to similar improvements in this task as well.
            
            
                Workflow
                Currently the software runs in Google App Engine using high-resolution source images. We are in the process of setting up the software to be run in a vagrant environment to make it available for local environments. The vagrant script will provision a Virtual Machine, either locally or to the cloud to serve the software and configure it to work with a user-provided library of documents. In either case, transcribers can access the software via a web browser. The user then proceeds to segment the document by lines and words by drawing bounding boxes, and characters by drawing over them. It also collects text annotations of the text at the word- and character-level. It stores all the information in a MySQL database.
            
            
                Line and word level
                 Our process starts by having experts segment the document into lines. Transcribers use a modified version of the Image Citation Tool from the Homer Multitext Project to quickly break the document down into CITE URNs representing each line by drawing boxes around them (Blackwell and Smith, 2014). After all the lines are selected the process is repeated for each word. A screenshot of these processes is shown in Fig. 1.
                
                    
                    Figure 1: An example of the interface for selecting lines and words. Manuscript: Einsiedeln, Stiftsbibliothek, Codex 629(258), f. 4r – [Jacobus de Voragine] 
                        Legenda aurea sive lombardica (http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/sbe/0629)
                    
                
            
            
                Pixel level annotation
                After segmenting the document into words, our software prompts the expert to segment and annotate each word letter by letter. Instead of using a bounding box, we have the user trace over each character in the word using a pen tool. This gives us a pixel-by-pixel segmentation of the image that can be used to train a CNN to segment the characters automatically, much in the same way segmentation models are trained for other computer vision tasks (Ronneberger et al., 2015). At this stage the expert will also select which letter best represents each character from an array of buttons, as shown in Fig. 2.
                
                    
                    Figure 2: An example of the tool used to collect pixel level ground-truth at the character level.
                
            
            
                Psychophysical measurements
                The final stage collects psychophysical measurements of the human process of reading. The software brings up individual characters, as shown in Fig. 3, and asks the transcriber to pick an annotation for a character without word context. They will also be asked to select the difficulty of each character. The software also records how long it takes for the user to submit an answer and compares whether the user selected the same character that was selected during the word-level annotation.
                
                    
                    Figure 3: A screenshot of the psychometric data collection stage.
                
            
            
                Outcomes
                The software produces a segmented image for each document that can be used as training data for machine learning-based segmentation. Furthermore, it provides the pyschophysical measurements on the reading difficulty of each character. We also designed it to produce word-level segmented data in a similar format to the IAM Historical Document Database (Fischer et al., 2012; Fischer et al., 2011). Finally, the user will be able to export the transcribed document into a standard markup language such as TEI.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Blackwell, C. W. and Smith, D. N. (2014). The Homer Multitext and RDF-Based Integration. 
                        Papers of the Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, 
                        7.
                    
                    
                        Cohen, G., Afshar, S., Tapson, J. and Schaik, A. van (2017). EMNIST: an Extension of MNIST to Handwritten Letters. 
                        CoRR, 
                        abs/1702.05373.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, A., Frinken, V., Fornés, A. and Bunke, H. (2011). Transcription Alignment of Latin Manuscripts Using Hidden Markov Models. 
                        Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing. ACM, pp. 29–36.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, A., Keller, A., Frinken, V. and Bunke, H. (2012). Lexicon-free Handwritten Word Spotting Using Character HMMs. 
                        Pattern Recognition Letters, 
                        33(7): 934–942.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, A., Wuthrich, M., Liwicki, M., Frinken, V., Bunke, H., Viehhauser, G. and Stolz, M. (2009). Automatic Transcription of Handwritten Medieval Documents. 
                        Virtual Systems and Multimedia, 2009. VSMM’09. 15th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 137–142.
                    
                    
                        LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. and Hinton, G. (2015). Deep Learning. 
                        Nature, 
                        521(7553): 436–444.
                    
                    
                        Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. and Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 
                        International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 234–241.
                    
                    
                        Sánchez, J. A., Romero, V., Toselli, A. H. and Vidal, E. (2016). ICFHR2016 Competition on Handwritten Text Recognition on the READ Dataset. 
                        Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), 2016 15th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 630–635.
                    
                    
                        Scheirer, W. J., Anthony, S. E., Nakayama, K. and Cox, D. D. (2014). Perceptual Annotation: Measuring Human Vision to Improve Computer Vision. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
                        36(8): 1679–1686.
                    
                    
                        Wan, L., Zeiler, M., Zhang, S., Cun, Y. L. and Fergus, R. (2013). Regularization of Neural Networks Using Dropconnect. 
                        Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-13). pp. 1058–1066.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The Coptic language is the last phase of the Egyptian language family, descending ultimately from the ancient hieroglyphs. Coptic Scriptorium has developed a multidisciplinary research platform using core Corpus Linguistics tools and methods in collaboration with other disciplinary methods. This paper will argue that this collaborative, interdisciplinary approach allows for the creation of research resources that enrich even 
                disciplinary work.
            
            Coptic Scriptorium has created the first open source natural language processing tools for any phase of the Egyptian language family, including a tokenizer, normalizer, part of speech tagger, language of origin tagger (for loan words from Greek, Latin, and other languages), and lemmatizer. We have also contributed annotated data to the universal dependency Treebank project. A fully searchable corpus annotated with these tools is available online at copticscriptorium.org, and all tools and corpora can be downloaded from our GitHub repositories.
            This paper will argue that multidisciplinary collaboration improves even disciplinary research. Three examples are provided here; these and others will be demonstrated live in the short paper. 
            Collaboration with Egyptologists creating a TEI Coptic lexicon file enabled the creation of an online Coptic Dictionary, in which words in our searchable database are hyperlinked to the dictionary entries. The dictionary entries likewise show frequency statistics for the terms in our database. This collaboration benefits Egyptology, by providing an open source corpus for teaching and research linked to a dictionary, and it benefits corpus linguistics, by providing clear frequency data and lexical resources for linguists. 
            Collaboration with Religious Studies scholars has enabled including in our corpora transcriptions of Coptic manuscripts that have never before been published in print. Scholars in Religious Studies have provided transcriptions of texts to the project, enabling scholars in other disciplines, such as Linguistics, to conduct computational corpus research on important, previously inaccessible texts. Likewise Religious Studies scholars can use the database to conduct philological and historical research on religious texts.
            Coptic Scriptorium also annotates manuscript information of interest to archivists, philologists, and codicologists within a multilayer annotation model. This enables codicologists, philologists, and archivists to use the query syntax of our corpus linguistics database (ANNIS) to investigate research questions about scribal practices, spelling and morphology, and other manuscript-related issues over multiple manuscripts, including utilizing metadata such as repository information, dates and locations of the original manuscripts, etc.
            We presented the very beginnings of the Coptic Scriptorium project at DH 2014 in Switzerland. This short paper will demonstrate the extensive progress made as a result of collaboration and interdisciplinary partnerships.
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Digital resources in poetry in Spanish are scarce, particularly for certain periods. This poses difficulties for Digital Humanities studies in Spanish. 
                Some digital editions of medieval poetry exist, e.g. BiDTEA (Gago Jover et al, 2015), ADMYTE (Marcos Marin and Faulhaber, 1992), PoeMetCa (Escribano et al, 2016), besides resources containing partial editions like ReMetCa (González-Blanco and Rodríguez, 2014). For the Golden Age, Navarro-Colorado et al. (2015) presented the 
                    Corpus of Spanish Golden-Age Sonnets. For later periods, we are not aware of poetry collections, although other genres are covered in Textbox (Schöch et al, 2017), BETTE (Santa María Fernández et al, 2017), Aracne (Álvarez and Martín, 2015) or Revistas Culturales 2.0 (Ehrlicher and Rißler-Pipka, 2015).
                
                This paper describes the DISCO corpus and how it complements available digital materials for poetry in Spanish in several respects: First, the author and period range. Second, metadata concerning the authors and their works expressed in TEI-RDFa, given the importance of interoperability between literary datasets and the advantages of Linked Open Data as a paradigm. Finally, example findings that can be obtained with our corpus are provided, regarding metrical patterns diachronically. 
                The corpus is available on GitHub
                    
                        
                            
                                https://github.com/postdataproject/disco
                            /
                        
                     and Zenodo.
                    
                        
                            
                                https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1012567
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Corpus description
                The corpus contains 4087 sonnets in Spanish by 1204 authors (15th to 19th century),
                    
                         About 125 sonnets by approx. 20 authors whose production took place in the early 20th century (with date of death prior to 1936) are also included in the corpus; the documentation on the GitHub repository (footnote 1 above) provides more details. 
                     extracted from HTML sources at Biblioteca Virtual Cervantes (García, 2005, 2006a, 2006b) and Wikisource. Sonnets were chosen given the form’s importance in European poetry, where it is even considered as its own genre. The form’s clear restrictions make it easily amenable to computational treatment, facilitating meaningful comparison across poems. Several computational linguistics studies on the sonnet exist (Navarro-Colorado et al., 2015, 2016, 2017a, 2017b; Agirrezabal, 2017). A new sonnet corpus complements earlier work on both traditional and computational poetry analyses. 
                
                We focused on canonical and non-canonical authors, from different Spanish-speaking countries (Figure 1). 
                
                    
                    Sonnet and author distribution per period, including the number of female and male authors, and the continent where they developed their literary activity. Numbers in parentheses indicate authors which were probably active in Europe.
                
                
                    Encoding Paradigms: TEI and Linked Open Data
                    The poems are encoded in XML-TEI P5. A plain-text version is also provided. Together with the TEI-semantics, this corpus provides a layer of Linked Open Data (LOD) expressed in RDFa (Herman et al., 2015). To our knowledge, no out-of-the-box tools exist for publishing literary TEI corpora as LOD.
                        
                             Whereas the publication of literary corpora in Linked Open Data formats is not widespread, inspiration could be drawn from the linguistics community, which has been especially successful in building the means to convert resources with linguistic annotations to the Resource Description Framework model (see McCrae et al., 2011; Chiarcos and Ejavec, 2011). In addition, more general projects, not limited to linguistic analysis, are being developed as well: see work on building a TEI ontology in Ciotti et al (2016). 
                         In this context, the enrichment of TEI with RDFa attributes is a solid approach to translate TEI semantics to the web (see precedents like Jewell, 2010) and benefit from the wide range of possibilities of the Semantic Web: First, we enrich our dataset by linking to third-party ones (as DBpedia), providing additional resources to complement the corpus. Second, we publish our data openly using standard schemas, thus supplying semantic interoperability that allows third-party applications to automatically use our data. 
                    
                
                
                    
                        Author metadata
                    
                    Author metadata were extracted or inferred from unstructured source content, and specified in the teiHeader: Year, place of birth and death, and gender. Two versions of the texts are available: one collecting every sonnet per author, the other with a single sonnet per file. 
                    For the current corpus release we augmented the TEI annotation with URIs and class/property information, expressing them in RDFa. The most straightforward information concerns authors and their works, and the DCMI Metadata Terms (DCMI Usage Board, 2012) provides an appropriate scheme. Most features regarding authors’ biographical data were formalised with the FOAF vocabulary (Brickley and Miller, 2014). Links to other resources were supplied. For instance, authors were assigned 
                        Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) identifiers, by querying VIAF’s API supplemented with manual validation. Since the corpus includes non-canonical authors, LOD is an important asset to share their work thanks to the enhanced display of this type of data implemented by search engines.
                    
                    Our documentation
                        1 provides further details. 
                    
                
                
                    
                        Metrical encoding and enjambment
                    
                    Using the 
                        met attribute, each line was annotated for scansion (strong and weak syllables) with the ADSO tool
                        
                            
                                
                                    https://github.com/bncolorado/adsoScansionSystem
                                
                            
                         (Navarro-Colorado, 2017), which specializes in Spanish fixed-meter forms, attaining a performance of 0.95 F1. A heuristic was used to automatically annotate the quatrains’ rhyme-scheme, i.e. enclosed (ABBA) or alternate (ABAB).
                    
                    Using an 
                        enjamb attribute, lines were annotated for enjambment
                        
                             The tool detects different types of enjambment (i.e. a mismatch between syntactic and metrical structure) as characterized by Quilis (1964). The tool also detect’s Spang’s (1983) concept of 
                                enlace, which takes place when a subject or direct object occur in a line adjacent to their governing verb’s line, and which triggers a less noticeable effect than the enjambment types defined by Quilis
                            
                         with the ANJA tool
                        
                             See 
                                
                                    https://sites.google.com/site/spanishenjambment/
                                 for details
                            
                         (Ruiz-Fabo et al., 2017). The tool’s performance at detecting enjambment is above 0.8 F1, and its efficacy at classifying enjambment types varies across periods and types. A 
                        cert attribute specifies the expected certitude for each enjambment type annotated. 
                    
                    The corpus documentation
                        1 provides more details.
                    
                
                
                    How’s this corpus different?
                    The metadata mentioned in 2.2. were unavailable in structured, machine-readable format in the corpus sources, or in other sonnet collections, like Sonnet-Archiv (Elf Edition). Regarding coverage, the corpus complements Navarro-Colorado et al’s (2015) Golden Age Sonnet corpus, by including minor Golden Age authors. For later periods, we cover more poems and authors than existing digital corpora, up to the 19th century. Our corpus integrates RDFa annotations, which in a second version will be fully compliant with the POSTDATA model.
                        
                             See Bermudez-Sabel et al. (2017). 
                                Version 0.2 of the POSTDATA model is available at 
                                
                                    https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.832906
                                
                            
                         This is a pioneering model that will provide means to publish European poetry materials as Linked Open Data. Finally, combining the annotation of metrical patterns, stanza types and enjambment is not offered by prior corpora. 
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Some metrical findings
                
                Corpus data on stress patterns (Figure 2) agree with existing descriptions
                    
                         See Domínguez Caparrós (2014: 143) or Henríquez Ureña (1919: 132) for details on 
                            a maiori and 
                            a minori patterns. The main 
                            a maiori variants as described in previous literature are 2 6 10 and 3 6 10; this is confirmed in our data. Patterns are formalized as a series of numbers indicating stressed syllables, e.g. 2 6 10 for the second, sixth and tenth syllables. Note that 10th-syllable stress is mandatory in all patterns. 
                        
                     of the Spanish hendecasyllable based on small-sample analyses: A maiori patterns (with 6th-syllable stress) predominate, and a minori patterns (with 4th-syllable stress) follow. However, our data show an increase of a minori patterns in the 19th century, which might suggest an interest in metrical variety in that period.
                
                Regarding diachronic data on the number of stressed positions (Figure 2), patterns with three stresses are highly used across periods. However, most a maiori patterns with four stresses decrease in the 19th century. This might indicate a 19th-century preference for “lighter” patterns, with stresses further apart from each other.
                Whereas the predominant meter for sonnets is naturally the hendecasyllable, alexandrines
                    
                         In Spanish, the alexandrine has 14 metrical syllables. In sonnets, the hendecasyllable predominates almost exclusively. However, particularly since the 19th century, alexandrine sonnets have been written. 
                     are attested, mostly in the 19th century, preferentially used by American authors. The alexandrine sonnet uses an alternate rhyme scheme (ABAB) more often than the usual enclosed scheme (ABBA). See Figure 4. 
                
                
                    
                    Distribution of stress patterns per period (percentage of lines for each pattern) for the 10 most frequent patterns in the corpus, sorted by decreasing percentage of occurrence in the complete corpus. Pattern classes are also provided (
                        mai: 
                        a maiori, i.e. stress on 6th syllable, 
                        min: 
                        a minori, i.e. stress on 4th and 8th syllable). Rows for 
                        a minori patterns are in italics. 
                        Stress count refers to the number of stresses in the pattern. Patterns with three stresses are widely used in any period. Most 
                        a maiori patterns with 4 stresses decrease in the 19th century, whereas 
                        a minori patterns increase in that century. 
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                    Distribution of stress patterns per period (percentage of lines for each pattern) for the 11 most frequent patterns in the corpus. 
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                    Count of hendecasyllable vs. alexandrine sonnets according to the authors’ continent of production, in the 
                        19th century (alexandrine sonnets are very rare before). The type of rhyme scheme in the quatrains (enclosed or alternate) is also specified. The alexandrine sonnet is preferentially used by American authors, and there’s a preference for alternate rhyme for this meter length.
                    
                
                Acknowledgements
                Supported by the project ‘Poetry Standardization and Linked Open Data: POSTDATA’ (ERC-2015-STG-679528), funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, and led as a Principal Investigator by Dr. Elena González-Blanco, LINHD-UNED (
                    http://postdata.linhd.es/).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Agenjo, X. (2015). Las bibliotecas virtuales españolas y el tratamiento textual de los recursos bibliográficos. 
                        Ínsula: revista de letras y ciencias humanas 822: pp. 12–15.
                    
                    
                        Agirrezabal, M. (2017). 
                        Automatic Scansion of Poetry. PhD Thesis. University of the Basque Country.
                    
                    
                        Álvarez Mellado, E. and Martín-Fuertes, L. (2015). 
                        Aracne Project, 
                        
                            http://www.fundeu.es/aracne/
                        
                         
                        (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Bermúdez-Sabel, H., Curado Malta, M. and González-Blanco, E. (2017). Towards Interoperability in the European Poetry Community: The Standardization of Philological Concepts, in Jorge Gracia et al. (ed.) 
                        Proceedings of Language, Data, and Knowledge: First International Conference (LDK 2017): pp. 156–65. Springer International Publishing doi:10.1007/978-3-319-59888-8_14.
                    
                    
                        Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (1999)
                        .
                        Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 
                        
                            http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (2007)
                        .
                        Biblioteca del Soneto [Sonnet Library]
                        , 
                        
                            http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/bib/portal/bibliotecasoneto/
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Brickley, D. and Miller, L.
                         (2014). FOAF Vocabulary Specification, 
                        
                            http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec
                        
                        /
                         (Accessed 22 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Chiarcos, C. and Erjavec, T. 
                        (2011). Owl/dl formalization of the multext-east morphosyntactic specifications.
                        Proceedings of the 5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, LAW V ’
                        11, pp. 11–20 Stroudsburg: PA, USA, 
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F., Peroni, S., Tomasi, F., and Vitali, F.
                         (2016). An OWL 2 Formal Ontology for the Text Encoding Initiative.
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts,
                         pp. 151–
                        153
                    
                    
                        DCMI Usage Board
                         (2012). DCMI Metadata Terms, 
                        
                            http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Domínguez Caparrós, J. 
                        (2009). 
                        El moderno endecasílabo dactílico, anapéstico o de gaita gallega
                        . Sevilla: Padilla Libros.
                    
                    
                        Domínguez Caparrós, J. 
                        (2014). 
                        Métrica española
                        . Madrid: UNED.
                    
                    
                        Ehrlicher, H., and Rißler-Pipka, N. 
                        (2015).
                        Revistas Culturales 2.0
                        , 
                        
                            https://www.revistas-culturales.de/es
                        
                        . (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Elf Edition
                        : 
                        Sonett-Archiv, 
                        
                            http://sonett-archiv.com
                        
                        . (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Escribano, J., González-Blanco, E. and Río Riande, G. del 
                        (2016). 
                        PoeMetCa—Recursos digitales para el estudio de la Poesía Medieval Castellana
                        , 
                        
                            http://poemteca.linhd.es
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Gago Jover, F.
                         (2015). La biblioteca digital de textos del español antiguo (BiDTEA). 
                        Scriptum Digital
                         4: pp. 5–36.
                    
                    
                        García González, R. 
                        (2005).
                        Sonetos del siglo XVIII
                        . Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 
                        
                            http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/sonetos-del-siglo-xviii--0/html/
                        
                        . (Accessed 26 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        García González, Ramón
                         (2006a).
                        Sonetos del siglo XV al XVII
                        . Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 
                        
                            http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/sonetos-del-siglo-xv-al-xvii--0/html/
                        
                         (Accessed 26 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        García González, R. 
                        (2006b).
                        Sonetos del siglo XIX
                        . Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 
                        
                            http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/sonetos-del-siglo-xix--0/html/
                        
                        (Accessed 26 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        González-Blanco, E. and Rodríguez, J. L. 
                        (2014). ReMetCa: A Proposal for Integrating RDBMS and TEI-Verse. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                        , 8
                        
                            https://jtei.revues.org/1274
                        
                        (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017), doi:10.4000/jtei.1274.
                    
                    
                        Henríquez Ureña, P.
                         (1919). El endecasílabo castellano. 
                        Revista de Filología Española
                        , 6: pp. 132–157.
                    
                    
                        Herman, Ivan, Asida, B., McCarron, S., Birbeck, M. (2015). 
                        RDFa Core 1.1 - Third Edition
                        , 
                        
                            https://www.w3.org/TR/rdfa-core
                         (Accessed 22 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Jewell, M. O. (2010). Semantic screenplays: Preparing TEI for Linked Data. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2010. 
                        
                            http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab-878.html
                        
                        (Accessed 22 Nov. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Marcos Marín, F. and Faulhaber, C. B. (coord.) (1992). 
                        ADMYTE. 
                        Archivo Digital de Manuscritos y Textos Españoles, 
                        
                            http://www.admyte.com/admyteonline/contenido.htm
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J., Spohr, D. and Cimiano, P. (2011). Linking lexical resources and ontologies on the semantic web with lemon. 
                        Proceedings of the 8th Extended Semantic Web Conference on The Semantic Web: Research and Applications, V (Part I): pp. 245–259, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B.
                        (2015). A computational linguistic approach to Spanish Golden Age Sonnets: metrical and semantic aspects. 
                        ACL Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature
                        .
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B.
                         (2017).
                        ADSO project – Análisis distante del soneto castellano de los Siglos de Oro [Distant analysis of the Spanish Golden Age sonnet], 
                        
                            http://adso.gplsi.es/index.php/es/proyecto-adso
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B., Ribes Lafoz, M. and Sánchez, N.
                        (2015).
                        Corpus of Spanish Golden-Age Sonnets
                        . Alicante: University of Alicante,
                        
                            https://github.com/bncolorado/CorpusSonetosSigloDeOro
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017).
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B., Ribes Lafoz, M. and Sánchez, N. 
                        (2016). Metrical Annotation of a Large Corpus of Spanish Sonnets: Representation, Scansion and Evaluation. 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
                        
                            http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/453_Paper.pdf
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017)
                    
                    
                        Navarro-Colorado, B.
                        (2017). A metrical scansion system for fixed-metre Spanish poetry.
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities.
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx009
                        
                         (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017)
                    
                    
                        Quilis, A.
                         (1964).
                        Estructura del encabalgamiento en la métrica española.
                         Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Patronato Menendez y Pelayo, Instituto Miguel de Cervantes.
                    
                    
                        Ruiz Fabo, P., Martínez Cantón, C., Poibeau, T. and González-Blanco, E.
                        (2017). Enjambment detection in a large diachronic corpus of Spanish sonnets.
                        LaTeCH-CLFL 2017, Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature.
                        Vancouver, Canada.
                    
                    
                        Santa María Fernández, M. T., Jiménez Fernández, C. M. 
                        (2017).
                        Biblioteca Electrónica Textual Del Teatro Español, 1868-1936
                        . Universidad Internacional de la Rioja, Spain.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C. Henny, U., Calvo Tello, J. Popp, S. 
                        (2015).
                        The CLiGS Textbox, 
                        
                            https://github.com/cligs/textbox
                        
                          (Accessed 22 Sep. 2017)
                    
                    
                        Wikisource
                        : 
                        Categoría: Sonetos.
                        ,
                        
                            https://es.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Categor%C3%ADa:Sonetos
                        
                         (Accessed 26 Nov. 2017)
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                
                    
                        Overview: 
                    
                    
                        This short paper looks into the process of developing the Latin American Comics Archive (LACA), a project created by our team at Carnegie Mellon University. LACA combines ongoing research in the Humanities with digital technologies as a tool for enhancing access and analysis capabilities for both scholars and students of these materials. The curated digital archive includes representative samples of Latin American comics digitally encoded in Comic Book Markup Language (CBML), while a technical foundation combining the open source content management system Omeka with TEI Boilerplate offers a customizable front-end for public or restricted access to the individual items and curated collections of the comics. This allows students and researchers access to source materials and possibilities to collaborate in their exploration, definition, tagging, and annotation for the analysis of visual and verbal language, cultural and linguistic characteristics or themes, and a variety of formal categories. 
                    
                
                
                    Statement of the problem:
                    
                        Despite the overdue growing recognition of the genre of comics in academia, the study of foreign/second language comics within the United States has encountered specific obstacles. Primary-source research of Spanish-language comics has often proved to be challenging. Among other difficulties, collections are most often housed in the source countries, and a desired piece of documentation may sometimes be in libraries hundreds or thousands of miles away. Items may be both in public and private hands, and access to certain items is often highly restricted due to their fragility, rarity, and value. Oftentimes, specific documents aren’t cataloged in the archives’ container lists, making the identification, location, and access of relevant materials problematic. When using traditional research methods, these challenges have to be confronted and resolved by the researcher, who works in isolation with the source documents. Many of these issues also generate constraints in the realm of teaching, where the limitations to the access of sources restricts course conceptualization and implementation, and where students don’t usually have much agency or opportunities to engage in larger debates and conversations with other students or scholars of Latin American comics. 
                        Digital tools have the potential to facilitate or solve many of these issues for research and teaching of this important cultural and literary medium. Indeed, they have the ability to address precisely the core values that Spiro (2012) associates with work in the Digital Humanities -- openness, collaboration, diversity, experimentation, collegiality, and connectedness. These tools can, for instance, create optimal opportunities to view and use some of these sources online, thus granting access to an audience who may never have had the chance to see them in the “analog” era, and opening and expanding the possibilities for a richer and deeper type of collaborative research. Our goal is to expand the possibilities of using Spanish-language comics by identifying and piloting the use of digital tools with which digital copies of representative Latin American comics can be made, accessed, and annotated in collaboration with students and scholars. Our focus is on developing an archive of sources that scholars and students can use for analysis, interpretation, and research employing digital tools.
                    
                
                
                    Critical Context
                    LACA seeks to insert itself in the broad scholarly landscape created at the intersection of comics scholarship (e.g. Priego, 2016; Walsh, 2012), visual ontologies and comics (e.g. Bateman et. al., 2017; Turton, 2017), work done to encode comics elements (e.g. Dunst et. al., 2016; Haidar and Ganascia, 2016; Kuboi, 2014), and work on the value of comics as a pedagogical tool (e.g. Brooks, 2017). 
                
                
                    Methodology
                    
                        Given the team’s expertise in Digital Humanities (DH) and Digital Scholarship, and with the support of an institutional Mellon DH seed grant, the project was initiated in the summer 2016. LACA was modeled after existing specialized collections such as MIT’s Comics and Popular Culture archive, UNAM’s specialized online resource 
                            http://www.pepines.unam.mx/, and the Grand Comics Database (GCD) with the purpose of combining the PI’s ongoing research and teaching experience on Spanish-language Latin American comics with the use of DH tools to create an environment enabling students and scholars to have access to and collaborate in the analysis of the digital materials. At the current stage, LACA includes a small digital sample of Latin American comics produced throughout the last century, provided through a combination of previously digitized materials, materials we scanned, and those provided by authors themselves. 
                        
                        The presentation will detail three parts of the project: 
                        
                            Curating the comics and creating the archive; 
                            Creating the online Metamedia platform to house digitized sources for the research and teaching of Spanish-language comics through student/scholar collaboration; 
                            Piloting and implementing the digital archive for research and teaching. 
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Insights/
                        
                            Results
                        
                    
                    
                        LACA was piloted at CMU over the past year as an instrument in courses for undergraduate students of Spanish language and culture. Students and faculty collaborate in the analysis and CBML coding of the comics. In the process, students learn the basics of TEI and CBML, as well as critical approaches to Spanish-language comics, and their work contributes to the availability of comics on the site. Students are also able to develop integrated textual and visual competence, knowledge, and skills. The pilot courses provide initial evidence that coding the comics facilitates students’ attention to details, notice of patterns, and, in general, collaborative advancement in the analysis and understanding of the linguistic and cultural elements contained in the comics. At the same time, it also helps students keep in mind communication to a wide public audience. The PI has benefitted from the additional opportunities afforded to glean information about students’ progress toward cultural, linguistic, visual, and digital literacy. Thus, it is suggested that LACA could be of use and applicable to other courses in Hispanic studies, Modern Languages, and the Humanities. 
                        We intend to make LACA publicly available for use as a hub where students and scholars interested in experimenting with the inquiry of Latin American comics can interact. This would help transform and expand the scale of traditional research methods used, and could open new modes and possibilities for text analysis that can be employed into the realm of student agency and learning. However, as we advance in the process to attain this goal, we acknowledge that IP/copyright permissions remain a challenge. Some creators have granted permission to distribute their works; others will only be used as part of course materials. Despite this, we think it is important to keep in mind Walsh’s (2012) point that “nothing prevents a scholar from applying CBML markup to any text as part of a strategy for reading, interpretation, and analysis. The end goal of markup is not and should not always be publication of a digital surrogate. The encoding of a text may be a rigorous intellectual activity that has great value as process, not just as product.”
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bateman, J. A., Veloso, F. O. D., Wildfeuer, J., Cheung, F. H. and Guo, N. S. (2017). An open multilevel classification scheme for the visual layout of comics and graphic novels: Motivation and design. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        32(3), 476–510. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw024
                    
                    
                        Brooks, M. (2017). Teaching TEI to undergraduates: A case study in a digital humanities curriculum. 
                        College and Undergraduate Libraries, 
                        0(0), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/10691316.2017.1326331
                    
                    
                        Dunst, A., Hartel, R., Hohenstein, S. and Laubrock, J. (2016). Corpus Analyses of Multimodal Narrative: The Example of Graphic Novels. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Krakow, Poland. Retrieved from http://dh2016.adho.org/static/data-copy/387.html
                    
                    
                        Haidar, A. and Ganascia, J. (2016). Automatic Detection of Characters in Case Insensitive Text in Comics. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts (pp. 425–426). Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University, Kraków.
                    
                    
                        Kuboi, T. (2014). Element Detection in Japanese Comic Book Panels. 
                        Master’s Theses and Project Reports. https://doi.org/10.15368/theses.2014.141
                    
                    
                        Priego, E. (2016). Comics as Research, Comics for Impact: The Case of 
                        Higher Fees, Higher Debts. The Comics Grid: Journal of Comics Scholarship. 6, p.16. DOI: 
                        http://doi.org/10.16995/cg.101
                    
                    
                        Spiro, L. (2012). “This Is Why We Fight”: Defining the Values of the Digital Humanities. In M. K. Gold (Ed.), 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press. Retrieved from 
                        http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/13
                    
                    
                        Turton, A. (2017). Towards Feminist Data Production: A Case Study from Comics. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Conference Abstracts. Montreal, Canada. Retrieved from https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/493/493.pdf
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Hasta hace pocos años, la Web proporcionaba información unilateralmente. Por un lado, estaban las grandes empresas e instituciones, que eran las que poseían espacio en la red, y por el otro, los usuarios, en actitud receptora y pasiva. Esa tendencia está siendo modificada por el movimiento denominado Web 2.0 que propugna que todos somos potenciales surtidores de contenidos y creadores de los registros del conocimiento. La evolución natural en la sociedad de la información se expresa en la metáfora del paso del ciudadano 1.0, consumidor de recursos, al ciudadano 2.0, creador de recursos, evidenciando la horizontalización y democratización de las fuerzas que rigen la red. Las Humanidades Digitales son un resultado de esas transfiguraciones digitales y como un ámbito disciplinar de convergencia cultural e investigativa, dejó de ser una moda para convertirse en una urgencia para cultura y memoria del mundo. 
            En Cuba, ya se notan de forma clara las comprensiones sobre la necesidad de fomentar este ámbito de teoría y práctica; aprovechando un contexto de crecimiento tecnológico en el país, en el que empieza a notarse la presencia digital en casi todos los sectores de la sociedad, con demandas infocomunicacionales y culturales crecientes y multilaterales. El presente trabajo tiene la finalidad de compartir los avances más visibles, así como las proyecciones hacia lo profesional, lo académico, lo investigativo y lo institucional, como parte de la agenda de las Ciencias Sociales y Humanísticas en Cuba. 
            Se abordan los conceptos de partida de las Humanidades Digitales para Cuba, como un campo interdisciplinar dispuesto para dar espacio a las reflexiones y prácticas suscitadas por los cambios que produce la introducción de las tecnologías digitales en el universo de la cultura y la información; con énfasis en el desafío epistemológico y metodológico para la articulación de conocimientos y prácticas profesionales y de investigación que enfrentan las ciencias humanas en el cibermundo. Se abordan como una oportunidad de transformación sinergética del consumo cultural, cada vez más urgente, en tanto se demanda mayor conocimiento de investigadores y usuarios, que a su vez demandan información, de forma activa, en espacios colaborativos. 
            La manera en que se puede trabajar en las Humanidades Digitales, partiendo de los límites casi precarios del desarrollo tecnológico en Cuba, ha creado proyectos sui géneris. Estos son inimaginables en Europa o en Estados Unidos. Varios ejemplos: la circulación de USB, tan común en el paso de los archivos, crea un sistema de distribución de conocimiento muy diferente. Dentro de esos sistemas de distribución, hay una relación política diferente hacia los derechos de autor que cambia la manera en que el conocimiento fluye. Se crean también proyectos digitales que pueden pasarse de máquina en máquina por USB, muy diferentes a aquellos que se colocan en un servidor. Se pueden desarrollar nuevas pistas para el análisis textual, por ejemplo. 
            En Cuba esto tiene un aspecto político que no siempre se verbaliza, pero son reconfiguraciones de trabajo en equipo que transforma la manera en que la investigación se ha hecho hasta ahora. Eso cambia la relación hacia la investigación a nivel social y su papel en la formación de grupos sociales para el trabajo cultural, ahora más equitativas. De la misma forma, existen jerarquías que vienen de la organización tradicional del trabajo de investigación, en la cual el personal técnico se encuentra separado del investigador y ambos de los bibliotecarios; transitando hacia un modelo colaborativo e interdisciplinar. 
            Los primeros pasos en Cuba proceden de los años 90 del siglo XX, marcado por un período social complejo en el país, con la publicación del primer libro digital. De forma aislada, varias instituciones académicas y de investigación han realizado proyectos de Humanidades Digitales y finalmente en mayo de 2017, se avanzó hacia una estrategia de articulación, con el primer curso de Humanidades Digitales impartido por profesoras del Laboratorio de Innovación de Humanidades Digitales (LINHD). Uno de los resultados de ese encuentro fue la disposición de crear iniciativa profesional que articule y visibilice el trabajo en Humanidades Digitales que se ha venido realizando en el país. 
            Se han identificado algunos focos muy visibles, en especial el de la carrera Ciencias de la Información, de la Universidad de La Habana, cuyo propósito es transversalizar las Humanidades Digitales en el campo de las Ciencias de la Información en Cuba. Ese proyecto, con una vocación claramente pedagógica, comenzó a trabajar en noviembre de 2016. Las investigaciones resultantes del primer año tienen como principio que las Humanidades Digitales se interesan por el estudio, preservación y acceso a la información registrada, objetivos que disciplinariamente enfrenta también la comunidad científica, académica y profesional del campo de esta carrera, y que para ello las Humanidades Digitales se distinguen por el uso intensivo de métodos de procesamiento automático y semiautomático, expresados científicamente a través de contribuciones en congresos, experiencias en laboratorios de I+D+I y en programas de formación universitaria. 
            Asimismo, el equipo se preocupa por las colecciones digitales, y en consecuencia por el requerimiento de protocolos de preservación de sus contenidos, determinados por funciones y estructuras más sofisticadas que modifican los procesos de gestión de esos recursos electrónicos a través de métodos globales como open data, linked data, linguistic link data y TEI.
            Es un hecho que las bibliotecas digitales clasifican como uno de los sistemas de información más complejos por la multidisciplinariedad que implican; además, por la convergencia de conocimientos que supone organizar, difundir y usar información en este tipo de repositorios; y especialmente por las complicadas e interdependientes multirrelaciones que activa, que llegan a la autotransformación y a la construcción de contrahegemonías emancipatorias.
            Las primeras siete investigaciones del grupo exploraron los conceptos de las humanidades digitales en su multiplicidad y complejidad, las redes profesionales y los currículos de humanidades digitales. Además, se realizaron indagaciones más enfocadas a la solución de problemas como el procesamiento de una revista infantil con carácter patrimonial con el método linked data y la creación de un espacio de aprendizaje colaborativo para estudiantes de Ciencias de la Información.
            En Feria del Libro de la Habana, a realizada en el mes de febrero de 2018, se desarrolló un programa especial denominado “Cuba Digital”. Libros digitales, aplicaciones móviles, conferencias de investigadores nacionales y extranjeros y proyectos cubanos, entre otros, integraron las propuestas de ese espacio, que contó con la coordinación de la Editorial Cubaliteraria. 
            La lista de proyectos e instituciones cubanas involucradas en proyectos que apuntan a las humanidades digitales, crece. Un levantamiento preliminar en la capital destaca los siguientes: Instituto de Historia de Cuba; la Fundación Fernando Ortiz con su proyecto Archivo de la palabra; el Instituto de Literatura y Lingüística, dedicado al estudio y descripción del español de Cuba; el proyecto www.postdata.club, del Centro Martin Luther King; la Biblioteca Nacional de Cuba con su catálogo digital, y el proyecto Mirador, en colaboración con Infomed, la red nacional de información en salud en Cuba, enfocado en el rescate de colecciones patrimoniales en Cuba y también aliado del Grupo de Investigación de Humanidades Digitales para las Ciencias de la Información, de la Universidad de La Habana. Convocados por la editorial digital Cubaliteraria, del Instituto Cubano del Libro, que lidera la producción de ebooks y multimedias sobre literatura cubana.
            En el futuro cercano, se proyecta una postura sinérgica que aproveche los aprendizajes de las Humanidades Digitales del Sur, con un enfoque parecido a la realidad cubana y se articule en una iniciativa nacional o proyecto de Asociación de Humanistas Digitales. 
        
    

        
            El proyecto 
                Corpus de derecho castellano-indiano / digital es una propuesta colectiva e interdisciplinaria que abarca la compilación, digitalización, procesamiento, macroanálisis y publicación anotada en línea del conjunto de los textos jurídicos vigentes en el marco de la monarquía castellana entre el siglo XIII y principios del XIX. El núcleo principal del proyecto es la construcción de un modelo para el macroanálisis de estos textos jurídicos y, en consecuencia, la generación de herramientas analíticas y de consulta del corpus que permitan comprender la interrelación entre sus distintos elementos semánticos y conceptuales y su transformación a través de los siglos y así proponer una interpretación de cómo es que posiblemente funcionaban en el contexto del discurso y la práctica en el orden jurídico tradicional de la cultura jurisdiccional, tanto en el ámbito de la doctrina, del ejercicio de la potestad normativa como en el del actuar cotidiano del aparato de gobierno e impartición de justicia.
            
             El proyecto implica diversas conexiones y diálogos en diversos ámbitos. En el ámbito interdisciplinario, entre los historiadores de la corriente crítica (cultural) del derecho, lingüistas, humanistas digitales y programadores; en el ámbito teórico y metodológico, entre dos posturas acaso antagónicas en apariencia: la lectura densa y cercana de los textos jurídicos hecha por la historia cultural del derecho a lo largo de varias décadas y la lectura distante. Lo anterior nos obliga a discutir ciertos principios teóricos, como lectura densa, tomada por la historia cultural del derecho de la idea de descripción densa (Geertz, 1973), como sistema capaz de ser leído como texto en relaciones contextuales, o un nivel más complejo (Genette, 1992) y su noción de transtextualidad. Varios historiadores del derecho han aplicado incluso algo parecido a la lectura cercana del criticismo literario (Clavero, 1991). Esto interesa al estudiar el derecho de antiguo régimen frente a la posibilidad de aplicación de metodologías computacionales enfocadas, generalmente, a una lectura distante (Moretti, 2013) en la búsqueda de estructuras formales mediante el análisis de grandes cantidades de texto/data. Es justamente necesario pensar en la posibilidad de ensayar no sólo una minería de texto cuantitativa sino en aspectos más cualitativos, modelando campos semánticos que se transforman históricamente.
             Cabe aclarar que el criterio de selección de fuentes para la conformación del corpus es complejo y presenta muchos problemas. Responde a una historiografía que ha definido el campo de lo jurídico en el antiguo régimen hispánico como algo más allá del texto jurídico normativo (entendido como ley). Incluye la doctrina de los juristas y de los teólogos por considerarse que la cultura jurídica tiene una estrecha relación con la doctrina católica. El corpus completo abarcaría tanto normas como doctrina y costumbre y se consideran textos jurídicos producidos tanto en Castilla como en los territorios americanos de la monarquía. Por lo tanto, no se trata de un corpus reunido de antemano en su propia época, sino de un corpus compuesto por el conjunto de la comunidad de historiadores dado que se ha analizado su utilización práctica a lo largo de los siglos y en un contexto cultural determinado (Castilla y sus dominios ultramarinos entre los siglos XIII y XIX). Tener claro cómo suponemos que se definía un texto jurídico en el antiguo régimen es de suma importancia ya que el interés del proyecto es generar una comunidad colaborativa de investigación interdisciplinario que determine sus elementos semánticos necesarios para poder caracterizar digitalmente este tipo de textos. Esto es primordial puesto que son textos completamente distintos de los literarios o de otra índole que se han considerado, por ejemplo, en la iniciativa TEI. Dicho de otra forma, el nodo fundamental del problema es cómo se construye un corpus histórico jurídico particular para que sea útil en las humanidades digitales.
            Como la reunión del corpus completo es un proyecto a muy largo plazo, en una etapa piloto consideramos que trabajar con los textos normativos puede ser suficiente para ensayar la propuesta de un modelo flexible y escalable. Además, para el caso de los textos normativos ya existe un ordenamiento y un proceso de digitalización previo de esa parte del corpus. De unas 35,355 normas referenciadas se han puesto en línea, de manera digital básica, 26,831 por un grupo de académicos españoles que viene trabajando al respecto desde la década de 1970 y en el que se han ya recogido la mayor parte de las normas legisladas entre el año 1020 y 1868.
             Por tanto, el objetivo de esta ponencia es discutir los diferentes ejes de nuestra propuesta teórica: 1) el aspecto de su realidad digital, es decir, cuáles son los requisitos para una digitalización óptima de fuentes jurídicas que se presentan en la realidad de maneras diversas –manuscritas, impresas, cuyos contenidos varían ortográfica y semánticamente a lo largo de los siglos-, 2) el problema de qué se concibe como texto propio de la cultura jurisdiccional en el orden jurídico tradicional –no sólo los obviamente jurídicos en apariencia-, y, en consecuencia, 3) los retos que implica el diseño de herramientas digitales propias que permitan el macroanálisis de los textos como datos masivos. Esto, a su vez, implica un problema mayor y de fondo que es el de la conexión entre un necesario abordaje hermenéutico de los textos jurídicos (lectura densa) en una perspectiva de larga duración –desde la baja edad media hasta el fin de la edad moderna– para entender su contexto cultural de sentido, y el reto de procesar dichos textos entendidos como corpus y en forma de datos masivos mediante computadora (lectura distante), no sólo en procesos de segmentación del corpus para su visualización (nubes de palabras, frecuencias relativas y absolutas, KWIC), sino la posibilidad de ensayar, sobre todo, un modelado tópico semántico con objeto de reflexionar sobre cuál sería un modelo de macroanálisis adecuado para este tipo de corpus. Finalmente, proponer un modelo particular para la edición digital del corpus de los textos jurídicos propios de la cultura jurisdiccional del orden jurídico tradicional.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        Clavero, B. (1991). 
                        Antidora: antropología católica de la economía moderna. Milano: Giuffrè. 
                    
                    
                        Geertz, C. (1973). 
                        The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books.
                    
                    
                        Genette, G. (1992). 
                        The architext : an introduction. Berkeley: University of California Press.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). 
                        Distant Reading. London: Verso.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Alan​ ​Liu​ ​has​ ​called​ ​upon​ ​digital​ ​humanists​ ​to​ ​think​ ​more​ ​critically​ ​about​ ​infrastructure​ ​-​ ​the​ ​“social cum​ ​technological​ ​milieu​ ​that​ ​at​ ​once​ ​enables​ ​the​ ​fulfillment​ ​of​ ​human​ ​experience​ ​and​ ​enforces constraints​ ​on​ ​that​ ​experience” (Liu, 2017).​ ​Liu’s​ ​invitation​ ​comes​ ​at​ ​the​ ​moment​ ​when​ ​researchers​ ​involved​ ​in large-scale,​ ​long-term​ ​projects​ ​are​ ​shifting​ ​focus​ ​from​ ​remediation​ ​and​ ​the​ ​creation​ ​of​ ​digital incunabula​ ​to​ ​transmediation​ ​and​ ​the​ ​development​ ​of​ ​systems​ ​that​ ​support​ ​sustained​ ​discourse across​ ​ever-morphing​ ​digital​ ​networks,​ ​when​ ​we​ ​are​ ​recognizing​ ​the​ ​potential​ ​for​ ​“dynamism​ ​of​ ​the base​ ​or​ ​serialized​ ​form​ ​of​ ​the​ ​text—the​ ​state​ ​in​ ​which​ ​it​ ​is​ ​stored—as​ ​opposed​ ​to​ ​dynamic​ ​modes​ ​of presentation” (Brown, 2016: 288)​. ​REED​ ​London​ ​is​ ​one​ ​such​ ​project​ ​with​ ​a​ ​polyvalent​ ​dataset​ ​that​ ​spans​ ​over​ ​500 years’​ ​worth​ ​of​ ​archival​ records, ​embracing​ ​from​ ​the​ ​start​ ​the​ ​need​ ​to​ ​establish​ ​a​ ​stable, ​responsive production​ ​and​ ​presentation​ ​environment​ ​primed​ ​for​ ​use​ ​by​ ​a​ ​wide​ ​range​ ​of​ ​scholarly​ ​audiences. Thus​ ​we​ ​find​ ​that​ ​we​ ​are​ ​immediately​ ​testing​ ​those​ ​infrastructural​ constraints. ​In​ ​this​ ​paper, members​ ​of​ ​the​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​project​ ​team​ ​will​ ​address​ ​the​ ​challenges​ ​we​ ​face​ ​as​ ​we​ ​develop​ ​and implement​ ​a​ ​framework​ ​that​ ​trains​ ​us​ ​to​ ​think​ ​about​ ​our​ ​collected​ ​data​ ​in​ ​relation​ ​to​ ​much​ ​larger networks​ ​of​ ​disparate​ ​resources​ ​and​ ​user​ ​needs.
            REED​ ​London​ ​develops​ ​from​ ​a​ ​partnership​ ​between​ ​the​ ​Records​ ​of​ ​Early​ ​English​ ​Drama​ ​(REED) and​ ​the​ ​Canadian​ ​Writing​ ​Research​ ​Collaboratory​ ​(CWRC). ​Together​ ​we​ ​are​ ​establishing​ ​an​ ​openly accessible​ ​online​ ​scholarly​ ​and​ ​pedagogical​ ​resource​ ​of​ ​London-centric​ documentary, editorial, and bibliographic​ ​materials​ ​related​ ​to​ ​performance,​ ​theatre,​ ​and​ ​music​ ​spanning​ ​the​ ​period​ ​1100-1642. With​ ​support​ ​from​ ​the​ ​Andrew​ ​W.​ ​Mellon​ ​Foundation​ ​and​ ​a​ ​CANARIE​ ​Research​ ​Software​ ​Program grant,​ ​a​ ​team​ ​of​ ​researchers​ ​in​ ​the​ ​digital​ ​humanities​ ​and​ ​performance​ ​history​ ​from​ ​the​ ​U.S., Canada,​ ​and​ ​the​ ​U.K.​ ​are​ ​building​ ​a​ ​stable,​ ​extensible​ ​editorial​ ​production​ ​and​ ​publication environment​ ​that​ ​will​ ​create​ ​new​ ​possibilities​ ​for​ ​scholarly​ ​presentation​ ​of​ ​archival​ ​materials​ ​gathered from​ ​legal,​ ​ecclesiastical,​ ​civic,​ ​political,​ ​and​ ​personal​ ​archival​ ​sources​ ​in​ ​and​ ​around​ ​London.​ ​The REED​ ​London​ ​project​ ​combines​ ​materials​ ​from​ ​three​ ​printed​ ​REED​ ​collections​ (
                Inns ​
                of​ ​
                Court, 
                Ecclesiastical​ ​
                London​,​ ​and​ 
                Civic​ ​
                London​ ​
                to​ 
                1558)​,​ ​the​ ​prosopographical​ ​material​ ​from​ ​REED’s 
                Patrons​ ​
                &amp;​ ​
                Performances​ ​
                (P&amp;P)​,​ ​the​ ​bibliographical​ ​materials​ ​of​ ​the​​ 
                Early​ ​
                Modern​ ​
                London​
                Theatres (EMLoT)​ ​​database,​ ​and​ ​in-progress​ ​and​ ​planned​ ​digital​ ​collections​ ​focusing​ ​on​ ​London​ ​area performance​ ​spaces,​ ​most​ ​notably​ ​the​ ​Globe,​ ​Rose,​ ​and​ ​Curtain​ ​theatres​ ​and​ ​Civic​ ​London 1559-1642.
            
            REED​ ​is​ ​an​ ​internationally​ ​renowned​ ​scholarly​ ​project​ ​that​ ​has​ ​worked​ ​to​ ​locate,​ ​transcribe,​ ​and​ ​edit evidence​ ​of​ ​drama,​ ​secular​ ​music,​ ​and​ ​other​ ​communal​ ​entertainment​ ​in​ ​Britain​ ​from​ ​the​ ​Middle Ages​ ​until​ ​1642.​ ​Since​ ​1979​ ​REED​ ​has​ ​published​ ​twenty-seven​ ​printed​ ​collections​ ​of​ ​transcribed records​ ​plus​ ​contextual​ ​materials.​ ​REED​ ​has​ ​long​ ​recognized​ ​the​ ​importance​ ​of​ ​online​ ​access​ ​to​ ​its resources,​​first​​ with 
                P&amp;P​​​ and​​​ 
                EMLoT​, ​​and​​ more​​ recently​​ with ​​the ​​born-digital​​ collection​ 
                Staffordshire​. REED​ ​has​ ​wrestled​ ​with​ ​the​ ​balance​ ​between​ ​what​ ​was​ ​once​ ​considered​ ​its​ ​“core”​ ​print​ ​publication activities​ ​and​ ​“adjunct”​ ​digital​ ​efforts,​ ​in​ ​the​ ​process​ ​migrating​ ​its​ ​data​ ​across​ ​a​ ​succession​ ​of programs​ ​and​ ​formats​ ​from​ ​Basic​ ​and​ ​dBASE​ ​to​ ​TEI​ ​P5​ ​XML​ ​and​ ​MySQL (Hagen,​ ​MacLean,​ ​and​ ​Pasin, 2014).​ ​REED​ ​has​ ​developed​ ​its digital​​ resources ​​in​​ ways ​​that​​ complicate ​​integration (
                P​
                &amp;P ​​​exists ​​in​​ a ​​Drupal​​instance;​​​ 
                EMLoT ​​​was built​ ​in​ ​a​ ​version​ ​of​ ​Django​ ​that​ ​is​ ​now​ ​out-of-date;​ ​
                REED​ ​Staffordshire​ ​was​ ​lightly​ ​tagged​ ​in​ ​TEI​ ​and relies​ ​on​ ​EATSML for entity management, an​ ​XML​ ​format​ ​used​ ​by​ ​the​ ​Entity​ ​Authority​ ​Tool​ ​Set​ ​(EATS)​ ​for​ ​serialisation​ ​of​ ​its​ ​data).​ ​The​ ​components​ ​of​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​must​ ​therefore​ ​first be​ ​made​ ​intra-operable​ ​before​ ​they​ ​can​ ​become​ ​interoperable (Jakacki, 2016).​ ​The​ ​partnership​ ​with​ ​CWRC supports​ ​broader​ ​adoption​ ​of​ ​standards​ ​for​ ​TEI​ ​text​ ​markup,​ ​RDF​ ​metadata​ ​specifications,​ ​and named​​ entity ​​aggregation,​​ most ​​immediately​​ with ​​the ​​ingestion​​ of ​
                EMLoT ​​​and ​​the​​ printed ​​​
                Inns ​​
                of Court​​ ​collection.
            
            CWRC​ ​is​ ​an​ ​online​ ​infrastructure​ ​project​ ​designed​ ​to​ ​enable​ ​unprecedented​ ​avenues​ ​for​ ​studying the​ ​words​ ​that​ ​most​ ​move​ ​people​ ​in​ ​and​ ​about​ ​Canada.​ ​Built​ ​with​ ​funding​ ​from​ ​the​ ​Canada Foundation​ ​for​ ​Innovation,​ ​the​ ​CWRC​ ​platform​ ​supports​ ​best​ ​practices​ ​in​ ​the​ ​production​ ​of​ ​online collections,​ ​editions,​ ​born-digital​ ​essays,​ ​anthologies,​ ​collections,​ ​monographs,​ ​articles,​ ​or bibliographies,​ ​and​ ​supports​ ​the​ ​inclusion​ ​of​ ​visual,​ ​audio,​ ​and​ ​video​ ​sources (​About​ ​CWRC/CSÉC).​ ​It​ ​supports collaboration​ ​through​ ​the​ ​use​ ​of​ ​interoperable​ ​data​ ​formats​ ​and​ ​interlinking​ ​of​ ​materials,​ ​and​ ​for teams​ ​like​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​provides​ ​invaluable​ ​tools​ ​for​ ​communicating,​ ​tracking​ ​activity,​ ​and workflow.​ ​We​ ​envision​ ​that​ ​as​ ​the​ ​partnership​ ​develops​ ​and​ ​as​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​advances​ ​through production​ ​toward​ ​publication​ ​we​ ​will​ ​take​ ​full​ ​advantage​ ​of​ ​CWRC’s​ ​functionality.​ ​From​ ​the​ ​start​ ​we have​ ​worked​ ​directly​ ​in​ ​CWRC’s​ ​unique​ ​editor,​ ​CWRC-Writer,​ ​which​ ​allows​ ​us​ ​to​ ​edit​ ​REED​ ​London records,​ ​essays,​ ​and​ ​bibliographical​ ​material​ ​using​ ​more​ ​diplomatic​ ​and​ ​critical​ ​TEI​ ​P5​ ​XML​ ​markup and​ ​at​ ​the​ ​same​ ​time​ ​creating​ ​semantic​ ​web​ ​annotations​ ​with​ ​RDF​ ​to​ ​identify,​ ​manage,​ ​and​ ​interlink entities​ ​contained​ ​within.​ ​The​ ​platform​ ​is​ ​also​ ​helping​ ​us​ ​to​ ​develop​ ​a​ ​better​ ​editorial​ ​workflow through​ ​management​ ​of​ ​access​ ​to​ ​data​ ​and​ ​editing​ ​by​ ​role,​ ​team​ ​communications,​ ​tracking​ ​and reporting​ ​of​ ​team​ ​activities.
            To​ ​ensure​ ​REED​ ​London’s​ ​stability​ ​and​ ​sustainability​ ​while​ ​extending​ ​its​ ​content​ ​and​ ​value​ ​to​ ​new generations​ ​of​ scholars​ ​the​ ​project​ ​is​ ​being​ ​built​ ​within​ ​the​ ​CWRC​ environment. ​The​ ​scope​ ​of​ ​REED London​ ​would​ ​not​ ​be​ ​possible​ ​without​ ​the​ ​sophisticated,​ ​integrated​ ​platform​ ​that​ ​CWRC​ ​provides. The​ ​focus​ ​of​ ​our​ ​first​ ​year​ ​is​ ​the​ ​design​ ​and​ ​construction​ ​of​ ​a​ ​collaborative​ ​online​ ​production​ ​and publication​ ​environment.​ ​Extending​ ​from​ ​CWRC’s​ ​existing​ ​integrated​ ​content​ ​management​ ​and preservation​ ​system,​ ​the​ ​enhanced​ ​environment​ ​will​ ​accommodate​ ​the​ ​range​ ​of​ ​record​ ​texts, editorial​ ​and​ ​bibliographical​ ​content​ ​from​ ​the​ ​source​ ​materials,​ ​while​ ​a​ ​customized​ ​browser-based CWRC-Writer​ ​platform​ ​will​ ​support​ ​the​ ​team’s​ ​goal​ ​of​ ​developing​ ​online​ ​editorial​ ​collaboration​ ​and review.​ ​The​ ​resulting​ ​streamlined​ ​production​ ​and​ ​publication​ ​environment​ ​will​ ​yield​ ​multi-faceted user-centered​ ​editions,​ ​meaning​ ​that​ ​agile​ ​component​ ​archival​ ​and​ ​editorial​ ​parts​ ​can​ ​cohere according​ ​to​ ​various​ ​criteria​ ​in​ ​response​ ​to​ ​scholars’​ ​research​ ​and​ ​teaching​ ​needs.​ ​In​ ​this​ ​way​ ​we are​ ​establishing​ ​a​ ​platform​ ​that​ ​produces​ ​new​ ​forms​ ​of​ ​“edition”​ ​that​ ​combine​ ​customized​ ​textual​ ​and contextual​ ​materials,​ ​exportable​ ​customized​ ​datasets​ ​and​ ​dynamic​ ​data​ ​visualizations.​ ​It​ ​also​ ​means that​ ​we​ ​will​ ​be​ ​able​ ​to​ ​realize​ ​the​ ​promise​ ​of​ ​extending​ ​the​ ​value​ ​of​ ​these​ ​materials​ ​to​ ​colleagues​ ​in fields​ ​beyond​ ​performance​ ​history,​ ​including​ ​political,​ ​religious,​ ​and​ ​cultural​ ​studies,​ ​and​ ​linguistics. 
            The​ ​partnership​ ​between​ ​CWRC​ ​and​ ​REED​ ​allows​ ​us​ ​to​ ​explore​ ​the​ ​potential​ ​for​ ​new​ ​research applications​ ​associated​ ​with​ ​prosopography,​ ​networks,​ ​and​ ​deep​ ​contextualization.​ ​REED​ ​London’s wealth​ ​of​ ​references​ ​to​ ​very​ ​itinerant​ ​individuals​ ​across​ ​contemporaneous​ ​records​ ​means​ ​that​ ​we will​ ​be​ ​able​ ​to​ ​discern​ ​patterns​ ​through​ ​linking,​ ​analysis,​ ​and​ ​visualization.​ ​We​ ​will​ ​leverage​ ​REED’s named​ ​entities​ ​for​ ​linking​ ​people,​ ​places,​ ​events,​ ​and​ ​organizations.​ ​Our​ ​team​ ​has​ ​healthy​ ​debates about​ ​the​ ​problematic​ ​present​ ​of​ ​linked​ ​data.​ ​Brown​ ​has​ ​stated​ ​that,​ ​“linking​ ​up​ ​with​ ​other​ ​data means​ ​connecting​ ​one​ ​ontology​ ​to​ ​another,​ ​and​ ​this​ ​brings​ ​with​ ​it​ ​a​ ​pressure​ ​toward​ ​generalization rather​ ​than​ ​specificity” (Brown,​ ​Simpson,​ ​et.​ ​al.,​ ​2015).​ ​Cummings​ ​has​ ​posited​ ​that​ ​“being​ ​able​ ​to​ ​seamlessly​ ​integrate​ ​highly complex​ ​and​ ​changing​ ​digital​ ​structures​ ​from​ ​a​ ​variety​ ​of​ ​heterogeneous​ ​sources​ ​through interoperable​ ​methods​ ​without​ ​either​ ​significant​ ​conditions​ ​or​ ​intermediary​ ​agents​ ​is​ ​a​ ​deluded fantasy” (Cummings​ ​2014).​ ​Still,​ ​as​ ​a​ ​group​ ​we​ ​hope​ ​that​ ​by​ ​publishing​ ​our​ ​ontologies​ ​as​ ​a​ ​means​ ​of​ ​relating​ ​these entities​ ​as​ ​linked​ ​open​ ​data,​ ​we​ ​will​ ​be​ ​able​ ​to​ ​contribute​ ​to​ ​larger​ ​dialogues​ ​about​ ​class​ ​and​ ​society in​ ​Britain​ ​-​ ​certainly​ ​over​ ​the​ ​500​ ​years​ ​covered​ ​by​ ​REED​ ​London,​ ​but​ ​also​ ​about​ ​the​ ​development​ ​of Britain​ ​and​ ​Europe.​ ​CWRC​ ​content​ ​will​ ​be​ ​aggregated​ ​by​ ​the​ ​Advanced​ ​Research​ ​Consortium (ARC),​ ​and​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​will​ ​benefit​ ​from​ ​that​ ​aggregation,​ ​as​ ​we​ ​anticipate​ ​that​ ​people​ ​who​ ​figure in​ ​the​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​corpus,​ ​such​ ​as​ ​Elizabeth​ ​I,​ ​Francis​ ​Bacon,​ ​and​ ​Inigo​ ​Jones​ ​will​ ​be discoverable​ ​by​ ​scholars​ ​searching​ ​for​ ​these​ ​known​ ​figures​ ​across​ ​other​ ​linked​ ​resources.​ ​Perhaps more​ ​important,​ ​REED​ ​London​ ​records​ ​include​ ​extended​ ​references​ ​to​ ​thousands​ ​of​ ​Londoners​ ​who were​ ​in​ ​some​ ​way​ ​connected​ ​to​ ​performance,​ ​but​ ​who​ ​were​ ​not​ ​defined​ ​by​ ​that​ ​connection:​ ​civic officials,​ ​guild​ ​members,​ ​lawyers,​ ​clerks,​ ​priests,​ ​etc.​ ​The​ ​work​ ​of​ ​this​ ​project​ ​thus​ ​holds​ ​as​ ​yet unrealized​ ​value​ ​for​ ​a​ ​much​ ​broader​ ​understanding​ ​of​ ​British​ ​historical​ ​subjects.
            Working​ ​within​ ​CWRC’s​ ​platform​ ​and​ ​optimizing​ ​CWRC-Writer​ ​has​ ​allowed​ ​the​ ​core​ ​REED​ ​London team​ ​to​ ​move​ ​efficiently​ ​to​ ​an​ ​advanced​ ​planning​ ​phase.​ ​By​ ​the​ ​end​ ​of​ ​2017​ ​we​ ​will​ ​have designed​ ​templates​ ​for​ ​all​ ​record​ ​formats​ ​from​​ 
                Inns of Court​ ​​and​ ​mapped​ ​database​ ​fields​ ​from 
                EMLoT​​ ​to​ ​align​ ​with​ ​the​ ​record​ ​parts​ ​from​ ​the​ ​print​ ​collections.​ ​We​ ​will​ ​have​ ​harvested​ ​a​ ​preliminary “white​ ​list”​ ​of​ ​named​ ​entities​ ​(people,​ ​places,​ ​organizations)​ ​from​ ​all​ ​three​ ​print​ ​​​collection​ ​indexes, P&amp;P,​ ​and​ ​Staffordshire.​ ​Because​ ​of​ ​this​ ​efficient​ ​onramp​ ​we​ ​will​ ​be​ ​able​ ​to​ ​focus​ ​in​ ​the​ ​first​ ​half​ ​of 2018​ ​on​ ​ingesting​ ​data,​ ​records,​ ​and​ ​contextual​ ​materials​ ​from​ ​Inns​ ​of​ ​Court​ ​and​ ​EMLoT.​ ​We​ ​will test​ ​the​ ​REED-specific​ ​entity​ ​list​ ​on​ ​ingested​ ​materials.​ ​We​ ​will​ ​also​ ​begin​ ​to​ ​user-test​ ​the​ ​editorial workflow​ ​system​ ​with​ ​the​ ​larger​ ​project​ ​team​ ​of​ ​REED​ ​editors​ ​and​ ​staff.​ ​By​ ​June​ ​2018​ ​we​ ​will​ ​have begun​ ​semantic​ ​tagging​ ​and​ ​experimentation​ ​with​ ​the​ ​CWRC​ ​HuViz​ ​semantic​ ​web​ ​visualization​ ​tool. At​ ​the​ ​DH​ ​2018​ ​conference​ ​we​ ​will​ ​report​ ​on​ ​further​ ​customization​ ​of​ ​the​ ​CWRC​ interface,​ our​ ​plans for​ ​data​ ​discovery​ ​and​ ​research​ ​collaboration,​ ​and​ ​present​ ​preliminary​ ​plans​ ​for​ ​user-responsive editions​ ​and​ ​data​ ​linkage.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brown, ​S. (2016). ​Tensions​ ​and​ ​Tenets​ ​of​ ​Socialized​ ​Scholarship. 
                        D​​
                        igital​ ​
                        Scholarship​ ​
                        in​ ​
                        the Humanities​, ​31 (2): 283-300.
                    
                    
                        Brown, S.​, ​Simpson, J., ​
                        CWRC​ ​Project​ ​Team, and ​Inke​ ​Project​ ​Team. (2015) ​An​ ​Entity​ ​By​ ​Any​ ​Other Name:​ ​Linked​ ​Open​ ​Data​ ​as​ ​a​ ​Basis​ ​for​ ​a​ ​Decentered,​ ​Dynamic​ ​Scholarly​ ​Publishing​ ​Ecology. 
                        Scholarly​ ​
                        and​ ​
                        Research​ ​
                        Communication​​ ​6 (2). 
                        http://src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/212/409.
                    
                    
                        Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory ​project​ ​website.​ ​​
                        http://www.cwrc.ca/en/.
                    
                    
                        Cummings,​ ​J. (2014).​ ​The​ ​Compromises​ ​and​ ​Flexibility​ ​of​ ​TEI​ ​Customisation.​ In​ ​Mills, C., ​ ​Pidd, M.​ ​and​ Ward, E.​ (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the Digital Humanities Congress 2012.​ ​
                    
                    CWRC:​ About​ ​CWRC/CSÉC​ ​webpage.​ ​​
                        http://www.cwrc.ca/about/#whatis
                    
                    CWRC​ ​Humanities​ ​Visualizer​ ​webpage. ​​
                        http://www.cwrc.ca/uncategorized/huviz-tool/
                    
                    
                        Early Modern London Theatres​​ ​website.​ ​​
                        http://www.emlot.kcl.ac.uk
                    
                    Entity Authority Tool Set​ ​(EATS)​ ​website. ​​
                        https://eats.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
                    
                    
                        Hagen, T.,​ ​MacLean, S.,​ ​and​ ​Pasin, M.​ (​2014).​ ​Moving​ ​Early​ ​Modern​ ​Theatre​ ​Online: the Records​ ​of​ ​Early​ ​English​ ​Drama​ ​introduces​ ​the​ ​Early​ ​Modern​ ​London​ ​Theatres. http://static.michelepasin.org/public_articles/2014-REED_McLean-Pasin.pdf
                    
                    
                        Jakacki, D. (2017)​ ​REED​ ​London:​ ​Humanistic​ ​Roots,​ ​Humanistic​ ​Futures.​ ​Paper​ ​given​ ​at​ ​MLA​ ​2017. 
                        http://dx.doi.org/10.17613/M67794
                    
                    
                        Jakacki, D.​ (2016) REED​ ​and​ ​the​ ​Prospect​ ​of​ ​Networked​ ​Data. Paper​ ​given​ ​at​ ​the​ ​Conference​ ​of​ ​the​ ​Canadian Society​ ​for​ ​Renaissance​ ​Studies.​http://dx.doi.org/10.17613/M6CK59
                    
                    
                        Liu, A. (2017)​ ​Toward​ ​Critical​ ​Infrastructure​ ​Studies",​ ​paper​ ​given​ ​at​ ​the​ ​University​ ​of​ ​Connecticut.​ ​​
                        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ojrtVx7iCw
                    
                    Records​ ​of​ ​Early​ ​English​ ​Drama​ ​project​ ​website. h​​ttp://reed.utoronto.ca 
                        
                    
                    
                        REED​ Patrons and Performances website. https://reed.library.utoronto.ca
                        
                    
                    
                        REED​ 
                        Staffordshire​​ ​Collection​ ​website. ​​https://ereed.library.utoronto.ca/collections/staff/
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Our project will make freely available a searchable webapp, built in eXist-db (
                
                    http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html
                ), containing a database of poems responding to Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861-65, along with audio recitations and musical performances drawing directly on these poems (Rennie, 2017). This poetic response is important in that it often represents labouring-class voices from the mid-nineteenth century, which, in spite of renewed academic interest in such material, remain underappreciated (Goodridge et al, 2012 provides a useful introduction and bibliography). The study of this material and its digital publication will significantly enrich literary scholarship and historical perspectives of this economic crisis, and provides the opportunity to draw public attention to an episode of history that is little known beyond the scholarly sphere. The project seeks to establish a much more detailed understanding of the nature of Lancashire Cotton Famine poetry: its extent, its intents, and its functions. To date, there is no critical literature specifically addressing the poetry written and published during the Cotton Famine, though the period is touched upon in Brian Hollingworth’s anthology 
                Songs of the People: Lancashire dialect poetry of the industrial revolution (1972: 98-113).
            
            The project draws predominantly on the local newspaper collections of Lancashire’s various civic archives and local studies centres for material. Though some of these newspapers have been digitised in collections such as the British Newspaper Archive and Gale Historical Newspapers, the majority are in hard-copy or microfilm format, so that users attempting to access the poetry encounter practical obstacles relating to both geography and the preservation of materials. Additionally, as the archives and local studies collections in Lancashire are significantly under-resourced, there are long-term concerns about maintenance of the equipment and staffing levels required to ensure that access to these significant historical collections is sustainable. The recovery element of our project therefore aims to ensure long-term, free-of-charge access to a near-complete repository of Cotton Famine Poetry without the requirement to visit multiple archives or local studies centres. As the recovered poems have been transcribed by hand, we are also avoiding replicating the Optimal Character Recognition errors which have been incurred by some of the existing newspaper databases (Joulain-Jay, 2016).
            Alongside the vital recovery and collation of this material, the experience of the investigators in the field of labouring-class poetry enables a simultaneous critical analysis of the poetry as it emerges, focussing on local, regional, national, and international fields of interest. We encounter a wide range of poetic styles, written both in Lancashire dialect and standard English, which demonstrate the sophisticated literary engagements of their authors. In terms of subject matter, the poems describe not only the direct, local experience of the Cotton Famine, but also offer more abstract reflections on issues including work, poverty, war, slavery and abolition. We want to determine the extent to which political dissent is present in the poetry, and to what degree opposing discourses relating to slavery and the American Civil War were articulated through literature of this type. We are already beginning to establish that a significant proportion of Cotton Famine poetry represents a labouring-class address to a regional and national middle-class readership, and part of our analysis will involve mapping a transatlantic discourse between the Lancastrian labouring classes and writers on both sides of the American conflict. The popular narrative of the Cotton Famine has Lancashire textile workers staunchly supporting the North in spite of the deprivation caused by the war, because of their strong support for abolition. Early analysis of poetic responses suggests a more complicated engagement with the American conflict, including some elements of support for the south (see also Ellison, 1972). We hope that by making the poetry freely available online, we encourage its further use as an important historical and literary resource for understanding some of these complex themes. 
            The digitisation of a large and varied body of work such as this presents both challenges and possibilities, and this paper will reflect upon the difference that digital methods make to our interpretation of the material and the ways in which it can be used. The process of marking up text for the database enables us to make our editorial decisions in presenting this body of work transparent, and to group similar poems and themes for the reader’s ease of analysis. Nonetheless, in so doing, we impose our own interpretations upon what was a fluid form - often orally transmitted, and published in different versions across different media. A key concern in presenting this material has been the desire to ensure its usefulness for scholars who might have different approaches and questions to our own. In forcing us to grapple with these challenges, the use of digital methods has encouraged us to make explicit our own methodologies and thought processes, and enabled the creation of a resource that could be considered more intellectually ‘open’ than the traditional analogue anthology. 
            The design of our webapp therefore reflects our desire for a flexibility which in turn offers better representation of a literature which was originally available in multiple, sometimes changing forms. Some poems were written to be read or sung aloud, while others endeavoured to capture in writing the transient forms of local dialect, and different variations of the same poem appear across the newspapers. The use of XML enables us to continuously add layers of interpretation as they occur in the data for macro analysis, while marking up at word-by-word level enables a careful close reading in which we are forced to be conscious of the decisions we are making about the presentation of material.
            An important part of the project is its public-facing element, including the involvement of school groups in finding and transcribing the poetry. We also welcome submissions of potential Cotton Famine poetry from members of the public, local historical societies, and educational projects with an interest in this material. Managing the upload and editing of these submissions, and ensuring that appropriate credit is given, is one of the tasks that the project team has taken on, and it is likely to present its own set of challenges: gathering this data provides an opportunity to involve the public in undertaking research and giving them insights into this process, but we also need to ensure that the results are useful and worthwhile for the project’s outputs. At present we are not planning to train people beyond the team in how to encode in TEI, but giving contributors a ‘behind the scenes’ tour of the database and offering an introduction to how we create and structure our digital materials (and why) has the potential to enable further discussions and may encourage contributors to get involved with digital humanities activity beyond our immediate project. We feel that this is an important step in ensuring that contributors gain an understanding of what happens to their data once they submit it, and how it is transformed into what they see in the final digital publication. We will discuss these challenges and how we intend to maintain interest and engagement amongst our contributors.    
            At this stage of the project, in which we are making key decisions about how to manage our own data and that from our external contributors, we would welcome discussion and comments from the wider digital humanities community on how we can ensure that our resource is an effective tool for both research and teaching. We hope, too, that the challenges that we are encountering and some of our proposed solutions might prove helpful for others working with comparable datasets or audiences.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ellison, M. (1972) 
                        Support for Secession: Lancashire and the American Civil War. Chicago &amp; London: University of Chicago Press.
                    
                    
                        
                            http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html
                        
                    
                    
                        Goodridge, J. et al (2012) ‘Introduction’, 
                        Labouring-Class Poets Online. 
                        
                            https://lcpoets.wordpress.com/introtobibliography/
                        
                    
                    
                        Hollingworth, B. (1972) 
                        Songs of the People: Lancashire dialect poetry of the industrial revolution. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
                    
                    
                        Joulain-Jay, A. (2016) ‘Dealing with Optimal Character Recognition errors in Victorian Newspapers’, 
                        British Library Digital Scholarship Blog, July 20
                        th 2016. 
                        http://blogs.bl.uk/digital-scholarship/2016/07/dealing-with-optical-character-recognition-errors-in-victorian-newspapers.html
                    
                    
                        Rennie, S. (2017) 
                        The Poetry of the Lancashire Cotton Famine (1861-65) 
                        
                            http://cottonfaminepoetry.exeter.ac.uk
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The collected works of Leo Tolstoy were printed and published in 90 volumes of some 46,000 pages between 1928 and 1958. The visibility and usability of these volumes were increased by the project "Tolstoy Digital", a TEI-encoded version of this vast resource (Skorinkin &amp; Mozhaev 2016).
                This talk, however, is not about the 90 volumes themselves, but about the 91st volume of this edition, a supplement volume containing indexes of works and proper names, from both the fictional works and the many volumes containing Tolstoy's letters.
                "The 91st Volume" is a web application based on the digitised index of proper names for the 90-volume collection of Tolstoy's collected works (
                    ). The digitised data features additional properties, which can be explored by the enthusiast as well as the specialist.
                
                This talk tries not just to present a new tool for literary scholars, but tries to generalise how this kind of resources can be used to gain new insights into larger text collections.
            
            
                
                    Level 1: Enhanced Searches
                
                First and foremost, the index retains its original functionality, which is to map names to volumes and pages. Collected works of a canonical writer are not primarily meant to be read one by one, line by line. A 90-volume collection of books does not only contain entertaining narratives, but it can also be viewed as a set of facts, dates, names, mentions, etc. An index is the key to this data, and it was the only means to gain some orientation in the pre-digital age.
                In the web app version of the "91st Volume", the index is even more convenient to use than in the paper version, as it allows "fuzzy" searches. By entering "ava" it will list among the results terms like "Poltava", "Bavariâ", or "Abdulla-al'-Mamun Zuravardi". The higher the frequency of a name within the whole collection, the higher up it will be displayed in the results. These types of searches are already an enhancement over the traditional index search.
                If we cannot define in advance what we are looking for, we still have the lists of all names in the index (which sum up to more than 16,000 entries). Once we've found what we were looking for, we don't need to remove any book from its shelf and open the right page, but can jump directly to the corresponding page.
                A graphical word-cloud representation is also featured and conveys a first idea about the most frequent words in the corpus.
            
            
                
                    Level 2: Studying Life and Works of Leo Tolstoy by Means of Network Analysis
                
                Turning an index of names into a network is a new approach to facilitate the study of contexts. The co-occurrence of names in the same environment (on the same page, in the same chapter, etc.) reveals similarities and relations between different entities, which on the scale of 90 volumes, helps us to understand larger contexts.
                "The 91st Volume" unfolds a rather unconventional social network of Leo Tolstoy. It shows not only Tolstoy's connections with other people (e.g., his pen pals), but also the connections of people from the point of view of Tolstoy.
                The co-occurrence of proper names on the same page within the 90 volumes establishes an edge of the emerging network as it creates a link between two entities. For example, the Hindu scripture "Bhagavat-gita" can be found five times on the pages of the Complete Works, and it shares these five pages with a total of 43 other names mentioned. The proximity of these mentionings is not accidental, of course, in our example they form some kind of "Indian cluster" containing works like "Gitopadeša", "Dhammapada", "Vamana Purana", or names like Ramakrišna Šri Paramagamza.
                For Tolstoy, the mentioned texts are part of a set of carriers of philosophical knowledge, and are associated with names like Xenophon, Montaigne, Montesquieu, Pascal, Skovoroda, Socrates. These networks provide great opportunities for understanding the whole range of Tolstoy's interests and ideas. It presents a panoramic picture revealing general trends and larger thematic clusters. For each individual name there is also a small graph showing the most significant names associated with it.
                Another new kind of access to the 90 volumes is a heat map that shows the density of proper names used in each of them (the more names mentioned, the warmer the colouring).
                In the first volume of the collection containing youth experiments, a red splash suddenly appears in the middle of a rather calm blue background on page 269. You can view this page and will find that it contains a list of European cities: Rome, Naples, Dresden, Berlin.
            
            
                
                    Level 3: Editorial Evolution of the "Complete Works"
                
                The index also allows scholars to study the coming into life of the "Complete Works of Leo Tolstoy", i.e., the difficulties that had to be overcome when working on this edition (as they are laid out in Osterman 2002). The "91st Volume" allows us to understand how editorial principles have changed over time, especially as regards the depth of commenting.
                For example, the 13th volume, with draft editions of "War and Peace", has a weak commentary, and the 47th volume (diaries and notebooks) features such detailed comments that it is the most detailed in the entire 90-volume edition. Quantifications like this allow us to draw conclusions to the process of editing the Complete Works over three decades.
                Like mentioned above, the web app retains all the capabilities of the traditional index, and at the same time extends its potential through computer-based information management, a multi-purpose search engine and different kinds of visualisations. The app is to be understood as a suggestion to apply the newly developed methods to the Collected Works of other authors.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Osterman L. (2002): The Battle for Tolstoy: History of the Publication of Tolstoy's Complete Works. [Srazhenie za Tolstogo. Istorija izdanija Polnogo sobranija sochinenij Tolstogo.]
                    
                    
                        Skorinkin D., Mozhaev E. (2016). TEI markup for the 90-volume edition of Leo Tolstoy’s complete works. In: TEI Conference and Members' Meeting 2016. Book of Abstracts. Vienna: Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities, pp. 107–109.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Background, aims, and hypotheses
                In 19th century Spanish American novels, the expression of emotionality is an essential characteristic of the texts belonging to different subgenres.
                    This contribution is concerned with the linguistic manifestation of emotions in literary texts on the textual surface. See Winko, 2003 for a discussion of how emotional meaning and literary texts are related. Especially during the Romantic period in the first half of the century, many sentimental novels have been written (Zó, 2015). But emotions also play an important role in other types of novels: a love story is often a basic plot element for example in historical or costumbrista novels. Also, there are novels characterized more by negative emotions, like Cuban anti-slavery novels (Rivas, 1990), Argentine anti-Rosas novels (Molina, 2011: 285-312, García Ardeo, 2006), or sociopolitical novels in general.
                
                In text mining, a common method to analyze emotions is Sentiment Analysis (Pang and Lee, 2008). Sentiment Analysis is the computational treatment of sentiment, opinion, or emotion in text. Sentiments are usually modelled in terms of polarity values (positive, negative, neutral) or emotion values (such as trust, fear, joy, etc.).
                The aim of this proposal is to test several hypotheses about sentiments in subgenres with an explorative analysis of a corpus of Spanish American novels. To this end, sentiment values are used as features in a text classification task. A secondary objective of this contribution is to compare the results of two different sentiment lexica for Spanish to see how well they perform.
                The first hypothesis of this proposal is that the degree and kind of emotionality in the novels differs for different subgenres. The second hypothesis here is that not just emotions in general matter, but also whether they are expressed in the direct speech of the characters of the novels or in narrated text.
                    The anti-slavery novel, for example, has been defined in terms of its atmosphere of fear, but also by vigorous interferences of the narrator. Cf. Rivas, 1990.
                
            
            
                State of the Art
                Two recent examples for the usage of Sentiment Analysis with literary texts are Zehe et al., 2016 for the prediction of happy endings in German novels and Kim et al., 2017 for the analysis of prototypical emotion developments in literary genres with English texts. Sentiment Analysis has been used with Spanish texts, as well, mainly for the analysis of reviews and tweets (see Henríquez Miranda and Guzmán, 2017 for an overview). To the best of my knowledge, there are no applications of Sentiment Analysis on Spanish novels yet, and the distinction of direct speech and narrated text has not previously been used in combination with the analysis of sentiments in literary texts.
            
            
                Data
                For this analysis, a corpus of 30 Spanish American novels has been selected. The collection has the following characteristics: The novels have been published between 1840 and 1910 (13 before 1880 and 17 after 1880), are from three countries (Argentina: 16, Cuba: 9, Mexico: 5), and have been written by 16 different authors.
                    This is a subcollection of a larger corpus of Spanish American novels being prepared in the context of the junior research group 
                        Computation Literary Genre Stylistics (CLiGS), see 
                        .
                     Fig. 1 shows the distribution of novels per decade and subgenre:
                
                
                    
                        
                        Distribution of novels per decade and subgenre
                    As the texts at hand are not easily distinguishable genre fiction but more general literary fiction, the assignment of subgenre labels is a non-trivial task. For the assignment of subgenre labels to the novels, the subgenres as given in titles and subtitles of the novels were collected and subgenre assignments made in secondary literature were considered. Both types of information were used to derive four kinds of interpretive
                    Because the many variations found had to be normalized for this computational analysis, an interpretive step was unavoidable. subgenre labels corresponding to four broad types of novels: costumbrista (6 novels)
                    Novels of manners in the context of the Costumbrismo movement., historical (8), sentimental (9), and sociopolitical (7) novels.
                    The distribution of novels shows that there is a tendency for sentimental novels to belong to the first half and for non-sentimental novels to the second half of the century. This observation may be relevant for future tasks with a bigger corpus and interested in the development of genres over time. More detailed metadata for the novels can be found at 
                        .
                    
                
            
            
                Methods
                In general, Sentiment Analysis can be done with a machine learning approach and a lexicon-based approach. Here, two sentiment lexica were used: (1) SentiWordNet 3.0, an adaptation of WordNet 3.0 for sentiment analysis (Miller, 1995, Baccianella et al., 2010) and (2) the NRC Emotion Lexicon (Saif and Turney, 2013). The two lexica differ in how sentiments are modelled and also in their volume. SentiWordNet has polarity values (positivity, negativity, neutrality) for WordNet synsets which range between 0 and 1 and sum up to 1. The NRC lexicon, in contrast, has only binary values (0 or 1), but those are provided for positivity and negativity as well as eight basic emotions (Trust, Fear, Joy, Sadness, Anger, Disgust, Anticipation, Surprise). SentiWordNet contains 117,653 entries, the NRC lexicon just 14,182.
                    SentiWordNet can be used for Spanish because the synset IDs can be mapped to the Spanish version of WordNet. The NRC lexicon has been translated into Spanish automatically. See Baccianella et al., 2010 for evaluation reports for SentiWordNet. The authors of the NRC lexicon state that the translated versions may contain errors. An orthographic check on the NRC lexicon returned 409 entries that were not recognized as Spanish words. A further evaluation and improvement of the translated lexica is desirable.
                
                In order to use the sentiment lexica, the texts had to be lemmatized (for NRC) and annotated with WordNet synsets (for SentiWordNet) which was done with the NLP library FreeLing (Padró and Stanislovsky, 2012). To be able to use the distinction between direct speech and narrated text as a feature, the texts were annotated semi-automatically in their TEI master files (see Fig. 2):
                
                    
                        
                        Example of a paragraph with annotated direct speech, from "Camila o la virtud triunfante" (1856) by Estanislao del Campo
                    Each paragraph was split into sentences. Each sentence was annotated with FreeLing and the words with sentiment values were determined using the lexicons. The sentiment values for the words were summed up for each sentence.
                    The Sentiment Analysis could be refined further by considering the sentence structure (and negation), which is a future task. For the eight basic emotions of the NRC (Trust, Fear, etc.), a sentence is assigned the emotion with a highest value in the sentence. Besides the sentiment features that come directly from the lexicons, the following features were determined for each sentence:
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Additional features for the Sentiment Analysis
                        
                    A Decision Tree classifier was used for the classification of the novels by subgenre, using the above-mentioned features (see Manning and Schütze, 1999: 578-589 on this method). The advantage of Decision Trees is that they can be interpreted. This is desirable in an explorative analysis interested in the kind of sentiment-based features that are relevant to differentiate novels of different subgenres. When compared to other types of classifiers, Decision Trees do not necessarily yield the best results in terms of accuracy, but their interpretability is valued higher here in order to gain insight into how sentiments, the opposition of direct speech vs. narrated text, and subgenres are related.
                
                To generate data forthe machine learning task, the values of the single sentences were aggregated into five sections and divided by the section length (number of sentences contained in the section), resulting in150 data points for the 30 novels. 60 different experiments were run, varying the sentiment features and lexicon used, and the depth of the decision tree. A 5-fold cross-validation was applied.
            
            
                Results and Discussion
                The results of the experiments are summarized in Fig. 4 below. The depth of the Decision Tree was varied between 1 and 15.
                    Restricting the tree depth helps to prevent overfitting and usually leads to a better performance of the classifier on the test set. The accuracy is given as the mean F1 score obtained from the cross-validation. Four different sets of sentiment features were used: Features from the SentiWordNet lexicon (WN) and from the NRC lexicon (NRC), both without differentiating between direct speech and narrated text, as well as WN- and NRC-features with separate sentiment values for direct speech and narrated text (WN speech and NRC speech). The results of all experiments are compared to the “most frequent”-baseline and to a baseline obtained with an SVM classifier, using the 5,000 most frequent words.
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Results for subgenre classification with sentiment features
                        
                    Although the F1 scores are not very high (the highest mean value being at 0.52), almost all of them outperform the “most frequent”-baseline (0.3) which confirms that sentiment features are relevant for subgenre classification. Still, the results do not reach the best mean score of the MFW classification (0.57).
                    See Hettinger et al., 2016 for a discussion of various types of features (MFW, topics, networks) for subgenre classification, stating that genre classification in general works best with most frequent words, all words, and the like. In terms of classification accuracy, a next step will be to combine both sentiment features and MFW to see if the sentiment features can contribute to improve the overall results.
                
                When comparing the results for the two different sentiment lexica, the NRC lexicon performs better than SentiWordNet, although the latter covers almost ten times as many words as the first one. A look into the feature importance shows that the eight basic emotions, which are only present in the NRC lexicon, are crucial (see Fig. 5 and 6).
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Feature importance for a tree with depth 3, using NRC and speech vs. narrated text
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                            Feature importance for a tree with depth 6, using NRC and speech vs. narrated text
                        
                    
                
                Regarding the difference between speech and narration, Fig. 4 above also shows that the highest values for both WN and NRC are reached when the sentiment values are calculated separately for direct speech and narrated text. The best scores are obtained for the feature set “NRC speech”. The most important feature in both example trees is positive speech, followed by narrated fear. Fig. 7 shows the Decision Tree corresponding to the feature importance in Fig. 5 above.
                
                    
                        
                        
                            A Decision Tree for the classification of subgenres, based on the best parameters
                        
                    The tree shows that novels with higher values of positive speech are more likely to be sentimental novels. Other features that contribute to the distinction of sentimental novels are lower values of trust and higher values of anticipation in narrated text. The path for historical novels includes less positive speech and more fear and anger in narrated text. Costumbrista novels are characterized by less sadness in narrated text than sociopolitical novels and by more trust in narrated text than sentimental novels. Sociopolitical novels differ from historical novels in that they have a lower value of fear and anger in narrated text.
                    The results of all experiments can be found at 
                        .
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion and Future Work
                This exploration of sentiments in Spanish American Novels showed that Sentiment Analysis can be used as a basis for subgenre classification tasks. It has been shown that the distinction between emotions in direct speech and emotions in narrated improves the classification results considerably. Regarding the two sentiment lexica that were tested, the NRC Emotion Lexicon performs better than SentiWordNet.
                The Decision Trees resulting from the classification give much insight into how sentiments in general, in direct speech and in narrated text are related to different types of novels. That the features can be interpreted easily contributes to a better understanding of what textual features are connected to the subgenres, but the classification results themselves can still be improved. Other classifiers, for example Random Forest trees or an SVM, might yield better results but will also be less interpretable. Another important next step is to increase the corpus size to make the results more stable.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baccianella, S., Esuli, A. and Sebastiani, F. (2010). SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. 
                        Proceedings of LREC 2010.Valletta, Malta:
                         ELRA: 2200-2204. 
                         (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        García Ardeo, J. M. (2006). Eduardo Gutiérrez y sus dramas del terror. 
                        Letras
                        54: 77-94.
                    
                    
                        Henríquez Miranda, C. and Guzmán, J. (2017). A Review of Sentiment Analysis in Spanish. Una Revisión Sobre el Análisis de Sentimientos en Español. 
                        TECCIENCIA
                        12 (22): 35-48. doi: 10.18180/tecciencia.2017.22.5.
                    
                    
                        Hettinger, L., Jannidis, F., Reger, I. and Hotho, A. (2016). Classification of Literary Subgenres. 
                        DHd2016. Leipzig: Universität Leipzig: 154-158. 
                         (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kim, E., Padó, S. and Klinger, R. (2017). Prototypical Emotion Developments in Literary Genres. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017. Conference Abstracts. Montréal: McGill University. 
                         (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Manning, C. D. and Schütze, H. (1999). 
                        Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: A Lexical Database for English. 
                        Communications of the ACM
                        38 (11), 39-41.
                    
                    
                        Molina, H. B. (2011). 
                        Como crecen los hongos. La novela argentina entre 1838 y 1872. Buenos Aires: Teseo.
                    
                    
                        Padró, L. and Stanislovsky, E. (2012). FreeLing 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012). Istanbul, Turkey: ELRA: 2473-2479. 
                         (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Pang, B. and Lee, L. (2008). Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis. 
                        Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval
                        2 (1-2): 1-135.
                    
                    
                        Rivas, M. (1990). 
                        Literatura y esclavitud en la novela cubana del siglo IXI. Sevilla: Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos.
                    
                    
                        Saif, M. and Turney, P. (2013). Crowdsourcing a Word-Emotion Association Lexicon. 
                        Computational Intelligence
                        29 (3), 436-465.
                    
                    
                        Zehe, A., Becker, M., Hettinger, L., Hotho, A., Reger, I., and Jannidis, F. (2016): Prediction of Happy Endings in German Novels based on Sentiment Information. 
                        Proceedings of DMNLP, Workshop at ECML/PKDD. Riva del Garda, Italy. 
                         (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Zó, R. E. (2015). 
                        Emociones escriturales. La novela sentimental latinoamericana. Saarbrücken: Editorial Académica Española.
                    
                    
                        Winko, S. (2003). Über Regeln emotionaler Bedeutung in und von literarischen Texten. In Jannidis, F., Lauer, G., Martínez, M., Winko, S. (eds.), 
                        Regeln der Bedeutung. Berlin: de Gruyter, pp. 329-348.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Resumen
            ¿Los nodos centrales de una red social de personajes son los protagonistas de una obra de teatro? Para responder a esta pregunta utilizamos diferentes medidas de centralidad junto con otros valores cuantitativos textuales en un corpus anotado de obras dramáticas de teatro español correspondientes a la Edad de Plata (1868-1936). Los resultados señalan que la centralidad está en correlación moderada con la importancia, siendo mayor la correlación con valores cuantitativos textuales.
            Introducción
            La representación de personajes literarios mediante grafos y redes sociales (Marcus 1973, Moretti 2011) aporta nuevas herramientas al estudio literario. La interpretación del concepto de centralidad en grafos (Jannidis et al., 2017) ha sido investigada en su aplicación a las obras literarias (Moretti 2011; Rochat 2014; Trilcke et al. 2015 y 2016; Jannidis et al., 2016, Rodríguez 2016; Algee-Hewitt 2017). En la tradición hispánica, se han utilizado enfoques cuantitativos para analizar la densidad versal en obras del Siglo de Oro (Hermenegildo 1994 y Espejo 2002), estudiar tanto contenido simbólico y sociopolítico de los personajes de Galdós (Menéndez 1983), así como el origen social o caracterización de los personajes de Lope de Vega (Oleza 1984 y Oleza 2013).
            En este trabajo queremos evaluar cuatro preguntas:
            1. ¿Qué tipo de correlación hay entre las medidas de centralidad y la importancia del personaje?
            2. ¿Aparecen los personajes más importantes al comienzo del 
                dramatis personae?
            
            3. ¿Hay correlación entre importancia y valores textuales (cantidades de unidades textuales del personaje)?
            4. ¿Qué valores podríamos utilizar para distinguir a los protagonistas del resto?
            Textos y metadatos
            A diferencia de otras lenguas europeas, el español no cuenta con un gran corpus teatral anotado en XML-TEI. El proyecto 
                Biblioteca Electrónica Textual del Teatro en Español de la Edad de Plata (1868-1936) (BETTE) ha publicado veinticinco obras en XML-TEI de Lorca, Valle, Galdós, Clarín o Muñoz Seca, como repositorio GitHub (María Jiménez et al., 2017). En la versión 2.0 cada personaje ha sido anotado con diferentes metadatos:
            
            • Sexo
            • Papel en la obra (protagonista, amante, antagonista u otro)
            • Naturaleza (persona, animal, no humano...)
            • Importancia (personaje primordial, secundario o terciario)
            • Persona individual frente a grupo
            Además, se añadieron una serie de valores textuales cuantitativos de manera automática:
            • Posición en el dramatis personae (castList)
            • Cantidad de texto que pronuncia
            • Cantidad de intervenciones
            • Cantidad de referencias a su nombre
            • Cantidad de escenas en las que aparece
            Aquí un ejemplo de esa información en XML-TEI:
            
                
            
            Fig. 1. Metadatos de personaje en XML-TEI
            El valor de importancia fue asignado según los siguientes criterios:
            • Minor: si el personaje no aparece en el resumen (contenido también en el archivo TEI)
            • Secondary: si aparece en el resumen 
            • Primary: si pertenece al grupo de entre dos y cuatro personajes esenciales
            De esta manera por cada personaje (con un total de 516) tenemos:
            1. Un valor de su importancia dentro de la obra (que puede ser utilizado como 
                ground truth)
            
            2. Diferentes valores cuantitativos textuales
            3. Posición en dramatis personae
            4. Diferentes valores según medidas de centralidad
            Metodología
            La implementación para extraer, analizar, evaluar y visualizar los datos se realizó en Python mediante librerías como 
                lxml y 
                networkx. Para la creación de las redes sociales se definió la arista no direccional como la coaparición en escenas (la definición más frecuente en trabajos de este tipo): 
            
            
                
            
            Fig. 2. Red social de personajes en 
                La zapatera prodigiosa de Lorca
            
            A partir de estas redes sociales, calculamos diferentes medidas de centralidad e información sobre los nodos:
            • Degree
            • Betweenness centrality
            • Eccentricity
            • Closeness centrality
            • Load centrality
            • Current flow betweenness centrality
            • Eigenvector centrality
            • Approximate current flow betweenness centrality
            • Communicability centrality exp
            Resultados
            Analizamos la dependencia entre la importancia y el resto de valores, calculado su correlación (Spearman) 
            
                
            
            Fig. 3. Boxplots y correlaciones con importancia de todas las obras de BETTE
            Ninguna de las medidas de centralidad tiene una correlación fuerte (&gt; 0.6 o &lt; -0.6 según Evans 1996). El valor máximo (0.51 en correlación negativa) es de 
                current flow betweenness centrality, también conocida como 
                information centrality (Brandes and Fleischer 2005; Stephenson and Zelen 1989), medida que no está entre el repertorio usual de las HD.
            
            En cuanto a la posición en el 
                dramatis personae, la correlación es solo de 0.42, con una fuerte dispersión, aunque los primeros y terceros cuartiles de personajes primarios y terciarios se posicionan en rangos totalmente diferentes. Es decir, la posición en el dramatis personae sí parece aportar cierta información sobre la importancia, aunque no podemos utilizarlo de manera exclusiva (p.ej. Muñoz Seca los ordena por sexo). 
            
            En tercer lugar, las medidas de cuantitativas textuales tienen todas correlaciones notablemente más altas, llegando hasta 0.67 en la cantidad de intervenciones.
            Ante estos resultados, nos hemos preguntado si las medidas cuantitativas textuales tienen el mismo tipo de correlación con las medidas de centralidad, en concreto si la information centrality tiene una correlación más fuerte que el resto (calculando Spearman o Pearson, dependiendo si las variables son continuas u ordinales):
            
                
            
            
                Fig. 4. 
                Scatterplots 
                mostrando correlación entre las veces que un personaje habla (&lt;sp&gt;s) y otros valores
            
            Como se observa 
                current flow betweenness (o
                 information) centrality, de nuevo, es la medida de centralidad con la correlación más fuerte con la cantidad de intervenciones.
            
            Finalmente hemos observado si la distribución de centralidad o valores textuales son diferentes para los personajes protagonistas de los del resto:
            
                
            
            
                Fig. 5. Boxplots de protagonistas frente al resto de personajes
            
            La mayor diferenciación de ambos 
                boxplots entre las medidas de centralidad se consigue mediante 
                current flow betweenness (o 
                information) 
                centrality. El solapamiento menor se consigue mediante la cantidad de texto pronunciado (pers_mes_characteres). La posición relativa en el 
                dramatis personae en este caso consigue diferenciar de manera bastante clara los protagonistas del resto de personajes.
            
            Conclusiones y futuros pasos
            La anotación en detalle de información sobre los protagonistas nos permite evaluar métodos digitales. En concreto seguimos la propuesta de Moretti (2013) de abandonar la división binaria de personajes, incluyendo en nuestro caso los valores de personajes secundarios.
            Nuestros resultados muestran que, para el caso del corpus BETTE y con las formalizaciones arriba explicadas:
            1. La importancia tiene una correlación solamente entre débil y moderada con cualquier formalización de centralidad, teniendo la correlación más fuerte la 
                information centrality
            
            2. La posición en el 
                dramatis personae puede ser un indicador sobre el protagonismo de personajes o la diferenciación entre primarios y terciarios, pero no para diferenciar a estos de los secundarios
            
            3. Los valores cuantitativos textuales tienen correlaciones más fuertes. Este tipo de unidades son también las que mejor clasificarían personajes entre protagonistas y no protagonistas
            4. Es sorprendente que unidades textuales más sencillas que la centralidad en redes aporten más información tanto sobre la importancia de los personajes, así como su papel de protagonistas.
            Como otros trabajos en redes sociales (cf. Moretti 2011 y 2013; Rochat 2014) hemos trabajado con una cantidad reducida de textos. Nos gustaría comprobar estas hipótesis en mayores corpus literarios. También nos gustaría analizar los efectos que subgéneros literarios, períodos y autores ejercen sobre estos valores.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        Algee-Hewitt, Ma. (2017). 
                        Distributed Character: Quantitative Models of the English Stage, 1500-1920. Montréal: McGill University &amp; Université de Montréal, pp. 119–21.
                    
                    
                        Brandes, U. and Fleischer, D. (2005). Centrality Measures Based on Current Flow. 
                        Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS ‘05). Springer-Verlag, pp. 533–44 http://www.inf.uni-konstanz.de/algo/publications/bf-cmbcf-05.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Espejo, J. (2002). Algunos aspectos sobre la construcción del personaje en el teatro conservado de Hernán López de Yanguas (1487-¿?). 
                        Scriptura, 17, pp. 113-132.
                    
                    
                        Evans, J. D. (1996). 
                        Straightforward Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole Pub. Co.
                    
                    
                        Gómez, S., Calvo Tello, J., González, J. M. and Vilches, R. (2015). Hacia una biblioteca electrónica textual del teatro en español de 1868-1936 (BETTE). Texto Digital, 11(2), pp. 171–84.
                    
                    
                        Hermenegildo, A. (1995). Personaje y teatralidad: la experiencia de Juan del Encina en la Égloga de Cristino y Feba. In Pedraza, F.B. y González, R. (ed
                        .). Los albores de teatro español: actas de las XVII Jornadas de teatro clásico Almagro, julio de 1994. Almagro: Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, pp. 90-113.
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F., Reger, I., Krug, M., Weimer, L., Macharowsky, L. and Puppe, F. (2016). Comparison of Methods for the Identification of Main Characters in German Novels. 
                        DH2016. Krakow: ADHO, pp. 578–82 http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:LjYz88cQhboJ:dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/297+&amp;cd=1&amp;hl=es&amp;ct=clnk&amp;gl=de&amp;client=ubuntu.
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F., Kohle, H. and Rehbein, M. (eds). (2017). 
                        Digital Humanities: eine Einführung. Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler Verlag.
                    
                    
                        Jiménez, C., Martínez Carro, E., Santa María, M. T., Calvo Tello, J., Simón Parra, M., Martínez Nieto, R. B. and García Sánchez, M. (2017). BETTE: Biblioteca Electrónica Textual del Teatro en Español de la Edad de Plata. 
                        Sociedad, Políticas, Saberes. Málaga: HDH, pp. 88–91 http://hdh2017.es/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Actas-HDH2017.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Marcus, S. (1973). 
                        Mathematische Poetik. (Trans.) Mândroiu, E. Bucureşti; Frankfurt/Main: Editura Academiei ; Athenäum Verlag.
                    
                    
                        Menéndez, C. (1983). 
                        Introducción al teatro de Benito Pérez Galdós. Madrid: CSIC.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        The New Left Review (68), pp. 80–102.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). “Operationalizing”: or, the function of measurement in modern literary theory. 
                        The New Left Review (84), pp. 103-119.
                    
                    
                        Oleza Simó, J. (2013). 
                        Biblioteca Digital Arte Lope. Valencia: Universitat de València. artelope.uv.es/biblioteca.
                    
                    
                        Rochat, Y. (2014). 
                        Character Networks and Centrality. N.p. Web.
                    
                    
                        Rodríguez, D.I. (2016) 
                        Análisis de grafos en paralelo mediante Graphx. Trabajo de titulación. Universidad Católica de Loja. Ecuador. 
                    
                    
                        Stephenson, K. and Zelen, M. (1989). Rethinking centrality: Methods and examples. 
                        Social Networks, 11(1): 1–37 doi:10.1016/0378-8733(89)90016-6.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, P., Fischer, F., Göbel, M. and Kampkaspar, D. (2016). Dramen als small worlds? Netzwerkdaten zur Geschichte und Typologie deutschsprachiger Dramen 1730-1930. In Burr, E. (ed), 
                        DHd 2016 Modellierung, Vernetzung, Visualisierung. Leipzig: DHd/nisaba, pp. 254–57.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, P., Fischer, F. and Kampkaspar, D. (2015). Digitale Netzwerkanalyse dramatischer Texte. 
                        DHd-Tagung. Graz http://gams.uni-graz.at/o:dhd2015.v.040.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Introducción
            Una de las características de la cultura jurídica del antiguo régimen era la evidente polisemia de sus conceptos (Hespanha, 2002). Términos que actualmente pertenecen al plano teológico, moral, histórico y literario; tenían un valor normativo dentro del lenguaje jurídico que afectaba la práctica del gobierno y la justicia. Como explica Alejandro Agüero, la perspectiva crítica develó una lógica del orden natural del mundo y del poder político en la que el derecho escrito si bien no es irrelevante tampoco cumple el papel protagónico en la organización de las ciudades y los reinos (Agüero Nazar, 2012: 84). 
            El giro metodológico, de la exégesis a la auscultación del pensamiento jurídico a través de los conceptos centrales del discurso normativo desde la edad media europea, ha implicado cruzar las fronteras de la historia del derecho como campo especializado del estudio del derecho para entrar a discutir con la disciplina histórica. La hermenéutica jurídica trasciende por lo tanto el ejercicio de la interpretación del texto para remitirse al “sentido” (
                sinn) del derecho en un enfoque cercano a la filosofía hermenéutica (Costa, 1972: 46), cuya derivación más conocida por los historiadores la representan Gadamer y Koselleck (1997).
            
            Con este trabajo pretendemos explorar las posibilidades que brindan los métodos de análisis computacional para la historia de los conceptos y en general del lenguaje jurídico-político anterior al siglo XIX, en el entendido que el perdón permite analizar un elemento fundamental del poder político de la Edad Moderna (Foucault, 1975: 56–57), así como el proceso de secularización y de pretendida tecnificación del indulto en el marco del proyecto de modernización legislativa decimonónico (Prodi, 2000). 
            
                La construcción del corpus: modelado básico de la información.
            
            El corpus textual objeto de esta muestra está compuesto de documentos seleccionados de fondos de justicia y gobierno de archivos españoles y colombianos. Al no existir una serie documental consistente para el problema del perdón, fue necesario realizar una exploración y recolección de documentación en diversos repositorios que permitiera representar el universo de la clemencia en el ámbito del virreinato del Nuevo Reino de Granada. 
            Con el propósito de estructurar la información, se aprovechó el entorno Omeka para facilitar tanto la transcripción como la asignación de metadatos al contenido y a los elementos (Melo Flórez, 2016). Se identificaron distintos tipos documentales que se agruparon en cédulas, peticiones y concesiones de indulto, legislación, doctrina, prisiones, perdones particulares, expedientes judiciales y biografías. Para estos dos últimos elementos se construyó un tipo de elemento (ítem-type) con lo cual se puede recuperar información específica como suplicaciones, vistas fiscales, sentencias, alegatos de defensores, testimonios. 
            La transcripción de los documentos se realizó de manera tradicional intentando conservar el valor fonético o literal de las fuentes, por lo cual el texto digitalizado no fue modernizado en su ortografía ni en la acentuación. Un problema consistió en el desarrollo de abreviaturas, las cuales por lo general se indican haciendo uso de corchetes, por ejemplo, N
                vo R
                no de Granada se desarrolla como N[ue]vo R[ei]no de Granada. Por el momento se ha optado por imitar la etiqueta &lt;expan&gt; del modelo TEI del modo [expan = Nuevo Reino de Granada] con lo cual se adelanta la identificación de algunos elementos semánticos y por otra parte solventa la lectura automática del texto. La misma operación se realiza con etiquetas como &lt;abbr&gt;, &lt;gloss&gt;, &lt;note&gt;, &lt;corr&gt;, &lt;sic&gt;, &lt;placeName&gt;, &lt;geo&gt;, &lt;textLang mainLang&gt; y &lt;name type&gt;.
            
            Finalmente, la información se recuperó mediante la función 
                metadata de Omeka que permite seleccionar entre diferentes tipos de metadatos para luego exportarlos en HTML y convertirlos a texto plano (Turkel and Crymble, 2012). Con el propósito de visualizar el cambio de significado el corpus se segmentó en seis grupos temporales: 1739-1775, 1776-1789, 1790-1807, 1808-1818, 1819-1829, 1830-1842.
            
            Segmentación
            Antes del análisis textual, el texto requiere ser 
                tokenizado, es decir, segmentado en unidades lingüísticas con la intención de conocer las métricas de las fuentes (Mikheev, 2005). Este proceso tiene el propósito de agrupar caracteres alfanuméricos en palabras, diferenciar tipos (número de palabras diferentes en un corpus), la frecuencia de cada palabra representada como 
                tokens, y aplicar el proceso de 
                stemming (reducir las palabras a su raíz) y la lematización (formas flexionadas de una palabra). Por lo tanto, en esta etapa, el análisis se reduce a la estructura básica del texto, su construcción y la medición del peso de sus elementos (Jockers, 2013: 4). El resultado se presenta en la tabla 1, aunque el primer segmento (1700-1775) revela la disparidad temporal respecto a las demás divisiones, por lo cual se comprende deberá corregir esta discrepancia en un futuro ejercicio. Los periodos con mayor cantidad de tokens están representados por aquellas etapas más convulsas del periodo: la rebelión de los comunes de 1781 y el proceso de revolución e independencia desde 1808 hasta 1830.
            
            
                
                    Corpus
                    Tokens
                    Types
                    Lemmas
                
                
                    1700-1775
                    112136
                    15514
                    15514
                
                
                    1808-1818
                    93301
                    12198
                    12538
                
                
                    1776-1790
                    80015
                    11438
                    11714
                
                
                    1819-1830
                    51548
                    8510
                    8605
                
                
                    1830-1842
                    32968
                    6578
                    6736
                
                
                    1790-1808
                    25885
                    5932
                    6043
                
            
            Tabla 1. Resultados del proceso de segmentación del corpus por segmentos
            La abundancia de tipos y lemas se deriva de la cantidad de variaciones que el software no tiene la capacidad de deducir formas de una misma palabra, por ejemplo, indulto e yndulto es leído como dos vocablos separadas. La manera más simple de solucionar este inconveniente consiste en modernizar la ortografía de las expresiones arcaicas, sin embargo, esto disociaría el corpus de las fuentes doctrinales y legales impresas, cuya información se recupera por técnicas de OCR. En este caso nos remitimos nuevamente a la representación de grafemas, tarea propia de la paleografía, y su uso por parte de escribanos en la Edad Moderna, así como las posibilidades de semi-automatización y estandarización de esta tarea.
            Análisis y visualización
            La colocación es un fenómeno léxico que da cuenta de las unidades fraseológicas más allá de las locuciones con significado propio. Su interpretación se fundamenta en la frecuencia estadística con la cual ciertos vocablos se relacionan entre sí y cuál es la relevancia de dicha asociación (Alonso Ramos, 1995: 9–28). En este sentido, consideramos esta es una de las estrategias de la lingüística que mejor podemos aprovechar para percibir un posible cambio semántico (Pazos-Bretaña, 2016). Para realizar el análisis de colocación nos servimos de la herramienta informática 
                LancsBox (Brezina et al., 2015), así como de las propuestas metodológicas del lingüista Paul Baker (2016: 142–48). Cada segmento del corpus fue interpretado con la opción “GraphColl” del mencionado programa, la cual se configuró con una estrategia estadística MI (
                mutual information statistic) que favorece las relaciones léxicas entre palabras evitando al mismo tiempo artículos de uso frecuente como “el”, “la” o “de”. Se utilizó la extensión de análisis estándar de cinco palabras hacia la izquierda y la derecha del término.
            
            El resultado de cada segmento se asemeja al presentado en la gráfica 1, en el cual se despliegan los valores más significativos de la colocación. En este ejemplo, el término indulto (representado con caracteres comodín para solventar los problemas de 
                semmatization y lematización) se despliega en una red que comprende en un primer nivel los términos real, facultad, gracia, perdón, cédula, delito, reos, presos, concesión, entre otros. Todos estos son términos que coinciden con el discurso tradicional del perdón real que dominó durante la Edad Moderna castellana (Rodríguez Flores, 1971; Sandoval Parra, 2014). 
            
            
                
            
            Gráfica 1. Red semántica centrada en el concepto indulto (1739-1775). R5-L5, MI(5)
            Si se compara con la gráfica 2, el vocablo perdón es reemplazado por el nombre gracia, separándose completamente los términos perdón, clemencia y misericordia del nombre indulto, aunque siguen formando parte de las impetraciones y de las cartas de perdón de parte. Esto parece indicar que en el lenguaje de la práctica jurídico-política hubo un fenómeno de metonimia en el cual la gracia reemplazó al perdón, en este caso, gracia era equivalente a perdón pero no a indulto (por ello se añadiría la conjunción copulativa “indulto y gracia”).
            
                
            
            Gráfica 2. Red semántica centrada en el concepto indulto (1790-1807). R5-L5, MI(5)
            Proyecciones
            Este ejercicio abarca varios procesos relevantes para el análisis de corpus de información histórica no estructurada. Con el avance de la digitalización de fuentes documentales en archivos y bibliotecas en ambos lados del Atlántico la tarea de recuperación y macroanálisis de la información se hace más compleja, por lo cual es necesario ya no sólo introducir metodologías computacionales utilizadas en contextos anglosajones, sino construir estrategias propias que permitan lidiar con una tradición paleográfica y archivística particular.
            Las tareas inmediatas que se plantean para este proyecto incluyen el resolver la transcripción de documentos para lo cual se está explorando la plataforma Omeka S, así como la posible exportación de elementos y modelarlos en XML-TEI. Del mismo modo, se pretende mejorar el modelo de segmentación construyendo una estrategia para resolver las disparidades grafológicas. Se espera que estos ejercicios en un futuro pueden ser relevantes para los proyectos de digitalización actuales en Latinoamérica.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        Agüero Nazar, A. (2012). Historia política e Historia crítica del derecho: convergencias y divergencias. 
                        PolHis, 
                        5(10): 81–88.
                    
                    
                        Alonso Ramos, M. (1995). Hacia una definición del concepto de colocación: de J. R. Firth a I. A. Mel’ĉuk. 
                        Revista de Lexicografía, 
                        1: 9–28.
                    
                    
                        Baker, P. (2016). The shapes of collocation. 
                        International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 
                        21(2): 139–64 doi:10.1075/ijcl.21.2.01bak.
                    
                    
                        Brezina, V., McEnery, T. and Wattam, S. (2015). Collocations in context: A new perspective on collocation networks. 
                        International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 
                        20(2): 139–73 doi:10.1075/ijcl.20.2.01bre.
                    
                    
                        Costa, P. (1972). Semantica e storia del pensiero giuridico. 
                        Quaderni fiorentini per la storia del pensiero giuridico moderno, 
                        1(1): 45–87.
                    
                    
                        Foucault, M. (1975). 
                        Surveiller et punir: naissance de la prison. Paris: Gallimard.
                    
                    
                        Gadamer, H.-G. and Koselleck, R. (1997). 
                        Historia y hermenéutica. (Ed.) Villacañas, J. L. &amp; Oncina Coves, F. Barcelona: Paidós.
                    
                    
                        Hespanha, A. M. (2002). 
                        Cultura jurídica europea: síntesis de un milenio. (Trans.) Soler, I. and C. Valera Madrid: Tecnos.
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. L. (2013). 
                        Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. (Topics in the Digital Humanities). Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    
                        Melo Flórez, J. A. (2016). Metadatos 
                        Cibercliografía http://cibercliografia.org/manuales/crear-un-fichero-de-investigacion-con-omeka/metadatos/ (accessed 28 April 2018).
                    
                    
                        Mikheev, A. (2005). Text Segmentation. In Mitkov, R. (ed), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199276349.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199276349-e-10 (accessed 25 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Pazos-Bretaña, J.-M. (2016). El efecto de la historia sobre el cambio semántico en el español peninsular. 
                        Itinerarios: revista de estudios lingüisticos, literarios, históricos y antropológicos(23): 123–39.
                    
                    
                        Prodi, P. (2000). 
                        Una Storia Della Giustizia: Dal Pluralismo Dei Fori Al Moderno Dualismo Tra Coscienza e Diritto. (Collezione Di Testi e Di Studi). Bologna: Il mulino.
                    
                    
                        Rodríguez Flores, M. I. (1971). 
                        El perdón real en Castilla (siglos XIII-XVIII). Salamanca: Universidad de Salamanca.
                    
                    
                        Sandoval Parra, V. (2014). 
                        Manera de Galardón: Merced Pecuniaria y Extranjería En El Siglo XVII. (Sección de Obras de Historia). Madrid: Fondo de Cultura Económica : Red Columnaria.
                    
                    
                        Turkel, W. J. and Crymble, A. (2012). From HTML to List of Words (part 2). 
                        Programming Historian https://programminghistorian.org/lessons/from-html-to-list-of-words-2 (accessed 28 April 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Japanese books in the Edo period (1603-1868) were mainly published by woodblock print. Their caligraphic writing style using differnt characters prevents native Japanese people to read and understand the content, and the knowledge of the past has been buried in libraries. To change this situation, NIJL-NW project started a ten-year mass digitization program to create the open dataset of 300,000 old Japanese books [7]. To take advantage of emerging big data of Japanese culture, we are working on the development of “deep access” technology to make the content of books accessible by structuring the content by either manually or automatically. 
                This paper focuses on a series of old Japanse books called “Bukan” [6]. Bukan offers the directory of families of the state king (Daimyo) and bureaucrats of the central government (Bakufu) in the Edo period. Bukan has a unique history. It had been a best seller book for as long as 100 to 200 years, had been updated and published frequently with a peak frequency of a few times in a month, and had been the battle field of two commercial publishers competing each other to improve the quality of their own Bukan editions. Because of good coverage and quality of Bukan, the comprehensive analysis of Bukan is expected to improve our understanding on the political, administrative, and cultural structure in the Edo period. 
                Comprehensive analysis cannot be achieved, however, without a solution to the problem of multiple versions. Bukan had been published for a long period with high frequency, and it is not known how many versions had been published, or how to decide the proper ordering of existing versions. Moreover, the complete transcription of Bukan is not realistic due to a large amount of text across multipe versions. In short, two major problems, management of versions and reduction of transcription, need to be solved for comprehensive analysis of Bukan
            
            
                Method 
                We first propose the concept of “differential reading,” which refers to the mode of reading books, such as close reading and distant reading. It is a reading focusing only on changes between different versions with support from digital tools. Algorithms to detect changes in different versions are two-fold; namely text-based and image-based approaches. 
                Text-based change detection is effective for manuscripts. Many tools, such as CollateX [2] and ViTA [9], have been developed for text comparison, or Versioning Machine [8], for structured text or TEI (Text Encoding Initiative). In the case of woodblock print, however, image-based change detection has a number of advantages. In the terminology of old Japanese bibliography, versions can be further classified into “publication” and “correction,” where the former refers to the complete re-creation of the woodblock, while the latter refers to the application of small patches to the woodblock. Change detection on publication is an easy problem for image processing, and change detection on correction is also feasible by image matching because only a small part is corrected and other parts remain the same. Other advantages of image-based change detection include transcription-less change detection and non-textual change detection. 
                By taking advantage of image-based change detection, we formulate differential reading as a two-step process; namely machines work first to detect changes, and humans work next to read changes. 
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                Figure 1: Comparison of two different versions of Bukan. Left: Kansei Bukan (1789); middle: Kansei Bukan (1791); right; the result of change detection, where red color represents regions present only on the 1789 version, and blue, the 1791 version.
            
            
                Results
                An image-based change detection algorithm was implemented on image processing library OpenCV 2.4 with a combination of algorithms such as FAST for feature detection, BRIEF for feature description, and Hamming distance for feature matching. In addition, RANSAC was used for estimating homography matrix for matching two images. Changes are then emphasized using a coloring scheme by assigning red and blue for large difference in pixel values and white for small difference in pixel values.
                We compared two different versions of Bukan, Kansei Bukan (1789) [3] and Kansei Bukan (1791) [4] to check if the image-based change detection algorithm can identify changes between versions two years apart. Figure 1 shows the result of image-based change detection. It is clear that a part of the page, such as the genealogy of the family, has been changed from the 1789 version to the 1791 version. In the workflow of differential transcription, machine gernerated change infromation will be transferred to planned differential reading interface so that humans can focus only on a part of the image. 
                Differential transcription needs base transcription, on which transcription of subsequent versions depend. Initially the database of “Bukan Complete Collection” [1] uses Kansei Bukan (1789) as the base transcription. The database not only contains basic information about Daimyo, but also offers visualization about “Sankin Kotai,” which is a required travel for Daimyo between their states and Edo city to meet Shogun (the national leader) in every two years or more often. Animated visualization in Figure 2 shows spatio-temporal and seasonal patterns of their trips coordinated by Bakufu. The database also offers the graphic design collection of Daimyo, such as family emblem, costumes, and tools they used for official activities.
                We found one important missing element in creating the database; namely the standard ID system agreed within the community. Bukan is a collection of entities, such as people and political organization that changes over time. To uniquely identify entities appearing in different sources and to create a time-series database of linked entities, we need the standard ID system in the Edo period through collaboration with historians. With a proper ID system, this system may evolve into the information infrastructure of people and political entities for the historical studies of the Edo period.
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                Figure 2: Bukan Complete Collection website. Left: the list of Daimyo family emblems; right: animated visualization of spatio-temporal patterns of Daimyo trips. Only Japanese website is available at this moment 
            
            
                Discussion and Conclusion
                The advantage of differential reading is two-fold. First, when reading two similar versions, differential reading has advantage over close reading by reducing the burden of human attention. A traditional approach of side-by-side comparison is error-prone, and machines can be optimized for pixel-level comparison without loss of attention by fatigue. For this type of task, human-machine collaboration should evolve into a combination that machines are in charge of low-level change detection while humans are in charge of high-level interpretation. Second, differential reading can be used as a component for differential transcription. The base transcription is required in any case, but the amount of transcription for subsequent versions is significantly reduced. A version management system may play an important role to optimize the transcription workflow, which is left for future work.
                A proposed approach of differential transcription by human-machine collaboration is not only effective for Bukan, but also applicable to other woodblock print books with different versions. Our tools have been developed on IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework), which allows us to apply our tools not only on NIJL-NW datasets but other datasets in the same manner. In the future, we plan to make a user interface on top of our IIIF Curation Viewer [5] and combine it with a workflow management tool to support efficient work of transcriptors. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bukan Complete Collection, 
                        http://codh.rois.ac.jp/bukan/, (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        CollateX, 
                        https://collatex.net/, (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kansei Bukan (1789), 
                        https://doi.org/10.20730/200018823
                    
                    
                        Kansei Bukan (1791), 
                        https://doi.org/10.20730/200018825
                    
                    
                        IIIF Curation Viewer, 
                        http://codh.rois.ac.jp/software/iiif-curation-viewer/, (accessed April 27, 2018).
                    
                    
                        KITAMOTO, A., et.al. (2017) Structuring Time-Series Historical Sources by Human-Machine Specialization: Toward the Construction of Edo Information Platform Referring to “Bukan”, 
                        IPSJ SIG Computers and the Humanities Symposium 2017, pp. 273-280 (in Japanese).
                    
                    
                        NIJL-NW project, 
                        http://www.nijl.ac.jp/pages/cijproject/index_e.html, (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        Versioning Machine, 
                        http://v-machine.org/, (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                    
                        ViTA (Visualization for Text Alignment), 
                        http://ovii.oerc.ox.ac.uk/vita/, (accessed April 27 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The edition of the works of Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), entitled 
                    Leonhardi Euleri Opera omnia (LEOO), is a monument of scholarship known to most historians of science. Leonhard Euler’s 
                    Opera omnia consists of 81 volumes, 76 of which have already been published in paper format as four series of books. Volume IV, LEOO IV, of the fourth series contains the correspondence between Leonhard Euler and the German mathematician Christian Goldbach, encompassing 200 letters sent over 35 years (Martin Mattmüller, 2015). The aim of our project is to present this volume to researchers in science and history as a digital edition via the Bernoulli-Euler Online Platform, BEOL (Tobias Schweizer, 2017). BEOL is implemented using Knora (Benjamin Geer, 2017), a generic virtual research environment for the humanities. In this environment, scientists have access to all edited materials of LEOO IV, and can also annotate and edit material in their private workspace and share the results of their research with others. In Knora, the contents of the LEOO IV volume can be represented as a directed graph providing an overview of the network of different entities (letters, persons, bibliographic items, etc.). The tools provided in this environment are intended to facilitate research on the origin of ideas and findings.
                
                Technical steps
                LEOO IV consists of two parts: one with transcriptions of the letters in the original languages (Latin and German), and another with English translations of the letters. LaTeX is used to edit both text and mathematical formulas. The volume also contains an index of persons, a bibliography of cited works by Euler, and a general bibliography. The project aims to import all this content into Knora, which represents data as RDF graphs using OWL ontologies (Pascal Hitzler, 2012). Therefore, ontologies are created to describe the structure of the texts and entities of this edition. The data itself must then be converted to XML and imported into Knora.
                
                    
                        Specifying the structure of the data
                    
                    The data model specifying the structure of the data to be imported must be given in the form of OWL ontologies.
                        
                             A user interface for designing these ontologies is under development.
                         All bibliographical items, as well as persons in the name index of the edition, are represented internally as RDF triples. For example, every person is represented as an RDF resource belonging to the OWL class beol:Person, which has properties such as beol:hasFamilyName. The property beol:hasIAFIdentifier refers to the IAF/GND dataset maintained by German national library
                        
                             Integrated Authority File, Deutsche National Bibliothek, 
                                
                                    http://www.dnb.de/EN/Standardisierung/GND/gnd_node.html
                                
                            
                        , and ensures the uniqueness of each person mentioned in the BEOL platform.
                    
                    Figure.1 illustrates a part of the generic bibliography ontology, which we have defined to describe all the bibliographical information needed in the BEOL platform (publication types, manuscripts, publishers, etc.). The prefix biblio refers to this ontology, beol refers to the ontology of BEOL-specific entities, and knora-base is the standard Knora ontology, which defines the basic data structures that Knora works with. Ellipses represent types or classes of resources, arrows semantically defined properties attached to them, and rectangles their literal values.
                    In Knora, a text document (stored in a knora-base:TextValue) can contain markup as well as text. Internally, markup is stored separately from the text, using an RDF-based standoff format
                        
                             Text with Standoff Markup, 
                                
                                    http://www.knora.org/documentation/manual/rst/knora-ontologies/knora-base.html#text-with-standoff-markup
                                
                            
                        . A project such as BEOL defines a mapping between XML and Knora’s standoff/RDF markup; texts can then be imported from XML into standoff and exported from standoff back into identical XML
                        
                             Creating a Custom Mapping, 
                                
                                    http://www.knora.org/documentation/manual/rst/knora-api-server/api_v1/create-a-mapping.html#creating-a-custom-mapping
                                
                            
                        . Standoff/RDF markup can contain links to other resources, such as a person or a bibliographical entity mentioned in a text. The Knora API server ensures that the target of the link exists. Standoff links are directed statements, but can easily be queried as incoming links to a given resource.
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 1. OWL ontology for bibliographical data
                    We have also defined a data model for letters and their metadata such as author, recipient, date, etc., which provides a network of the correspondence included in the edition. Figure.2 illustrates an excerpt from ontology of the whole LEOO IV project.
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 2. Excerpt from the LEOO IV project data model 
                
                
                    
                        Importing data into the BEOL platform
                    
                    First, the index of persons and the bibliographical items of LEOO IV are written in XML format, using XML schemas that are automatically generated by the Knora API server, based on the ontologies defined for the project. This XML data is then validated against these schemas. After validation, the data can be imported in a single API request (an HTTP POST request to the Knora API server).
                    Second, the text of the letters is imported using a similar process. Although the text has been transcribed in LaTeX, these transcriptions are first converted to XML to ensure the homogeneity of texts from different editions, and to make it possible to present texts as TEI/XML by applying XSL transformations. The LaTeXML tool (Miller, 2017), with the addition of some BEOL-specific Perl scripts, is used to convert LaTeX to XML. All references to persons and bibliographical items within the text of the letters are replaced with references to the corresponding resources in BEOL, making them queryable via the Knora API. The XML representing the letters is then imported using the same process as for the bibliographical data.
                    Future work
                    Since we have developed the methodology for this type of digital edition in a generic way, we expect to be able to integrate all the other recent volumes of Leonhard Euler’s 
                        Opera omnia, which have also been edited using LaTeX. The older volumes in printed form should be scanned, their text should be recognized via OCR, and their structure should be defined with markup.
                    
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    Figure 3. Original figure (left), detected labels (middle), reconstructed figure (right)
                    Most of the older volumes contain figures that are reproduced from scanned letters. We are working on a machine learning algorithm to interpret these figures as well as their labels, so they can be automatically redrawn as vector graphics, see Figure. 3.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Benjamin Geer, et al (2016). 
                        Knowledge, Organization, Representation, and Annotation. Digital Humanities Lab 
                        
                            http://www.knora.org/
                        .
                    
                    
                        Martin Mattmüller, F. L. (ed). (2015). 
                        Leonhardi Euleri Opera Omnia: Correspondence of Leonhard Euler with Christian Goldbach. Vol. IVA/4. Basel.
                    
                    
                        Miller, B. R. (2017). 
                        LaTeXML: A Latex to Xml/Html/Mathml Converter. 
                        
                            http://dlmf.nist.gov/LaTeXML/
                        .
                    
                    
                        Pascal Hitzler, et al (2012). 
                        OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Primer (Second Edition). W3C 
                        
                            http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-owl2-primer-20121211/
                        .
                    
                    
                        Tobias Schweizer, et al (2017). Integrating historical scientific texts into the Bernoulli-Euler online platform. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017. 
                        
                            https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/147/147.pdf
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    


    
        
            
                @LIBB: Changing Literacies for the Boundless Book
                
                    
                        Brillenburg Wurth
                        Catharina Anna
                    
                    Utrecht University, Netherlands, The
                    c.a.w.brillenburgwurth@uu.nl
                
                
                    
                        Poletti
                        Anna
                    
                    Monash University, Australia
                    anna.poletti@monash.edu
                
                
                    
                        Van Maas
                        Sander Adriaan
                    
                    University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, The
                    vanmaas@uva.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    boundless book analog digital changing literacies
                
                
                    digital humanities - nature and significance
                    literary studies
                    hypertext
                    creative and performing arts
                    including writing
                    genre-specific studies: prose
                    poetry
                    drama
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Description 
            The open @LiBB workshop explores how the codex has been fanning out into an ‘open’, boundless book and how this affects the way we engage with literature today. Standard research on changing literacies in the digital age focuses on the impact of new media technologies on existing cultural and artistic competences. Such research shows how ‘old’ literacies associated with print culture make way for ‘new’ cultural and artistic literacies of the digital. By contrast, this workshop aims to establish how the codex is being unbound, and literary competences are being transformed, today in a creative contrast between the analog and digital. The idea of the boundless book uniquely allows us to probe the dynamics of changing literacies between offline and online cultures. How do these changes affect comparative literature as a humanist discipline? The workshop aims to make an inventory of effects of the boundless book, and reconsider the ‘crisis’ of close reading in the digital age. This workshop is extremely relevant to digital humanities research, as it not only considers technologies of digitization with respect to literature but also the transformation of literary and creative strategies of presentation. How does digitization inform a ‘material turn’ in literature today? What kinds of frameworks do we need to understand this new material turn? 
            Comparative literature scholars are acutely aware of the challenges the Internet is posing to literature and print-based scholarship. The digitization of literature already started in 1949, with the development of the concordance of the works of Thomas Aquinas on punch cards, but only took off in 1971 with the creation of Project Gutenberg and its quest for open access. In the 1990s–2000s, an early phase of research on the interplay between page and screen involved the exploration of new modes of text editing in cyberspace (McGann); new horizons for the literary as hypertext, networked fiction, and digital poetry; and the history of electronic text in relation to the avant-gardes (Wardrip-Fruin). This early phase—represented by scholars like Robert Coover—was characterized by digital optimism: the digital was posited as the culmination of the ‘analog’ book, the fullest realization of textual potentialities in editing, or nonlinear writing modes that would change our mode of thinking and open up new imaginative pathways. 
            Today, this early phase has been replaced by the recognition that new media do not necessarily fulfill the old. They co-exist in a complex media ecology (Hayles, Pressman, Brillenburg). Yet there is a strong sense of cultural change among leading literary scholars such as Katherine Hayles and Kathleen Fitzpatrick who are considering the transition from ‘print’ to digital culture, from book to pad, from paper- to digitally based humanities research. Though reading has a long and varied history, the Internet is now creating a new sense of urgency about changing modes of ‘close’ reading, analysis, and literary knowledge. 
            The @LiBB workshop intervenes in this debate on shifting media ecologies with the claim that changing literary competences today can only be gauged in an intermedial framework. This framework takes into account digital 
                and ‘analog’ reinventions of the book and the page: there is no transition; there is interplay. The @LiBB workshop refers to these reinventions as the ‘boundless book’. The idea of the boundless book refers to the book as a system and tradition mutating or proliferating beyond recognition, its binding literally or metaphorically undone, its status yet indefinable (Sussman). Examples of boundless books are the bookworks of Brian Dettmer, discarded knowledge books rift open by digital information flows, or the screenfold 
                Codex Expangliesis:
                From Columbus to the Border Patrol (1998; 2001) by Enrique Chagoya, 
                Guillermo Gomez-Pena, and Felicia Rice. 
                Codex remakes 
                the book into a nonlinear system of images and icons to be read forward and backward at once, without end. At the same time, the boundless book materializes in cyberspace as a design structure hyperlinked into a vast electronic universe, or as an open space networked between multiple media platforms, such as Tan Lin’s reworking of the codex into a broadcasting medium in HEATH or 7CV. Such electronic boundless books fit in with the concept of future narratives coined by Christoph Bode and his research group: narratives that consist of two or multiple nodes rather than a set of linearly organized events. We will specifically pay attention to the growing significance of database aesthetics in both digital and ‘analog’ literature today, and how
                re
                counting has given way to counting (Ernst).
            
            
                Questions that will be raised in the workshop are: What new concepts and analytical tools do we have to analyze and categorize such ‘boundless’ works? What new literacies does the boundless book require, and which new narratological models do new (or future) modes of storytelling demand? What is the relation between such new modes and changing media technologies in the present? How can we compare comparable developments in the other arts? Why is it that music, and the cut-up and sampling techniques it has long employed, continues to be a major source of inspiration for experimental writers in the digital age?
            
            Participants 
            The organizers of the workshop seek participants from the fields of digital humanities, comparative literature and comparative arts, book history, and zine studies to present papers and engage in lively debates. The workshop will be open to graduate and postgraduate students, as well as to early career researchers from the interdisciplinary field of comparative literature, the arts, intermediality, and digital humanities. 
            Structure 
            10.10 AM: Welcome and Introduction 
            10.20–11.00: Plenary: @LIBB: Boundless Books and Media Divergence—Professor Kiene Brillenburg Wurth, Utrecht University
            11.00–11.15: Questions 
            11.15–11.55: Plenary: @LIBB: Zines: New Reading Strategies for the Digital Age—Professor Anna Poletti, Monash University 
            11.55–12.10: Questions 
            12.10–13.00: Lunch 
            13.15–13.55: Plenary: @LIBB: The Writing of Sound: On Scripts, Scores and Archives—Professor Sander van Maas, University of Amsterdam 
            13.55–14.10: Questions 
            14.15–15.15 / 15.30–17.30: @LIBB WORKSHOP on the basis of: 
            A. A set of primary texts to be read prior to the workshop: 
             • Kunzru, H. (2013). 
                Memory Palace. Curated by Laurie Britton Newell and Ligaya Salazar. V&amp;A Publishing, London. 
            
             • 
                McCarthy, T. (2015).
                Satin Island
                . Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
            
             • 
                Two digital works selected by the participants from the Electronic Literature Collection vols 1 and 2 (http://collection.eliterature.org) or from the ELMCIP anthology of European electronic literature (http://anthology.elmcip.net). 
            
            
                B. A list of key secondary works:
            
             • Emerson, L. (2014). Reading Writing Interfaces. In 
                From the Digital to the Bookbound. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
            
             • Ernst, W. (2013). 
                Digital Memory and the Archive. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
            
             • Hayles, N. K. (2012). 
                How We Think. Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
            
             • Schnapp, J. (2012). 
                The Electric Information Age Book: McLuhan / Agel / Fiore and the Experimental Paperback, with Adam Michaels. Intr. Steven Heller. Princeton Architectural Press, New York.
            
             • Siegert, B. (2003). 
                Passage des Digitalen. Brinkman und Bose, Berline. [Also: B. Siegert (2014). 
                Cultural Techniques: Grids, Filters, Doors, and Other Articulations of the Real. Fordham University Press, New York.] 
            
            During the afternoon workshop, the workshop organizers will discuss and analyze in depth the listed works with the workshop participants. Participants will briefly present their selected hypertextual works. We will have an open discussion and collect all insights and criticisms proposed by the participants into a working document. This document may form the basis for an eventual (online) publication. 
            Required Technological Support 
            A computer with a beamer and a projection screen. 
            Description of the Presenters 
            
                Kiene Brillenburg Wurth is full professor of literature and comparative media at Utrecht University, the Netherlands, and 
                project leader of the NWO-funded VIDI research project Back to the Book. Her books include
                Between Page and Screen: Remaking Literature through Cinema and Cyberspace
                (Fordham UP / Oxford UP),
                Musically Sublime
                (Fordham UP), and with Ann Rigney,
                The Life of Texts
                (Amsterdam UP). She has published widely in peer-reviewed volumes and journals. Forthcoming is a volume on
                Book Presence
                . She is finishing a new monograph titled
                Back to the Book: ‘Analog’ Literature in a ‘Digital’ Age
                .
            
            
                Anna Poletti
                is assistant professor with the Faculty of Arts at Monash University, and a specialist in the field of zines, print culture, and online life writing. Her books include
                Identity Technologies: Constructing the Self Online
                (University of Wisconsin Press) and
                Intimate Ephemera: Reading Young Lives in Australian Zine Culture
                (Melbourne University Publishing). She is editor of special issues and author of numerous articles in peer-reviewed journals.
            
            
                Sander van Maas
                is assistant professor of musicology and creative industries at the University of Amsterdam and visiting professor at the London College of Music.
                He authored
                The Reinvention of Religious Music
                (Fordham UP) and has edited several volumes, including
                Thresholds of Listening: Sound, Technics, Space
                (Fordham UP) and
                Contemporary Music and Spirituality
                (Ashgate). He specializes in creative industries and mediatheoretical approaches to music.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Remote Health Support System for Pregnant Women in Rural Areas
                
                    
                        chaki
                        Rituparna
                    
                    University of Calcutta, India
                    rchaki@ieee.org
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Health support
                    Rural areas
                    Vehicular Adhoc Network
                    Sensor Network
                    Response
                
                
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The primary objective of this proposal is to present a pervasive and wearable logic that will act as a doctor (or watchdog) for the pregnant women of remote areas. This logic is aimed to monitor the pregnant women’s health condition. It is well known that in countries such as India and Australia, large parts of the country are not easily reachable by road. In remote places, pregnant women face several risk factors besides the normal ones associated with pregnancy, such as,
             • A woman may feel sick while she is busy in her housework at her village and no one is there to assist her. 
             • In rural areas, teenage motherhood is a serious problem. Babies born to teenage mothers have an increased risk of pre-term birth, low birth weight, and associated complications. 
             • Pregnant mothers living in remote areas usually do not have the same access to prenatal care as women living in rural areas. 
             • Women in remote areas also involve themselves in risky hard work, such as farming, carrying heavy loads, etc.
            Due to the locational disadvantage, social beliefs, and lack of money, women are reluctant to visit the health centres, which might be situated quite a distance away. In such situations, monitoring of sudden changes in physiological and physical factors like accelerated pulse rate, blood pressure, glucose rate, sudden body movement, and body temperature would be helpful in assisting the pregnant women. 
            Our logic aims to sense the above-mentioned physiological and physical parameters of the woman. If it senses something out of ordinary from the sensor data it sends an alarm to the server of nearest health sub-centre. In case the people at the sub-centre are unable to manage the sensed information, they send a suggestion to the woman’s phone to provide temporary relief. Otherwise, they send an alarm message to a PSH (Public Service Health) centre. PSH takes the necessary action to monitor that woman.
            Our logic helps in monitoring the health condition of pregnant women, who have the knowledge that their doctors are always with them through this device. 
            
                Proposed Logic
            
            In describing the detailed methodology, the whole system is explained as relates to the overall system architecture and a description of each module. 
            WEARABLE SENSOR BAND
            
                
            
            
                 The wearable sensor band is attached to the wrist of the pregnant woman. The sensor band is built around five sensors that act in concert simultaneously and in real time to provide a holistic, precise, and accurate view of the woman’s health immediately and over extended periods of time and even in dangerous situations.
            
            The 3D accelerometer detects even the smallest movement. It measures the rate of change of velocity of the device, both in terms of magnitude (g-force) and direction (3 axes). This can range from whole-body movement, like walking or running or a sudden fall to smaller movements also.
            By measuring the user’s skin surface temperature, the temperature sensor provides a more accurate reading of exertion in an activity state. By measuring how the body is regulating skin temperature, the sensor band gets a much better picture of how a person’s body is responding to one’s physical activity or mental state. The body regulates itself to keep running at just the right temperature.
            The wearable glucometer measures women’s glucose levels.
            The heart rate sensor employs reflectance mode photoplethysmography to extract the pulse signal from the wrist, which is equivalent to the heartbeat of a pregnant woman. 
            Fetal heart rate is also measured by a fetal heart rate monitoring sensor. 
            The controller on the sensor band acquires data from the sensors and sends it to the smart phone of the user through low-power Bluetooth technology.
            Different and fusion sensor data are clustered among several groups according to their source, pregnant women’s behaviour, and locational context. This work implements classification algorithms to classify the new data to which group it belongs. 
                Multi-classifiers are developed for each different cluster group. All classifiers are trained with sensor data using a supervised learning algorithm.
            
            The smart phone has a machine learning algorithm such as a decision tree to decide whether the acquired sensor data have crossed the threshold value. The threshold is precalculated and stored in the smart phone based on laboratory and field testing results. When the accumulated data cross the threshold value, the smart phone sends an alert message with its location through the GSM network (with short message service) to the server, which resides with a sub-health center and the PSH. The server is equipped with a GSM modem. The server’s database will contain the user’s name and home address. The location where the event has occurred and time of the event are received by the server through the alert SMS. After receiving the alert message, the server will flash an alarm on its dashboard. 
            Modular Description
            
                Software Functionalities of the Sensor Band
            
             • Establishing and maintaining Bluetooth connectivity with the smart phone of the user.
             • Acquisition of heart rate of mother and fetus, body movement of pregnant mother (such as a sudden fall downstairs, a sudden accident) during household work, and blood sugar and body temperature of mother signals at a predefined sampling rate.
             • Transmission of the acquired signals to the smart phone device through Bluetooth (Figure 2).
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Sensor band transfers acquired signal to the smart phone through Bluetooth.
            
                Software Functionalities of the Smart Phone
            
             • Acquisition of data from the sensor band via Bluetooth at regular time intervals.
             • Different and fusion sensors data are clustered into different groups using a clustering algorithm.
             • The clustering algorithm is designed based on the data value received from sensor band and locational content.
             • Multi-classifiers are developed for each different cluster group. 
             • All classifiers are trained with sensor data using supervised learning algorithm.
             • Application of decision tree algorithm on the acquired sensor data to determine whether the threshold value has been exceeded.
             • Determination of GPS location and event time and sending of an alert message to the server, which resides at the public sub-health center.
            
                Functionalities of Public Sub-Health Centre
            
             • Logging of alarm events.
             • Annunciation of alarm messages on the dashboard with user location, time, identification, and data value of sensor band. 
             • Server database contains patient ID, name, address, normal heart rate of mother and fetus, blood sugar level of mother during previous checkup, and previous checkup date.
             • If datavalue &gt; m*threshold
             * Sending an alarm message to PSH.
             • Else
             * Send suggestion to the patient’s mobile.
        
    



    
        
            
                TEI HackAThon: Building Tools for TEI Collections
                
                    
                        Cummings
                        James C.
                    
                    University of Oxford, United Kingdom
                    James.Cummings@it.ox.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    TEI
                    hacking
                    text analysis
                    encoding
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    information retrieval
                    software design and development
                    text analysis
                    xml
                    standards and interoperability
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (TEI) have been used throughout numerous disciplines of the field of digital humanities to mark up digital texts for many years. Doing so has produced huge numbers of TEI collections underlying leading digital editions, projects, and other resources. These digital texts are most often transformed for display as websites, camera-ready copy, or for import into other systems for processing, analysis, or visualization. While the TEI Consortium provides XSLT stylesheets for transformation to and from many formats, and both commercial and open-source software is TEI-aware, there is little standardisation across multiple projects in implementation of querying, searching, analysing, and visualising TEI-encoded texts. The proposals for documentation of intended processing models that forms part of the TEI Simple project should eventually help standardise the recording of this information. TEI encoding is taught frequently in the digital humanities, but the development of TEI processing systems is often approached by developers unfamiliar with the TEI either with trepidation or ignorance of its potential complications. This HackAThon is open to developers with very little experience with TEI (but with significant programming experience) and TEI also experts (with a little programming experience) as well as those who have experience in both. It is hoped that the developers and TEI experts will be able to share their expertise in a knowledge-exchange hacking event. It is intended to be both fun and fruitful. 
            
                Participants and Organisation
            
            The HackAThon will be organised as an unconference-style event. Applicants will be asked for basic details of their experience and possible contribution to the HackAThon. Decisions will be made by an international programme committee of TEI experts based on the criteria of getting both a sufficient and variety of expertise (technical and TEI), interest in challenges similar to those proposed, as well as geographical, cultural, disciplinary, and gender balance. 
            A mailing list for HackAThon participants will be created to discuss in advance the possible challenges that might be undertaken. This will allow some preseeding of ideas and potentially people to start work or familiarise themselves with particular aspects of the TEI or technical solutions. 
            
                Challenges
            
            Possible challenges that this HackAThon will focus on include: 
             • Development of a library of standard functions for the basic interrogation, analysis, or extracting of data from collections of TEI documents.
             • A server platform that provides access to those functions through a RESTful interface.
             • Integration of these with existing popular software (e.g., editors, processing infrastructures, etc.).
            These are intended as a set of potential interlinking challenges suitable for a range of skill levels and familiarity with TEI. They also potentially coordinate well with developments in the TEI community such as the TEI Simple project and the TAPAS repository. The potential challenges and possible implementations of them will be openly discussed on the HackAThon’s mailing list. All outputs will be made freely available under open licenses. 
            
                HackAThon Outline
            
            The HackAThon will be organised with an unconference-style pre-DH2015 mailing list discussion, followed by finalising on the workshop day the precise groups of participants and challenges they want to work on. Most of the rest of the day is spent working in these groups, with a review midway through of what the groups are working on. The day concludes with reporting back, demonstrating the work they have done, and discussing next steps (potentially with TEIC support). 
            Morning
             • 
                09:30–10:30—Introduction and coffee, finalise groups and challenges. 
            
             • 
                10:30–12:30—Groups start work (break-out sessions).
            
            Lunch
             • 
                12:30–13:30—Lunch.
            
            Afternoon
             • 
                13:30–14:00—Groups briefly report on work done so far.
            
             • 
                14:00–16:00—Group work continues (break-out sessions). 
            
             • 
                16:00–17:00—Regroup, report back and show work, plan for next steps, complete any DH2015 workshop evaluation form. 
            
            
                Programme Committee
            
            The programme committee will decide on submitted applications (trying to err on the side of inclusion) and will include all of the TEI experts mentioned below as well as Hugh Cayless (as TEI Technical Council chair), Marjorie Burghart (as a representative of the TEI board), and Magdalena Turska (as a representative of the TEI Simple project). 
            
                Organisers and TEI Experts
            
            The organisers of this proposal all have extensive experience in leading and coordinating hands-on workshops focused on TEI or related theories and technologies. They will be available during the workshop together with other TEI and DH experts who will be attending DH 2015 and confirmed their interest to take part in the HackAThon. These TEI experts (and developers in their own right) include:
            
                James Cummings (james.cummings@it.ox.ac.uk), senior digital research specialist in Academic IT at University of Oxford’s IT Services, where he helps academics plan research projects with digital aspects, is the department’s liaison for digital humanities activities, and is a director of the annual Digital Humanities at Oxford Summer School. He has built many TEI-based websites, such as William Godwin’s Diary, which uses TEI XML served from an eXist XML database to power a datacentric view using jQuery DataTables of the information that this 48-year diary contains. He will be presenting a paper at DH2015 on the output of the TEI Simple project, which includes new proposals for documenting intended processing models. He is an elected member of the TEI Technical Council. 
            
            
                Syd Bauman (s.bauman@neu.edu) is the senior XML programmer analyst at Northeastern University Digital Scholarship Group, primarily focused on the Women Writers Project. He has been involved with structured text representation since before SGML, and TEI since 1990. Syd frequently teaches TEI encoding, TEI schema creation, and XSLT workshops. He is an elected member of the TEI Technical Council. 
            
            
                Martin Holmes (mholmes@uvic.ca) is a programmer and consultant for the Humanities Computing and Media Centre and the University of Victoria. He is an elected member of the TEI Technical Council. 
            
            
                Conal Tuohy (conal.tuohy@gmail.com) is an independent digital humanities software developer living in Brisbane, Australia. He has previously been an elected member of the TEI Technical Council. 
            
            Target Audience
            DH practitioners and developers interested in experimenting with TEI, DH technical developers, experienced XML users, and TEI users with exciting ideas.
            
                Expected Number of Participants
            
            10–20; ~25 max, including four TEI experts. 
            
                Rooms and Equipment
            
             • One room to host up to 25 people (ideally ability to break up into small groups with individual tables, or access to public space where small groups can work together quietly).
             • Wifi.
             • Projector.
             • Lots of power sockets.
            Programme Committee 
             • Hugh Cayless (TEI Technical Council chair).
             • Marjorie Burghart (TEI board).
             • James Cummings (TEI Technical Council). 
             • Martin Holmes (TEI Technical Council). 
             • Syd Bauman (TEI Technical Council). 
             • Conal Tuohy (independent consultant). 
             • Magdalena Turska (DiXiT Fellow; TEI Simple developer).
        
    



    
        
            
                HuNI: Building and Linking Research Collections Online
                
                    
                        Davidson
                        Alwyn
                    
                    Deakin University, Australia
                    alwyn.davidson@deakin.edu.au
                
                
                    
                        Burrows
                        Toby
                    
                    University of Western Australia, Australia
                    toby.burrows@uwa.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    linked data
                    collaboration
                    open knowledge
                    virtual collection
                
                
                    information retrieval
                    cultural infrastructure
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This half-day workshop is designed to introduce humanities researchers to the HuNI Virtual Laboratory. The workshop will be a combination of discussion of issues relating to the design of environments for data linkage and aggregation and a practical engagement with the HuNI platform in which attendees will be guided to build collections and link entities.
            The Humanities Networked Infrastructure (HuNI; https://huni.net.au/) is a national Virtual Laboratory project combining information from 30 of Australia’s most significant cultural datasets across 13 institutions. These datasets comprise more than 2 million authoritative records relating to the people, organisations, objects, and events that make up Australia’s rich cultural heritage. HuNI enables researchers to work with and share this large-scale aggregation of cultural information. 
            The HuNI Virtual Laboratory is designed to support the nonlinear and recursive research methods practiced in the humanities. HuNI provides discovery tools for casual users from the wider community, but more sophisticated functionality is available to researchers who register for an account in the virtual laboratory. Registered researchers have their own personal workspace within HuNI. The HuNI VL enables researchers to create, save, and publish selections of data; to analyse and manipulate the data; to share findings; and to export data for reuse in external environments.
            The HuNI workshop will enable attendees to be able to start using the HuNI Virtual Laboratory as an integral part of their research. Researchers will be given an introduction to the contents and capabilities of HuNI, the importance and management of the contributing datasets, and the main aims of the research tool. The workshop will highlight the benefits to be gained by bringing together multiple cultural datasets to answer questions that transcend multiple disciplines and research interests.
            This workshop will also address concepts around data linkage, leading to a discussion of the advantages and pitfalls of differing approaches. HuNI’s innovative approaches to enabling greater collaboration and creating a rich and dynamic data aggregate has led to the development of ‘socially linked data’, where users of HuNI have the ability to be able to assert relationships and descriptions between different entities that all HuNI users then share. This creates a layer of information that is dynamic, open for lively debate, and irreplaceable in terms of its benefits to research. This approach will be discussed and demonstrated throughout the workshop, providing attendees with hands-on experience in research collaborations as well as the linking and building of information.
            The workshop is designed to focus on interaction and hands-on experience. After completing the session, attendees will be able to
             • Understand the scope and capabilities of the HuNI VL.
             • Discover interesting and useful resources in HuNI.
             • Set up and manage their personal HuNI account.
             • Build and share personal collections of HuNI data.
             • Understand the concept of ‘socially linked data’ and work with HuNI entities to create relationships and links.
             • Export information from HuNI.
            
                Contact Information
            
            The workshop will be led by Alwyn Davidson and Toby Burrows.
            
                Dr Alwyn Davidson (alwyn.davidson@deakin.edu.au) is the current project manager of HuNI at Deakin University, Australia. Alwyn’s main research interests include the analysis of cultural data and geospatial analytics and visualisation. Alwyn has a strong knowledge of the HuNI VL, including running workshops, working with contributing datasets, and managing the project.
            
            
                Dr Toby Burrows (toby.burrows@uwa.edu.au) is currently a Marie Curie International Incoming Fellow in the Department of Digital Humanities at King’s College London. He is also an Honorary Research Fellow in the School of Humanities at the University of Western Australia. Toby’s main research areas include the design of e-research infrastructure for the humanities, and the history of medieval manuscript collections (particularly their curation, description, and digitization). He was the coordinator of community liaison and outreach for the original HuNI project. 
            
            
                Description of Target Audience
            
            The workshop is aimed at those who are interested in cultural data, virtual collections, data linkage and aggregation, and open knowledge. Attendees—whether they have limited exposure to working with cultural datasets or are highly experienced researchers in the area—will benefit from learning about HuNI and the benefits in combining multiple datasets for exploration and discovery. No specialized computing knowledge is required. Based on previous experience, we believe the workshop would work well with 20 to 30 participants.
            Technical Support
            Very little technical support is needed. Participants will be required to bring their own laptops. We would also require from the venue a data projector, Internet access for participants, and power points for charging laptops.
            
                Intended Length and Format
            
            The workshop has been designed as a half-day exercise which, with the exception of the introduction, will be hands-on activity based for all participants. The workshop outline is as follows:
            
                 •
                Introduction (40 minutes)
                Overview of the HuNI VL, its architecture, contributing datasets, and main aims.
            
            
                 •
                Searching and browsing the HuNI VL (20 minutes)
                Navigating the contents of HuNI and interpreting and using search results.
            
            
                 •
                Registration (10 minutes)
                Creating and managing your user account.
            
            
                 •
                Creating collections (40 minutes)
                Creating, managing, and sharing your own collections within the VL.
            
            
                 •
                Socially linked data (40 minutes)
                Building relationships between entities in the HuNI data aggregate.
            
            
                 •
                Exporting and Re-use (20 minutes)
                Exporting and re-use of data from the HuNI VL.
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Digital New Testament
                
                    
                        Finney
                        Tim
                    
                    Vose Seminary, Australia
                    tjf@tfinney.net
                
                
                    
                        Clivaz
                        Claire
                    
                    University of Lausanne, Switzerland
                    Claire.Clivaz@unil.ch
                
                
                    
                        Schmidt
                        Desmond
                    
                    Ecdosis, Australia
                    desmond.allan.schmidt@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Carlson
                        Stephen
                    
                    Australian Catholic University
                    Stephen.Carlson@acu.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    New Testament
                    phylogeneticanalysis
                    critical editions
                    collation algorithms
                    simulation
                
                
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    philology
                    theology
                    programming
                    visualisation
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    agent modeling and simulation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This workshop proposes to have four presentations on the topic of ‘Digital New Testament’. Application of computer technology to the Bible and particularly the New Testament has a long and illustrious history. New Testament researchers continue to make substantial contributions to digital humanities. Examples include
             • The pioneering work of Vinton Dearing (http://senate.universityofcalifornia.edu/inmemoriam/vintonadamsdearing.htm).
             • The INTF’s Virtual Manuscript Room (http://ntvmr.uni-muenster.de/).
             • The Codex Sinaiticus site (http://www.codexsinaiticus.org/en/).
            The New Testament presents a unique challenge to digital humanists. The volume and scope of its primary documents test many approaches to essential tasks, such as transcription and collation of manuscripts (there are tens of thousands of them if translations are included), analysis of textual relationships (the number of texts and complex textual histories break conventional approaches to establishing an initial text), and establishing a critical text (again, complex textual histories frustrate the process; the volume of witnesses requires selection of a mere sample of textual representatives for hand editions).
            Approaches to alleviating some of the manifold problems presented by the New Testament textual tradition will be presented at the proposed workshop:
             • Phylogenetic analysis of textual variation in order to better understand relationships between witnesses (Stephen Carlson).
             • ‘Towards an Open-Ended New Testament? Digital Materiality, Critical Editions, and categories of Ancient Christian Texts’ (Claire Clivaz).
             • Computer simulation of textual transmission to better understand textual development and use of distance-based analysis methods to map the textual landscape (Tim Finney).
             • Generally applicable collation algorithms to produce the fundamental information required for analysis of textual relationships (Desmond Schmidt).
            Relevance to the Digital Humanities Community
            The digital analysis techniques proposed to be presented at the workshop are directly applicable to textual criticism of other corpora (e.g., Homer). Digital techniques that work with the New Testament have already passed a severe test due to the diversity and volume of the material. The techniques are therefore unlikely to be (completely) derailed when applied to other corpora.
            
                Workshop Leaders
            
            
                Stephen Carlson
                (Stephen.Carlson@acu.edu.au
                )—Research interests include New Testament textual criticism, synoptic source criticism, editing the Fragments of Papias of Hierapolis, formation of the New Testament canon. Areas of expertise include textual criticism, scholarly editing, Koine Greek pragmatics, cladistic analysis, computer programming, including heuristic search techniques such as simulated annealing.
            
            
                Claire Clivaz
                 (claire.clivaz@unil.ch; https://unil.academia.edu/ClaireClivaz)
                —Assistant professor of New Testament and early Christian literature at the Faculty of Theology and Religious Studies of the University of Lausanne (2008–2014). She received a Ph.D. in theology from the University of Lausanne on the topic ‘L’ange et la sueur de sang (Lc 22,43–44) ou comment on pourrait bien encore écrire l’histoire’ at the University of Lausanne.
            
            
                Timothy J. Finney (tjf@tfinney.net; http://tfinney.net)
                —Research interests include the text of the New Testament and statistical analysis of New Testament textual variation data. Areas of expertise include programming; big data approaches to digital corpora (e.g. http://founders.archives.gov/, of which he was lead programmer); computer-assisted transcription, collation, and analysis of the New Testament textual corpus.
            
            
                Desmond Schmidt (desmond.allan.schmidt@gmail.com; 
                http://ecdosis.net)—His research interests are in the building of general tools for creating and publishing digital scholarly editions. This includes tools for generating multi-version documents, which are an idealised form of works that exist in multiple versions.
            
            
                Description of Target Audience
            
            The target audience is people with an interest in digital resources applicable to collation and analysis of textual corpora with a view to producing critical editions.
            
                Expected Number of Participants
            
            About 30 participants is not unrealistic given the number of digital humanists interested in computer applications relevant to reconstruction of the history and text of various corpora.
            
                Special Requirements for Technical Support
            
            These items will be required:
             • A projector with VGA and DVI connectors. (Some presenters will use programs run on their own computer using custom software.)
             • A computer workstation that can be connected to the projector in case a presenter wants to load a presentation from a USB stick. Internet connection to the workstation is desirable.
             • Wi-Fi access for presenters who want to access the Internet during their presentations.
            
                Intended Length and Format of the Workshop
            
            
                
                    Time
                    Item
                    Presenter
                    Comments
                
                
                    9:00–9:45
                    Phylogenetic analysis
                    Stephen Carlson
                    Overview of theories of NT textual criticism, including eclecticism and classical stemmatics, and the use of cladistics from computational biology to perform a phylogenetic analysis of the textual tradition of Galatians. This presentation will also discuss the problem of reticulation (textual mixture from more than one source) and some proposals to account for it.
                
                
                    10:00–10:45
                    Towards an open-ended New Testament?
                    Claire Clivaz
                    Digital materiality, critical editions and categories of ancient Christian texts.
                
                
                    11:00–11:30
                    MORNING TEA
                    —
                    Snacks and refreshments
                
                
                    11:30–12:15
                    Merging and Collation
                    Desmond Schmidt
                    Demonstration of tools for creating and displaying multi-version documents, including side by side comparison at the character level, ‘edition view’, with a tabulated apparatus, and a multi-version document editor.
                
                
                    12:30–13:15
                    Copying simulation
                    Tim Finney
                    Demonstration of a text copying simulation written in R (see http://www.tfinney.net/Simulation/index.xhtml). This will include use of distance-based analysis techniques such as classical multidimensional scaling, divisive clustering, partitioning around medoids, and neighbour-joining.
                
            
            The format of each component will be a 45-minute presentation using a computer workstation and projection system followed by 15 minutes for questions.
            
                Workshop Program Committee
            
            The four presenters are proposed as the program committee.
        
    



    
        
            
                Why Can’t You Just Whack it on the Photocopier? : a workshop on the digitisation of heritage collections in large collecting institutions
                
                    
                        Patton
                        Maggie
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    maggie.patton@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
                
                    
                        Neville
                        Richard
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    richard.neville@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
                
                    
                        Wajon
                        Scott
                    
                    State Library of NSW, Australia
                    scott.wajon@sl.nsw.gov.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Digitisation
                    Cultural Heritage
                    Galleries
                    Libraries
                    Archives and Museums
                
                
                    archives
                    repositories
                    sustainability and preservation
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Facilitators
            Richard Neville—Mitchell Librarian, State Library of New South Wales
            Maggie Patton—Manager, Research and Discovery, State Library of New South Wales
            Scott Wajon—Manager, Digitisation Services, State Library of New South Wales
            Outline
            This workshop aims to unpack and discuss the challenges and complexities of digitising heritage collections. The discussions will be based on recent projects undertaken by the State Library of New South Wales, including
             • Digitisation of over 180,000 pages of diaries and letters written by over 500 servicemen and women from the First World War.
             • A pilot project to digitise 4,500 books (1.35 million pages) from the iconic David Scott Mitchell Collection.
            As a large collecting institution the State Library has an obligation to preserve and provide access to a significant collection of over 5 million items, including a vast collection of manuscripts, photographs, and printed books. A key priority is to also ensure that these heritage collections and the cultural heritage data contained within millions of pages is accessible and able to be interrogated and reinterpreted using contemporary digital technologies and research practices.
            The workshop will cover a range of issues experienced through these large-scale digitisation projects, including project scoping and funding, complex contractual agreements required for external partners, metadata creation, equipment, digitisation and quality assurance specifications, conservation and object handling skills, and the format and variety of outputs.
            In working through a range of decisions, the workshop will highlight key aspects of any digitisation project: why is this material significant, what elements of the object are essential to be maintained, when is the content more significant than the container itself, and when are compromises acceptable?
            Audience
            Colleagues from cultural institutions and practitioners planning large-scale digitisation projects. Researchers working on the use and interrogation of historical data, including manuscripts and printed books. Students interested in understanding the complexities of preserving and digitising cultural artefacts.
            Length
            Three hours. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Computer Supported Collation With CollateX
                
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker
                        Ronald
                    
                    Huygens ING, Netherlands, The
                    ronald.dekker@huygens.knaw.nl
                
                
                    
                        Andrews
                        Tara L.
                    
                    University of Bern
                    tla@mit.edu
                
                
                    
                        Birnbaum
                        David J.
                    
                    University of Pittsburgh
                    djbpitt@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Olsson
                        Leif-Jöran
                    
                    University of Gothenburg
                    leif-joran.olsson@svenska.gu.se
                
                
                    
                        van Zundert
                        Joris J.
                    
                    Huygens ING, Netherlands, The
                    joris.van.zundert@huygens.knaw.nl
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    collation
                    xml
                    programming
                    text comparison
                    python
                
                
                    literary studies
                    scholarly editing
                    text analysis
                    philology
                    xml
                    programming
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Comparing witnesses of a text is an important part of scholarly editing. Collation is regarded as one of the scholarly primitives (Unsworth, 2000). Comparing texts by hand can be tedious and prone to error, and it can be made more efficient and reliable with the assistance of computers. This workshop will explain how to use the open-source CollateX
                1 collation tool to compare witness of a texts automatically, in a way that can be used to produce critical textual editions and other types of comparative documents. Attendees will learn how to prepare source materials in any language (including those that use non-Latin scripts and directionality that is not left-to-right) for collation, how to perform automated collation using CollateX, and how to edit the results. 
            
            
                Full Contact Information 
            
            Ronald Haentjens Dekker (ronald.dekker@huygens.knaw.nl) 
            Software Architect and Consultant 
            Huygens ING 
            The Netherlands 
            
                Ronald Haentjens Dekker is a software architect and consultant at the Huygens Institute for the History of The Netherlands (http://www.huygens.knaw.nl/dekker/?lang=en). He has been the lead developer of CollateX since 2007. 
            
            Tara L. Andrews (tla@mit.edu) 
            Assistant Professor of Digital Humanities 
            University of Bern 
            
                Tara L. Andrews is assistant professor of digital humanities at the University of Bern. Her research interests include Byzantine history of the middle period (in particular, the 10th to 12th centuries), Armenian history and historiography from the fifth to the 12th centuries, and the application of computational analysis and digital methods to the fields of medieval history and philology. 
            
            David J. Birnbaum (djbpitt@gmail.com) 
            Professor and Chair, Slavic Languages and Literatures 
            University of Pittsburgh 
            
                David J. Birnbaum teaches digital humanities at the University of Pittsburgh (http://dh.obdurodon.org) and has been enhancing CollateX to collate medieval Slavic manuscript materials. Links to some of his digital philology and other digital humanities projects are available at http://www.obdurodon.org. 
            
            Leif-Jöran Olsson (leifjoran. olsson@svenska.gu.se) 
            Language Technologist and System Developer 
            Department of Swedish 
            University of Gothenburg 
            
                Leif-Jöran Olsson is a language technologist and system developer at the Språkbanken (the Swedish Language Bank; http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/personal/ljo). He is also a developer of the open-source eXistDB XML database system ( http://existdb.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html) and has worked on a plug-in to integrate eXistdb and CollateX. 
            
            Joris J. van Zundert (joris.van.zundert@huygens.knaw.nl) 
            Researcher and Developer in Computational and Digital Humanities 
            Huygens ING 
            The Netherlands 
            
                Joris J. van Zundert is scientific researcher and developer in the field of digital and computational humanities at the Huygens Institute for the History of The Netherlands. A scholar of medieval Dutch literature by training, his main interest as a researcher and developer lies in the possibilities of computational algorithms for the analysis of literary and historical texts, and the nature and properties of information and data modeling in the humanities. 
            
            
                Target Audience
            
            Scholars who are interested in using tools to facilitate humanities research, especially with respect to preparing digital critical editions. Participants who wish to work with their own materials will need to bring them (in plain text or TEI markup); the organizers will provide sample data that can be used by participants who do not have their own project materials. Participants are strongly encouraged to install Python 3 and CollateX in preparation for the workshop; the workshop organizers will provide installation instructions in advance. No prior Python programming experience is required. Based on prior workshop experience, we anticipate attracting between 15 and 30 participants. 
            
                Special Requirements for Technical Support 
            
            A computer projector (HDMI or VGA) will be required for the presentation. Participants will be required to bring their laptops, and the room will need to provide sufficient plug-in electrical connections and wireless Internet connectivity for all participants. 
            
                Intended Length and Format of the Workshop 
            
            Full day, two sessions. 
            
                Session 1. 9:00–12:00: The Basics of Automatic Collation
            
            The first session will cover the theory of collation, the basics of using CollateX, and the collation of plain text data. No prior experience with collation tools is required. 
             • Introduction to the theory and uses of collation. 
             • The collation data model: witnesses, tokens, and tokenization.
             • Installing, configuring, and testing CollateX.
             • Collating plain text strings and files.
             • Output options and postprocessing.
             • Introduction to normalization.
            
                Session 2. 13:00–16:00: Collating XML (including TEI) Data 
            
            The second session will cover more advanced topics, most notably the collation of transcriptions that contain XML (including TEI) markup. 
             • The collation data model with XML (especially TEI) input. 
             • Advanced normalization. 
             • Recognizing and tracking markup information during collation. 
             • Processing tokens differently according to markup information. 
             • Output options and post processing for XML (especially TEI) output. 
            
                Call for Participation
            
            We asked applicants on relevant mailing lists (such as Humanist, TEIL, Digital Medievalist) to tell us about their interests, needs, and prior experience with respect to collation. The instructors listed above will serve as the workshop program committee. For participants, up to 30 participants were to be accepted. 
            Note
            1. The main CollateX website is http://collatex.net. CollateX Python is freely available in the Python package repository: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/collatex. The source code is open and available at https://github.com/interedition/collatex. For a report about a recent application of CollateX, see 
                Haentjens (2014).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                            Haentjens
                             Dekker
                            , 
                            R., 
                            van 
                            Hulle
                            ,
                        
                        
                             
                            D.
                        
                        ,
                        
                            Middell
                            ,
                        
                        
                             
                            G.
                        
                        ,
                        
                             
                        
                        
                            Neyt
                            ,
                        
                        
                             
                            B.
                        
                         and 
                        
                            van 
                            Zundert
                            , J. (2014). 
                        Computer-Supported Collation of Modern Manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (2014), http://dsh.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/12/02/llc.fqu007, 
                        
                            http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu007
                        .
                    
                    
                        Unsworth, J. (2000). Scholarly Primitives: What Methods Do Humanities Researchers Have in Common, and How Might Our Tools Reflect This? In 
                        Symposium on Humanities Computing: Formal Methods, Experimental Practice. London: King’s College, http://people.brandeis.edu/~unsworth/Kings.500/primitives.html.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Introduction To The TXM Content Analysis Software
                
                    
                        Heiden
                        Serge
                    
                    ENS de Lyon, France
                    slh@ens-lyon.fr
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    text analysis
                    txm software
                    xml
                    tei
                    nlp
                
                
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    natural language processing
                    text analysis
                    xml
                    concording and indexing
                    content analysis
                    visualisation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            The objective of the Introduction to the TXM Content Analysis Software tutorial is to introduce the participants to the methodology of textometric content analysis (
                http://textometrie.ens-lyon.fr/?lang=en) through the use of the free and open-source TXM software (
                http://sourceforge.net/projects/txm/files/documentation/TXM%20Leaftlet%20EN.pdf/download) directly on their own laptop computers. At the end of the tutorial, the participants will be able to input their own textual corpora (Unicode-encoded raw texts or XML tagged texts) into TXM and to analyze them with the panel of content analysis tools available: word patterns frequency lists, kwic concordances and text browsing, rich full text search engine syntax (allowing to express various sequences of word forms, part of speech, and lemma combinations constrained by XML structures), statistically specific sub-corpus vocabulary analysis, statistical collocation analysis, etc.).
            
            During the tutorial, each participant will use TXM (from 
                http://sourceforge.net/projects/txm) and the TreeTagger lemmatizer (
                http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger) on her Windows, Mac, or Linux laptop and will leave the tutorial with a ready-to-use environment.
            
            The tutorial will also introduce the participants to the TXM community ecosystem (users mailing list and wiki, bug reports, etc.) and to the TXM portal version server software (see, for example, 
                http://portal.textometrie.org/demo) for online corpus distribution and analysis. Time permitting, TEI encoding aspects of corpora related to TXM could also be introduced, as well as speech transcriptions or parallel corpora encoding and analysis.
            
            Such tutorials have been given on a monthly basis in Lyon (France) since September 2012 (see, in French, 
                https://groupes.renater.fr/wiki/txm-users/public/ateliers_txm).
            
            It has proven to be very beneficial to participants from various fields of the humanities working on digital textual data: geography, history, linguistics, literary studies, sociology, psychology, urbanism, political sciences, economy, etc.
            The tutorial will be taught in English and will complement two accepted communications introducing the TXM platform given during the conference:
             • ‘Progressive Philology with TXM: From “Raw Text” to “TEI Encoded Text” Analysis and Mining’, #463.
             • ‘From KWIC Concordance to Video Excerpt or Folio Facsimile: Demonstration of Multimodal and Multimedia Corpora in TXM’, #468.
            
                Tutorial Instructor
            
            Serge Heiden (slh@ens-lyon.fr)
            Project Manager of TXM Platform Development (
                http://textometrie.ens-lyon.fr/spip.php?article9) 
            
            
                S. Heiden develops the textometry content analysis methodology in a research team of five people through the development of tools able to process richly encoded corpora (
                http://icar.univ-lyon2.fr/pages/equipe31.htm). Working on the relation between analysis tools and XML-TEI encoded corpora, he is involved in the TEI consortium activities as the TEI Tools SIG convener (
                http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/SIG/Tools).
            
            
                Target Audience and Expected Number of Participants
            
            Participants can come from any humanities and social sciences disciplines. No previous statistical or XML background is necessary. Participants can come with their own corpora.
            The ideal number of participants is about 12 to 15 people; the maximum number of participants is about 20.
            Each participant should come with her own laptop computer.
            The tutorial needs to run at least for a full day*: typically half day for TXM tools fundamentals and half day for main corpus formats fundamentals (TXT and XML) and input procedures into the platform.
            *The regular TXM tutorials run for two days (one-day TXM introduction, one-day corpus formating and import into TXM).
            Brief Outline
            
                9am–12pm (3h) + 1pm–5pm (4h) = 7h total
            
            Install and introduction: 45 minutes
             • TXM, TreeTagger, sample corpus installation checkup (participants will be asked to install the software before coming to the workshop to save time).
             • TXM user interface &amp; windows, corpus Description command.
            
                Main tools: 2 hours, 15 minutes
            
             • Lexicon analysis and spreadsheet export.
             • Index building for distributional semantics and Corpus Query Language syntax.
             • Concordance and Edition browsing, Progression graphics.
             • Sub-corpus building, corpus partitioning, and specificity/factorial analysis/clustering.
             • Words co-occurrence analysis.
             • TXM portal demo (optional).
             • TXM community: mailing lists, websites, and documentation.
            Importing corpora into TXM: 4 hours
             • TXM import strategy and main corpus formats: TXT-Unicode+CSV, XML+CSV, XML-TEI: 1/2 hour.
             • TXT-Unicode sample corpus and TXT+CSV import into TXM, sample analysis: 1 hour, 15 minutes.
             • Introduction to XML and to TXT2XML conversion tools: 1/2 hour.
             • XML sample corpus and XML/w+CSV import into TXM, sample analysis: 1 hour, 45 minutes. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Linking humanities data geospatially with Pelagios and Recogito
                
                    
                        Isaksen
                        Leif
                    
                    University of Southampton, United Kingdom
                    l.isaksen@soton.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Ridge
                        Mia
                    
                    The Open University, United Kingdom
                    m.ridge@open.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Linked Open Data
                    Geospatial technologies
                    Cartography
                    Semantic annotation
                
                
                    art history
                    classical studies
                    corpora and corpus activities
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    semantic analysis
                    internet / world wide web
                    concording and indexing
                    content analysis
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    crowdsourcing
                    semantic web
                    maps and mapping
                    networks
                    relationships
                    graphs
                    linking and annotation
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            After the initial burst of investment in the digitization of humanities resources, more recent work in the digital humanities has begun to address the problem of siloed information by bridging heterogeneous and independently maintained datasets. One such approach is Linked Open Data, which has given rise to an emerging and diverse ecology of projects, collectively building the digital foundations for new modes of discovery, analysis, and representation (Elliott, 2014). The potentially unlimited number of resources to which this methodology is suited means that establishing a healthy community of practice is essential in order for it to scale. This workshop offers a hands-on introduction to the theory and practice of Linked Open Data in the humanities through the framework of the Pelagios project.
            Pelagios is an award-winning multi-year initiative—funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, JISC, and the AHRC—that is semantically linking a large corpus of geospatial documents from Latin, Greek, European medieval and maritime, as well as early Islamic and Chinese traditions. For this purpose we have developed 
                Recogito, an open-source online platform for associating place references in maps and texts with URI-based gazetters of historical places (GPL v.3 licensed source code hosted at
                 http://pelagios.org/recogito/documentation). 
                Recogito has been under development for almost two years and is a fully functioning toolkit for annotation that draws upon the maturing ecosystem of digital gazetteers for classical and post-classical eras. Sources already in 
                Recogito include Herodotus’ 
                Histories, Roman itineraries, portolan charts, mappae mundi, accounts of pilgrimages to Jerusalem, and al-Muqaddasi’s description of the Islamic world.
            
            The workshop will demonstrate how geospatial data can be created from humanities sources, whether textual or cartographic, and re-purposed in a variety of ways. The workshop will comprise four short (45-min.) sessions:
             1. A short tutorial introducing the project along with the basic goals and practices of annotating materials with 
                Recogito, including principles that can be extended to a wide variety of other historical entities such as people and events.
            
             2. A practical session dedicated to creating semantic geo-annotations by using a visual tool to mark up place references in a wide range of pre-modern maps, itineraries, and geographic descriptions.
             3. A hands-on session devoted to ‘georesolution’, associating the annotations with an entry in an online gazetteer.
             4. The final session will provide concrete examples by which participants can make use of the data they and others have created, either through the use of Pelagios’ sophisticated API, or as a CSV file that can be visualised or analysed in GIS or a spreadsheet, and encourage participants to reflect on the application of these approaches to their own work.
            The tools and methods will continue to be available to participants after the workshops, allowing them to make use of 
                Recogito for their own needs.
            
            Description of Target Audience and Expected Number of Participants
            This workshop will appeal to anyone seeking practical approaches to Linked Open Data with low barriers to entry and well-defined benefits, and conversely, anyone interested in new developments in spatial technologies. We particularly welcome those with an interest in semantically annotating their own content so that it can draw on and contribute to the developing Linked Data ecosystem. (Participants wishing to do so should contact the organisers in advance.) We will be able to support a maximum of 30 participants. No previous knowledge of geospatial or semantic technologies is required.
            Thanks to the Andrew W. Mellon foundation and a DM2E/OKFN Open Humanities Award, Pelagios has already run three highly successful workshops about 
                Recogito at Tufts University, the University of Heidelberg, and the University of Applied Science Mainz. In addition to this, an emerging community of contributors has formed around 
                Recogito, focussing on particular areas of content and improving usability through their feedback. On this basis we are confident that participants will both gain practical experience and find the workshop intellectually stimulating. 
            
            Further information about previous workshops is available at
            http://dm2e.eu/open-humanities-awards-sea-change-update-2/
            http://dm2e.eu/open-humanities-awards-sea-change-final-update/
            Technical Support
            A projector and screen, along with wireless Internet access are the only essential requirements.
            Contact Information 
            
                Leif Isaksen
                Leif is a lecturer in archaeology and co-directs the Web Science Innovation Centre for Doctoral Training at the University of Southampton. He is particularly interested in historical and contemporary representations of space and geography, using a variety of digital approaches to explore this topic, including GIS, Linked Open Data, and network analysis. He is an executive committee member of the European Association for the Digital Humanities (EADH), a trustee of the International Society for the History of the Map (ISHMap), and chairs the Space and Time working group of the Network of Digital Methods in the Arts and Humanities (NeDiMAH).
            
            
                Mia Ridge
                Mia’s PhD in digital humanities (Open University) uses methods from human-computer interaction and user experience design to understand effective design for participatory digital history and the collaborative enhancement of historical materials. Mia has published and presented widely on her key areas of interest, including user experience design, human-computer interaction, open cultural data, audience engagement, and crowdsourcing in the cultural heritage sector. She is chair of the Museums Computer Group (MCG) and a member of the Executive Council of the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH).
            
            For further information, please contact:
            Dr Leif Isaksen
                Archaeology
                Avenue Campus
                University of Southampton
                Highfield, Southampton
                SO17 1BF
                United Kingdom
            
            email:  l.isaksen@soton.ac.uk
            Tel. +44 770 9546407
            Up to 30 participants will be able to take part. They will require their own laptop with wireless access and a browser.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Elliott, T., Heath, S. and Muccigrosso, J. (2014). Prologue and Introduction. 
                        ISAW Papers 7, http://dlib.nyu.edu/awdl/isaw/isaw-papers/7/elliott-heath-muccigrosso/. 
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Cleaning and Exploring Your Data With Open Refine
                
                    
                        Mason
                        Ingrid
                    
                    Intersect Australia, Australia
                    ingrid@intersect.org.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Data processing
                    Data normalisation
                    APIs
                    Open Refine
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            This three-hour workshop introduces participants to Open Refine, which is a powerful tool for cleaning, normalization, and exploration of datasets. In this tutorial we’ll work through the various features of Refine, including importing data, faceting, clustering, and calling into remote APIs, by working on a fictional but plausible humanities research project. 
            
                Contact Information 
            
            Ingrid Mason (on behalf of Intersect Australia, tutorial instructors TBC) 
            ingrid.mason@intersect.org.au http://intersect.org.au/contact 
            Research Interests 
            eResearch, digital humanities 
            
                Area of Expertise 
            
            The eResearch analysts and software developers at Intersect Australia deliver training and tutorials to support uptake of ubiquitous and domain-specific technologies employed in data-intensive research. This training is regularly delivered to academics and higher degree students in its member universities in Australia. A common area of expertise shared across the team is data, information and technology management, informatics and data modelling, through to technical evaluation and software engineering to enable the development, application, and uptake of technologies in support of research. 
            
                Target Audience 
            
            Attendees accustomed to using ubiquitous tools on their desktop computer, e.g., Excel, and interested in building up further skills to process their data. Mastering tasks such as 
             • Cleaning up messy data: If you have a text file with semi-structured data, you can edit it using facets, transformations, and clustering to make the data cleanly structured. 
             • Transformation of data: Converting data to different formats, normalising and the de-normalising of data. 
             • Parsing of data from websites: Open Refine contains a URL fetch feature. 
             • Adding data to your dataset by fetching it from web services with json: A good example of this is used for geocoding addresses to geographic coordinates. 
            
                Participant Number 
            
            30 participants 
            
                Technical Requirements 
            
            Attendees bring a laptop they have administration access to (able to download software) and robust wireless must be available. 
            
                Course Outline 
            
            Open Refine is a powerful free tool for exploring, normalizing, and cleaning up datasets. In this 2.5-hour tutorial we’ll work through the various features of Refine, including importing data, faceting, clustering, and calling into remote APIs, by working on a fictional but plausible humanities research project. We will start with a research question in mind and use the features of Refine to gain insights and to find answers. The research question relates to NSW police stations—finding out what we can about where they are located, their heritage status, and the kinds of archival records that State Records NSW holds on them. During this course you will be shown how to get map coordinates by creating direct batch queries to Google Maps. 
            Participants will learn
             • How to install Open Refine. 
             • How to create a project. 
             • How to organise your data. 
             • Ways to explore your data. 
             • How to work with APIs. 
             • How to export a dataset. 
            For more information, see http://intersect.org.au/course-resources.
        
    



    
        
            
                An Introduction to Digital Manuscript Studies
                
                    
                        Pierazzo
                        Elena
                    
                    Université Stendhal Grenoble III, France
                    elena.pierazzo@kcl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Stokes
                        Peter Anthony
                    
                    King's College London
                    peter.stokes@kcl.ac.uk
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    manuscript studies
                    digital editing
                    palaeography
                    codicology
                    cataloguing
                
                
                    encoding - theory and practice
                    medieval studies
                    scholarly editing
                    digitisation - theory and practice
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Description and Rationale
            This workshop will teach both the theory and practice of working with manuscripts in the Digital Age. The purpose is to provide a taster of core DH theories and practice which have been tailored specifically to people working with manuscripts. Theoretical discussions will focus on the impact of digital technology on manuscript studies, and practical sessions will address the use of TEI XML to prepare editions of texts and catalogues of manuscripts, also providing a brief introduction to the digital imaging of books and documents. The programme thereby presents a condensed version of the highly successful ‘Medieval and Modern Manuscript Studies in the Digital Age’, which is a five­day intensive course that has been run in the United Kingdom since 2009 (
                
                    http://dixit.uni­koeln.de/mmsda.html
                ).
            
            As noted above, the teaching method will combine both theoretical and practical components. This principle – that theory and practice are interdependent and that neither can be taught without the other – is fundamental to the design of MMSDA (and, indeed, of Digital Humanities more generally) and will be included here as well. The workshop will therefore consists of approximately one third theoretical lectures on the impact of the digital on manuscript studies, one third XML practice, and one third theory and practice of digital images. This pedagogical approach is unusual but has proved to be highly successful and has been discussed in peer­reviewed publications (Stokes 2011; Mahony and Pierazzo 2012).
            The workshop will address the requirements of people working with material from the medieval through contemporary periods, and examples will therefore be drawn from the early and ‘high’ Middle Ages, the Renaissance, Reformation and Counter­Reformation, through to the twentieth century. It is therefore suitable to a wide range of participants and also enables comparative discussion of different types of manuscript material from different dates. Such a range of material is covered by the expertise of the instructors and has proven to be a very successful mix in MMSDA, a programme which to our knowledge is the only one to present this content for those working with modern manuscripts.
            Experience has demonstrated a very substantial need for training in manuscript studies in a digital context. This is manifested in numerous existing programmes in Europe: examples include not only MMSDA but also DiXiT, SCRIPTO, Quadrivium, the Digital Scholarly Editions for Medievalists workshops in Leeds, the Autumn Schools run at the University of Ghent, and workshops run by COST Action IS1005 (‘Medioevo Europeo: Medieval Cultures and Technological Resources’). MMSDA alone receives well over 100 applicants every year, including many enquiries from outside Europe which we have not been able to support because of restrictions imposed by the funding body. Indeed, we are aware of very few 
            training programmes of this sort outside Europe. Although training in TEI is now relatively widespread, it is much rarer to find this tailored to the specific needs of manuscript studies, particularly in digital editing and cataloguing, and especially for such a chronological range. The famously extensive TEI Guidelines cover these topics in some detail, but their size means that specific training is also needed alongside general introductions to the principles. Furthermore, the combination of both theory and practice that this workshop provides has proven unusual and extremely popular, particularly in a format that is tuned specifically to the needs of those working with manuscripts. The target audience is students in the Humanities, for which theory is necessary and welcome, but the emphasis is also on providing the practical skills that they need and want in order to complete their work and to prepare them for the digital scholarly environment in which they will inevitably work.
            The workshop will start with a theoretical introduction to the impact of digital technologies in disciplines connected to manuscripts such as editing, codicology and paleography. A particular emphasis will be placed on evaluating the impact of digital facsimiles on teaching and research, and the methodological shifts that these have induced. We will then introduce participants to the principles and then practice of XML and TEI. It is beyond the scope of the workshop to provide a thorough overview of such technologies; we will therefore concentrate on those aspects that will enable the participants to transcribe, describe and encode a manuscript. The teaching will cover documentary aspects such as corrections, substitutions and page layout, as well as an introduction to the building of a critical apparatus. Toward the end of the first day we will start to introduce the TEI model for manuscript description and cataloguing, a topic that participants can continue on their own in the evening and which will be discussed again on the second day. Here again we will cover only the most important features for manuscript studies, providing the starting point for further investigations that the participants will be able to undertake by themselves after the end of the workshop. We will conclude with an introduction to principles of digital images and image manipulation, in order to help participants learn basic principles such as capture, resolution and colour depth, and to use these in techniques such as enhancement, revealing faded writing and helping to identify differences in inks and pigments. The workshop will therefore provide the participants with a basic toolkit that enables them to engage in active work with manuscripts and, if appropriate, to proceed to more in­depth techniques either by studying themselves or through further training events.
            This workshop is sponsored by DiXiT, the ‘Digital Scholarly Editions Initial Training Network’, which is a Marie Curie International Training Network with ten Full and eighteen Associated partner institutions (
                
                    http://dixit.uni­koeln.de/
                ); it is funded by the European Union 
                
                    Seventh
                
                
                    Framework Programme (FP7)
                under 
                
                    grant agreement n° 317436
                . As well as providing financial support, DiXiT also provides a substantial body of expertise and experience which will be drawn upon in the design and implementation of this workshop.
            
            S. Mahony and E. Pierazzo. 2012 'Teaching skills or teaching methodology'. 
                Digital humanities pedagogy: practices, principles and politics. Brett D. Hirsch (ed.), Cambridge: OpenBook Publishers, pp. 215­225.
            
            P.A. Stokes. 2011. ‘Teaching Manuscripts in the “Digital Age”’. 
                Kodikologie und Paläographie im Digitalen Zeitalter 2 — Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age 2. F. Fischer et al. (ed). Norderstedt: Books on Demand, pp. 229–45. 
                
                    urn:nbn:de:hbz:38­43521
                
            
            Outline
            29 June
            Morning
            9:30­10:30 Introduction:
            ● The impact of the digital on manuscript studies
            ● The impact of the digital on codicology and paleography;
            10:45­12:30
            ● The impact of the digital on editing
            ● Introduction to XML
            Afternoon
            14:00­15:00
            ● Introduction to TEI
            15:00­16:15
            ● Text editing in practice
            16:30­17:00
            ● Manuscript description and cataloguing
            30 June
            Morning
            9:30­10:00
            ● Continuation: Manuscript description and cataloguing (discussion of homework problems)
            10:15­12:30
            ● Introduction to imaging; image enhancement and virtual restoration
            Elena Pierazzo: Professor of Italian Studies and Digital Humanities, University ‘Stendhal’ Grenoble III; Visiting Senior Research Fellow, Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London.
            email: elena.pierazzo@u­grenoble3.fr
            Research interests: My research interests rotate around editing and digital editing, with a focus on modern draft manuscripts. I also research on text encoding in general and in particular as a tool for textual scholarship. My interests include italian studies, and in particular Renaissance and Modern Italian Philology.
            Peter Stokes: Senior Lecturer, Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London.
            email: 
                peter.stokes@kcl.ac.uk
            
            Research interests: My research interests rotate around Palaeography and manuscript studies, but they extend to include Digital Humanities, particularly the application of digital tools and techniques to palaeography and manuscript studies; Medieval studies, early medieval history; Old English, Latin language and literature.
            Target audience and expected number of participants:
            The workshop is aimed at PhD students and Early Career researchers whose current or planned future work involves manuscript studies and who are curious about the impact of digital technologies on this area of research. No previous computing knowledge is required apart from general IT literacy (browsing, emailing, word processing etc.). Applications will be particularly welcome from those who do not have the resources to attend MMSDA or equivalent courses in Europe or North America. We aim at a maximum of 20 participants since the hand­on approach often requires close support from instructors.
            
                Special requirements for technical support:
            
            A data projector; internet access for all participants; participants are required to bring their own laptops. Participants will have to pre­install the following software onto their laptops:
            ­ oXygen (
                
                    http://www.oxygenxml.com
                ): a multiplatform XML editor which comes with a
            
            30­days free trial licence
            ­ GIMP (
                
                    http://www.gimp.org/
                ): free multiplatform software for image manipulation
            
            Intended length:
            One and a half days.
            Depending on the cost of the rooms and any other extra costs required by the Local Organisers, we may be able to hold it for free, or ask for a small fee from the participants. DiXiT will cover the costs of the instructors and can also provide up about to $700 AUD for additional local costs.
            Participation and Selection Process
            We will have an open call for participation to open as soon as we receive notification that the workshop has been successful (expected to be 28th of February). The call will close on the
            10th of April; applicants will be notified by the 15th of April in order to benefit from the ‘early bird’ registration fee. In case of further availability after that date, we will then re­open applications to latecomers. In this way we intend to fill all the slots, but also accommodate those who wish to take full advantage of early registration.
            The Program Committee to choose the participants are:
            ● Elena Pierazzo
            ● Peter Stokes
            ● James Cummings (University of Oxford)
            ● Marjorie Burghart (École des Haute Études en Sciences Sociales, Lyon)
            ● Franz Fischer (University of Cologne)
        
    



    
        
            
                Visualizing Data for Digital humanities Producing Semantic Maps with Information extracted from Corpora and other Media
                
                    
                        Poibeau
                        Thierry
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    thierry.poibeau@ens.fr
                
                
                    
                        Terras
                        Melissa
                    
                    DH, UCL, UK
                    melissaterras@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Ruiz
                        Pablo
                    
                    LATTICE-CNRS, France
                    pablo.ruiz.fabo@ens.fr
                
                
                    
                        Gray
                        Steven
                    
                    DH, UCL, UK
                    steven.gray@ucl.ac.uk
                
                
                    
                        Roe
                        Glenn
                    
                    ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences
                    glenn.roe@anu.edu.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Text mining; Visualization
                
                
                    data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling
                    multilingual / multicultural approaches
                    natural language processing
                    ontologies
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    scholarly editing
                    semantic analysis
                    text analysis
                    linguistics
                    visualisation
                    social media
                    semantic web
                    linking and annotation
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Brief Description of the Content and Its Relevance to the Digital Humanities Community 
            
            The goal of this proposal is to explore efficient methods to extract information from texts and produce meaningful and readable representations. The three-hour session (half a day) will include formal presentations, demonstrations, and discussion with the audience. It will thus be halfway between a workshop and a tutorial (see the structure of the session in the next section). 
            It is well known that we are now facing an information deluge, and experts in different domains, especially social sciences and literary studies, have long acknowledged that available texts—and more generally the mass of data available through different media—now constitute one of the important sources of knowledge. However, computers are unable to directly access information encoded through texts: this information must first be extracted, normalized, and structured in order to be usable. Moreover, meaningful representations are needed in order for people to understand it. This process is not trivial, and more and more groups have to face this dilemma: information is here, available on the Web or in more remote databases, but its manipulation is hard since it requires a complex process that most of the time is out of the hands of social scientists and literary studies experts. See, for example, this quotation (from the Médialab in Paris) that is typical of the current situation: 
            Qualitative researchers [. . .] arrive at the médialab bringing rich data and longing to explore them. Their problem is that qualitative data cannot be easily fed into network analysis tools. Quantitative data can have many different forms (from a video recording to the very memory of the researcher), but they are often stored in a textual format (i.e. interview transcriptions, field notes or archive documents . . .). The question therefore becomes: how can texts be explored quali-quantitatively? Or, more pragmatically, how can texts be turned into networks? (Venturini et Guido, 2012)
            The goal of this workshop is to practically address the question. It will include three presentations detailing some challenges and solutions. A large part of the workshop will be devoted to the presentation of practical tools and to discussion with the audience.
            
                Structure of the Workshop 
            
            The workshop will be chaired by Thierry Poibeau, Melissa Terras, and Isabelle Tellier. It will consist of talks by Pablo Ruiz, Steven Gray, and Glenn Roe. 
            Pablo Ruiz will address the concept of entity linking. In natural language processing, entity linking is the task of determining the identity of entities mentioned in text. It includes named entity recognition (NER) and the identification of their reference (via links to DBPedia or other structured databases). The bases of entity linking will be presented along with the demonstration of a platform combining different entity linking systems so as to obtain an efficient and robust coverage across text genres and application domains. Lastly, the production of maps from the result of the entity linking analysis will be presented. 
            Steven Gray will address the collection and visualisation of real-time online datasets. By utilising the Big Data Toolkit (a toolkit that specialises in mining social media data), the session will focus on the collection of data from various APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) and the mapping of the data by using Google Maps’ online mapping APIs. The session will conclude by focussing on visualising this real-time textual data for the Web, building an interactive discovery tool for geospatial social media data. 
            Glenn Roe will address the identification and visualisation of text reuse in unstructured corpora. Identifying text reuse is a specific case of the more general problem of sequence alignment—that is, the task of identifying regions of similarity shared by two strings or sequences, often thought of as the longest common substring problem. This technique is widely applied in the field of bioinformatics, where it is used to identify repeated genetic sequences. This talk will outline several different approaches to sequence alignment techniques for humanities research, as well as two recent projects aimed at visualising the output of alignment comparisons between texts and the alignment process itself using visual analytics. 
            The structure of the workshop will be as follows: each talk will consist of 20 minutes for presentation, 15 minutes for demonstration, and 15 minutes for discussion. A final slot (30 minutes) will be devoted to a general discussion on the topic with the audience. 
            
                Workshop Leaders 
            
            Thierry Poibeau 
            Laboratoire LATTICE 
            Ecole Normale Supérieure &amp; CNRS 
            1, rue Maurice Arnoux 92120 Montrouge FRANCE 
            Mail: thierry.poibeau@ens.fr 
            Web: http://www.lattice.cnrs.fr/Thierry-Poibeau 
            
                Thierry Poibeau is a director of research at CNRS and the head of the CNRS Lattice laboratory at Ecole Normale Supérieure. He is also an Affiliated Lecturer at the Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics (DTAL) of the University of Cambridge. His main interests are natural language processing (NLP), and its application to digital humanities. He is a recognized expert in information extraction, question answering, semantic zoning, knowledge acquisition from text, and named entity tagging. He is the author of three international patents and has published two books and more than 80 papers in journal and conferences. 
            
            Melissa Terras
            Director, UCL Centre for Digital Humanities 
            Vice Dean of Research (Projects), UCL Faculty of Arts and Humanities 
            Professor of Digital Humanities 
            Department of Information Studies 
            Foster Court 
            University College London 
            Gower Street 
            WC1E 6BT 
            
                Melissa Terras is director of the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities, professor of digital humanities in UCL’s Department of Information Studies, and vice dean of research (Projects) in UCL’s Faculty of Arts and Humanities. With a background in classical art history, English literature, and computing science, her doctorate (engineering, University of Oxford) examined how to use advanced information engineering technologies to interpret and read Roman texts. Publications include 
                Image to Interpretation: Intelligent Systems to Aid Historians in the Reading of the Vindolanda Texts (2006, Oxford University Press) and 
                Digital Images for the Information Professional (2008, Ashgate), and she has co-edited various volumes, such as 
                Digital Humanities in Practice (Facet, 2012) and 
                Defining Digital Humanities: A Reader (Ashgate, 2013). She is currently serving on the Board of Curators of the University of Oxford Libraries, and the Board of the National Library of Scotland. Her research focuses on the use of computational techniques to enable research in the arts and humanities that would otherwise be impossible. You can generally find her on twitter @melissaterras. 
            
            Isabelle Tellier 
            Laboratoire LATTICE 
            Ecole Normale Supérieure &amp; CNRS 
            1, rue Maurice Arnoux 92120 Montrouge FRANCE 
            Mail: isabelle.tellier@univ-paris3.fr 
            Web: http://www.lattice.cnrs.fr/sites/itellier/ 
            
                Isabelle Tellier is a professor of natural language processing and digital humanities at Université Paris 3 Sorbonne Nouvelle. She has published more than 50 papers in international venues in computational linguistics. Her main research topic is developing advanced machine learning techniques adapted to Natural Language Processing issues. She is also an expert in the application of these techniques to domain-specific corpora, especially in the digital humanities field. 
            
            
                Workshop Main Speakers 
            
            
                Pablo Ruiz is a research associate in digital humanities at LATTICE, a research laboratory of Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris. He has designed and developed several applications in the domain of natural language processing, including, for example, a prototype for the lexical normalization of Spanish microblog (tweets), and a sequence alignment engine used in automatic subtitling. He currently works on text analytics technologies for digital humanities, especially entity recognition and linking, so as to extract structured and meaningful pieces of information from unstructured texts. 
            
            
                Steven Gray is a teaching fellow in Big Data Analytics and the UCL Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis. With over 10 years’ professional software engineering under his belt, and a background in computing science and human computer interaction, he has built multiple award-winning systems, and his work has been featured in various worldwide media outlets (CNN, BBC, etc.). In recent years he has specialised in building mobile applications and systems that open up the world of data visualisation, mining, and analysis to the masses. His current research focuses on distributed high-performance computing, machine learning, and analysing large datasets in real-time while visualising the results. He currently serves as a Google Developer Expert for Google Maps where he evangelises best practises using cloud computing and online mapping platforms. You can regularly find him either on Twitter, @frogo, or on Google Plus as +StevenGray. 
            
            
                Glenn Roe is lecturer in digital humanities at the Australian National University. In 2011–2013 he held a Mellon Post-Doctoral Fellowship in digital humanities at the University of Oxford. Prior to that, he spent eight years as a senior project manager for the University of Chicago’s ARTFL Project (American and French Research on the Treasury of the French Language), one of the older and better-known North American research and development centres for computational text analysis. Glenn’s research agenda is primarily located at the intersection of new computational approaches with traditional literary and historical research questions. Glenn has presented and published widely on a variety of scholarly subjects, from French literary and intellectual history, to the design and use of new digital methodologies for literary research, and the implications of large-scale digital collections on humanities scholarship. 
            
            
                Target Audience 
            
            The target audience is large. Practitioners in social sciences are of course the key target, but experts in literary studies, information technology, and library management are concerned as well. In brief, the workshop will be of interest for anybody concerned with the extraction of information from large corpora and producing relevant maps to visualize key information. 
            
                Special Requirements for Technical Support 
            
            None, except a conference room projector. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Starting from Scratch?: Strategies for Building Undergraduate-Centered #DH Programs
                
                    
                        Shrout
                        Anelise Hanson
                    
                    Davidson College, United States of America
                    anshrout@davidson.edu
                
                
                    
                        Christian-Lamb
                        Caitlin
                    
                    Davidson College, United States of America
                    cachristianlamb@davidson.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    undergraduate
                    pedagogy
                    liberal arts
                    curricula
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    crowdsourcing
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Workshop Description 
            Despite widespread interest in digital humanities and growing interest in undergraduate-centered digital curricula, most DH discussions and DH programs still focus on graduate education. However, some institutions are beginning to offer DH training for undergraduate students, with predictably diverse results. Many in the United States have developed in the context of small liberal arts colleges (for example, Bard College and Davidson College), while other programs have emerged as offshoots of large graduate programs (for example, the Australian National University’s Center for Digital Humanities Research or the digital humanities program at University College Cork) or dedicated digital humanities centers (for example, discussions of undergraduate digital pedagogy taking place at the University of Victoria’s Digital Humanities Summer Institute). These programs are geographically and pedagogically diverse, alternately incorporating classes on digital methods, digital culture, instructional technology, libraries and archives, and ‘traditional’ fields ranging from English to history, from computer science to anthropology.
                1
            
            This workshop uses case studies of ‘startup’ undergraduate DH programs as a jumping-off point for a broader discussion about whether undergraduate digital programs must indeed start from scratch at each new institution, and whether it is possible to craft a transnational document for DH best practices. The central issues driving this workshop are 
             • The challenges of establishing DH programs at teaching and undergraduate-centered institutions.
             • The ways in which the pedagogical needs of undergraduate institutions and undergraduate-centered DH programs differ from and dovetail with those of larger research universities.
             • The role of and challenges to undergraduate-focused DH programs around the world.
             • How the discussions about digital humanities taking place on liberal arts campuses relate to broader questions that animate the field of digital pedagogy.
            The workshop itself will
             • Invite participants to share different approaches to undergraduate-centered DH programs, incorporating global perspectives.
             • Workshop some general solutions to common undergraduate DH problems, share local challenges, and collaborate to workshop particular problems. 
             • Define common principles and pedagogical reasoning, keeping in mind the variety and experimental nature of different initiatives.
             • Explore the many different forms that undergraduate-focused digital programs take.
             • Chart recent developments in digital liberal arts pedagogy.
            In addition to sharing insights from different programs in an in-person session, this workshop also aims to codify some best practices for building and sustaining new digital humanities programs for undergraduates. Drawing on the success of crowdsourced best practices, we will compile what we’ve learned into a collaborative, public document that speaks to the needs of undergraduates, their teachers, and their institutions in the digital age. 
            Workshop Background 
            The digital humanities began in research projects and at research universities, and discussions of digital pedagogy have tended to coalesce around graduate education (see Kirschenbaum, 2010; Schreibman et al., 2004). These discussions focus on supporting digital theses, building PhD programs, or running training in methods designed to support faculty research (see, e.g., McCarthy, 2010). However, alongside the development of graduate and professional programs, institutions around the world are beginning to build digital curricula centered on undergraduate education.
                2 These programs are driven by student interest in digital humanities, emphasizing research collaboration between faculty and students and exploring students’ digital engagement both within the classroom and in the world beyond the academy (see Hirsch, 2010, Introduction). Despite similar concerns, these programs have also tended to be shaped to suit unique curricular needs of particular institutions. As a result, they have developed in many and varied ways, and in the midst of this exciting diversity there remains little consensus on how to systematically integrate critical pedagogy, new teaching methods, and new ways of having undergraduate students interact with the digital humanities. 
            
            Workshop Structure 
            Through short presentations from DH stakeholders, small group discussions between participants, and a broadly ranging question-and-discussion period, this workshop explores the creation of digital programs at a diverse group of institutions. 
            In advance of the workshop, participants will be invited to scaffold a best-practices whitepaper: identifying different pedagogies, challenges, and questions they want a best-practices document to address. A version of this document will be circulated in advance of the workshop. At the workshop, participants will present short introductions to their undergraduate DH programs and outline one main takeaway each. Organizers and participants will both work to draw attention to commonalities and differences among presentations, before opening up the floor to design thinking exercises and formal discussions designed to add material to the whiteboard scaffold. The half-day workshop will afford time to identify additional best practices and suggestions for the shared document. After the conference, presenters will work together to transition the document into a more formal whitepaper and to compile an accompanying bibliography, linking the issues raised to the existing literature. 
            This public document is an informative, rather than a prescriptive document, intended to highlight practitioners' points of view. It will share and solicit contributions from attendees as well as those not present. Overall, the goal of this workshop and whitepaper is to share undergraduate DH practitioners’ experiences, with an eye to how others around the world can learn from or build upon those experiences. 
            Proposed Workshop Schedule 
            (subject to change based on preconference schedule) 
             9:00–9:30 Participant introductions — name, institution, one or two key challenges to undergraduate digital humanities pedagogy that participants want the workshop to address 
             9:30–10:00 Working in small groups (breaking up people from the same institution), building on the initial concerns scaffolded in the whitepaper 
             10:00–10:15 Reconvene as a group to discuss challenges 
             10:15–10:30 Break 
             10:30–12:00 Design thinking session,
                3 with small groups tackling individual issues raised in earlier group activity and adding to the crowdsourced whitepaper
            
             12:00–12:15 Break 
             12:15–12:45 Final wrapup and discussion 
            
                Workshop Leaders 
            
            Anelise Hanson Shrout, Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow at Davidson College 
            My interest in digital studies grows out of its ability to highlight hitherto unnoticed connections, to tell stories in new ways, and to make visible the histories of marginalized people. My training in American and Atlantic history led me to explore encounters between North America and the wider world. As a digital scholar, I am interested in the methods that help us to map and archive these encounters, as well as the tools we use to share our findings with the wider world. Recently, I have been teaching classes on digital history methods and digital mapping, as well as running workshops on undergraduate digital pedagogy and curricula. Contact info: Box 7192, Davidson College, Davidson, NC, 28035; anshrout@davidson.edu. 
            Caitlin Christian-Lamb, Associate Archivist at Davidson College 
            Since 2013, I’ve served as the associate archivist of Davidson College, where my duties include reference services, processing collections, planning outreach events and collaborations, serving as a core member of the institutional repository working group, teaching course modules, and acting as the library liaison to the digital studies concentration. Prior to joining Davidson’s staff, I served as a project producer for the Berkman Center for Internet &amp; Society at Harvard University’s metaLAB (at) Harvard project, and as a research associate at the Massachusetts Historical Society’s Adams Papers Editorial Project. My interest in digital humanities grew out of my interest in new ways of connecting users with collections, and with digital curation and preservation. My research interests: collective memory, intersections between pop culture and history, creative outreach methods, undergraduate education, the role of information professionals in academic discourse, social justice, and archives. I earned a B.A. in history from SUNY Purchase College, and an M.A. in history and an M.S. in library and information science from Simmons College. Contact info: Box 7200, Davidson College, Davidson, NC, 28035 cachristianlamb@davidson.edu. 
            Workshop Program Committee 
            The program committee reviews submissions and creates a final participants list. The committee consists of the workshop leaders and
             • James Baker, curator of digital research at the British Library.
             • Mark Sample, associate professor of digital studies at Davidson College.
             • Jentery Sayers, assistant professor of English and cultural, social, and political thought and director of the Maker Lab in the Humanities, University of Victoria. 
             • Sarah Sikes, associate editor of digital projects at the Massachusetts Historical Society.
            Workshop Participants 
            We hope to have approximately 15 to 20 participants. We aim to include participants from as wide a geographical range and roles within digital humanities initiatives as possible. We will send out a call for participants in general DH forums (DH Now, DH lib) as well as those frequented by DH practitioners outside of the United States (such as GO::DH) in advance of the conference in order to internationalize and diversify our participants. 
            Technical Support 
            A projector and screen, if possible. 
            Notes
            1. Davidson College, http://www.davidson.edu/academics/digitalstudies; Bard College, http://www.bard.edu/academics/programs/programs.php?id=2286088&amp;pid=1110; University College Cork: http://www.ucc.ie/en/ck118/; DHSI, http://dhsi.org/courses.php; Australian National University’s Center for Digital Humanities Research, http://cdhr.anu.edu.au/.
            2. Five of the papers presented at DH2014 explicitly engaged with undergraduate education (http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper492.xml, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper798.xml, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Poster763.xml, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper309.xml, and http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper520.xml), and programs like the recently inaugurated Institute for Liberal Arts Digital Scholarship (http://iliads.org/) are beginning to formalize best practices for digital liberal arts pedagogy. 
            3. For discussions of design thinking and examples of design thinking in practice, see http://dschool.stanford.edu/dgift/ and http://www.designthinkingforeducators.com/.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Hirsch, B. D. (ed.). (2010). 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M. G. (2010). What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English Departments? 
                        ADE Bulletin, no. 190. 
                    
                    
                        McCarthy, W. (2010). The PhD in Digital Humanities. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.). 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds). (2004). 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell, Oxford.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Introduction to Starting and Sustaining DH Centers
                
                    
                        Siemens
                        Lynne
                    
                    University of Victoria, Canada
                    siemensl@uvic.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    DH centres
                    research centres
                    collaboration
                    interdisciplinary
                
                
                    digital humanities - institutional support
                    project design
                    organization
                    management
                    digital humanities - facilities
                    interdisciplinary collaboration
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                Digital his growing in scale from a series of projects undertaken by a couple of individuals to institutionally based organizations, with larger budgets and mandates, beyond other factors. How can a group of interested researchers, academic staff, librarians, and other invested stakeholders work together to create such a centre? This half-day workshop will address this question by exploring issues related to scaling operations from the individual to a centre, determining the appropriate organizational model, developing the plan that situates the DH centre in the academic institution’s and other stakeholders’ mandates, communicating to administration to gain support and resources, structuring memorandums of understanding between partners, and other issues. It builds on centerNet’s initiatives to support centre startups with information and tools, which include the DHCenterStartUp listserv and resources page (http://digitalhumanities.org/centernet/resources-for-starting-and-sustaining-dh-centers/
                ). It also complements community building courses offered at the Digital Humanities Summer Institute (dhsi.org) and at its training network partners. 
            
            
                Workshop Leader
            
            Dr. Lynne Siemens, associate professor, School of Public Administration, University of Victoria and centerNet’s Coordinator for Center Startups.
            
                Lynne Siemens
                 is an associate professor at the University of Victoria. Her interests include academic entrepreneurship, collaboration, and teamwork with a focus on understanding methods and processes to facilitate collaborative research across distances, disciplines, and organizational boundaries. Beyond publishing in these areas, she has taught workshops in project management at the University of Victoria’s Digital Humanities Summer Institute and the University of Leipzig’s European Summer School for Culture and Technology, and she serves as a management advisor for Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE), a Major Collaborative Research Initiative project. Dr. Siemens is also centerNet’s Coordinator for Center Startups and coordinates the DHCenterStartUp listserv and the resources for starting DH centers webpage. 
            
            Co-Sponsors
            CenterNet is an international network of digital humanities centers. Part of its mandate is to support the development of centers at a variety of institutions by sharing information, resources, and expertise.
            Digital Humanities Summer Institute is an environment for discussing and learning about new computing technologies and how they are influencing teaching, research, dissemination, creation, and preservation in different disciplines, via a community-based approach. It also offers courses in project planning, team, centre, and community building.
            Contact Information
            Lynne Siemens
            School of Public Administration
            University of Victoria
            Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
            V8W 2Y2
            (250) 721-8069
            siemensl@uvic.ca
            
                Target Audience and Expected Number of Participants
            
            The target audience is individuals interested in starting a digital humanities center at their institution. Expected number of participants is 15 to 20. (These numbers are in line with previous offerings of similar workshops/talks.)
            
                Intended Length and Format of Workshop
            
            The workshop will be a half-day with a combination of lecture and discussion. No special technical requirements or equipment is needed. 
        
    



    
        
            
                Voyant Tools 2.0: The New, The Neat &amp; the Gnarly
                
                    
                        Sinclair
                        Stéfan
                    
                    McGill University, Canada
                    sgsinclair@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Rockwell
                        Geoffrey
                    
                    University of Alberta, Canada
                    grockwel@ualberta.ca
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    text analysis
                    Voyant
                
                
                    text analysis
                    data mining / text mining
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Voyant Tools (voyant-tools.org) is a web-based reading and analysis environment for digital texts. Users can create their own corpus of texts to study by pointing to URLs or uploading files in a variety of formats (plain text, XML, HTML, PDF, MS Word, RTF, etc.). Voyant allows users to navigate between macro views of the corpus (e.g., a word cloud visualization of the entire corpus) and micro views (e.g., a reading individual occurrences of a specific term in context). The default interface provides access to a basic set of tools for reading texts and studying word frequency and distribution. There are also more tools available in various pre-defined or user-defined ‘skins’ (a layout of tools that are coupled). 
            Voyant Tools is deliberately designed to be user-friendly and welcoming for text analysis. Voyant currently averages nearly 50,000 visits and about 750,000 tool invocations per month (not counting the downloadable instances of VoyantServer). This will be the seventh consecutive workshop of Voyant, with past sessions focusing on different aspects (pedagogy, multilingualism, customizability, standalone version, etc.). 
            The 2015 workshop will focus on the second major release of Voyant Tools (2.0), which represents an entire rewrite of the codebase to address several of the major shortcomings and irritants of the currently available version 1.0. Version 2.0 is currently available in a beta version online with a major release due in early spring 2015. In addition to performance improvements throughout, the search and filtering functionality have been vastly enhanced, and Voyant now supports proximity and n-gram operations. Voyant 2.0 also has improved corpus handling. Documents can be reordered or added to corpora on the fly, and there is a lightweight access management layer that differentiates between full access, full-text access, and expressive/consumptive access. 
            We have designed this workshop to be of interest both to new users of Voyant, who will get an introduction to the platform, and to existing users, who will discover all the new functionality 2.0 has to offer. As always, a crucial aspect of the workshop will be to get feedback from the community. 
            Workshop Outline 
            
                1. Introduction to Text Analysis with Voyant (1 hour) 
            
            We will begin with a general introduction to text analysis using Voyant aimed at those who haven’t used it before. We will provide a brief overview of Voyant’s user interface and discuss its strengths and weaknesses. We will provide initial text collections that users can use with Voyant, with a view to having participants experiment subsequently with their own text collections. 
            
                2. Voyant 2.0: What’s New? (1 hour) 
            
            This second part of the workshop will focus on what’s new in Voyant 2.0. Examples of changes include more powerful proximity and fuzzy searching of terms, infinite scrolling instead of paginated scrolling for tabular data, in-place modifications of corpora (adding documents or re-ordering them), and new tools (collocate networks, n-gram wordtrees, etc.). This part of the workshop will be useful both for users familiar with the old Voyant (to understand the changes and enhancements) and also to newcomers who will get a better sense of the variety of available tools. 
            
                3. Voyant: Text Repository or Analytic Platform? (1 hour) 
            
            One benefit of the enhanced scalability of Voyant Tools 2.0 is the ability to bridge the gap between existing text repositories (typically focused on searching for documents) and analytic platforms (for text mining). We are collaborating with several large-scale content providers (like TCP-EEBO and Érudit.org) to create custom Voyant skins that allow users to search and filter within very large text collections in order to create smaller worksets of relevant documents for analysis. Because everything is happening in Voyant, the jump from text repository to text analysis is smooth and efficient (very few text repositories allow mass downloading of worksets, but even when they do, additional steps are typically required for re-ingesting the workset into an analytic platform). This component of the workshop will demonstrate some of our existing collaborations and describe how other content providers and projects might be able to leverage this hybrid functionality. 
            Workshop Leaders 
            
                Stéfan Sinclair, sgsinclair@gmail.com, is an associate professor in digital humanities at McGill University. His research focuses primarily on the design, development, and theorization of tools for the digital humanities, especially for text analysis and visualization. He has led or contributed significantly to projects such as Voyant Tools, the Text Analysis Portal for Research (TAPoR), and BonPatron. Other professional activities include serving as associate editor of 
                Digital Humanities Quarterly, as well as serving on the executive boards of ACH, CSDH/SCHN, ADHO, and centerNET. 
            
            
                Geoffrey Rockwell, grockwel@ualberta.ca, is a professor of philosophy and humanities computing at the University of Alberta, Canada. He has published and presented papers in the area of philosophical dialogue, textual visualization and analysis, humanities computing, instructional technology, computer games, and multimedia. He was the project leader for the CFI (Canada Foundation for Innovation)–funded project TAPoR, a Text Analysis Portal for Research (tapor.ca), which has developed a text tool portal for researchers who work with electronic texts. He is the author of 
                Defining Dialogue: From Socrates to the Internet (Humanity Books).
            
            Target Audience 
            A wide range of DH practitioners interested in text analysis, particularly for research, teaching, or technical support. Voyant Tools workshops are typically fully subscribed; we prefer to limit registration to about 25 people to allow us to help participants as needed. 
            Format
            Half-day.
        
    



    
        
            
                Omeka: The Basics &amp; Beyond
                
                    
                        Tedeschi
                        Michael
                    
                    Interactive Mechanics, United States of America
                    mike@interactivemechanics.com
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 1)
                
                
                    omeka
                    digital humanities
                    web
                    technology
                    exhibits
                
                
                    databases &amp; dbms
                    audio
                    video
                    multimedia
                    interface and user experience design
                    software design and development
                    user studies / user needs
                    information architecture
                    internet / world wide web
                    GLAM: galleries
                    libraries
                    archives
                    museums
                    mobile applications and mobile design
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Omeka has become a popular platform for publishing collections and exhibits of any size. Over the last few years, the platform has grown considerably, releasing several new versions and a plethora of new plug-ins to help extend the platform. Unfortunately, the community has had a general lack of developer and designer support.
            Through this workshop, attendees will learn how to install and use the Omeka platform, as well as how to create custom themes for your project. We’ll also show how to use CSS3 media queries to build responsive Omeka sites that look great on any device (desktop, smartphones, and tablets), and integrate external libraries and frameworks to make our Omeka themes even more robust. By the end of this session, you’ll have a good foundation for the platform and the beginning of your own custom theme.
            You should attend if
             • You’re interested in using Omeka at your institution.
             • You’re using Omeka, but want to get better or learn more.
             • You’re a designer or developer who wants to start building for Omeka.
             • You’re looking to teach about Omeka and want to expand your knowledge.
            You’ll learn
             • How to install and get an Omeka site up and running.
             • How to navigate the backend, install plug-ins and themes, and create content.
             • How a theme is structured and how to create your own.
             • How to make your new theme customizable.
             • How to add new features into the theme or expand the platform.
            
                References
            
            Documentation and training on Omeka are slim; the existing documentation is not maintained, and very few organizations have produced content related to building, using, and extending Omeka. We aim to help populate this list to help improve and expand the community around this platform in the digital humanities and museum circles.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Goldman, R. (2012). Introduction to Omeka. Slideshare, 17 April.
                    
                    
                        Heller, M. (2013). Creating Themes in Omeka 2.0. ACRL TechConnect Blog, 29 August. 
                    
                    
                        Leon, S. (2010). Omeka: Open Source for Open Museums? (MCN 2010), 29 October.
                    
                    
                        Tedeschi, M. (2014). The Basics of Building Omeka Themes. 
                        Interactive Mechanics, 10 September.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                The cusp of change - A culturally safe e-Learning platform on Ancient Australia
                
                    
                        Turner-Jensen
                        Nola Joyce
                    
                    Crackerjack Education, Australia
                    nola@crackerjackeducation.com.au
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    Ancient Australia
                    Indigenous
                    e-Learning
                    Aboriginal
                
                
                    teaching and pedagogy
                    digitisation
                    resource creation
                    and discovery
                    digital humanities - pedagogy and curriculum
                    cultural studies
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            What Is a Culturally Safe E-Learning Platform? 
            A conceptual framework based on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ unique sense of identity has been developed as a structural tool for the embedding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures within the schools and workplace settings of Australia. This sense of identity is approached through the interconnected aspects of country/place, people, culture, and learnt generational knowledge. Embracing these elements enhances all areas of a young person’s spirituality, thus ensuring pride and a sense of connection with their culture, local history, and traditions. 
            Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities can again become strong, rich, and diverse. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and Australian peoples’ identity is central to this priority and is intrinsically linked to living, learning about their local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities’ history, deep knowledge traditions, and general expertise with regards to the flora, fauna, and landscapes where we live. 
            
                Why Learn Only about Ancient Australia?
            
            After four years of focus group and market research, our team have determined that some astounding outcomes can occur if all education settings simply include ancient Australia systematically within their subject areas:
             • Create economic opportunity for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples across many sectors and encourage them to attend school.
             • Produce an opportunity to achieve a strong sense of identity and deep connection to this continent of Australia for every person today and for all future generations (something we believe has never been achieved by most non-Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Australians and is impossible without connecting with ancient Australia).
             • Forge a new era of positivity and acceptance in this country of people from all cultures. 
            The acceptance and implementation of ancient Australia in education settings will establish more sustainable and harmonious communities—for Indigenous as well as non-Indigenous people.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. The negative cycle of many non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander service providers and educators.
            
                Understanding the Historical Education of Most Australians in Regards to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Culture and People
            
            According to the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians (MCEECDYA),
                1 educators and workers from all sectors are important partners in engaging young Australians with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge and traditions. However, these are generations of Australians who, through no fault of their own, have had very limited access to an informed and positive education about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their culture. Most Australian education up to now excluded Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander information (except at the most tokenistic level), and certainly the media has portrayed Australia’s Indigenous peoples in a very negative light.
            
            Ma Rhea and Russell (2012) state that it is therefore important that today’s educators and trainers are supported and provided with a culturally safe framework to expand their knowledge and understanding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their knowledge and traditions. We believe that if all Australians are initiated in ancient Australia, we will finally break the negative cycle that modern and ancient Australians are trapped within today.
            Note
            1. The core aspects from the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians related to teaching Indigenous knowledge and perspectives retrieved from http://www.mceetya.edu.au/mceecdya/melbourne_declaration,25979.html.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ma Rhea, Z. and Russell, L. (2012). The Invisible Hand of Pedagogy in Australian Indigenous Studies and Indigenous Education. 
                        Australian Journal of Indigenous Education, 
                        41(1): 18–25.
                    
                
            
        
    



    
        
            
                Exploring Peer Review in the GeoHumanities
                
                    
                        Wrisley
                        David Joseph
                    
                    American University of Beirut, Lebanon (Lebanese Republic)
                    dwrisley@gmail.com
                
                
                    
                        Weimer
                        Katherine
                    
                    Rice University, Texas, USA
                    kathy.weimer@rice.edu
                
                
                    
                        Grossner
                        Karl
                    
                    Stanford University, California, USA
                    karlg@stanford.edu
                
            
            
                
                    2014-12-19T13:50:00Z
                
            
            
                Paul Arthur, University of Western Sidney
                
                    Locked Bag 1797
                    Penrith NSW 2751
                    Australia
                    Paul Arthur
                
            
            
                Converted from a Word document 
            
        
        
            
                
                    DHConvalidator
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Paper
                
                
                    Pre-Conference Workshop and Tutorial (Round 2)
                
                
                    GeoHumanities
                    Peer Review
                
                
                    geospatial analysis
                    interfaces and technology
                    maps and mapping
                    English
                
            
        
    
    
        
            Brief Description of the Workshop
            This workshop expands upon Weimer and Wrisley’s accepted DH2015 poster presentation, ‘Supporting Peer-Review for GeoHumanities and Spatially Inflected Projects’, in which the authors are exploring existing peer review criteria in the digital humanities and suggesting how the geohumanities present special challenges for such criteria. This workshop aims to open that conversation up for community exploration. Attendees will walk through the draft peer review criteria provided in the poster, using a few exemplary projects pre-selected by workshop planners and work in small groups to test (critique) the draft criteria. Suggested modifications will later be presented for input to the larger geohumanities community through the ADHO GeoHumanities SIG. 
            Target Audience
            The target audience for this workshop is anyone involved in geohumanities, spatially inflected research, or information visualization, as well as those interested in defining peer review criteria more generally. We expect approximately 20 participants. 
            Relevance of the Workshop
            With an eye for the complexities of authorship, collaboration, and attribution, a starting point for evaluating spatial research is UNL’s 
                Best Practices (2014), a document that provides a high-level overview of design principles, navigation, and testing, as well as dynamic content and multimedia. Both Drucker’s claim (2013) that our theoretical notions should be reflected in our interfaces and Rumsey’s outline of future discussion of spatio-temporality (2009) are other important starting points. Whereas the humanities have been mostly influenced by the linguistic and visual turns, Rumsey argues that they ‘have not given priority to critical spatial reasoning’. These are among the key topics of conversation we hope to initiate in the workshop. 
            
            Professional associations provide some guidance for the evaluation of scholarship in non-traditional formats. DH Commons, the CenterNet-sponsored publication, provides ‘peer review for mid-stage digital projects’ among its goals in order ‘to foster an innovative, truly developmental model of peer review’. To that end, it provides detailed guidelines for submission and review. Reviewers are asked to consider questions in categories of ‘Contribution, Presentation, and Preservation’. There is a separate list of elements suggested for inclusion in submissions, including goals of the project, intended audience, and technical documentation, among many others. 
            The DH Commons criteria, as well as those provided by the Modern Language Association, ARC, and NINES, are naturally oriented towards textual scholarship and do not account well for several aspects of the geohumanities domain. As Nowviskie (2012) rightly notes, review of digital textual scholarship is often based on a comparison to a print equivalent. Even though the visual arguments of such projects might be accompanied by textual content that falls within specialized subject domains, this metaphor of print is obviously inadequate for the visualization of spatially inflected research. What makes the geohumanities particularly complex is that spatially inflected projects embody specific (and sometimes multiple) theoretical assumptions about place and time in their visual output. The deliverables of this workshop should be considered, therefore, as supporting the general scholarly environment of peer assessment in the case of a geohumanities project, or a project containing spatial elements. To that end, in addition to the review criteria offered by DH Commons (above), the workshop leaders will probe attendees to suggest additional geohumanities-related criteria. 
            Workshop attendees will conduct a short ‘trial’ review of a few exemplary geohumanities projects, using the draft GeoHumanities criteria. Possible candidates include ORBIS: The Stanford Geospatial Network Model of the Roman Empire (Stanford), the
                 Early Modern Map of London (Victoria), the
                 Mapping the Lakes project (Lancaster), as well as any suggested by workshop participants. 
            
            Workshop leaders will build on the questions laid forth by DH Commons and the results of the poster presentation by Weimer and Wrisley in presenting a list of suggested guidelines against which the exemplar projects might be discussed and reviewed by the participants. Criteria to be addressed by the participants in the workshop could include how a project mobilizes spatial concepts or facilitates spatial reasoning, how transparent it is about data provenance and reuse of infrastructure, how it engages with spatio-temporal representation, how open its code and data are, and what kind of innovation is most notable in the project (creation of spatial data, infrastructure, visual semantics, etc.). 
            Outcomes for the Workshop
            The workshop will appeal to a range of constituencies and produce a number of outcomes: (1) valorizing the creation and visualization of spatial data as a research practice, (2) pushing forward geohumanities research in a community of practitioners by encouraging best practices in an emergent domain, and (3) setting forth some clear guidelines for professional review of work carried out in that domain. 
            Timeline for the Workshop
            3 hours, plus 15-minute break
            
                Mini-Presentations (by Leaders)
            
            1. 10 minutes: Introduction to issues of digital scholarship, more generally in DH. 
            2. 10 minutes: Introduction to issues related to geohumanities projects. 
            3. 10 minutes: Introduction to review criteria draft provided for this workshop. 
            
                Break-Out Group Work (Leaders and Participants)
            
            4. 45 minutes: Break-out for small groups to perform review using draft criteria with suggested projects. (Alternative exercise for those engaged in geohumanities projects would be self-review of projects). This could be done as an online form with some Likert-like scales and plenty of room for narrative feedback. 
            
                Small Group Presentations (Participants)
            
            5. 45 minutes: Reports from break-out groups on usability of draft review criteria. 
            15-minute break 
            
                Discussion and Revisions (Collective) 
            
            6. 30 minutes: Collective revisions to draft criteria (using CommentPress or GoogleDocs). 
            7. 30 minutes: Summary and plan for next steps (modes of peer review).
            
                Technical Needs
            
            A projector and Wi-Fi. 
            Pre- and Post-Workshop Deliverables
            There will be no CFP for the workshop. Workshop leaders will post readings on the GeoHumanities SIG site and will open those for comment before, during, and after the workshop. Workshop leaders will summarize the results of the workshop immediately to the GeoHumanities SIG site and submit a more thorough analysis in article form to 
                Digital Humanities Quarterly or
                 Journal of Digital Humanities. 
            
            
                Profiles and Research Interests of Workshop Leaders 
            
            
                David Wrisley, American University of Beirut–English, dw04@aub.edu.lb (@DJWrisley), comes to the geohumanities from medieval studies and literary history. His research brings together literary geographies, humanities visualization, and entity extraction from medieval texts. His teaching includes modeling spatial data for the humanities, digital environments for teaching medieval literature, as well as network modeling and storytelling using literary texts. He organized the panel ‘Geospatial Literary Studies’ at MLA2014 and is proposing ‘The Visual Display of Literary Information’ for MLA2015. He will be teaching ‘Spatial Humanities and Digital Mapping’ at 
                DHI-Beirut in March 2015. 
            
            
                Kathy Weimer, Rice University, Fondren Library, kathy.weimer@rice.edu (@kathy_weimer), is a librarian with research and practical background in map and GIS collections and services in libraries, gazetteer development, georeferencing digitized historic maps and photos for spatially aware digital archival exhibits, and related digital humanities projects. She is co-editor of the 
                Journal of Map &amp; Geography Libraries and is co-founder and co-chair of the ADHO GeoHumanities SIG. 
            
            Karl Grossner, Stanford University Center for Interdisciplinary Digital Research, karlg@stanford.edu (@kgeographer), is a geographer and digital humanities research developer. In his present position he designs and builds geospatial interactive scholarly works, and develops generalized software and systems useful for digital humanities research. As a Geographic Information Science researcher, his interests lie in computational models of place and extending the capabilities of traditional GIS to support an as yet unrealized class of digital historical atlases. Karl is co-founder and co-chair of the ADHO GeoHumanities SIG. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Advanced Research Consortium (ARC). (2014). 
                        
                            Scholarly Peer Review
                        
                    
                    
                        Belojevic, N., Sayers. J. and the INKE and MVP Research Teams. (2014). 
                        Peer Review Personas. 
                        JEP: The Journal of Electronic Publishing,
                        17(3). 
                    
                    
                        DHCommons Journal
                        . http://dhcommons.org/journal. 
                    
                    
                        Drucker, J. (2013). 
                        Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly,
                        7(1). 
                    
                    
                        
                            Map of Early Modern London
                         (University of Victoria). http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/index.htm. 
                    
                    
                        Fitzpatrick, K. (2011). Peer Review, Judgment, and Reading. 
                        Profession, 
                        6: 196–201. 
                    
                    
                        
                            Mapping the Lakes
                        
                        : A Literary GIS (Lancaster University). 
                    
                    http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/mappingthelakes/index.htm 
                    
                        Modern Language Association. (2012).
                        
                            Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities
                        . 
                    
                    
                        NINES/NEH Summer Institute. (2011).
                        
                            Guidelines for Promotion and Tenure Committees in Judging Digital Work
                        . 
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2012). Evaluating Collaborative Digital Scholarship (or, Where Credit Is Due). 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities, 
                        1(4), http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-4/evaluating-collaborative-digital-scholarship-by-bethany-nowviskie/.
                    
                    
                        ORBIS: The Stanford Geospatial Network Model of the Roman Empire. Stanford, CA. http://orbis.stanford.edu/. 
                    
                    
                        Rumsey, A. S. (2009). Scholarly Communication Institute 7: Spatial Technologies and the Humanities, University of Virginia, 28–30 June 2009. In 
                        Scholarly Communication Institute, Reports on Summer Institutes,
                         pp. 115–22.
                    
                    
                        University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Center for Digital Research in the Humanities. (2014). 
                        
                            Best Practices for Digital Humanities Projects
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    







Preliminaries: The Social Networks of Literary Production in the Spanish Empire During the Administration of the Duke of Lerma (1598-1618)



Brown
,
David Michael

University of Western Ontario, Canada
dbrow52@uwo.ca



Suárez
,
Juan Luis

University of Western Ontario, Canada
jsuarez@uwo.ca




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100







The Preliminaries Project is an ongoing study that uses social network analysis to better understand the publication of literary texts in the 17th century Spanish Empire. Using the metadata provided in the preliminaries sections of these texts, we have constructed a series of graph databases that allow us to organize this information in a custom tailored and meaningful way. The data is exported to Gephi graph visualization software for analysis to discover patterns, key communities, and structures not apparent in traditional humanistic studies. We then use traditional humanistic techniques to study important points located in the graph. This study demonstrates the utility of social network analysis in understanding Early Modern publication in the Spanish Empire. By using modern tools to analyze large data sets, we show the effectiveness of digital humanities as a tool to locate previously overlooked areas for further study using a more traditional humanistic approach.



No source: created in electronic format.




LP20





Paper


Long Paper


Hispanic Studies
Social Networks
Transatlantic Communities
Publication
Gephi


databases & dbms
historical studies
literary studies
metadata

data modeling and architecture including hypothesis-driven modeling

spanish and spanish american studies
bibliographic methods / textual studies
cultural studies
visualisation






Laura Weakly
Initial encoding







The “preliminaries” section of a 17th-century book encompasses the pages appearing in the printed text before the beginning of the work itself. This information is divided into seven different types of documents: details of publication, documentation of censorship (both civil and ecclesiastical), licensing, selling price, dedications, letters, and errors. The importance of the preliminaries for this project lies in the information present in these sections: the names of the officials signing the documents, their governmental/institutional affiliation, dates, place of issue, and literary circles that appear in the form of dedications and poetry written by various authors and published in their friend’s or associate’s books. In a few pages, the preliminaries give a complete image of the formal process required for the publication of each work of literature. By compiling all this information into a graph database and performing queries specific to various research questions, we have at hand a valuable source of information about the historical networks that influenced the publication of Early Modern Spanish literature.


To get a comprehensive look at this information, we generated lists of every edition of what we consider literary texts (fiction in prose, theatre, poetry, chronicles) published during the 17th -century in the Spanish empire (Jiménez et al. 1980)(Calvo et al. 2003). As shown by the following screen shot, we have focused on acquiring every available edition of each literary work.




Sample of one of our
acquisitions
lists



We then divided the 17th Century into periods corresponding to the different “validos” —royal favorites that served as head of government or “prime ministers” — of the various kings in order to address the changing power structures of the time and their influence in literary production (Hernán et al. 2002). Through interlibrary loans and, in some cases, trips to the libraries that hold the edition, we acquired copies of the pages of each book that make up the preliminaries section. Then, we manually built a graph database using sylvadb.com, an open source software and free graph database management service developed in the CulturePlex Lab. Within Sylva, data was stored and organized using a custom designed system of schemas based on a node/edge relationship system. Finally, we exported the database to Gephi (
https://gephi.org/
), a software package that allows for visualization and statistical/metric analysis of the network using built-in algorithms and Python based scripting (Bastian et al. 2009). This allows us to detect important communities within the network, key players, important objects, and hubs of production.


For this study, we have unearthed the social networks of publishing and literary creation in 17th-century Spanish literature, focusing particularly on the period during the rule of the Duke of Lerma (1598-1618). Currently the first of our
editions
lists (Duke of Lerma) consists of 330 editions, out of which we have successfully obtained 228 scanned copies of preliminaries sections: approximately 70% of the total number. Of these scans, 121 have been entered into the database, producing a graph with 1612 nodes and 3472 relationships. Rendered in Gephi using the built-in OpenOrd algorithm, the graph looks like this:



The Preliminaries graph rendered in Gephi


Using the algorithms, metric analysis tools, and filters built into Gephi we pinpointed the individuals, governmental and ecclesiastical bodies that influenced publication in this period. Also, by using the concept of “ego network” from social network analysis, we established what we call the “publication network” of some of the authors that interest us (Carrington et al. 2011). A publication network includes the editors, censors, and other individuals important in the formal process of publication, as well as any other individuals that are more directly connected to the author: friends, family, patrons, literary colleagues, etc. We determined the range of the publication network based on the internal data structure of the Preliminaries database as follows. Due to bibliographic concerns (Bowers et al. 1962) and organizational aspects of our data schema, in order to establish a connection between the author and those involved in the approval, licensing, and publication of an edition there are four steps e.g., Author->Work, Work->Edition, Edition->Approval, Approval->Censor. Therefore, to establish an author’s publication network we needed to find neighbors for up to four degrees of separation. Although Gephi does not include ego network filters that extend to four degrees, using its Python based scripting console we were able to code functions that allowed us to isolate subsets within the graph to generate ego networks for any node to
n
degrees of separation. For instance, in the graph below we can see the publication networks of two authors associated with Mexico; Bernardo de Balbuena, author of
Grandeza Mexicana
; Juan de Torquemada, author of
Monarquía Indiana
; and the intersecting nodes in their publication networks:




Publications Networks: Balbuena=Black, Torquemada=Grey, Intersecting Nodes=White



Using the above techniques, we set out to find and isolate the main nodes of this social network that made possible the creation and sustainability of a transatlantic network of cultural agents. The first thing that stands out in the graph is Lope de Vega and his powerful, Madrid based publication network (Martínez et al. 2011). Using the Python scripting console, we determined that Lope’s publication network consists of 1083 nodes, or 67% of the nodes in the graph. This information is not new, based on the extremely prolific nature of his literary production we can assume that he was very well connected. However, we can also determine who
wasn’t
in his publication network. Departing from Lope’s publication network, we were able to locate the successful political and institutional connections that help us explain the central position of institutions such as the House of Zúñiga in the cultural fabric of the period.



Publication network: Lope de Vega=Black


To do this we used the scripting console to remove the subset of nodes representing Lope’s publication network from the other nodes that make up the graph, and returned a list of the names of all of the people who are not in Lope’s publication network. A quick review of this list produced some interesting results: we found several authors based in Spain including Gonzalo de Céspedes y Meneses and El Inca Garcilaso; and two authors active in Peru, Diego Dávalos y Figueroa and Pedro de Oña. While a quick look at both Céspedes and El Inca produced interesting results, the two Lima based authors attracted our attention. In this period social circles were highly influenced by geography, and it is logical that these authors find themselves at the periphery of a network centered geographically in Madrid. However, despite geographic concerns both authors remain connected to Lope de Vega’s network. We found that both Oña and Dávalos y Figueroa are connected to Lope’s network at 3 degrees of separation through their dedications to the Viceroy of Peru, Luis de Velasco y Castilla; and at four degrees through Juan de Zúñiga, Diego de Ojeda, and the Order of Santiago:




Publication networks: Dávalos y Figueroa=Black, Lope de Vega=Grey, Intersecting nodes=White



In order to contextualize the Peruvian network we compared the aforementioned “Mexican” authors with the “Peruvian” authors. Combining the four social networks into two based on geographic constraints, we found that at 4 degrees of separation there was no direct overlap, so we upped the parameter to 5 degrees of separation and produced the following image:




Publication Networks: Intersection between Mexican and Peruvian Networks



As shown here, even at five degrees of separation there are few overlaps between the networks. However, in the above image we begin to notice the importance of the House of Zúñiga. It is well known that the House of Zúñiga was powerful in both Spain and the Americas, and also that certain members of this house were important patrons of the arts and literature (Cátedra 2003; Díez Fernández et al. 2005). Nonetheless, we don’t think that their role in transatlantic literary production has been adequately explored. The political importance of this family in New Spain is obviously important (an Archbishop and a Viceroy); however, the Preliminaries graph illustrates not only the political role this house played in America, but also the importance of political figures/nobility in publication circles and how the members of one house can spread their cultural influence throughout geographic space. To take this concept one step further, we followed the Zúñigas back the Spain. Here we find the Duke of Béjar, Alonso López de Zúñiga y Pérez de Guzmán, and the first part of Don Quixote. It turns out that American authors were not the only artists soliciting support from the House of Zúñiga: Miguel de Cervantes dedicated part 1 of Don Quixote to the famous Duke of Béjar(Rico 2005).


The above samples show the potential of a research model that combines network-based analysis with quantitative and qualitative studies of cultural production, providing evidence of the interaction between political structures and cultural production in the Spanish Empire (Martínez et al 2008). By repurposing bibliographic data, the Preliminaries Project allows us to explore the concept of cultural networks within the framework of transatlantic studies and complexity theory (Wood 2010; Suárez 2007). Furthermore, this study demonstrates the effectiveness of digital humanities methods as a tool to locate previously overlooked areas for further study using a more traditional humanistic approach.







1.
 Pedraza Jiménez, F. B., and M. R. Cáceres.
(1980).
Manual de literature española
. Pamploa: Cénlit.


2.
Huerta Calvo, J. (dir.)
(2003).
Historia del teatro español
. Madrid: Gredos.


3.
García Hernán, E.
(2002).
Políticos de la monarquía hispánica (1469-1700)
. Madrid: Fernández Ciudad.


4.
Bastian M., S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy
(2009). “Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating networks.” International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.


5.
Carrington, P. J., and J. Scott
(2011).
The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis
. Los Angeles: Sage.


6.
Bowers, Fredson.
(1962).
Principles of Bibliographic Description
. New York: Russell & Russell.


7.
Martínez, J. F. 
(2011).

Biografía de Lope de Vega, 1562-1635: un friso literario del Siglo de Oro

. Barcelona, PPU.


8.
 Cátedra, P. M. 
(2003).

La "Historia de la Casa de Zúñiga" otrora atribuida a Mosén Diego de Valera

. Salamanca: Gráficas Cervantes.


9.
Díez Fernández, J.; I., and G. Santonja.
(2005).
El mecenazgo literario en la casa ducal de Béjar
. Burgos: Instituto Castellano y Leonés de la Lengua.


10.
Rico, F. 
(2005).

El texto del "Quijote”: preliminares a una ecdótica del Siglo de Oro

. Barcelona: Ediciónes Destino.


11.
Martínez Millán, J.;, and M. A. Visceglia (eds.)
(2008).
La monarquía de Felipe III
. >Madrid: Cyan, Proyectos y Producciones Editoriales. Print.


12.
Wood, A. T.
(2010). Fire, Water, Earth, and Sky: Global Systems History and the Human Prospect.
The Journal of the Historical Society
. X:3: 287-318.


13.
Suárez, J. L.
(2007). Hispanic Baroque: A Model for the Study of Cultural Complexity in the Atlantic World.
South Atlantic Review
. 72(1): 31-47.












Reverse Image Lookup, Paintings, Digitisation, Reuse



Kirton
,
Isabella


University College London, Information Studies, United Kingdom

kirton134@googlemail.com



Terras
,
Melissa


University College London, Information Studies, United Kingdom

m.terras@ucl.ac.uk




University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Center for Digital Research in the Humanities

319 Love Library
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100
cdrh@unlnotes.unl.edu


Lincoln, Nebraska

University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588-4100







We present a pilot study which tracked a sample of images from The National Gallery, London, to establish where they were reused on other webpages. In doing so, we assessed the current methods available for applying Reverse Image Lookup, establishing how useful it can be to the cultural and heritage sectors.



No source: created in electronic format.





Poster





Reverse Image Lookup
Paintings
Digitisation
Reuse


art history
digitisation
resource creation, and discovery
user studies/user needs
digitisation — theory and practice






Erin Pedigo
Initial encoding








Once digital images of cultural and heritage material are digitized and placed online, how can we tell if they are copied, disseminated, and reused? This poster explores Reverse Image Lookup (RIL) technologies — usually used to identify unlicensed reuse of commercial photography — to help in assessing the impact of digitized content. We report on a pilot study which tracked a sample of images from The National Gallery, London, to establish where they were reused on other webpages. In doing so, we assessed the current methods available for applying RIL, establishing how useful it can be to the cultural and heritage sectors.


RIL technologies are those which allow you to track and trace image reuse online. The main commercial service, TinEye, available since 2008, finds ‘exact and altered copies of the image you submit, including those that have been cropped, colour adjusted, resized, heavily edited or slightly rotated’ (TinEye, n.d). Since 2007, Google Image Search has also provided a free service which can find similar images across the Internet. Can these tools provide a useful method for tracking reuse of images of paintings once they are placed online? Kousha et al (2010) published a pioneering study which assessed ‘image reuse value’ of academic scientific images. We believe ours is the first systematic study to use RIL to look at digitized heritage content.


We choose two samples of paintings from the National Gallery: all paintings held in Room 34 entitled ‘Great Britain 1750-1850’, containing 26 paintings by 9 artists, just over 1% of their total number holdings (National Gallery, n.d.). We also created a random sample of 6 paintings, from different artistic periods and of varying levels of fame. We analysed the dissemination of these images using TinEye and Google Image Search, using Content Analysis (White and Marsh 2006) to discover the contexts for image reuse.


We then triangulated findings using web access statistics from the National Gallery’s Google Analytics account, and from the commercial ISP analysis firm Hitwise. Our results show that the most popular paintings (by access) are the most commonly used elsewhere, but we also uncover a feedback loop which proves dissemination of images online provides direct traffic back to the National Gallery’s website. Our content analysis also provides a qualitative analysis of types of image reuse, such as commercial art publishers, blogs, reviews, tourism, image collections, encyclopaedias, other museum websites, DVD cover images, and beyond. We demonstrate that type and volume of image reuse is both subject and artist specific.


This study has allowed us to establish what motivates image reuse in a digital environment. We recommend a framework for data collection that could be used by other organisations. However, we also show that there are limitations to the information that can be gleaned from a study of this kind, due to the problematic implementation of the RIL tools which were not designed for this sector.



Acknowledgments

We thank Charlotte Sexton, Melissa Naylor, and Matt Terrington from the National Gallery, and Mike Tovell from Hitwise.








Kousha, K., M. Thelwall, and S. Rezaie
(2010). Can the Impact of Scholarly Images be Assessed Online? An Exploratory Study Using Image Identification Technology.

Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,

61(9): 1734


The National Gallery
, ‘Room 34’

http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/visiting/floorplans/level- 2/room-34

(accessed 12 February 2012.


TinEye
, (n.d.) “Frequently Asked Questions”.
http://www.tineye.com/faq
(accessed 26 September 2011.)


Domas White, M. and E. E. Marsh
(2006). Content Analysis: A Flexible Methodology
Library Trends
55(1): 23-4.






The Computational Thinking and Learning Initiative (CTLI) at Vanderbilt University formed out of an awareness that, across society and academe, computation is changing the nature of knowledge. As the practices and methods for producing, sharing, and contesting knowledge change, the enterprise of the university—its disciplinary scholarship, liberal arts mission, and charge to prepare professionals for the world of work—is being reshaped by algorithmic norms. The rise of computational thinking as a transdisciplinary category holds both promise and peril for the humanities. How can humanists, especially digital humanists, take advantage of the push for computational thinking across the curriculum while avoiding the dangers of appropriation? Alternatively, how can those developing and refining computational methods tap into the critical perspectives of the humanities? This paper discusses how an interdisciplinary group of colleagues is drawing on the theory of human-centered computing to develop environments and curricula for students of the humanities to explore the basics of text mining while also providing them with space to critique and resist the imposition of algorithmic rationality.The CTLI foregrounds a particular image of computational thinking across the curriculum, working to identify, stabilize, and study new forms of human-computer partnership that are responsive to disciplinary ways of knowing. Our aim is to study new ways in which individuals or groups of humans, along with computers or groups of computational entities, can come together productively and critically as collective computational-thinking units and build on complementary strengths to investigate problems while rejecting facile technical solutions. The perspective of human-centered computing, that is, the “design of computing systems with a human focus from beginning to end,”1 functions as an Archimedean point of our collaboration.A trans-institutional group of researchers and scholars have assembled at the CTLI, including faculty from the schools of arts and science, engineering, and education as well as the library and the data sciences institute. Together, we are exploring how human-centered computing collaborations transform epistemologies, practices, and pedagogies across disciplines.Following the programmatic overview that Anderson and Ramey presented at DH2019,2 these collaborators selected textual analysis as one of two focus areas (the other being climate change) for the first year of the initiative. Using NetsBlox,3 a block-based programming environment developed at Vanderbilt University, we constructed components and curricula to teach students in the humanities the fundamentals of computational thinking (variables, looping, functions, recursion, etc.) by manipulating textual corpora rather than matrices of numbers. We wanted this environment to be "low threshold" enough for middle and high school students to use it as an entry point to disciplinary inquiry, while having a sufficiently "high ceiling" to allow scholars of literature and history to use it meaningfully as well.Given our commitment to discipline-specific visions of computational thinking, our pilot project attempted to understand how the professional vision4 of the humanist might resonate with the technological capacity of new computational tools and methods. We viewed human-computer collaboration as an integration of productively-different ways of interacting with the objects of analysis (e.g., texts). Computers and humans “read” differently, and the trick was to find a way to put these ways-of-reading into conversation. We used design-based research5 to investigate possibilities, supporting and studying scholars' creative efforts to engage with technological tools and achieve what they regarded as progress on humanistic projects. We then developed a learning environment that enabled younger students to take on similar relations to computational tools, but in simpler, playful settings. Working with the same computational approaches at different levels of complexity and sophistication, we aimed to gain new perspectives on their power and limitations. We explored a design space with scholars and students centered on the analysis of style and affect in poetry, iteratively identifying and testing functionality with the ultimate objective of creating activities for both secondary-school and undergraduate courses.In the course of our explorations, we narrowed the team’s focus to three different technologies for textual analysis: (i) fundamental natural language processing concepts such as named entity recognition; (ii) word embeddings, such as Word2Vec;6 and (iii) a “query runner” to TEI-encoded documents in BaseX,7 a native XML database. During our collaboration, the team applied each of these technologies, first playfully, to explore what insights they could yield with familiar and constructed texts; then more deliberately, in settings in which it was likely that the computer’s “readings” might be put in productive conversation with humans’ readings. Finally, the team proposed questions, on the one hand, that revealed new patterns in larger corpora; and activities, on the other, that engaged younger learners in reflecting on style as a feature of writing under the writer’s control.In this paper, we report on this first year’s effort and our progress in building a block-based computing environment and curriculum that supports textual analysis by both high school students and professors of literature. We discuss how these tools and perspectives scaffold activities as diverse as teaching secondary students about the linguistic differences between poetry and prose and detecting stylistic patterns among Victorian writers. We also discuss the limitations of taking a human-centered computing approach when conducting digital humanities research; in particular, we examine the drawbacks of block-based languages for text mining in comparison with tools like Lexos8 and Voyant.9
How might DH textual scholars respond to call to queer DH practices, methodologies and projects? This panel brings together four papers investigating the queer margins of digital textual or methodological culture. Barnett considers the queer politics of metadata in digitisation projects identifying the way item-level markings become work-level interpretive interventions. Cytron deploys close and distant reading to position Eduardo Mendicutti’s 1982 radical act of queer world-building in a global context through analytical stylometry and TEI. Sumner considers the queer implications of distant reading techniques on the FBI files on Langston Hughes and James Baldwin, which conflate homosexuality, race, and poetics by identifying all three as “perversity.” Gairola deploys queer of color critique as a lens to read the intersectional nexus of queer and postcolonial theory through analyzing machine learning’s supposed ability to detect “gayface” with facial recognition software. Together, these papers identify and press upon diverse margins in global queer digital inscriptions.
This panel addresses the teaching of markup and the XML family of languages as a critical pedagogy that empowers students as decision makers and project managers. The panelists discuss how the exploration, schematization, documentation, transformation, and review of markup interpellates newcomers to digital humanities as thoughtful participants in real textual communities. We find that the practice of sharing markup languages with students counters persistent misconceptions in the DH community about hierarchical data modeling with XML and TEI. Rather than experiencing conceptual limitation in the tree structure, students practicing markup and its transformations engage in a direct confrontation with cultural and computational issues surrounding the crafting, control, and distribution of documents--a confrontation that involves code switching and intervention in controlling discourses.
Our poster will present and link to a publication and toolkit for working with Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables, in French and English, using the CITE Architecture. The published data will include CTS-Compliant texts in French and English, and programmatically derived versions of those texts: TEI-XML, HTML, stop-words removed (useful for Topic Modelling), lemmatized (stemmed) editions, vocabulary lists, contextualized concordance, and a web-based translation-alignment tool.The deliverable is not only a very rich deluxe, bilingual edition of the novel, but the documented scripts used to take a CITE/CTS text and transform it for different presentations and analyses.
Qualitative interviews constitute an important research tool for disciplines such as history, sociology, ethnology or political science. Yet, despite rare initiatives, transcriptions are scarcely shared with other researchers. And their annotation is most of the time done only for a personal use, without following any sort of standard, and not meant to be shown to anyone.In this paper, we advocate for the necessity of a more open management of these resources, and present a proposition for a XML-TEI-conformant standard, allowing for their accurate transcription and annotation. The ODD we present is aimed at facilitating systematic analyses of corpora of interview transcriptions, as well as at ensuring a better dissemination and re-usability of these resources. We rely as much as possible on existing TEI elements, but introduce a new element and a new attribute, to address the specificities of this kind of materials.Interviews: a precious resourceFiguratively and literally, interview transcriptions are a precious resource. Producing them comes at a high cost: researchers must dedicate a lot of time and money to organize the interviews, travel, speak with the interviewees and transcribe the interviews. They should thus be used and re-used to their fullest potential. Finding a way to properly encoding them will help further qualitative or quantitative analyses by the researcher as well as by other colleagues taking interest in the source. Sharing effectively these resources would allow for comparisons between results obtained by researchers from various disciplines, at different periods and places, or to build larger corpora to obtain new results.Addressing the reproducibility crisisHuman and social sciences have been targeted by many critics during the “replication crisis” controversy. Research relying on qualitative analyses are not easily subject to the same reproducibility assessment, but should in many cases allow for “comparative re-production”: in a similar context, and following the same principles and questioning, will a new interview lead to results comparable to the ones previously made? Making one’s transcriptions and annotations available would be a way to make this possible. It would also ensure that conclusions drawn from an interview are trusted, as a reviewer, colleague, or reader in general, could access the annotations underlying the researcher’s analyses.A standard adaptable by each research communityWe propose to create an ODD (One Document Does It All), setting out which TEI elements and associated attributes can be used and in which context, and documenting our choices to future users. An ODD also enables to add new elements and attributes. And within a given community, it is possible to agree on an available ODD customization that will ensure the interoperability, shareability and reusability of the TEI files. To create this ODD, we mostly combine the elements and attributes declared by the modules “Transcription of Speech” and “Language Corpora”, and propose to add one new element and one new attribute.Ethics and respect of privacy A key concern in sharing qualitative interviews should be the respect of legal constraints and ethics principles. We thus propose the creation of a new element, to annotate passages that could not be freely shared. This element allows for a description of the deleted passage and the reason for its deletion. It is meant to ensure the protection of interviewees, while concealing as little relevant information as possible.The creation of this new element relies on TEI best practices, and draws on the use of the element <damage>, employed to encode the damages done to a primary sources - for example by indicating that some text is lacking, and by supplying the lacking part with alternate text. The new element <privacy> works in the same way to mention that a passage has been deleted and why it has been deleted. As well as the <damage> element, <privacy> bears attributes such as “unit”, “quantity” and “extent” to precise the length of the deletion. The reason of the deletion could then be expressed within an attribute “reason”, more suitable in this context than the attribute “agent” born by <damage>. An element <desc> enclosed in the element <privacy> gives also more information on the causes of the deletion (legal reasons, ethics code, personal moral judgement). We also propose an alternate encoding strategy by enclosing a <gap> element within <privacy> to provide more information on the deletion. Moreover if the transcriber wishes to replace the deleted passage - e.g., replacing the name of a person with a pseudonym for ease of reading -, he or she may also use a <supplied> element enclosed within <privacy>.Reflecting on one’s interview practicesThe <u> element is used to encode the different parts of speech given by the interviewers and the interviewees, with a “who” attribute to express who is the speaker. But qualitative interviews are not ordinary conversations: they are prepared by a researcher, implementing a strategy to get as much information as possible on a topic of interest. It is thus crucial to encode the researcher’s comments on its own speech (Beaud, 1996): was the question prepared? spontaneous? what was its purpose (changing the subject/knowing more/confirming a previous statement etc.) ? This is why we propose to add a “type” attribute to the list of already existing attributes born by <u>, describing this kind of information.Annotating the interview: sharing one’s interpretationIn addition to simple content annotations (persons or places cited, dates evoked etc.), our model offers the possibility of sharing one’s interpretations about relevant passages of the transcription.We propose to use the <seg> element bearing an “xml:id” attribute to delimit the parts of the speech that are in need of further analyses. These analyses can then be provided via a <span> element bearing a “target” attribute to identify which <seg> element is concerned, and a “type” attribute to express the nature of this analyses. The <interpr> element may be used in conjunction with the <span> element, but <interpr> is more suitable to identify various parts of speeches under unique conceptual categories. Associating identified parts of speeches and specific conceptual categories is easy with TEI pointer mechanisms: for example, an “ana” attribute born by a <seg> element enables to associate this element with an <interp> element bearing an “xml:id” attribute.
The Text Encoding Initiative is one of the oldest continuously developed DH projects in existence. For many years, efforts have been made to translate the TEI Guidelines and specifications into languages other than the original English. These efforts, however, have often been frustrated or eventually abandoned. Despite the TEI's ingenious infrastructural support for translation, for which much credit is due to the late Sebastian Rahtz, it is difficult for translation efforts to stay continuously up to date with the Guidelines, which change incrementally and employ terminology that is often technical and sometimes unclear. In a recent meeting as part of the Triangle Scholarly Communications Institute, a group of scholars focused on the problem of communicating the TEI and developed proposals to remedy the problems with translating the TEI documentation. The conclusions and next steps that were identified in that meeting are the focus of this poster.It is quite clear that the flow of knowledge as we try to communicate the TEI cannot simply go from English to other languages: the act of translating can highlight cases where the Guidelines and specifications are insufficiently clear or even wrong. Revisions to the original document may be required. Research groups working with different languages may discover they have problems and solutions in common. Therefore, it is important that the TEI Consortium should take active responsibility for coordinating ongoing translation efforts, foregrounding them, and ensuring that they have the tools and affordances they need for their work. Additionally, the advent of reasonably useful machine translation may prove to be an important catalyst (though not by itself sufficient) for translation efforts. A glossary of TEI technical terms must be developed, accompanied by notes and examples for translators, so that it is clear not just what a term means, but why it (or its translation) was chosen, and how it is to be used.Further, the affordances on the TEI's website must be improved so that it is clear to beginners where to start and where useful examples may be found. As part of this, and of the translation of the specifications, it may be necessary to move the Guidelines themselves out of the foreground and to make the more easily internationalized specifications the primary point of contact for users. Although it is probably inevitable that a single language (which must probably be English for historical reasons) be used as a common basis of discourse for the TEI, a concerted effort must be made to provide introductory materials in other languages. This poster will document the steps we are taking towards ensuring that communication between the different linguistic communities using TEI can flow in multiple directions. We intend to make the ways TEI is communicated more equitable so that it may be adopted by a more diverse user base.
The TEI continues to work toward becoming the default method for encoding and publishing digital scholarly editions. But TEI-xml has to be transformed, one way or another, in order to become readable by humans, either in print or online. To be read online, TEI encoded scholarly editions have to be transformed into the web's native language, html. Because "HTML and JavaScript have grown into . . . powerful technologies" (Ford and Thompson. “An Adventure with Client-Side XSLT to an Architecture for Building Bridges with Javascript”) it makes sense, perhaps especially when presenting an already well-documented text, to eschew TEI and encode the text directly in html, using css and javascript (as, if needed php) to offer an affordance-rich digital scholarly edition. In this short presentation of _A Paradise Lost Portal_ such an edition, along with its encoding, will be offered.
As this year's conference theme suggests, Digital Humanities finds itself on the intersection between many different "disciplines, methodologies, and pedagogies" (Estill and Guiliano 2019). But while this intrinsic interdisciplinarity (see e.g. Klein 2015) can be regarded as one of the research field's chief assets, it quickly becomes a considerable hurdle in the classroom. As Ryan Cordell suggests, we tend to overestimate the technical skills of our ‘tech-savvy,’ ‘digital native’ students – and perhaps even the general affinity they have towards digital tools and methodologies (Cordell 2016, 465). Without a formalized technical or computational background, the skills our students  bring to the table rely heavily on their individual interests, experiences, and auto-didacticism. This situation culminates in a heterogenous classroom that makes it difficult to assess where the gaps in each of the students' knowledge lie, and how they can be bridged. As such, the teacher's first task becomes to decide which basic skills the students will need for their digital research. As a result, technical DH courses often focus on teaching students specific skills that can be used in specific contexts to achieve specific research results, such as: How to use TEI-XML to encode a text-bearing object; How to use python to query a corpus of digital texts; How to use R to perform a stylometric analysis; How to use GIS frameworks to map data layers onto geographical zones; etc.As Mahony and Pierazzo argued in 2012, however, more than teaching such purely technical skills there is "a need for teaching methodological approaches". Rather than teaching students to use new technologies, we need to teach them how those technologies work: how their methodological constraints affect our data; how they determine what we can and cannot do with our data; and how seemingly simple data processing steps imply "interpretative decisions that change the nature of the data and how it can be validly interpreted". Still the question remains: "What are the right basic requirements" for our students? (Scagliola et al. 2019) – Where do we start?In this paper, we propose a 'minimal digital pedagogy' that applyies the principles of Minimal Computing in the classroom. As a working group of ADHO's GO:DH Special Interest Group, Minimal Computing sets out to rethink DH work for areas in the world where factors such as high-end hardware, software, network capacity, power, etc. are not a given, by performing our computational research "under some set of significant constraints." It is precisely such constraints, we believe, that allow us to get to the fundamentals of the technologies we are using – and to give our students a critical understanding of the tools they are using by building and configuring them from the ground up.This is the setup we have adopted for the Antwerp Summer School in DH – an intensive one-week summer school that aims to teach students the basics of developing and hosting their own digital archives and editions. In the last two years, we have developed a tutorial for deploying a IIIF-compliant image server on a local network of Raspberry Pis (RPi). At the next iteration of the summer school, we want to take this setup one step further by teaching students how develop a full-fledged Digital Scholarly Edition based on those reproductions. Much to our continued surprise, experience tells us that all of this is possible on a RPi. These affordable light-weight minicomputers the size of a credit card were originally designed to teach digital novices (especially children) computing and digital making skills, but have recently been successfully used in higher education classrooms as well. In our specific setup, students used RPis to up a Local Area Network where they installed, configured, and controlled web-based tools to host, share, and reuse digital reproductions of manuscripts with each other. This collaborative act of building a private network offered them a practical way to learn more about and play with fundamental computing concepts. In particular, through a series of tutorial instructions, integrated exercises, and group discussions, they were exposed to issues in physical computational and networking infrastructures; to working with unfamiliar operating systems; to operating a computer without an interface (command line); to communicating with and controlling other computers (SSH); to a number of data formats and markup languages (HTML, XML, CSS, JSON, Pyramid TIFF, etc.); and – crucially – they learned to approach important technological standards and complex digital frameworks (such as IIIF) from a developer’s perspective rather than from a user’s.But alongside the advantages of learning-by-building (Clement 2012; Ramsay and Rockwell 2012) and its applicability to a range of DH technologies, adopting a minimal computing approach to DH pedagogy has other benefits as well. To start, the setup is cost efficient: it requires no proprietary software, and can be run quasi-independently of the host institution’s technical infrastructure. A such, the minimal set of hardware for this course requires a onetime investment of around $1,500 – or less than a single up-to-date desktop computer. What is more, if the host institution provides an internet connection without AP isolation and participants bring their own laptops, the entire hardware setup for a course with up to 30 participants may even fit into a standard-sized carry-on trolley. And for students without personal computers, minor adaptations to the tutorial could be considered to provide a similar learning experience. Finally, since our current setup only uses the internet to update and download free Linux packages (which might be provided via a local repository within the RPi network), it may even be possible to teach this course without an internet connection. As such, this portable and independent setup would allow us to teach DH in areas with limited access to digital infrastructures – a setup that we hope to try out at a collaborating university in the Philippines.
"She Was Simply a Woman Who Was In Search of Variety"Supporting Complex Searches on The Willa Cather Archive with OrchidDussault, Jessica; Tunink, Greg; Dalziel, KarinUniversity of Nebraska-LincolnThe Center for Digital Research in the Humanities (CDRH)1 is developing the open-source software, Orchid, to provide a browsing, searching, and viewing interface for documents stored in a center-wide API.2 Orchid was built not only to accommodate new projects at the CDRH, but also as a tool to allow rapid upgrading of older sites using TEI-XML3 documents as part of a mission to address the technical debt of dozens of aging sites. In late 2018, the first production site powered by Orchid, The Complete Letters of Willa Cather,4 was launched as a complement to the existing Willa Cather Archive (WCA) website.5 While The Complete Letters was now powered by Orchid, the rest of the WCA remained in Apache Cocoon,6 a framework it had used since the mid-2000s. In 2019, the CDRH challenged itself with migrating the entire WCA to an Orchid-powered application — a strong proof-of-concept that Orchid was equally suited to the task of hosting complex existing projects as well as new sites.The first obstacle to migrating the WCA site was that Orchid had not been built for the complexity of sites such as the WCA. The site draws from overlapping sets of documents with differing displays and behavior, so the new application required both a site-wide search in addition to the existing Complete Letters search functionality. In order to address this challenge, Orchid logic was altered to support multiple sections of websites with customizable browsing options, search defaults, interfaces, and internationalization.7 This was engineered to re-use as much of the existing Orchid code and require as little additional configuration and code in the application as possible.Figure 1: Screenshots of the site-wide WCA search (left) and The Complete Letters search (right). Differences include the ability to search annotations separately, different filters, a custom display, and a search by letter identifier.This multi-section functionality is predicted to be utilized by complex sites slated for upgrade from older technologies, such as The Walt Whitman Archive.8 Perhaps most exciting of all, the multi-section functionality of Orchid brings us closer to a long-term goal of the CDRH to offer simple interfaces for engaging with older documents from dozens of projects available as sub-sites in a single, centralized application.
From Silo to Repo:Enforcing File Structure to Improve Workflow and AccessDussault, Jessica; Weakly, Laura K.University of Nebraska-Lincoln    The University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Center for Digital Research in the Humanities (CDRH) has created more than 80 projects since 1998.1 Because of the collaborative and experimental nature of Digital Humanities projects, a variety of technologies and structures were utilized, which has proved challenging to support as we continue to develop projects.2 Recently the CDRH has implemented policies that separate data from websites and standardize file locations. These policies have been reinforced by building software with expectations about data location, which makes creating, maintaining, and upgrading sites more manageable. This paper examines the structural changes of organizing files, the impact on workflow, and the increased accessibility of data for researchers.File Organization    The CDRH’s largest and most well-known projects are document-driven digital archives, producing tens of thousands of encoded TEI-XML3 files. Historically, these files were part of a website's code base, but projects shared no common structure. The first step towards managing data for dozens of projects was to move the documents out of website code into "data repositories."4 Datura5, CDRH-developed software, provides customizable scripts for transforming a data repository's documents into other formats, such as HTML or JSON for search indexes. The location of documents is enforced by Datura's expectations of file types.Figure 1: The basic structure of a data repository. The source documents, stored in subdirectories by type, are transformed by scripts which apply overrides and configuration settings into files in the output directory. Most commonly, TEI files are transformed into HTML for display or JSON for populating search indexes.Images are stored separately from the website served with an International Image Interoperability Framework-compatible image server.6 These changes to data and image locations allow us to focus on standardizing other aspects of our websites, such as publishing documents with a center-wide API.WorkflowThis Datura-driven standardization has led to improvements in project workflow. Students and other researchers can be commonly trained on file naming and data structures. They are trained to use a version control system, currently git hosted on GitHub, allowing easier access to file sharing and virtually eliminating data being lost or overwritten. Previously students working on multiple projects needed training on each project as to where metadata files and images were stored, scan specifications, file naming, and file sharing. Now students can work across projects with little to no learning curve for each new project.Increased AccessibilityThe CDRH has a commitment to making data available for scholars. We have long exposed XML source files powering individual pages7, but the new data repository system makes downloading and working with project files even easier. The CDRH publishes data repositories on the code-sharing platform GitHub, tagged with "tei-xml" to aid discoverability.8 These public repositories can be downloaded or referenced remotely. An artist has already used repository documents to power a small site.9 The public repositories also provide student contributors with a resource to showcase their project work.10ConclusionThough this system has drawbacks that we will discuss during our presentation, our data-first approach has dramatically decreased development time spent on creating websites and on student training. Gathering documents together has improved the internal workflow of collaborators, laid the groundwork for future initiatives to renovate aging websites, and aided in the dissemination of data and scholarship to researchers around the globe. Discussion around designing Digital Humanities projects to enable future support is increasingly important in the discipline. Typically, each project has a single data repository, but in the case of larger and more complex projects like The Walt Whitman Archive, a project may have multiple data repositories to group documents with different concerns like marginalia or scribal documents.
Alongside the comparative network analysis of larger literary corpora (Algee-Hewitt 2017, Trilcke/Fischer 2018), there has recently been a trend towards focusing on author-centred subcorpora, such as the oeuvres of Jane Austen (Wade 2017) or Anton Chekhov (Faynberg et al. 2018).Instead of picking out individual authors, we can instead focus on productive literary topoi instead and examine them with the means of network analysis, something that has not been undertaken yet as far as we can see. The abundance of dramas revolving around the Faust myth will serve as an example.The German Drama Corpus (https://dracor.org/ger) currently holds 18 TEI-encoded plays that centre around a Faust character. They range from early plays like Weidmann's "Johann Faust" (1775) to the two parts of Goethe's "Faust" (1808, 1832) and Friedrich Theodor Vischer's "Faust, part III" (1862), but also feature mash-ups like Grabbe's "Don Juan und Faust" (1829) and a version with a female Faust character, Wilhelm Schäfer's "Faustine" (1898).Network analysis enables us to take a comparative macroscopic look at the different structures of these plays. For example, the roles of the devil/sub-devil Mephistopheles and the famulus Wagner can be examined more closely, shedding new light on the structural development of the sujet. It will become clear when and where these characters appear – but also where they are missing. Other types of characters also come to the fore, such as Gretchen or even Faust's parents, who play no role in Goethe's version but who do appear in other plays.Our poster first offers network visualisations that concentrate on the centres, i.e., the constellation directly around the Faust character, especially in the larger plays (Soden's "Doctor Faust" has 62 characters, Julius von Voss's "Faust" has 72 characters, Avenarius' "Faust" has 95 characters, Goethe's first part of "Faust" has 115 and the second part even 189 distinguishable characters/voices). The visualisations are supported by statistical network measures, such as the Betweenness Centrality, Degree and Weighted Degree. In addition to visual evidence, these measures can also address the positioning of the characters surrounding Faust in a new way.The poster will demonstrate how network analytical and quantitative aspects complement existing literary research on the topic (for an overview of the wealth of literary works around Faust cf. Hucke 1992).
Manuscripts can be burned, lost, forgotten, thrown away... If scholars have already tried to measure the proportion that has survived since the apparition of moveable types with Gutenberg [Weitzman, 1987], such percentages do not help editors of texts to answer a more practical question: how many documents of a given author still exist, and among them how many are accessible to scholars?In the present paper, we want to use Madame de Sévigné (1626-†1696) as a test case to calculate how many autograph manuscripts (AM) are still circulating on the market, and therefore assess precisely what is inaccessible because it is held in private collections by combining three different sources of information. First, a list of French AM held in libraries – which has been created for the occasion, because there is no catalogue for French literature such as the one by P. Beal [2005]. Second, a list of Sévigné’s AM held in historical private collections, drawn from Duchêne’s edition [Sévigné, 1972-1978]. Third, a list of manuscripts drawn from fixed-price and auction catalogues [Bodin, 2000], which contains the description of hundreds of thousands of manuscripts sold over decades (fig. 1).1. QuantificationExisting manuscripts (E) of an author (a) are either kept accessible in libraries and archives (L), either (more or less) hidden in private collections (C). The problem is that while we know L, for which we have catalogues, C is unknown. To know what it represents, we can divide it in two: on the one hand we have historical collections (H), usually inherited by old families, well documented and extremely static, and on the other hand there is an unknown amount of documents circulating between private collectors (P). If we cannot know P, we can use a proxy: we can deduce what is still on the market (M) by subtracting what is owned (because it has been bought) by libraries (L) from everything that has been sold (S). Because buyers are constantly intervening on the market (S), any value is only true at time t – i.e. the date of the last sale catalogue taken into account, assuming that all the previous ones have been analysed. With all these information, we can now deduce how many manuscripts still exist (E) if we know S. Figure 1: RDA, May 1894 (N°166)Looking for French AM, we have concentrated our efforts on documents sold in Paris, and for financial and time reasons, we have focused on catalogues published before c. 1900. We have retro-converted:250 fixed-price catalogues of the Revue des autographes (RDA, cf. fig. 1).300 fixed-price catalogues of the Lettres autographes et documents (LAD).100 auction catalogues.Because of similarities between such catalogues and dictionaries, we have been able to use GROBID dictionaries [Khemakhem et al., 2018] to process the images and transform them into a fully TEI-conformant semantic encoding (fig. 2) thanks to a custom workflow [Gabay et al., 2020].Figure 2: XML-TEI encoding of an entryThe workflow keeps undergoing constant improvements (e.g. Rondeau Du Noyer et al. [2019]), which have led to the creation of a dedicated tool for catalogues [Khemakhem et al., 2020]. In its last version, on top of traditional features for information extraction (special characters, position on the page... in red in fig. 3), we now use typographical information (bold, italics, size of the font... in blue in fig. 3) for more precise results. Figure 3: RDA, May 1873 (N°37)3 Annotation and reconciliation The letter previously mentioned is not the only one of Sévigné sold during the 19th c., and it has not been sold only once Figure 4: RDA, July 1897 (N°200)Figure 5: RDA, April 1902 (N°257)Because the same item can be sold multiple times, it is crucial to transform the list obtained with the digitisation of sale catalogues into a set of unique types (or classes, cf. blue and red boxes in fig. 6), prior to comparing these types with existing documents held in libraries. Doing so, we can identify AM that have never appeared on the market (in pink and in black), document the history of those that are now in library collections (in blue and in orange) or identify “ghost” manuscripts that are still circulating on the private market (in green and red). Figure 6: Reconciliation-identification processTo carry out this task, more information is required than those provided by GROBID dictionaries, we have therefore added an extra layer of information, including the type of document (L.a.s. for autograph letter signed, D.s. signed document...), its length (number of pages or folios...), its format (in-octavo, in-quarto...), its date or its price. Since these information follow either an extremely strict (1 p., L.a.s.... ), either a fairly common pattern (12 janvier 1798, 19 sep. 1820...), they are tagged with regexes and dedicated python libraries in order to obtain a more fine-grained encoding: Figure 7: Annotated <desc>Combined with the name of the author, such information provide a unique combination of features that can be used to compare sold documents over time, and identify not only same AM sold twice, but also different fragments of a single manuscript (tab. 1), which share part of the information only (same date, same format but different length). Table 1: Key information of three sold items from cataloguesBecause we have catalogued all the known manuscripts of the marquise de Sévigné after extensive research in European and American libraries, it is possible to reconstitute part of their history thanks to the sale catalogues. Table 2: Key information of two manuscripts ResultsWe can now offer some results:63 sales have been identified until 190346 AM being sold at least one time, 14 at least two times13 letters out of the 46 sold are not in public libraries or archivesFollowing these numbers, we can say that:c. 1% of the 1,350 letters identified by Duchêne [Sévigné, 1972-1978] are still circulating on the market.c. 5% of the total has survived but is inaccessible to scholars, if we add the 62 letters still held in the private collections of the Guitaut family in Burgundy.Such numbers, obviously, need to be taken with caution for two main reasons. On the one hand, the oldest catalogues are not precise enough to identify exactly which AM is sold. On the other hand, the market in the 19th c. is already international, and manuscripts sold outside of France are not taken into account by our study. This second problem should receive all our attention in a near future to contribute to the history of objects [Courtin, 2020], and especially the migration of manuscripts [Burrows et al., 2019].Acknowledgements Many thanks to Agathe Decaster for her (crucial) help with the mathematical formulas, and her brother Erwan.
This paper is based on HAIRO, a Franco-Romanian project for creating a library of Romanian Hajdouk novels in an XML/TEI format (see https://proiectulbrancusihairo.wordpress.com/home-1/). Hajdouks were outlaws living in the woods, that fascinated the public in the second half of the 19th century and at the beginning of the 20th century, both for their cruelty and their sense of justice. Between 1840 and 1920, they appear in almost 12% of the Romanian novels, with at least 40 titles specifically dedicated to this picturesque character.Our main concern is “the place-making mediated by the text”, and more precisely the creation of a Hajdouk space; in a rural Romania, structured by clear and stable relationships between spaces, their nomadic way of life constitutes a disrupting force, and we are looking at if and how this reflects in the novels. Much along the lines of (Hay and Butterworth 2019), our work focuses less on the “indexical relationship to the physical world”, and more on the ways in which the texts create their own spatiality.In the first part, we discuss the adaptation of Pustejovsky’s ISO metamodel (2014, 2019) to operate what we call a “basic annotation” of our set of novels. Faced with the specificities of our texts, we have defined not two, but seven types of spatial entities: toponyms, places, paths, zones, vehicles, topical spaces and potential spaces. The two last categories are the most salient difference between our annotation schema and the previous existing ones, and we advocate their interest in literary contexts, where “the other world” or “in his bosom” are frequently mentioned, to quote but two examples from a very rich list.We further characterize the spaces as “absolute” or “relative”. For this “basic annotation”, we have renounced to define other types of relations, such as orientation, movement or metrics.The annotation exercise took place in two phases. In a first, exploratory round, we have worked on XML files, and implemented our schema as a feature structure in TEI. In a second round, we have configured a BRAT server and started by measuring the inter-annotator agreement on a set of 10 samples of about 1000 words (see results in Galleron et al., forthcoming). In a third phase, currently under development, we proceed to the actual annotation of texts, using a place names dictionary to pre-annotate. Another path currently explored is that of the syntactic tagging of phrase constituents: since a large part of our space entities appear to assume a function of circumstantial complement of place, they could be spotted with a specialized dependencies tagger. However, the first experiences in this respect are quite disappointing, and all the more so they have been conducted on samples in French – results will probably be worse on Romanian samples, since Romanian is a language less equipped with NLP tools. Please note that usual NER systems (Stanford, Spacy library, etc.) do not work, or give very poor results, on Romanian texts. For all these reasons, manual annotation still appears as the best way to go, in spite of being extremely time consuming.To date, the repartition of the annotations per type, as indicated in figure 1, confirms that looking at toponyms only, with a NER/ NEL approach, fails to capture a large part of the placemaking process in a novel. Also, two major categories of novels seem to appear with regards to the writing of the space, one constituted by the texts in which places and zones are in even proportions, the other gathering novels in which places are dominant, to the detriment of zones.Figure 1. Annotations per type in a selection of novelsIn addition, categories “paths” and “vehicles” seem to be discriminant between two other types of fiction. Indeed, while the number of annotations remains quite low in both cases, they allow to identify certain novels as outliers, with lots of spatial changes, as opposed to the major part of novels that appear finally more “static”, and privileging scenes and summaries of the action. This is somewhat surprising, since we expected all our Hajdouk novels to pertain to the second category. We are currently trying to understand if the difference is motivated by the specific style of certain authors, the taste of an era, or it genuinely points towards a generic specificity within our corpus;
Not only in the context of Digital Humanities but also in other research areas the Open Data movement is gaining momentum. For this reason, the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (ACDH) started an experiment at the beginning of 2019: For the first time ever, we published the calls for participation in three virtual hackathons funded by the Austrian manifestations of DARIAH and CLARIN, CLARIAH-AT. These hackathons focused on Open Data sets that are publicly available online, and the tasks to perform on these data involved the creation of Open Source code. Each of the hackathons had a special theme and was co-timed with an event that involved an aspect of Openness. These events also inspired the choice of the respective data sets.Usually hackathons take place on site, participants are given tasks to be solved within a given timeframe in a fixed location. This requires the programmers to be flexible and available and to have access to travel funding. A virtual hackathon on the other hand offers people all over the globe the possibility to participate and contribute without having to travel. Therefore, our approach enabled a much larger community to participate in the event on the one hand, thus also promoting the benefits of Open Data on the other.The first hackathon was carried out in cooperation with the European Lexicographical Infrastructure (ELEXIS) and focused on lexicographical data (the Digital Dictionary of Tunis Arabic). The task was to develop a creative mode of processing it, e.g. by enriching it, visualizing it, doing statistical analysis, or integrating it with other resources (e.g. LOD). The submissions were to be handed in by the end of the first ELEXIS observer event taking place in February 2019.For the second hackathon, the ACDH cooperated with the City of Vienna and chose a set from the city’s Open Government Data platform to be processed. The task was to be completed on the Open Data Day Vienna 2019 (28 February 2019). The aim was to develop a creative mode of processing cartographical data showing damage to buildings in Vienna during World War II.The third and final hackathon of the series offered a task to be completed on the International Open Data Day 2019 (2 March 2019). For this final highlight, a choice of two Open Data sets was offered to the participants. The first data set to be worked on in this task was a collection of XML/TEI transcriptions of early German travel guides. The second data set consisted of German historical newspapers and was provided in cooperation with the Europeana newspaper project.The best contributions were determined by an international board of judges and received cash prizes. The criteria for judgement were creativity and innovation, accessibility, reusability and reproducibility, as well as elegance. In our presentation, we will share the lessons learned and show how Open Science was the necessary precondition for this project, as well as what inspired its ultimate success. We will make our case by giving insights into the lessons learned in 2019 and sharing how we improved the concept for the second round of the hackathon series in 2020.
Towards Modeling the European Novel. Introducing ELTeC for Multilingual and Pluricultural Distant ReadingThis contribution reports on the collaborative effort of building an open access multilingual corpus of European novels published 1840-1920 (the European Literary Text Collection - ELTeC) within the COST Action “Distant Reading”.[1]Working at the intersection of many languages and cultures, we address practical and technical aspects of corpus design based on a theoretical discussion of pluri-cultural computational modeling of literature. In the corpus design, we adopt a metadata-based approach that allows for representing the diversity of novels published 1840-1920 across Europe. Our sampling and balancing criteria use metadata including publication date, text length, reprint counts and authors’ gender,[2] and we deliberately focus on inclusion of non-canonical novels.We have built a workflow for systematically sampling and encoding novels as well as a consistent annotation model of data and metadata (cf. Burnard, Schöch, Odebrecht, 2019). Currently, ELTeC constitutes a dynamic intersection of fictional discourse in fourteen languages, including Czech, English, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Serbian, Slovenian, and Spanish (ca. 600 text candidates amounting to ca. 52 mio. words).[3] Figure 1 depicts the current state of the Portuguese sample, across categories “text length” (long, medium, short), “gender” (female, male), and “date slot” (T1-4; https://distantreading.github.io/ELTeC/por/index.html).Figure 1. Screenshot of Portuguese sampleOur TEI-XML (TEI Consortium, 2019) encoding scheme aims is minimal, but aims at facilitating a rich and well-informed distant reading. ELTeC is rooted in the open data movement, with collaborative data creation and an open access extensive documentation for (meta-)data schema, decisions and workflows.[4] Each version of ELTeC is archived via Zenodo.[5] Thus, our (meta)data are re-usable, interoperable, accessible and findable (cf. FAIR Guiding Principles; Wilkinson et al., 2016).In view of the problematic notion of “representativeness” (see Biber, 1993), ELTeC deliberately refrains from modeling the statistical distribution of populations of publication or reception (cf. Herrmann & Lauer, 2019). Rather, we address the inevitable bias included in the sampling (see Bode, 2018), as well as the explicit link to research questions (Underwood, 2019; Lüdeling, 2011) and the act of construction (Piper, 2019).ELTeC caters to the computational modeling of literature at the intersection of cultures, nations, languages, genders, but also poetologies, trends, and traditions, in a historical period of extreme aesthetic change and diversity. Giving one example, in collaboration with other working groups, using demonym and named entity recognition, it is possible to comparatively explore images of ‘the other’ (ethnic, national, regional; Leerssen, 2016). Generally, in the creation of ELTeC we aim at inductively defining what a ‘novel’ is, allowing for diverse approaches in literary theory and history to be explored and tested.The research described in this paper was conducted in the context of the COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204 - "Distant-Reading"). 
IntroductionDigital paleography has been emerging as a field of research since the beginningof the new century. Paleographers, describe how a text has been displayed, andcollect information such as writing styles, contextual information and the epoch.Ciula (2017) gives a good summary about digital paleography and its practices.Challenges concerning digital paleography are discussed by Hassner et al. (2015)for writing systems and discussed more broadly in Stokes (2015). The mainresults of these publications is, that the community of digital paleographers,which was mainly focused on a few particular languages, sees to broaden itsscope and to research more global models to represent paleographic featuressuch as writing style, typographic features and anomalies in texts. This calls fora unified representation of paleographic features to which this publication wouldlike to contribute by suggesting a core vocabulary for paleographic descriptionof texts.Related WorkPaleographic features can to a certain extent be represented in TEI/XML1 Wit-tern et al. (2009) (scribal shifts, scribal alterations) as highlighting annotations.For systematic non-alphabetic languages, encodings can be developed to repre-sent the shape of the characters, e.g. for cuneiform and egyptian hieroglyphicsHomburg (2019), van den Berg (1997)In the linguistic community, linguistic linked open data (LLOD)McCrae et al.(2016) is very present and allows for tools such as BabelNet Navigli & Ponzetto(2012), a multilingual semantic network to translate words and texts based onsemantic content. This publication suggests to create such a semantic networkfor paleographic descriptions in order to formalize this part of research. Natu-rally, such a task cannot be done by a single scholar from a single field, so thepublication begins by suggesting vocabulary contents documenting the structureof systematic scripts like cuneiform and to model relations between componentsof parts of scripts, the so-called core vocabulary. Especially structured scripts(cf. fig. 1) expose a variety of encoding schemes for e.g. Chinese Bishop & Cook(2003), Japanese Apel (2014). Those encodings have been created to modelfonts, but form an ideal basis to create the proposed unified vocabulary. Similarto the OliA ontologies Chiarcos & Sukhareva (2015) the author suggests to ex-tend this core vocabulary representing the structure of the script (figure 3) bylanguage/script specific extensions. The concept will be presented using the ex-ample of cuneiform and egyptian hieroglyphics and builds upon the vocabularyshown in figure 2. Figure 1. Example of the PaleoCodage encodingHomburg (2019): PaleoCodage repre-sents a machine-readable way to describe highly structured scripts such as cuneiform.This structure, relations to other similar characters and scripts can be modelled usingthe proposed core vocabulary, while the language specific vocabularies would describewriting styles, shapes and stilistic characteristics of the respective script. Vocabulary describing two cuneiform glyphs connected to character rep-resentations, their finding spot, their assigned epoch, an assigned glyph sense (whichmay be distinct from the character/word sense) and possible serializations in SVG andas a PaleoCode. For other languages other encodings are possible.Excerpt: PaleoCodage Vocabulary describing a cuneiform sign. The sign’s structure is described using a PaleoCode which could itself be described usingSemantic relations. These relations allow to model the structure of script subelementswith extensions for paleographic features
TEI-XML is the standard in digital text editing. The classic inline annotation with TEI quickly reaches its limits when it comes to complex annotations. In order to realize DH projects with such requirements on the dhPLUS platform currently developed at the University of Salzburg, a special form of stand-off markup is presented: It saves the original TEI file, converts the markup into RDF instructions, keeps the text and links the triples to an unlimited number of annotation levels. A unique identifier connects the different stages and facilitates presentation and search processes.
This paper will detail the development of an ontology that reflects the complex relationship between concepts of labor and office in the 18th century Moravian ego-documents of Fulneck, Yorkshire. Undertaking this type of rich and subject-driven data mining permits the exploration of the relationship between forms of labor in Moravian congregations and their relationship to a broader understanding of work in the 18th century. It also provides a platform for further investigation of contemporary religious societies.Historically, the membership of the Moravian Church in the United Kingdom, like the Methodist Church of the Wesleys, has been seen as consisting primarily of men and women from the working class whose artisan and laborer skills were fundamentally redeployed by the advent of large-scale industrial production in the North of England. Thanks to the Moravian custom of writing a memoir these working people left autobiographical documents that include details of their working lives. For the most part unstudied, these English-language memoir collections provide historians with a treasure-trove of new archival material, written by the working-class members of the church.Recent scholarship on the intersection of gender, industry and religion (See Hammond and Forsaith, 2011) has begun to explore how these concepts were transformed by the early Industrial Revolution and provide a welcome revision to the dominant historiographical narrative of the British working class. (As inscribed by E.P. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, 1963.) This corpus of unpublished and mostly uncatalogued material allows us to examine the sentiments directed towards labor and office respectively.Since 2014, the Moravian Lives project (moravianlives.org) has undertaken the work of transcribing, encoding, and data-mining the memoirs written by thousands of Moravians in Europe, North America, and the Caribbean. Recently the project team has turned its attention to the English congregations, with a focus on revealing prosopographical information within of the memoirs.Using the Fulneck memoirs as our corpus, we have begun the process of harvesting this prosopographical data through semantic text encoding  detailed personography, minting unique identifiers and capturing data about key life and religious events. In the process of so doing, we have realized that we were also producing unique ontology of Moravian offices and occupations undertaken by these Moravians, within their community and within broader regional context. (See Eide, and Ciotti and Tomasi for an outline of challenges of using TEI XML for this kind of intensive semantic work.and data modeling.)By July 2020 the Moravian Lives project team will be able to report on the status of the prosopography and ontology. More importantly, we will be able to present initial analysis of the connections this work enables us to reveal - between male and female members of the “economies”, the shifts we detect in types of labour from the 1740s through the 1790s, and how this methodological approach might be used as a model for other research projects focusing on concurrent evangelist movements, and those concentrating more broadly on related themes and trends to do with the Industrial Revolution.
This poster will highlight two different analytical possibilities from a robust TEI (Text-Encoding Initiative) XML (eXtensible Markup Language) encoding of an ancient source, the Theodosian Code, one of the foundational documents for Roman and, by extension, modern law. The first attempts to correlate laws affecting women to imperial policy; the second highlights the power projections of emperors through their travels. These two act as proofs-of-concept for a larger project, the analysis of Late Roman socio-political structures via a full digital editioning of the Theodosian Code.
At many institutions, the library is at the center of Digital Humanities work on campus. Academic libraries are important discipline-spanning partners in the digital humanities, from research to teaching. DH library staff engage in a broad range of pedagogic activities, including teaching for-credit classes, partnering with teaching faculty in their classrooms, and offering workshops, to name a few. These sites of learning offer possibilities for social justice pedagogy across a spectrum of pedagogic praxis. This panel will explore a range of approaches DH librarians and staff across the United States employ for social justice pedagogy, representing a range of institutions from research universities to liberal arts colleges. We will examine ways of infusing critical pedagogy into DH library instruction, including one-shot instruction and embedded librarianship, as well as DH instruction designed specifically for classes related to social justice. We will cover varying approaches to building academic communities based on collaboration, kindness, generosity, and shared values, and we will discuss user-centered DH teaching and learning that is inclusive and responsive to particular student needs. We will also contemplate the perils and possibilities of engaging in DH and social justice work within and beyond libraries. Libraries are an important site to examine the intersections of DH, social justice, and pedagogy, and we hope this panel will offer multiple windows into the on-going work in this area and move forward both the conversation and the practice around the way we engage with DH learners.Pamella R. Lach, Digital Humanities Librarian, San Diego State University. “Infusing Critical Digital Humanities Pedagogy in the Library Classroom: From One-Shot Instruction to Embedded Librarianship”Digital Humanities librarians engage in a range of DH-related instruction, from the “one-shot”—a single and standalone interaction with a class—to embedded librarianship—in which a librarian works closely with a class for the duration of a semester. Librarians striving to infuse critical digital humanities approaches into classrooms that are not their own must be prepared to incorporate critical approaches in both small and large ways. This talk explores the opportunities and challenges for one DH librarian attempting to infuse critical digital humanities into their instruction.Often faced with a limited amount of time with students, I carefully select DH project examples that have a social justice focus, whether a digital history project that serves as a corrective to the archival silencing of people of color, or a project explicitly designed to advance equity, diversity, inclusion (EDI), and social justice through its digital praxis. I also ask students to explore well-intentioned projects that fall short of these goals—for example, projects that re-objectify and dehumanize individuals through problematic visual representations. In examining a range of projects dedicated to people of color—their histories and stories—my students and I engage in critical sensemaking that interrogates the motivations of the projects’ creators, the assumptions and biases baked into the projects, and the unintended messages being delivered. While I cannot always provide solutions to these problems, the questioning that we engage in together leads to a critical praxis that I hope they will apply to other classes and scholarship (digital or analog).More often than not, I work closely with classes over an entire semester in a more embedded style, which affords me opportunities for even greater social justice interventions.When engaging in ongoing work with a class—whether project- or tools-based—I bring in that same critical framework. But my obligation towards critical DH extends beyond the examples I use to teach or the conversations we have in class. Working at a lesser-resourced, teaching-intensive institution where not all students own a laptop or are comfortable with technology, I often select free, lower-tech solutions with minimal access barriers. But in selecting such tools, many of which rely on Google integration, I am also aware of the risks to the students, particularly for undocumented students who might be vulnerable using tools that do not guarantee data privacy or expose them to surveillance risks. While opting for expensive tools may not necessarily be the solution, I try to make these choices transparent, call attention to the risks, and offer meaningful alternatives and opt-out solutions so that students can make informed decisions about how they want to engage in DH in their classes.Even when we are not instructors of record, DH librarians can make important contributions to the classroom by modeling critical inquiry and helping students evaluate digital scholarship from an EDI- and social justice-informed lens. Whether they are reviewing existing digital projects or creating their own, we can teach students to make careful—if constrained—choices, and to be open and honest about those choices.Megan Martinsen, Digital Scholarship Librarian, Georgetown University. “Digital Humanities Methods for Social Justice Pedagogy”The growing discussion about infusing digital humanities pedagogy with social justice concepts is incredibly important work and exciting to see. Less discussed, but equally exciting in my view, is the reverse. Embedding digital humanities tools and methods into social justice pedagogy is a useful and important endeavor. It can open up avenues for social justice students to share their important work online as public scholars and as students gain comfort with digital research methods, they can potentially ask new questions about the social justice topics they study.My talk will present a case study of a social justice course at my institution where I collaborated with the teaching faculty member to create a final project that used digital humanities methods and where I served as an embedded librarian for the semester. The course, Justice and Peace Studies 299, is the research methods course required for the Justice and Peace Studies major and minor. The bulk of the course is spent exploring research methods used in social justice studies. My collaboration with the teaching faculty member added a section on digital humanities methods that can be applied to social justice studies.The assignment we created had students work in groups focused on a social justice issue of their choosing. Each group was required to write a paper that employed basic text mining, create an infographic, create a data visualization, and create a map. My talk will delve into how the assignment came to be, student reactions to the assignment, and common issues the student groups faced. And I’ll discuss lessons learned from the project and how we might change and shift the project in upcoming semesters.While not every institution has a social justice degree path, they are growing in popularity and many institutions now offer at least some coursework in social justice studies. My hope is that this talk will help digital humanities practitioners see a role for themselves as collaborators with these emergent programs.Brandon Walsh, Scholars’ Lab Head of Student Programs, University of Virginia Library; Amanda Visconti, Scholars’ Lab Managing Director, University of Virginia Library. “Building Community and Generosity in the Context of Graduate Education”The academy trains students in complex intellectual work and tends to reward the performance of one’s own intelligence, both in coursework and in conferences. But in collaborative digital projects, this sort of focus on the individual is detrimental to the group dynamic, which must take shape around more than just the individual. In our year-long introduction to digital humanities by way of project-based pedagogy, we consistently noted this tension in our fellowship cohorts. Each year, we struggled to promote healthy collaboration centered on shared buy-in and generosity; our students instead remained focused on what a group project would mean for them and their careers. While these are important needs and understandable desires, we hoped to use their year with us as an opportunity for them to grow beyond this framing. We eventually realized that our problem was expecting the students to act in a way different than habitually expected and taught in other parts of the academy. We realized this was a matter of training: our students were trained in seminar-type environments that value the performance of individual thought, and never were exposed to or rewarded for a different approach. This talk discusses workshops and exercises for our graduate student fellows that encourage reorienting their collaborative practices away from a focus on the self, and towards creating more generous and kind community spaces. We will focus on a workshop on community and collaboration we now teach for our students, where we discuss what might be gained by de-centering yourself, building up rather than deconstructing, leading from trust and kindness, and more. This session is part of a larger exercise in producing group statements of values—charters—that require students to examine their own personal goals, experiences, and backgrounds in relationship to the whole. This process tries to help students recognize that these conversations deserve a space in academic discourse, that academic practice can be different than they’ve experienced elsewhere, and that this conversation can be a space in which to begin to shape a different kind of scholarly work.Heather Froehlich, Literary Informatics Librarian, Penn State University. “Digital Pedagogy at Scale: Reaching Different Student Populations” How we adapt classroom pedagogy based on the needs of a given student population is a common discussion in instruction and pedagogy circles. However, this has been less of a discussion in Digital Humanities instruction: the assumption seems to be primarily focused on a specific population signed up for a class with a DH element. But what happens when your institutional population covers a range of students and socioeconomic backgrounds across a wide range of the state’s demographics? In this talk I will discuss some practical considerations about teaching digital methods across a multi-campus state university system using two examples of digital humanities instruction related to early modern digital projects. One project at a well-resourced flagship campus involving a graduate seminar in scholarly editing where students are learning about digital scholarly editing with TEI; the associated undergraduate class is learning to flex their muscles in a lower-stakes editing task. The other project, at one of our 4-year undergraduate, more residential colleges is an exercise in undergraduate student research related to 17th century recipe books; students transcribe and are developing research projects around this manuscript.In each situation, the pedagogical contexts are wildly different: at one campus, our students are widely understood to be from more upper middle-class families and often have a parent or family member who went to college; at another campus, our students are primarily local and a significant population are 1st-generation and/or coming in via local, urban community colleges. Our graduate students represent a third vector, given that they all have undergraduate degrees and many of them are in a combined MA-PhD program. Developing models of instruction for these classes require a level of flexibility for the librarian and faculty partners: what works for one group does not always work for all others.R.C. Miessler, Systems Librarian, Gettysburg College. “Values-Based Communities of Practice in the Digital Humanities”The Digital Scholarship Summer Fellowship is a library-led, high-impact learning experience for undergraduates at a liberal arts college that provides students an introduction to Digital Humanities tools and methods. Student fellows receive a stipend for the summer to participate in the program, in which they choose their own research question and create a digital project. While the students’ research topics may or may not share themes, tools, or methods during the course of the summer program, all fellows participate in a common curriculum, read and discuss a variety of readings from a diverse range of DH practitioners, and publicly present their projects at the end of the summer. The librarian facilitators of the program draw from their own areas of expertise or interest to mentor students, deliver workshops, and guide discussions. Together, both students and librarians broaden their own understanding of the nature and workings of DH in a space that encourages experimentation and failure.The core experience of the summer program is the emphasis on the development of a community of practice amongst the student cohort and librarian facilitators; rather than focusing on a single research question or method, the community is centered on shared values. To support a wide range of research questions, the librarians who facilitate the fellowship approach Digital Humanities pedagogy from a generalist and discipline-agnostic perspective when teaching tools and methods. With each student fellow undertaking an independent research project, workshops focus on critical evaluation of the affordances and limitations of the Digital Humanities more broadly, as well as introducing students to project management, user experience, and public speaking. Through the framework of the curriculum, students have agency to choose which tools and methods are best suited to their research while acknowledging the limitations of what they can reasonably accomplish in the course of the summer program.This talk will focus on the evolution of the development of local, values-based DH communities of practice that transcend typical administrator/undergraduate hierarchies and how those values are transmitted and reinforced via experimentation, mentorship, and pedagogy. Past student projects created during the summer programs that have focused on the local community and issues of social justice will also be highlighted to show how the values have carried on in student research activity.Nabil Kashyap, Digital Scholarship Librarian, Swarthmore College. “Institutional Tactics: Locating Social Justice in Liberal Arts DH”Drawing on a breadth of library activities at a liberal arts college, this talk explores how our campus has engaged highly elusive, tangled issues around digital humanities pedagogy and social justice. The questions that animate our work: Where can we find and make space in our professional practices to address injustice? How can we make that work legible and articulate value when it takes place diffusely across a range of decisions, sites, and stakeholders? Given our context, how can we avoid being subsumed by trends in higher education and resist institutional virtue signaling?We examine three loci of recent activity: faculty pedagogy, student programs, and ad hoc collaboration. We regularly design and lead workshops aimed at instructors around digital assignments and implementing DH tools in the classroom. The resulting skills intensives have taken place both at liberal arts colleges and larger campuses. This process affords us opportunities to explicitly engage the perils and possibilities of digital assignments and platforms--from the violence of metadata to military/colonial histories of particular tools to minimal web development for decentralized, public humanities.We run several co-curricular student programs including a digital scholarship student initiative that brings humanities and computer science majors together around theory and praxis of digital environments. We read widely in STS, Post-Colonial DH, and media theory, while working hands-on with the web stack, attentive to the ecological, political, and social dimensions of everyday digital infrastructure.We also have regular opportunities to collaborate with other units on campus. How might we, for example, partner with initiatives oriented around innovation and entrepreneurship? One way was to co-sponsored a hackathon, which allowed us to shape the structure and goals of event. Through that process we were able to eschew commercial webapps in favor of partnering with local activist organizations representing pressing community needs.Rather than showcasing disparate library initiatives, these activities taken in aggregate point to the library as a site for contingent tactics deployed alongside institutional strategies. We engage in flexible if fallible approaches to our professional and personal commitments to social justice as enacted through and imperiled by digital environments.
Stylo is a tool designed by the Canada Research Chair on Digital Textualities, with the support of Érudit, designed to simplify writing and editing scientific articles in the humanities and social sciences (HS).Writing in a digital environment ― whether for printed or digital dissemination ― is now a matter-of-course: no one writes an article by hand and then has it typed. However, rarely do scholars think about issues related to the act of writing and, in addition, we have far from exhausted the potential for digital technologies to enhance writing and editing practices.Moreover, the tools available for writing in an academic context are limited, often proprietary and rarely designed and adapted to the needs of HS researchers. In concrete terms, almost all scientific production in HS today uses a single software and the same format: Word and docx, both of which are owned by Microsoft. Designed for all contexts ― although particularly intended for office use, as the name indicates ―, this duo is poorly adapted to the specific needs of scholars. Stylo is also a tool for writing and editing scientific texts, specifically designed to meet the challenges of scholarly digital publishing. Stylo is still a prototype; its development remains strongly linked to theoretical thinking on writing in a digital environment.  Many less successful software have and continue to be developed. However none have come close to rivalling Microsoft’s dominance on the world stage of writing tools. The ambition of the project is not so much to create an umpteenth tool, but to think about the epistemological stakes of writing practices in digital environments. How do these new forms of writing structure thought? The philosophy of Stylo builds on the simple fact that writing skills are semantic rather than graphic, and yet, authors of scholarly articles are often asked to deliver graphical layout rather than enriched text. Indeed, writing tools have a major impact on the production of knowledge: they influence content structure; define content accessibility criteria; determine the durability or obsolescence of content.Almost all scientific content is still produced with proprietary word processing software that is not conceptualised and designed for academic use, namely Microsoft Word (Kirschenbaum Track Changes: A Literary History of Word Processing 2016). However, this tool for the general public has problematic shortcomings for scientific publishing in HS:- The principle of WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) confuses structuring and formatting: to facilitate the reading and processing of an article or book, the semantic value of fragments must be dissociated from their graphic rendering, for example: a level 2 title and its graphic rendering in a large font size. Stylo belongs to this type of initiative, alongside Software Studies (Fuller Software Studies: A Lexicon 2008).- The docx format does not allow the contents page to be structured scientifically. The contents produced in docx are poorly tagged and difficult to access because they are not indexed. At a time when text production has never been so abundant, it is crucial that documents be properly structured to improve their indexing and allow them to be queried using advanced search tools.- Publishers undertake the long and tedious task of reworking texts in order to reintroduce a semantic layer and to correct the many errors created by these word processors.- The durability of documents in docx format depends on Microsoft's willingness to maintain this proprietary format. However, sustainability is neither the mission nor the priority of a commercial company. There is no guarantee that content in docx format will be accessible in the future.By closely studying the editorial practices of scientific journals in HS, it appears that, when passing from the author to the publisher to the distributor, the scientific article goes through highly disparate states and formats. This process results in a considerable loss of time, data and meaning.There is therefore an urgent need to conceptualise and experiment with new writing models that are better adapted to the needs of HS knowledge production.Stylo has been conceived to offer a complete and continuous workflow from writing to publishing and to avoid loss of data and meaning between the various editing stages. It gathers functionalities such as sharing, versioning, track changes, reference management, revision annotations, multi-format export, metadata aligned with online authorities (LOC, Rameau, Wikidata, ORCID, ...) and inline semantic markup. In order to avoid frequent data breaches during editing processes, Stylo offers a continuous workflow from writing to dissemination, ensuring that semantic information provided by the author will indeed be published.Stylo can provide multiple outputs, depending on the needs of the author and the publisher: 1. XML (Érudit, JATS, TEI, etc.) for diffusion and harvesting platforms 2. HTML5 for direct publication on CMS 3. PDF & EPUB with programmable stylesheets 4. ODT, DOCX for common useBased on modular, lowtech and standard editing tools and formats, such as markdown, bibtex, Pandoc, Hypothes.is and LaTeX, Stylo integrates, into a single interface, the best practices in terms of web-based writing and publishing.In the digital chain of writing and publishing scholarly journals in HS, it is increasingly clear that the publisher no longer has control over the cultural, social or technical existence of its contents in an environment that is increasingly dependent on text-related data. Indeed, making a text exist in the digital environment implies exposing sufficiently rich and relevant data so that the contents be indexed by search engines. Stylo contends that each actor, from the author to the disseminating platform, is likely to be involved in a production process that guarantees the continuity of data. This is possible thanks to the sharing of a single pivotal format that is simple to access and use, and rich enough for the publishing of scientific texts in the humanities and social sciences.In this vision, writing is no longer just writing. Writing in the digital environment becomes part of a publishing dynamic. In other words, the act of writing necessarily goes hand in hand with the act of publishing. This idea that writing = writing + structuring brings us closer to a culture of digital literacy, which enables a mastery over the writing environment and an ability to inscribe space as much as to structure it. It is a matter of both knowing how to evolve in this environment and how to make it evolve. As pragmatic research project, Stylo works alongside the practitioners of writing and scholarly publishing, aiming for an evolution and an enrichment of these practices and inviting actors to reflect on the most effective means to harness the power of the digital environment.
Common Readers is a digital initiative dedicated to gathering and analyzing annotations in early modern playbooks through a custom-designed relational database. The corpus of the pilot phase consists of drama in English, 1550-1660. The goal is to foster a community of researchers to contribute to a growing dataset of annotations that will, ultimately, be part of a public-facing site. To date, there have been two major trends in annotation scholarship: the study of remarkable men (e.g. John Dee) and the study of remarkable books (e.g. a copy of Shakespeare’s First Folio held at Meisei University). DH work on annotations has followed suit, striving to make annotations by particular readers in particular books easily searchable.Common Readers stands in contrast to both these scholarly trends in its potential to illuminate the reading habits of the less extraordinary, anonymous men and women who read, marked, and commented upon texts. This talk will introduce the audience to Common Readers and solicit feedback on the existing annotations data module to improve its implementation, accessibility, and appeal to a variety of users. It considers the construction of the data schema through particular use cases as an opportunity to reflect on the process of structuring data, and in particular on the practical and scholarly implications of the choice between an hierarchical encoding structure like TEI and a relational database. (For an example of the former, see the Archaeology of Reading project; for an example of the latter see Derrida’s Margins.)Moreover, this talk will consider the way in which annotated books--as multivalent, hybrid objects--challenge many traditional structuring principles in and outside of DH. As an inquiry into the best approach to annotation studies, Common Readers raises broader questions about the ontology of annotated documents that engage many disciplines and subfields, offering potential applications for researchers who are curating data about complex material objects, designing platforms for capturing annotations, or practicing scholarship related to object-oriented ontology.In this emphasis on data structures, Common Readers seeks community guidance on its approach to making highly particular data not only publicly shareable but widely useful. Originally, the plan was to provide the (future) public site with an export function, allowing users to work with project data in whatever way best suited their needs, and to deposit versioned datasets for general use in a repository like Zenodo. Both practices are likely to benefit other early modernists, but probably not a general audience. While the appeal of Linked Open Data (LOD) is strong) the best way in which to structure such highly specific data (derived from a very particular use case) in a way that would comply with recognized standards and be widely machine-readable remains unclear. The project team welcomes advice in establishing these best practices, as well as for redesigning the annotations data module itself.
Digital scholarly edition (henceforth, DSE) has been gradually improved as structured electronic texts through TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) Guidelines[1] since around three decades ago in order to find better solution for not only digital humanities but also humanities in general. Emergence of IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework)[2] has recently been providing new possibilities to it via its interoperable nature. This presentation will report on an improvement of our collaborative digital scholarly edition as a use case of utilizing IIIF which enables us to manipulate hi-resolution images provided from many cultural institutions in the world such as Gallica, Cambridge University Library, National Diet Library of Japan, and Kyoto University for DSE.
Language Documentation (LD) and description have generated textual resources for minority tone languages of Africa. With the event of computers, text resources are being created mostly in the form of digital-born texts. Visual layout of texts in these languages follows a variety of representation models, even within the same writing systems. Some of the issues at stake are IPA vs Latin characters; omission vs surface representation of tones as accents; surface vs deep representation of tones, one tier vs multiple tier representation of linguistic analysis.This paper brings out the limitations of tone representation and analysis as an upper layer of character strings, and suggests a model based on the TEI-XML markup language.
We worked on construction of the corpus of senmyō (imperial edict) written in the 8th century for linguistic research. Senmyō is one of the oldest materials of Japanese language and is written in Old Japanese using a special notation method using only Chinese characters called "senmyō-gaki". In order to encode this notation, we reproduced it using a originally extended tag set based on TEI. We also added word information to the full text of this corpus using Mecab and UniDic. As some of the words in senmyō can be read in two ways, Chinese style and Japanese style, we devised that these two readings can be assigned to the same location when adding word information. This corpus is published through an online search application called "Chunagon".
We introduce a tablet based interactive application which presents a comprehensive digital exploration as a companion to a musicological article. Taking the opera Lohengrin, the article and digital companion show how one motive is altered each time it recurs, reflecting its role in the drama, and exploring Wagner’s sophisticated treatment of recurring themes. Musicological analysis is encoded using Linked Data as an independent, repurposable, and open Research Object. Interactive user views are generated directly and dynamically in the browser from this knowledge graph using novel visualisations, which in turn enable the user to navigate all possible paths through the evidential multimodal materials. Our companion explores the different compositional devices Wagner uses to vary his motives, browsing the whole opera for motive occurrences and their musical and textual contexts. Visualisations and recordings support the analysis, making it accessible to an audience that may struggle with a Wagnerian orchestral score.Musicological argument has traditionally been communicated in writings that are textual, linear and illustrated by occasional figures, despite almost always being concerned with diverse subjects and evidential materials, each potentially exemplified by different media, and each potentially a springing point for digression and exploration of the author's argument. While exploring the referenced materials may be non-linear, this is neither embodied in nor enabled by traditional communication mediums.  Previously we have digitally enhanced an extract of a musicological article with dynamic and interactive elements. Here, we introduce a tablet based interactive application which presents a comprehensive digital exploration as a companion to a complete musicological article. Taking the opera Lohengrin, the article and digital companion show how one motive is altered each time it recurs, reflecting its role in the drama, and exploring Wagner’s sophisticated treatment of recurring themes. Musicological analysis is encoded – along with relationships to multimedia materials – using Linked Data as an independent, repurposable, and open Research Object. Interactive user views are generated directly and dynamically in the browser from this knowledge graph using novel visualisations, which in turn enable the user to navigate all possible paths through the evidential multimodal materials.Our companion explores the different compositional devices Wagner uses to vary his motives, browsing the whole opera for motive occurrences and their musical and textual contexts. Visualisations and recordings support the analysis, making it accessible to an audience that may struggle with a Wagnerian orchestral score. Exploration of this material can follow or be triggered by the article, but can also be reader-driven, with free browsing of the curated musical landscape. A video essay also provides a source of narrative paths through the companion, as a guide itself and as a source of starting points. Figure 1: The musicological essay view in the digital companion.The application is built with a new version of the MELD (Music Encoding and Linked Data) framework. MELD traverses Linked Data graphs to select and filter relevant information, with reusable components for creating and retrieving annotations, and for displaying and interacting with musical, textual, graphical and audio-visual materials. MELD is written in Javascript and Python, with resources using standards including the MEI music encoding, TEI, the Music Ontology and Web Annotations. Figure 2: A view with labelled vocal score, text and translation.We provide two views for music notational content. Vocal score reductions are rendered from MEI with structural analysis dynamically overlaid; annotations trigger audio playback from that point. A second notational visualisation of MEI simplifies the complexity of a Wagnerian orchestral score: each instrument playing at a particular time is shown as a coloured ribbon, with the instrument's section of the orchestra providing the colour. This highlights differences across orchestration iterations that may seem identical as vocal score.Figure 3. The same iteration showing the orchestral summary view.For an opera thousands of bars long, overviews are crucial. An ever-present timeline shows all occurrences of a motive, providing a visual summary and a base for navigation. In the Time Machine view, users can also flick through motive occurrences – visualised as libretto, vocal score or orchestration – summarising the sequence within the opera, supporting quick comparisons, and as an index to detail views.
Oupoco (L’ouvroir de poésie combinatoire) is a project taking inspiration from Raymond Queneau's book Cent mille mille milliards de poèmes, published in 1961. Queneau’s book is a collection of ten sonnets which verses can be freely recombined to form new poems. The book can be seen as composed of ten sheets, each separated into fourteen horizontal bands, each band carrying a verse on its front. The reader can choose, for each verse, one of the ten versions proposed by Queneau. The ten versions of each verse have the same scansion and rhyme, which ensures that each sonnet thus assembled is regular in shape [Queneau, 1961].It would be tempting to develop a computer-based version of Queneau’s work, but Queneau’s book is still under copyright, and it is by definition limited to its ten original sonnets. To overcome this problem, we developed the Oupoco project, aiming at proposing a sonnet generator based on the recombination of a large collection of 19th century French sonnets. The challenge is thus more complex than the one proposed originally by Queneau since our sonnets do not have the same scansion and rhyme. From this point of view, even if the project is intended to generate new sonnets, it is largely based on the development of analysis tools able to identify the scansion, the rhyme and the structure of the original sonnets. It is thus very different from the numerous projects dedicated to the pure generation of poetry, being with symbolic [Gervás, P., 2013] or neural methods [Ghazvininejad et al., 2017] [Van De Cruys, 2019] (among many others).Oupoco is currently based on a collection of 788 sonnets from 16 authors from the 19th century, and this database is regularly expanding. Each sonnet is encoded in a XML format along with related metadata, and a TEI version of the database is available. The project requires to get access to a formal representation of rhymes [Beaudouin, 2002]. In order to do this, the first step is to get a phonetic transcription of the last word of each verse, but this is not enough: for example, aimé and aimée have the same phonetic transcription, but do not rhyme, according to French rhyming rules (feminine and masculine do not rhyme according to the classical rules of French poetry); there are also cases where the phonetic transcription diverges but words actually rhyme (for example with sounds like [e] and [e]). A series of rules had thus to be defined to get a proper analysis of rhyme from the phonetic transcription of the last word of each verse. The generator uses this analysis to produce random sonnets, with different possible structures, respecting the rules of French versification (the code and the resources used, especially the sonnet database, are open source and freely available for research, see: https://github.com/clement-plancq/oupoco-api).A series of “side products” have been produced from the project, including:a website (https://oupoco.org/):Figure 1: Web page introducing the Oupoco websiteFigure 2: A generated poem, along with the constraint panel (on the left), allowing the user to select the authors and the structure of the poem he wants to generate. Placing the mouse on a given verse gives access to the exact reference of that verse.a bot posting on Twitter (https://twitter.com/oupoco_bot): Figure 3: The Oupoco bot on Twitter, generating a quatrain every 6 hours. and a “poetry box” (la boîte à poésie), a portable version of the original idea that can be demonstrated in public events (based on Raspberry Pi components). Through these devices our goal is to reach a wider audience and engage people to reconnect with poetry.Figure 4: « La Boîte à poésie », a portable version of the project, conceived Atelier Raffard-Roussel (Paris). This portable device allows one to demonstrate the system in various venues; the electric power required to generate a poem can be produced manually, thanks to the crank on the side.The main interest of the project is to present French poetry through a new and original setting. With our system, poetry is not any more just a literary genre [Derrida and Ronnel, 1980], but a dynamic object that can be manipulated and experienced. For lots of people, poetry is seen at best as something related to school years, at worse as something boring and uninteresting from the past. Our new setting, in itself, makes it possible to show that playing with poetry can be fun. Our setting puts in perspective the notion of text coherence [Reinhart, 1980], since the result of the generator can be more or less satisfactory from a semantic point of view.This has two consequences. The first one is related to interpretation: because the machine produces structurally impeccable sonnets, the experiencer is unconsciously encouraged to find coherence in them, simply because we are used to coherence in our everyday life and because incoherence is bewildering. The second consequence is a frequent need for the experiencer to go back to the original poem, to see where from a given verse originates (tooltips always allows the experiencer to go back to the original sonnet where a verse has been extracted). The project is thus not just a sacrilege game over venerated texts, but a way to make people experience and rediscover poetry.
Drama Corpora Project (DraCor) ha ido conformando un repositorio donde se encuentran, en estos momentos, once corpus teatrales diferentes, que pertenecen a periodos, géneros dramáticos y lugares geográficos diversos. Entre estos corpus encontramos veinticinco obras de la Edad de Plata española (finales del XIX-mediados del siglo XX) que conforman el “Spanish Drama Corpus” y que han sido importadas de la Biblioteca Electrónica Textual del Teatro Español de 1868-1936 (BETTE).Además de los textos dramáticos en XML-TEI que se consultan en DraCor, podemos crear las redes sociales con grafos que conforman los personajes de cada una de dichas piezas dramáticas. Uno de los personajes comunes en muchas de estas piezas y que resulta fundamental en el desarrollo de la trama y para dar corporeidad a los pensamientos de otros personajes lo constituye el Coro.
The “Inscriptions of Israel/Palestine” (IIP) project (www.brown.edu/iip) seeks to create a corpus of inscriptions (texts written on durable materials, other than coins) from the geographical location of present-day Israel/Palestine, that date from around the sixth century BCE to the seventh century CE. The inscriptions are in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Aramaic. The purpose of the project is not only to allow for access and robust (and ultimately, federated) searching but also for scholarly analyses. As one of the longest running active digital epigraphy projects (with over 4,000 inscriptions entered to date), IIP provides several use cases of working with a complex and challenging multi-lingual corpus. This abstract will focus on our data modeling and approach to Linked Open Data.IIP was an early adopter of the Epidoc schema, a customization of TEI developed especially for those working with ancient texts preserved on durable materials, such as inscriptions and coins (Elliott, Bodard, Cayless). Many users of Epidoc are in contact with each other through epigraphy.info, and the schema is continually being modified in response to user requests. The general principle, however, is that each material object on which a text is inscribed or written is treated as a discrete XML file. IIP thus gives each inscription a unique, findable ID that also serves as its document name (e.g., ash0001.xml). Each file has an extensive teiHeader, in which we encode the metadata, where possible using controlled vocabularies as attributes of elements, linked to authority files. This kind of robust encoding allows for the database-style, faceted indexing and searching powered by SOLR that we provide through our interface. We also include images (although we have much more work to do collecting them) and geographical information. We have a geographical interface that allows for mapping (see Figure 1).Figure 1: Screenshot of Search Page of "Inscriptions of Israel/Palestine"Our data has always been open. All of our XML files can be seen and downloaded individually directly from our site, or downloaded in bulk from our open Github site (https://github.com/Brown-University-Library/iip-texts) or through our API (for which we give detailed instructions on the site itself). We also encode our permission license (CC BY-NC 4.0) into our files.Since participating in the conference, “The Big Ancient Mediterranean” (BAM) we have sought to create links in our data in three ways. The primary geographical data within each inscription is linked to its corresponding Pleiades Gazetteer id (Pleiades). The primary chronological data within each inscription is linked to its corresponding PeriodO id (PeriodO).   And each of the types of object upon which the inscription is written is linked to the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus (Getty). For example:                        <origin>                     <date period="http://n2t.net/ark:/99152/p0m63njbxb9"                           notBefore="0001"                           notAfter="0100">First century CE</date>                     <placeName>                                <region>Judaea</region>                                <settlement ref = "http://pleiades.stoa.org/places/687928"> Jerusalem</settlement>                                <geogName type="site">Akeldama Caves</geogName>                                <geogFeat type="locus">Cave 2 Chamber B</geogFeat>                            </placeName>                                                      <p/>                        </origin>The use of these ids allows our data to be scraped live by different projects, such as Pleiades and the Pelagios Network (Pelagios Network). The community is just now beginning to develop an ecosystem that allows for the fruitful exchange of data between sites using Linked Open Data and we hope that through this expansion the usefulness of our data will expand.We added these links to existing data, which was a costly process. We first developed an XSLT script to extract the place, time, and object values into a spreadsheet. We then manually found and added the links, in the process having to submit new geographical and chronological values for inclusion in the other authorities (and then, in return, adding the new id numbers). We then used another XSLT script to insert the new links into the XML files. Along the way there was a great deal of checking and testing. For new data files, the additions are added at the time of creation.One of our active projects involves the lexicographical tagging of the texts in a way that could similarly be linked and shared. This entails performing word segmentation on the existing XML files, and then assigning part of speech tags using natural language parsing. This will enable new interface features and better forms of analysis. The Global Philology Project is an exploratory project that began to lay the infrastructure for compiling and analyzing lexicographical data in many different languages across multiple sites (Global Philology). We want to further explore how our tagging of individual words could make our data – on the level of the individual words of our texts – accessible and more useful to researchers in different fields.For a broader description of IIP and our goals, see Satlow (forthcoming) and Lembi (forthcoming). We describe our approach to bibliographical management at Lembi, Mylonas and Satlow (2016) and our approach to the FAIR principles (FAIR) in Mylonas, Lembi, Creamer, and Satlow.
Annotation is a well established method in digital humanities. For textual documents, inline (typically TEI-XML) and stand-off (e.g. character index table based) markup are two widely used approaches. For adding textual annotations, various software affording different types and levels of abstraction are used, including XML editors such as Oxygen as well as online systems such as Catma. Many annotation systems enable annotation of other media than verbal text in various ways, often with a focus on images and figures. Systems are also available for audio annotation of text and music, and for video annotations. Annotation systems for 3D models are less common and many users in the humanities and cultural heritage resort to online platforms such as Sketchfab. Commercial platforms might be a good choice in many cases, but copyright issues and legal obligations make them unwanted or unusable in other. Furthermore, with these 3D presentation platforms, the focus is not on (collaborative) annotation as a method. Since 2017, the Departments for Digital Humanities and Media Culture and Theatre at the University of Cologne, in cooperation with the university’s Theatre Collection, has developed Kompakkt a free online tool for multi-modal 3D annotations which is specifically designed for collaborative work and storytelling. Kompakkt is fully open source and opt for new ways to provide public access for cultural heritage objects, archival material, etc.Figure 1: A schematic representation of annotations in Kompakkt [9]With Kompakkt, the 3D representation of an object serves as the hub of an open-ended collection of heterogeneous information established through the use of multimodal annotations, cf. Figure 1. Through personalised and group level collections of digital objects, Kompakkt enables a novel solution for gathering, generating and inter-connecting information about digital objects and related non-digital things. Registered users may decide if their content is restricted, private or public to control the visibility and access to their objects.Through opening up for collaborative annotation of objects, multi-vocal voices can be heard, presenting traditional scholarly and cultural heritage management perspectives as well as knowledge based on citizen humanities. Diverse groups around the world can annotate, discuss, and tell multiple stories about collections of objects, making sets of open data available to be discussed, further developed, and experienced. The annotation functionality for images and 3D models enables linking between repository-internal objects and external information through weblinks. Therefore every single point on the surface of the mesh can be selected. An annotation is not only linked to a specific location in space, it also includes and covers a user defined related perspective, the corresponding point of view. Multiple Annotations in Kompakkt are chained in flexible series what allows users to walk through the different related, thereby enabling a camera track by stepping from one annotation to the next and its corresponding perspective. Consequently, presentations and storytelling can be implemented through a series of annotations traversing through different objects.The challenge posed by the future of Kompakkt is primarily to increase the community and scale up the number of available objects. Therefore it is not only important to ensure the quality of the data through curation but also to develop the import and export functionality further and in general to enhance the usability with the help of user feedback. Additionally with the feedback from the community from the prototyping phase helps to improve and expand the annotation functionality and implement new suggested features.
Within recent years, both the DARIAH-DE as well as the CLARIN-D project established themselves as digital research infrastructures for tools and research data in Germany, and also worked on developing materials for teaching and further education in the field of digital humanities. Whereas DARIAH-DE had a clear focus on textual data and e.g. its representation in form of digital editions, the focus of CLARIN-D was more the provision of data and tools for linguistic analysis. Funded by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research, both infrastructures will be merged within CLARIAH-DE (2019-2021), building on earlier cooperation and coordination processes, and aiming at interoperability in the future (also in accordance with the FAIR data principles). In CLARIAH-DE Work Package (WP) 1 “Research Data, Standards and Procedures” one potential solution to enable interoperability is the use of prevalent TEI customizations like the German Text Archive’s base format (DTABf) as an exchange or target format. While the DTABf is already established as a pivot format for text collections (especially for the annotation of full texts of historical prints, and for newspapers and simply structured manuscripts), it will be now evaluated to what extent the DTABf can be applied to the diverse field of digital scholarly editing. Although such an exchange or pivot format may not be able to represent all previously coded information in the original depth, the underlying idea is that it still can be understood as a core data set, and therefore function as a common denominator.The evaluation is based on case studies of selected digital editions, and led by the following questions:Which phenomena in the digital editions are currently not covered by the DTABf tag set? Which phenomena are encoded differently in the DTABf than in the digital editions? Is a mapping more or less unproblematic or are there fundamental (semantic) differences? Which information is required by the DTABf, but has not been encoded in the digital editions? The encoded phenomena can be classified as loss-free transferable, partially transferable and missing or lost. Depending on the effort and the outcome, a conversion might result in either a DTABf-valid text, in which all necessary information has been encoded accordingly, but in which the encoding is also limited to the elements and attribute-value pairs permitted in the DTABf, or in a DTABf-compliant text, which contains a core encoding according to the DTABf, but which may also have annotations going beyond the DTABf. To ensure the diversity and thus the representability of the underlying data, the editions chosen to serve as case studies for the evaluation should differ significantly from each other. Therefore, seven criteria were developed based on a review of relevant literature and existing editions. These criteria, for example the editorial model applied, the TEI modules used or the source material, resulted in an edition matrix (EdMa), which – beyond the purposes of the CLARIAH-DE-project – should enable a rough categorisation of digital editions in general.The paper aims at outlining and discussing the problems in harmonizing standards between the two former separated infrastructures and the actions that have been taken so far, to bypass these obstacles. By using CLARIAH-DE as a concrete example, the presentation will therefore contribute to the general discussion on standardization within the context of national research infrastructures.
This paper presents the Darwin Correspondence Project’s work with Cambridge University Digital Library on Epsilon (Epistles of Science in the Long Nineteenth century). Following the work of Early Modern Letters Online and correspSearch, Epsilon uses Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format in TEI and open-source indexing tools to combine the work of large editorial projects, individual scholars, archive catalogues, and print correspondence sources to sift through the large volume of nineteenth century letters. The paper outlines our intentions to open a space that allows researchers to have a better sense of the rich variety scientific activities and actors during the period in which science as a professional discipline was being formed.
PurposeOur final research goal is to restore Edo’s historical city conditions (Tokyo’s former name before the late 19th century) using historical materials. In particular, we focus on non-textual materials. For textual materials, TEI is the de facto standard. For non-textual materials, we need to find new ways as just collecting images is insufficient. We need to organize images as data for analysis across historical materials.Material and MethodThe tool used for this work is the IIIF Curation Platform (ICP). “Curation” with ICP is a generic method that allows us to gather IIIF images or parts of images and add metadata to each. Curation allows images to be organized as structured and reusable data.A large number of digitized pre-modern Japanese books are being released by multiple Japanese institutions. We used ICP to organize 1255 images from eight guidebooks in the Edo period then organized 2489 images from the Edo shopping guidebook.Findings and DiscussionThe current curated data confirmed the relationship between famous places and commerce. Presently, our finding reconfirms previous studies. The Asakusa area has many shops around Sensoji Temple today. However, there were many medicine dealers in one corner of Nihonbashi area unlike today (Figure 1–2).By applying our method to Edo period publications, we not only structure useful information for our research, but also provide reusable data for other researches.Figure 1: Nihonbashi area illustration curated from Edo guidebooks. Nihonbashi was one of the most famous places in the Edo period. Figure 2: Advertisement of Nihonbashi merchant curated from the Edo shopping guidebook. There are many Chinese and Japanese medicine dealers unlike today.
Stage Directions (SD) have been stated as a “particularly underdeveloped topic” (Aston, Savona 1991: 71), even if this seems to be changing (cf. Aebischer 2003; Detken 2009; Dustagheer, Woods 2017; Habscheid et al. 2018). However, there are hardly any quantitative studies of SD so far (except of Sperantov 1998 who analysed Russian tragedies).Usually, dramas consist of two types of text: Spoken Text (ST) and SD, where SD often consist of rather formal instructions. To complement existing quantitative approaches to drama, we will profile SD as an object of research in digital literary studies. To this purpose, we will give an exploratory analysis of quantitative features of SD using 384 German plays. Subsequently, we will characterise the development of SD over a period of 200 years, using the hypothesis of a “tendency towards epification“ (“Episierungstendenz“, Szondi 1956) as an interpretative framework.2. Corpus and WorkflowOur corpus is based on the drama collection GerDraCor (Fischer et al. 2019). Even though literary studies has not yet reached a consensus on a definition of SD (Dustagheer, Woods 2017: 1–16), there are relatively uncontroversial (typographical) conventions what should be regarded as SD (Tonger-Erk 2018: 431–434). Digital editions using TEI (including GerDraCor) encode SD using the <stage> element.Of the 474 plays available in GerDraCor, we removed librettos and 3 plays without SD, which yields a corpus of 384 plays that are pre-processed using the DramaNLP package1. The package employs the Stanford PoS tagger (Toutanova et al. 2003; STTS tagset: Schiller et al. 1999) and mate lemmatizer (Björkelund et al., 2000) separately on the text types ST and SD. The resulting data is analysed with the DramaAnalysis R package (Reiter 2019).3. Exploratory Data AnalysisThe median number of tokens is 1.639 in SD and 20.270 in ST (Fig. 01), so on average SD takes up 7.48% of the entire text. Additionally, sentences in SD are on average only about half as long as in ST.Figure 1: Distribution of token count and mean sentence lengthSD and ST also differ in the proportions of certain parts of speech (POS). While SD has a higher percentage of adjectives and named entities, ST has a higher percentage of verbs and pronouns (Fig. 02).Figure 2: Portion of selected POS2A closer look can be taken by differentiating fine-grained POS tags of adjectives and verbs (Fig. 03). Compared to ST, SD are about named entities (NE) doing something (VVFIN) in a specific way (ADJD), while they lack the rhetorics of addressing (PRO) and modality (VMFIN), which are more characteristic for ST.Fig. 03: Portion of selected fine-grained POS4. EpificationWhile an intense discussion about (Brechtian) "Epic Theater" emerges in the aftermath of the ‘crisis of drama’ around 1890, “epification” in recent narratological and semiotical studies is conceptualised as a specific "mediation of the representation of events by a narrator-like instance" (cf. Weber 2017: 209). In contrast to the SD of 'classical' drama, primarily functioning as an “instruction” (Issacaroff 1988), the epified SD “seems to be incorporating qualities of the novel and the plastic arts” (Suchy 1991:80).Consequently, we characterise the development of SD in our corpus with respect to such an understanding of epification, with five concrete indicators:the proportion of SD in the total text increases, giving more 'word space' to a potential narrative voice;sentences in SD get longer, thus becoming similar to SP;SD and ST converge in their POS distributions, so that SD approaches ST in the 'verbal gesture‘;words describing a location increase in SD, indicating a more concrete shaping of the diegetic world by a narrative voice;SD becomes more emotional, indicating an increase in evaluations and (possible) internal focalisations, both understood as privileges of the narrator's voice.While there is almost no change in the number of tokens in ST, their number in SD increases over time, leading to a substantial increase in the SD/ST ratio (Fig. 04). The same holds for the mean sentence length in SD, which in several dramas 'around 1900' even considerably exceeds the mean sentence length in ST (i.e. ratio over one; Fig. 05).Figure 04: Historical distribution of token countFigure 05: Historical distribution of mean sentence lengthWhile verbs (Fig. 02) and attributive adjectives (Fig. 03) are synchronously more frequently found in ST, historically differentiated data shows a convergence of the percentages in SD and ST (Fig. 06). Conversely, the proportion of named entities in SD decreases (Fig. 06). Also noteworthy is the convergence of the proportion of relative pronouns in SD and ST (Fig. 06), which suggests an increase in sentence complexity in SD. Overall, SD and ST become more similar over time.Figure 06: Historical distribution for selected POSIn order to explore 'topologisation', we defined a lexicon of topological terms. 3 As Fig. 07 shows, a considerable increase in topological words in SD can be observed, which can be interpreted as a more concrete topological order of the diegesis on the stage.Figure 07: Historical distribution for topological wordsFinally, using word-related information from GermaNet 11 (Hamp/Feldweg 1997), we calculated the percentage of words (adjectives, nouns, verbs) from the semantic field 'GEFUEHL' (emotions). As Fig. 08 shows, there is also a clear increase in such words in SD.Figure 08: Historical distribution for ‘emotion‘ words5. ConclusionOur examinations outlined SD as a relevant object of research for a quantitative history of drama. We demonstrated that SD is a text layer that differs from ST in several aspects. By examining the historical development of SD, we have shown a transformation of SD between 1730 and 1930, which we linked back to the “tendency towards epification“ in German drama. Further research should develop more complex linguistic operationalisations of epification, and be extended to plays in other languages.
Historical documents often undergo transformations–transcription, annotation, re-formatting, and digitization–as part of preservation or humanistic inquiry. These processes modify documents’ content, artifactual form, and structure, which subsequently influences the ways in which they are read, explored, and interpreted. Transparency of such processes ensures proper attribution of curators’ labor, promotes greater inclusiveness, and enables a more holistic and critical interpretation of historical records. But how to engage with and make visible these transformation processes? In this paper, we begin to address this question through a visualization case study based on an exemplary collection of biographical student records from the University of St Andrews (Scotland) that date back to the 18th century. We present – illustrated through this case study - a methodology based on visual (re)-interpretations of historical records over time which, we believe, is relevant to a wide range of information collections within and beyond humanities research.Biographical Student RecordsThe handwritten student records (1747-1897) collected by the University of St Andrews originally included students’ name, age, church affiliation and birthplace (Fig. 1.1), but over the course of two centuries, they have undergone a variety of transformations (Fig. 1). From 1888 to 1905 the records were transcribed by the University archivist, James Maitland-Anderson (Maitland Anderson, 1905; Fig. 1.2). Between 1960 and 2004, one of Maitland-Anderson’s successors, Dr Robert Smart, revised these transcriptions and expanded the records with students’ parental lineage, courses taken, and floruit, drawing from a large variety of sources (Smart, 2004; Fig. 1.3). From 2013 to 2016, a team around Dr Alice Crawford from the University library transformed Smart’s work into machine-readable form using Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) (Fig. 1.4) which resulted in a web interface that allows targeted searches. In 2017, we transformed the data from Crawford’s work into a relational database which enabled the visualization of the records’ content (Vancisin et al., 2018; Fig. 1.5). To better understand the nature and impact of such modifications, we conducted interviews with the archivists, historians, and software engineers who have worked on these transformations. In combination with researching previous work on the records (Maitland Anderson, 1905; Smart, 2004), these interviews helped us identify and characterize four key transformations the records have undergone.{Figure 1: Records' Transformations.}Transcription. Maitland-Anderson and Smart transcribed the original handwritten documents into print form. This process required expertise in paleography and entailed interpretations, for example, of name spellings (e.g., Maitland-Anderson preserved the Latin ‘Petrus’ Dow; while Smart changed it to ‘Peter’; Fig. 1.1-1.3).Expansion. The records have been expanded by adding information from other archives (Smart), linking records to students’ publications (Crawford), and geo-encoding location mentions(Vancisin). These expansions can be considered as interpretations, informed by third-party sources.Re-Structuring. Maitland-Anderson deliberately preserved the structure of the original records, while Smart transformed them into an alphabetical index, enabling searches by-name but irrevocably removing the records’ temporal order. Crawford’s tagging imposed a rigid content structure on each record. Our database reconfigures and stores key information (dates, places etc.) in separate but linked tables. This re-structuring allowed new ways of representing and exploring the records, but also introduced additional interpretation layers.Artifactual Form. Transforming the handwritten records into print enabled easy record parsing, while the structural transformations allowed for new visual and textual representations and interactions. However, the individual human imprint of the handwritten text is lost in these transformations and so are their materiality and visual aesthetics (Forlini et al., 2018). These transformation processes can be considered as re-interpretations of the original records that enable new ways of engagement and representation. However, the fact that the records’ transformations are typically invisible is problematic from an ethical (Correll, 2019) and research perspective, because how we represent information fundamentally shapes our interpretation and the questions we ask. Moreover, an unawareness of underlying transformations hampers the holistic interpretation of historical records.Visualization OpportunitiesHistorical document visualization mainly focuses on providing access to the content of the collection in its ‘final’ stage (i.e., Edelstein et al., 2017; Hinrichs et al., 2015; Hyvönen et al., 2017), and our previous work is no exception (Vancisin, 2018; Fig. 2). Work by Hullman & Diakopulos (2011), however, shifts attention to the importance of weaving information about data provenance into visualization. Wrisley (2018) has promoted the idea of Pre-Visualization which argues for visualization prefaces that provide such perspectives in textual form. Péoux & Houllier (2017) introduce a diagrammatic approach to disclose transformation processes. However, visualization-driven approaches that highlight transformation processes and introduce critical and ethical perspectives to the document collection, its metadata, and their visual representations (Correll, 2019, Dörk et al. 2013, D’Ignazio & Klein, 2016) are unexplored. We have started addressing this challenge by investigating how we can portray the records’ transformation stages through visualization. Our visualization case study shown in Figure 3 presents one example of how this can be achieved.{Figure 2: Visualization of the records' content. (1,2) students' birth places within and outside of the UK; (3) distributions of nationalities; (4) student numbers in different colleges over time.}The bar chart at the bottom represents the temporal distribution of students in the original records (Fig. 3.1) while sketchy strokes emphasize the original records’ handwritten form. Subsequent transcriptions are depicted in an equivalent bar chart where smooth strokes show the records’ transformation into print (Fig. 3.2). The next layer highlights the records’ transformation into alphabetical order (reflecting Smart’s work) and the content expansion (represented by the bars’ width; Fig. 3.3). Crawford’s work revoked the records’ temporal or alphabetical ordering, so they are depicted as individual squares without any spatial organization (Fig. 3.4; square size corresponds to the amount of information in the record). Our database is shown in a horizontal node-link diagram where rectangles and arcs represent tables and their links (Fig. 3.5). All visualization layers are interactive and interlinked. Hovering over an element in one layer brings up the corresponding records in the record list view (Fig. 3.6) and highlights these in the other visualization layers (Fig. 4, 5 & 6).Although based on the same data, this type of visualization fundamentally differs from previous approaches in that it enables an exploration of the student records through the lens of their historical context, and through the people involved in their curation and interpretation. Our work, thus, provides a new perspective on visualizing historical documents by illustrating how to allow for their exploration by also considering their history, rather than just their ‘final’ interpretation. Our visualization of qualitative curatorial changes has to be considered as yet another interpretation of the original records, but we see this approach as an opportunity to make transparent others’ and our own interpretations of such collections; it promotes awareness of both the dynamic and interpretative character of historical documents and their visualizations.Our work combines the categorization of curatorial changes applied to the collection with their visualization, to promote transparency of the (re)-interpretations of the collection over time. Based on this case study, we launch discussion of design principles for visualizations that can make curatorial processes visible, in order to facilitate critical debate that centrally considers key curations of a collection over time (including pre-digital and early digitization), rather than rely only on ‘final’ data and/or final visualizations which often hide underlying interpretations that led to their assembly. Figure 3: Process Visualization of BRUSA records. 
This half-day workshop will introduce CETEIcean (pronounced /sɪˈti:ʃn/), a JavaScript library for displaying Text Encoding Initiative XML in a web browser. CETEIcean’s key feature is the isomorphic transformation of TEI into HTML by registering TEI elements with the browser as Custom Elements. This is in contrast to the typical methods for presenting TEI on the web that use the XML stack (XSLT/XQuery) to convert TEI XML sources to simple HTML—in the process discarding much of the information in the sources. Loading a TEI document with CETEIcean makes all of its information content accessible to the browser: TEI Custom Elements can be styled and made interactive with CSS and JavaScript just like HTML. We will begin with a discussion to contextualize this approach within the “minimal computing” movement, particularly as pioneered by the GO:DH Minimal Computing Working Group. This approach fosters “reconnecting with our knowledge production” in order to think critically about the question “what do we need?” (Alex Gil 2015 https://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2015/05/21/user-vs-learner/). Identifying the minimal technical stack for running a TEI project can help content creators to reach their goals quickly and effectively, even when there are constraints on the resources they can access or the computing environments they rely upon. Minimal computing principles argue that this can be an essential instrument in giving voice to underfunded and underrepresented groups. Attendees will work on a simple site publication embedding either a provided TEI example or their own TEI document.

        
            
                Introduction
                
                    Digital humanities is an area of research and teaching at the intersection of computing and the disciplines of the 
                    humanities . Developing from the fields of humanities computing, humanistic computing, 
                     Humanistic Computing, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 11, November, 1998, Pages 2123-2151. and digital humanities praxis 
                    
                        http://dhpraxisf13.commons.gc.cuny.edu/tag/dhpraxis/
                     digital humanities embraces a variety of topics, from curating online collections to data mining large cultural data sets. Digital humanities (often abbreviated DH) currently incorporates both digitized and 
                    born-digital materials and combines the methodologies from traditional humanities disciplines (such as 
                    history , 
                    philosophy , 
                    linguistics , 
                    literature , 
                    art , 
                    archaeology , 
                    music , and 
                    cultural studies ) and social sciences 
                    
                        "Digital Humanities Network". 
                        University of Cambridge. Retrieved 27 December 2012
                     with tools provided by 
                    computing (such as 
                    data visualisation , 
                    information retrieval , 
                    data mining , 
                    statistics , 
                    text mining , 
                    digital mapping ), and 
                    digital publishing . As well, related subfields of digital humanities have emerged like 
                    software studies , platform studies, and 
                    critical code studies . Digital Humanities also intersects with 
                    new media studies and 
                    information science as well as 
                    media theory of composition and 
                    game studies , particularly in areas related to digital humanities project design and production. 
                
                
                    
                        
                        Example of research which includes the use of digital methods: network analysis as an archival tool.
                    
                     League of Nations archives, United Nations Office in Geneva. Network visualization and analysis published in Grandjean, Martin (2014). 
                        "La connaissance est un réseau". 
                        Les Cahiers du Numérique
                        10 (3): 37–54. Retrieved 2014-10-15.
                    
                
            
            
                Areas of inquiry
                Digital humanities scholars use computational methods either to answer existing research questions or to challenge existing theoretical paradigms, generating new questions and pioneering new approaches. One goal is to systematically integrate computer technology into the activities of humanities scholars, 
                    
                        Opportunities/tabid/57/Default.aspx "Grant Opportunities". 
                        National Endowment for the Humanities, Office of Digital Humanities Grant Opportunities. Retrieved 25 January 2012.
                     as is done in contemporary empirical 
                    social sciences . Such technology-based activities might include incorporation into the traditional 
                    arts and 
                    humanities disciplines use of text-analytic techniques; 
                    GIS ; 
                    commons-based peer collaboration ; and interactive games and 
                    multimedia .
                
                Despite the significant trend in digital humanities towards networked and multimodal forms of knowledge, spanning social, visual, and haptic media, a substantial amount of digital humanities focuses on documents and text in ways that differentiate the field's work from digital research in 
                    Media studies, 
                    Information studies, 
                    Communication studies, and 
                    Sociology. Another goal of digital humanities is to create scholarship than transcends textual sources. This includes the integration of 
                    multimedia, 
                    metadata and dynamic environments. An example of this is 
                    The Valley of the Shadow project at the 
                    University of Virginia, the 
                    Vectors Journal of Culture and Technology in a Dynamic Vernacular at 
                    University of Southern California or 
                    Digital Pioneers projects at Harvard.
                
                A growing number of researchers in digital humanities are using computational methods for the analysis of large cultural data sets such as the 
                    Google Books corpus. 
                     Roth, S. (2014), Fashionable functions. A Google ngram view of trends in functional differentiation (1800-2000), International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, Band 10, Nr. 2, S. 34-58 (online: 
                        ).
                     Examples of such projects were highlighted by the Humanities High Performance Computing competition sponsored by the Office of Digital Humanities in 2008, 
                     Bobley, Brett (December 1, 2008). 
                        "Grant Announcement for Humanities High Performance Computing Program". 
                        National Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved May 1, 2012.
                     and also by the Digging Into Data challenge organized in 2009 
                    
                        "Awardees of 2009 Digging into Data Challenge". 
                        Digging into Data. 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2012.
                     and 2011 
                    
                        "NEH Announces Winners of 2011 Digging Into Data Challenge". 
                        National Endowment for the Humanities. January 3, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2012.
                     by NEH in collaboration with NSF, 
                     Cohen, Patricia (2010-11-16). 
                        "Humanities Scholars Embrace Digital Technology". 
                        The New York Times (New York). 
                        ISSN  
                        0362-4331. Retrieved 2012-06-07.
                     and in partnership with 
                    JISC in the UK, and 
                    SSHRC in Canada. 
                     Williford, Christa; Henry, Charles (June 2012). 
                        "Computationally Intensive Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences: A Report on the Experiences of First Respondents to the Digging Into Data Challenge". 
                        Council on Library and Information Resources. 
                        ISBN  
                        978-1-932326-40-6.
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Environments and tools
                
                Digital humanities is also involved in the creation of software, providing "environments and tools for producing, curating, and interacting with knowledge that is 'born digital' and lives in various digital contexts." 
                     Presner, Todd (2010). 
                        "Digital Humanities 2.0: A Report on Knowledge". 
                        Connexions. Retrieved 2012-06-09.
                     In this context, the field is sometimes known as computational humanities. Many such projects share a "commitment to 
                    open standards and 
                    open source." 
                     Bradley, John (2012). "No job for techies: Technical contributions to research in digital humanities". In Marilyn Deegan and Willard McCarty (eds.). 
                        Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities. Farnham and Burlington: Ashgate. pp. 11–26 [14]. 
                        ISBN  
                        9781409410683.
                    
                
            
            
                History
                Digital humanities descends from the field of humanities computing, of computationally enabled "formal representations of the human record," 
                     Unsworth, John (2002-11-08). 
                        "What is Humanities Computing and What is not?". 
                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie
                        4. Retrieved 2012-05-31.
                     whose origins reach back to the late 1940s in the pioneering work of 
                    Roberto Busa . 
                    
                     Svensson, Patrik (2009). 
                        "Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities". 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly
                        3 (3). 
                        ISSN  
                        1938-4122. Retrieved 2012-05-30.
                    
                     Hockney, Susan (2004). "The History of Humanities Computing". In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth (eds.). 
                        
                            Companion to Digital Humanities
                        . Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. 
                        ISBN  
                        1405103213.
                    
                
                Other aspects of digital humanities were descended from the 
                    IRIS
                    Intermedia project on hypertext at 
                    Brown University in the 1980s.
                
                The 
                    Text Encoding Initiative, born from the desire to create a standard encoding scheme for humanities electronic texts, is the outstanding achievement of early humanities computing. The project was launched in 1987 and published the first full version of the 
                    TEI Guidelines in May 1994. 
                     Hockney, Susan (2004). "The History of Humanities Computing". In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth (eds.). 
                        
                            Companion to Digital Humanities
                        . Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. 
                        ISBN  
                        1405103213.
                    
                
                In the nineties, major digital text and image archives emerged at centers of humanities computing in the U.S. (e.g. the 
                    Women Writers Project, 
                    
                        
                        
                            Women Writers Project
                        , Brown University, retrieved 2012-06-16
                     the 
                    Rossetti Archive, 
                    
                        Jerome J. McGann (ed.), 
                        
                            Rossetti Archive
                        , Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of Virginia, retrieved 2012-06-16 
                     and 
                    
                        The William Blake Archive
                    
                    
                        
                            Morris Eaves, Robert Essick, and Joseph Viscomi (ed.), 
                            
                                The William Blake Archive
                            , retrieved 2012-06-16
                        
                    ), which demonstrated the sophistication and robustness of text-encoding for literature. 
                     Liu, Alan (2004). 
                        "Transcendental Data: Toward a Cultural History and Aesthetics of the New Encoded Discourse". 
                        Critical Inquiry
                        31 (1): 49–84. 
                        doi: 
                        10.1086/427302. 
                        ISSN  
                        0093-1896. Retrieved 2012-06-16.
                     The Blake archive, in particular, was designed by its editors to take advantage of "the syntheses made possible by the electronic medium" and thus accomplish an "editorial transformation" in the publication of Blake's work which was, from the author's hands, multimedia. 
                    
                        "Editorial Principles". 
                        The William Blake Archive. Retrieved 17 December 2014.
                    
                
                The terminological change from "humanities computing" to "digital humanities" has been attributed to 
                    John Unsworth and Ray Siemens who, as editors of the monograph 
                    A Companion to Digital Humanities (2004), tried to prevent the field from being viewed as "mere digitization." 
                     Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011-05-08). 
                        "The humanities, done digitally". 
                        The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 2011-07-10.
                     Consequently, the hybrid term has created an overlap between fields like rhetoric and composition, which use "the methods of contemporary humanities in studying digital objects," 
                     Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011-05-08). 
                        "The humanities, done digitally". 
                        The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 2011-07-10.
                     and digital humanities, which uses "digital technology in studying traditional humanities objects". 
                     Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011-05-08). 
                        "The humanities, done digitally". 
                        The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 2011-07-10.
                     The use of computational systems and the study of computational media within the arts and humanities more generally has been termed the 'computational turn'. 
                     Berry, David (2011-06-01). 
                        "The Computational Turn: Thinking About the Digital Humanities". 
                        Culture Machine. Retrieved 2012-01-31.
                    
                
                In 2006 the 
                    National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), launched the Digital Humanities Initiative (renamed Office of Digital Humanities in 2008), which made widespread adoption of the term "digital humanities" all but irreversible in the United States. 
                     Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. (2010). 
                        "What is Digital Humanities and What's it Doing in English Departments?". 
                        ADE Bulletin (150).
                    
                
                Digital humanities emerged from its former niche status and became "big news" 
                     Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. (2010). 
                        "What is Digital Humanities and What's it Doing in English Departments?". 
                        ADE Bulletin (150).
                     at the 2009 
                    MLA convention in Philadelphia, where digital humanists made "some of the liveliest and most visible contributions" 
                     Howard, Jennifer (2009-12-31). 
                        "The MLA Convention in Translation". 
                        The Chronicle of Higher Education. 
                        ISSN  
                        0009-5982. Retrieved 2012-05-31.
                     and had their field hailed as "the first 'next big thing' in a long time." 
                     Pannapacker, William (2009-12-28). 
                        "The MLA and the Digital Humanities" (The Chronicle of Higher Education). 
                        Brainstorm. Retrieved 2012-05
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Organizations and Institutions
                
                The field of digital humanities is served by several organisations: 
                    The Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing (ALLC), the 
                    Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH), and the 
                    Society for Digital Humanities/Société pour l'étude des médias interactifs (SDH/SEMI), which are joined under the umbrella organisation of the 
                    Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO). The alliance funds a number of projects such as the 
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly, supports the 
                    Text Encoding Initiative, the organisation and sponsoring of workshops and conferences, as well as the funding of small projects, awards and bursaries. 
                     Vanhoutte, Edward (2011-04-01). 
                        "Editorial". 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing
                        26 (1): 3–4. 
                        doi: 
                        10.1093/llc/fqr002. Retrieved 2011-07-11.
                    
                
                ADHO also oversees a joint annual conference, which began as the ACH/ALLC (or ALLC/ACH) conference, and is now known as the 
                    Digital Humanities conference.
                
                CenterNet is an international network of about 100 digital humanities centers in 19 countries, working together to benefit digital humanities and related fields. 
                    
                    
                        "About". 
                        CenterNet. Retrieved June 16, 2012.
                    
                     Caraco, Benjamin (1 January 2012). 
                        "Les digital humanities et les bibliothèques". 
                        Le Bulletin des Bibliothèques de France
                        57 (2). Retrieved 12 April 2012.
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Criticism and controversies
                
                An edited text, 
                    'Debates in the Digital Humanities' (2012) has identified a range of criticisms of digital humanities: 'a lack of attention to issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality; a preference for research-driven projects over pedagogical ones; an absence of political commitment; an inadequate level of diversity among its practitioners; an inability to address texts under copyright; and an institutional concentration in well-funded research universities'. 
                    
                        
                    
                
                The literary theorist 
                    Stanley Fish claims that the digital humanities pursue a revolutionary agenda and thereby undermine the conventional standards of "pre-eminence, authority and disciplinary power." 
                     Fish, Stanley (2012-01-09). 
                        "The Digital Humanities and the Transcending of Mortality". 
                        The New York Times (New York). Retrieved 2012-05-30.
                    
                
                There has also been some recent controversy amongst practitioners of digital humanities around the role that race and/or identity politics plays in digital humanities. Tara McPherson attributes some of the lack of racial diversity in digital humanities to the modality of 
                    UNIX and computers, themselves. 
                    
                        
                     An open thread on DHpoco.org recently garnered well over 100 comments on the issue of race in digital humanities, with scholars arguing about the amount that racial (and other) biases affect the tools and texts available for digital humanities research. 
                    
                        
                     This is a current source of debate within the digital humanities.
                
                At present, formal academic recognition of digital work in the humanities remains somewhat problematic, although there are signs that this might be changing.[ 
                    
                        citation needed
                    ] Some universities offer programs related to the field 
                    
                        "Digital Humanities Programs and Organizations". UCLA Digital Humanities. Retrieved 2 November 2014.
                     and some have dedicated Digital Humanities programmes. 
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                See also
                
                    Centers
                    
                        
                            The 
                            
                                Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
                            
                            maintains 
                            
                                a comprehensive list of digital humanities centers
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Department of Digital Humanities (King's College London, UK)
                        
                        
                            Humanities Advanced Technology and Information Institute (University of Glasgow, Scotland)
                        
                        
                            Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (University of Virginia, USA)
                        
                        
                            Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities
                        
                        
                            Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media (George Mason University, Virginia, USA)
                        
                        
                            UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (University College London, UK)
                        
                        
                            Center for Public History and Digital Humanities (Cleveland State University)
                        
                    
                
                
                    Journals
                    
                        
                            Digital Medievalist
                        
                        
                            Digital Humanities Quarterly
                        
                        
                            Literary and Linguistic Computing
                        
                        
                            Southern Spaces
                        
                    
                
                
                    Meetings
                    
                        
                            Digital Humanities conference
                        
                        
                            HASTAC
                        
                        
                            THATCamp
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Miscellaneous
                    
                    
                        
                            Computers and writing
                        
                        
                            Computational archaeology
                        
                        
                            Cybertext
                        
                        
                            Cultural analytics
                        
                        
                            Digital Classicist
                        
                        
                            Digital Humanities Summer Institute
                        
                        
                            Digital library
                        
                        
                            Digital Medievalist
                        
                        
                            Digital history
                        
                        
                            Digitizing
                        
                        
                            Digital rhetoric
                        
                        
                            Digital scholarship
                        
                        
                            Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative
                        
                        
                            Electronic literature
                        
                        
                            EpiDoc
                        
                        
                            E-research
                        
                        
                            Humanistic informatics
                        
                        
                            Multimedia literacy
                        
                        
                            New media
                        
                        
                            Systems theory
                        
                        
                            Stylometry
                        
                        
                            Text Encoding Initiative
                        
                        
                            Text mining
                        
                        
                            Topic Modeling
                        
                        
                            Transliteracy
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                                Categories:
                            
                            
                                Digital humanities
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                
                    External links
                
                
                    
                        The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
                    
                    
                        CenterNet
                    
                    
                        A Day in the Life of the Digital Humanities
                    
                    
                        Lev Manovich, Computational Humanities vs. Digital Humanities
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Beagle, Donald, (2014). 
                        
                            Digital Humanities in the Research Commons: Precedents &amp; Prospects
                        , Association of College &amp; Research Libraries: dh+lib.
                    
                    Berry, D. M., ed. (2012). 
                        
                            Understanding Digital Humanities
                        , Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    Burdick, Anne, Johanna Drucker, Peter Lunenfeld, Todd Presner, &amp; Jeffrey Schnap (2012). 
                        
                            Digital_Humanities
                        , The MIT Press
                    
                    Busa, Roberto (1980). ‘The Annals of Humanities Computing: The Index Thomisticus’, in Computers and the Humanities vol. 14, pp. 83–90. Computers and the Humanities (1966-2004) 
                    Celentano, A., Cortesi, A. &amp; Mastandrea, P. (2004). Informatica Umanistica: una disciplina di confine, Mondo Digitale, vol. 4, pp. 44–55. 
                    Classen, Christoph, Kinnebrock, Susanne, &amp; Löblich, Maria, eds. (2012). 
                        Towards Web History: Sources, Methods, and Challenges in the Digital Age. 
                        
                            Historical Social Research
                        
                        , 37 (4), 97-188.
                    
                    Condron Frances, Fraser, Michael &amp; Sutherland, Stuart, eds. (2001). 
                        
                            Oxford University Computing Services Guide to Digital Resources for the Humanities
                        , West Virginia University Press.
                    
                    Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011). 
                        
                            Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future of the Academy
                        . New York; NYU Press.
                    
                    Gold, Matthew K., ed. (2012). 
                        
                            Debates In the Digital Humanities
                        . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
                    Hancock, B., &amp; Giarlo, M.J. (2001). 
                        
                            Moving to XML: Latin texts XML conversion project at the Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities
                        . Library Hi Tech, 19(3), 257-264.
                    
                    Hockey, Susan (2001). 
                        Electronic Text in the Humanities: Principles and Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
                    Honing, Henkjan (2008). 
                        
                            The role of ICT in music research: A bridge too far?
                        International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 
                        , 1 (1), 67-75.
                    
                    Inman James, Reed, Cheryl, &amp; Sands, Peter, eds. (2003). 
                        Electronic Collaboration in the Humanities: Issues and Options, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
                    
                    Kenna, Stephanie &amp; Ross, Seamus, eds. (1995). 
                        Networking in the humanities: Proceedings of the Second Conference on Scholarship and Technology in the Humanities held at Elvetham Hall, Hampshire, UK 13–16 April 1994. London: Bowker-Saur.
                    
                    Kirschenbaum, Matthew (2008). 
                        
                            Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination
                        . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
                    
                    McCarty, Willard (2005). 
                        Humanities Computing, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    Moretti, Franco (2007). 
                        
                            Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History
                        . New York: Verso.
                    
                    Mullings, Christine, Kenna, Stephanie, Deegan, Marilyn, &amp; Ross, Seamus, eds. (1996). 
                        New Technologies for the Humanities London: Bowker-Saur.
                    
                    Newell, William H., ed. (1998). 
                        Interdisciplinarity: Essays from the Literature. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
                    
                    Nowviskie, Bethany, ed. (2011). 
                        
                            Alt-Academy: Alternative Academic Careers for Humanities Scholars
                        . New York: MediaCommons.
                    
                    Ramsay, Steve (2011). 
                        
                            Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism
                        . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    Schreibman, Susan, Siemens, Ray &amp; Unsworth, John, eds. (2004). 
                        
                            A Companion To Digital Humanities
                         Blackwell Publishers.
                    
                    Selfridge-Field, Eleanor, ed. (1997). Beyond MIDI: The Handbook of Musical Codes. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
                    Thaller, Manfred, ed. (2012). 
                        Controversies around the Digital Humanities. 
                        
                            Historical Social Research
                        , 37 (3), 7-229.
                    
                    Unsworth, John (2005). 
                        
                            Scholarly Primitives: What methods do humanities researchers have in common, and how might our tools reflect this?
                        
                    
                    Warwick C., Terras, M., &amp; Nyhan, J., eds. (2012). 
                        Digital Humanities in Practice, Facet
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Introduction
            
                Historians of science usually face challenges in accessing the literature for their research. In the past, they had difficulties with acquiring the data they needed due to missing digital formats as the manuscripts were lying in archives not accessible to all researchers. Although in the present time manuscripts are mostly digitized and transcribed, the digital editions are not connected. Today there are many online digital editions available, but each presented in an individual platform without any connection to other editions. For example, a historian of science interested in the mathematics of the 17th-18th century must search for the data in various platforms; works of Leonhard Euler and the mathematicians of the Bernoulli dynasty are available in the 
                Bernoulli-Euler Online platform
                 (BEOL),
                
                    
                         Bernoulli-Euler Online, 
                        BEOL
                        , 
                        
                            https://beol.dasch.swiss/
                        
                    
                
                 works of Isaac Newton in 
                The Newton Project
                ,
                
                    
                        The Newton Project,
                        
                            http://www.newtonproject.ox.ac.uk/
                        
                    
                
                 works of Gottfried Leibniz in the 
                Leibniz Archive
                ,
                
                    
                        Leibniz Archive
                        ,
                        
                            https://www.gwlb.de/Leibniz/Leibnizarchiv/english/introduction/
                        
                    
                
                 etc.
            
            
                Although most of these mathematicians were corresponding and had cited each other's works in their books and articles, this linkage of the data is not evident because the works of these mathematicians are currently presented in individual digital platforms which are not semantically linked. For a historian of mathematics who tries to track these mathematicians’ lines of thought, having access to the information about how the data is linked plays a crucial role. From this information, the researcher can find the origin of ideas, estimate the effects of one mathematician's contributions on works of others, observe the relation between ideas, etc. Therefore, having access to the literature of all contemporary mathematicians along with a graph representing the semantic connections of the data through one single platform will facilitate historians' research dramatically. In our project, we aim to provide such a platform without locally storing all digital editions.
            
            
                
                Project Description
            
            
                As the base platform which will provide access and semantic links to other edition projects, we are going to use the BEOL platform. Because it is based on Knora, a web-based virtual research environment for the humanities, providing various research tools to historians as an HTML based Restful API (Geer, 2016). As for editions, 
                BEOL
                 contains the correspondence of Leonhard Euler,
                
                    
                        Leonhard Euler exchanged more than 3100 letters with 300 correspondents. Currently 
                        BEOL
                         contains just Euler's correspondence with Christian Goldbach but eventually, it will integrate all of Euler’s and the Bernoullis’ correspondence as well as their articles and books (Alassi, 2018).
                    
                
                 and of various members of the Bernoulli dynasty as XML-based online editions (Schweizer, 2017). On the other hand, 
                The Newton Project
                 is a TEI XML based digital edition project of Newton's correspondence and works. Since data in both projects are in a structured XML format, they prove to be the best candidates as a prototype. As proof of concept, we first attempt to connect the letter networks of the two projects.
            
            
                Although Knora provides a generic storage system, an RDF triplestore, our aim is not to store all the data of 
                The Newton Project
                 in 
                BEOL
                ,
                
                    
                        Unlike the similar project 
                        ePistolarium
                         which stores all the editions of works of Descartes and Huygens locally, we will attempt to avoid the redundancy of data by retrieving the data from 
                        The Newton Project
                         on demand. In this way, there won't be any need to update the database of 
                        BEOL
                         by every editorial change in third-party repositories
                    
                
                 instead we just store the metadata of letters,
                
                    
                        The original facsimiles of Newton's correspondence are served externally by the Cambridge university digital libraries.
                    
                
                 such as the date of creation, authors, recipients, URIs pointing to the facsimiles of Newton letters, subjects discussed in the letters, etc. These metadata will be extracted from letters of 
                The Newton Project
                 and will be imported into 
                BEOL
                . The correspondents and mentioned persons of the letters will then be linked to the existing persons of 
                BEOL
                , and the letters containing specific subjects will be connected to 
                BEOL
                 letters about the same topic, see Figure. 1. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure.1 Brief depiction of project framework and data model as RDF triples
            
                
                Furthermore, with the search features of Knora, a 
                BEOL
                 user can perform specific queries on the data, for example, to acquire all letters written in a specific date interval by a specific person. Knora will then check the entire 
                BEOL
                 database to retrieve all the letters complying with this search criteria. The search results which are originally part of 
                BEOL
                 will be directly presented to the user in 
                SALSAH
                ,
                
                    
                        SALSAH, 
                        System for Annotation and Linkage of Sources in Arts and Humanities
                    
                    
                        
                            https://dhlab-basel.github.io/Salsah/
                        
                    
                
                 the graphical user interface of Knora, and the results which are originally part of 
                The Newton Project
                 will be retrieved from the server of 
                The Newton Project
                 and presented to the user in 
                SALSAH
                . Moreover, there will be a search component integrated into 
                The Newton Project
                 with which the users of 
                The Newton Project
                 can benefit from the search functionality of Knora to perform advanced queries on the database of 
                The Newton Project
                .
            
            
                Lastly, since 
                BEOL
                 users have their own work-space in which they can access the data and annotate it, it is important that when users are working on resources retrieved from 
                The Newton Project
                , they have permanent access to the state of the letters which they were initially presented. Therefore, in case, a user starts to annotate a resource, a stable version of the retrieved Newton letter will be cached and stored in Knora in order to both preserve user's annotations and keep track of the user's works on a resource through versioning functionality of Knora. Caching the data can be avoided if the third-party repository- in this case 
                The Newton Project
                 -provides versioning of data. Then the required version of the data will be fetched from that repository.
            
            Conclusion
            
                Connecting the repositories of digital editions will preserve the information which would be difficult to access without semantically linking the data. In general, establishing a link between repositories will be useful for all disciplines of humanities. In 
                BEOL
                 focus is on the early modern mathematics but all the features developed for this project will be generic and can be used for other projects in humanities.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alassi, S. et al 
                        (2018). A digital edition of Leonhard Euler’s correspondence with Christian Goldbach. 
                        Digital Humanities 2018
                        .  
                        
                            https://dh2018.adho.org/a-digital-edition-of-leonhard-eulers-correspondence-with-christian-goldbach/
                        
                    
                    
                        Geer, B. et al
                         (2016). 
                        Knowledge, Organization, Representation, and Annotation
                        . Digital Humanities Lab
                        
                            http://www.knora.org/
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Schweizer, T. et al
                         (2017). Integrating historical scientific texts into the Bernoulli-Euler online platform. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017
                        . 
                        
                            https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/147/147.pdf
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction: During the 15th century the increase of letter-usage and the philological establishment of the Latin language according to the classical purity, promoted the development of a cosmopolitan movement of researching and sharing knowledge. Due to these means of communication, scholars from all over Europe gave life to an ideal society based on the classical values of 
                Humanitas (Fumaroli, 2015). 
            
            The longest-lived intellectual community of the Old country, the so-called 
                Republic of letters, rooted in this system of rhetorical and cultural values. The Italian writers, who during the 16
                th century initiated one of the most remarkable phenomena of the Italian literature – namely, the production of “Libri di lettere” – referred to these values as well. 
            
            Nevertheless, there are just a few critical studies on the relationship between these remarkable cultural movements and the massive production of letters in the 15
                th century. The most up-to-date list of projects that use technology to catalogue, digitise, and edit letters concerning these cultural movements – list available on the E.M.L.O. project web page –, shows that none of the 84 researches in progress studies the early stages of these processes: namely, the 15
                th century.
            
            The current project, started in December 2018, aims to encourage a critical review of this massive epistolary production through the creation of an online platform intended to map and catalogue letters, collect metadata, analyse prosopography and epistolary networks, and edit texts drawn from editions free from copyright and from unpublished manuscripts.
            
                Corpus: an initial review allowed us to define a body of 34 epistolaries (1400-1499) – of which more than half derived from editions free from copyright – which totals around 8500 documents. The cataloguing of these materials will be based on collecting of the following metadata: date of the letter; sender of the letter; people mentioned in the letter; recipient of the letter; place of origin of the letter; place of destination of the letter; origin; document type (manuscript letter, manuscript draft, extract, etc.); repository; shelf mark; printed copy details; digital copy details.
            
            Meanwhile, we will edit the digital critical text of the familiar letters of Iovianus Pontanus (1429-1479), an Italian humanist, politician, and leading figure of the court of the kingdom of Aragona (around 60 letters; Doglio, 1973).
            
                Methodology: The project consists of three phases:
            
            
                Get;
                Analyse;
                Represent &amp; disseminate.
            
            
                To execute these three phases, we will use the native XML-db application server eXist-db (
                http://exist-db.org ). The XML format used to store and index data is TEI. The choice to use an XML native db and TEI-XML format from the beginning, although less straightforward than others, will enable us to extend the metadata collected to the full-text at any time, without facing platform migrations.
            
            For the collecting data phase (GET) the 
                ARACNE framework (
                http://www.aracne.unina.it/) will be used: an open source software developed by the 
                Centro di Ateneo delle Biblioteche (CAB) of our university for managing and publishing archival document collections in TEI-XML format in eXist-db.
            
            For the next phases (analysis and representation &amp; dissemination) we will use several open source tools (some embedded, some easily pluggable with eXist-db), such as: Apache Lucene (
                http://lucene.apache.org/) and Elastic search (
                https://www.elastic.co/) to aggregate the data.
            
            To publish the results in machine-readable format, to create linked data in the eXist-db API, and to project data in other formats (i.e. json, XML-DC) 
                Apache Jena (
                https://jena.apache.org/) will be used. Furthermore, for human-readable results, 
                ARACNE, which provides the possibility to create a website for a published archival collection, will be used. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Curtius, E. R. (1948). 
                        Europaeische Literatur und lateinisches Mittelalter. Bern: A. Francke.
                    
                    
                        Battistini, A. and Raimondi E. (1990). 
                        Le figure della retorica: Una storia letteraria italiana. Torino: Einaudi.
                    
                    
                        Doglio, M. L. (1973). Cinque lettere inedite del Pontano. Con alcuni appunti per un’edizione dell'epistolario. 
                        Lettere Italiane: 215-225.
                    
                    
                        Keats-Rohan, K. (2007). 
                        Prosopography approaches and applications: a handbook. Oxford: Oxford Unit for Prosopographical Research.
                    
                    
                        Fumaroli, M. (2015). 
                        La République des lettres. Paris: Gallimard.
                    
                    
                        Guerrini, M. and Possemato T. (2015). 
                        Linked data per biblioteche, archivi e musei. Perché l'informazione sia del web e non solo nel web. Milano: Editrice bibliografica.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital scholarly editing. Theories, Models and Methods. Aldershot: Ashgate.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            We present here a project to prepare the digital critical edition of the 
                Chronicle of Matthew of Edessa, which is due to finish its first stage in April 2019. The 
                Chronicle is a 12
                th century Armenian-language historical text covering events in the Near East during the 10
                th-12th centuries. This takes the reader from the apogee of the medieval Armenian kingdoms to the fall of most of them during the eleventh century as their lands were annexed to Byzantium and ultimately lost to the Seljuk Turks. The Chronicle is also an important source for the history of the First Crusade, and particularly the Crusader County of Edessa. There are about 40 known manuscripts that contain the text of the Chronicle in whole or in part, copied between the end of the 16
                th century up to the 19
                th.
            
            In our workflow we have adopted the stages of digital critical edition suggested by Robinson 
                (2004) – transcription, collation, stemmatic analysis, edition and publication. We found, in the process, that these stages do not occur in a strict succession; it was quite regularly necessary to move back and forth between stages, refining earlier steps on the basis of later results. One of the central features of our project was to adopt a 
                continuous integration (CI) system
                
                     In this case, the software in question is Concourse (
                        https://concourse-ci.org/).
                    
                 in order to manage the work across these stages in a sensible manner. The primary challenge we then had to overcome was the need to ensure that the data was cleanly maintained from beginning to end, as the nature of CI design does not allow for modifications in the middle of the pipeline.
            
            Beginning with the transcription, where we also followed general guidelines proposed by Robinson and Solopova 
                (1993), diplomatic transcriptions of all available manuscripts were made in T-PEN 
                (Ginther et al., 2009) according to guidelines maintained in the project’s GitHub repository, and converted from T-PEN’s native Shared Canvas JSON format into valid TEI-XML using a Python library developed for the purpose. A major advantage of the digital approach is the ease with which entire categories of transcription error can be identified and corrected automatically. The CI framework enabled parsing and validation errors to be spotted immediately. Rare cases could be corrected manually in T-PEN (that is, the source of our pipeline data), but widespread mistakes required us to revise our workflow tools to behave in a way more akin to functional programming, so that we could insert custom code to handle peculiarities of our specific texts without compromising the more general design of the tools themselves. 
            
            Given transcriptions that passed our litmus tests for validation and basic accuracy of content, we were then ready to collate them using the JSON input functionality of CollateX 
                (Dekker and Middell, 2011). Here again we relied on custom programming within the CI setup – while programmatically taking TEI files and tokenise the text contents into individual readings is a straightforward task in its basics, the specifics will vary massively from text to text. Our tokenizer software thus provides a number of code plug-in interfaces that can be used to generate a correct token, also in the specific XML context of that reading in the document. The CI setup also allowed us to make, and preserve, a number of custom modifications to how we used CollateX, in order to maximise its accuracy.
            
            Since one of our transcription guidelines was to leave abbreviations unexpanded, we also developed a tool using a combination of base text collation, regular expression logic, and user interactivity to (semi-)automatically expand these abbreviations and store the results in a database, which could in turn be fed into the tokenisation step on later runs of the pipeline. Here too we retained the principles of diplomatic transcription: if the word was abbreviated the way that it could be expanded in a canonical orthography, we did so, otherwise, we tried to follow the intended (or perhaps mistaken) spelling of the scribe. 
            Given full collations of the chronological sections within the text, our editorial analysis could begin. We have used the Stemmaweb tool 
                (Andrews and Macé, 2013) both to normalise and to specify classes of relationship between individual readings throughout the text, which in turn eases the stemmatic analysis of the manuscripts. Recent versions of Stemmaweb also provide a means of indicating the ‘lemma’ reading among a set of variants, so that critical edition text can be produced directly. At this time a system for annotation of the textual content is under development, which will enable us to provide a digital commentary on the historical content of the 
                Chronicle, as well as the edition itself.
            
            Although our project has not extended the CI model past the stage of collation – this would require a system to save and “re-play” editorial decisions concerning the collated text, which would have required more of an engineering effort than we had resources for within the framework of the project – we consider this to be an important direction for producing a critical edition that is truly reproducible from the textual evidence at its base. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L., and Macé, C. (2013). Beyond the tree of texts: Building an empirical model of scribal variation through graph analysis of texts and stemmata. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        28(4): 504–21. 10.1093/llc/fqt032.
                    
                    
                        Dekker, R. H., and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-supported collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. In 
                        Supporting Digital Humanities. Copenhagen. http://crdo.up.univ-aix.fr/SLDRdata/doc/show/copenhagen/SDH-2011/submissions/sdh2011_submission_54.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Ginther, J., Firey, A., O’Sullivan, T., Walker, A., Elliot, M., Gaffield, M., … Cuba, P. (2009, 2012). T-PEN: Transcription for Paleographical and Editorial Notation. http://t-pen.org/TPEN/.
                    
                    
                        Howe, C. J., Connolly, R., and Windram, H. F. (2012). Responding to Criticisms of Phylogenetic Methods in Stemmatology. 
                        Studies in English Literature 1500-1900, 
                        52(1): 51–67. 10.1353/sel.2012.0008.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. (2004). Making electronic editions and the fascination of what is difficult. 
                        Linguistica Computazionale, 
                        20–
                        21: 415–38.
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P., and Solopova, E. (1993). Guidelines for Transcription of the Manuscripts of the Wife of Bath’s Prologue. In 
                        In The Canterbury Tales Project Occasional Papers 1
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Most antique and mediaeval codices preserved today present one or more layers of complexity. Codices are usually considered “complex” when they contain more than one text; but there are other aspects to be taken into consideration. Sometimes, they are complex objects because several scribes collaborated in copying several texts into one book, at times using different ink or layouts, or because their writing material was reused from pre-existing books. Other times, a manuscript’s owner might also restore damaged leaves or choose to add new texts on new quires. Readers too could contribute to an evolving complexity as they added comments, drawings or small pieces of content in the margins or in blank spots. The historical complexity of ancient codices is in itself also a complex notion (See further Gumbert, 2004; Maniaci, 2004; Andrist et al., 2013).
            
            
                How can the various levels of complexity of a codex be coded into a database in such a way that the complexity is not only clearly understandable but also correctly searchable? 
            
            
                The aim of this paper is to present a language-independent model for achieving this goal, and some of the new challenges it now faces. It is called the syntactical model and is already in use in several MySQL as well as XML/TEI databases.
            
            
                The first section of the paper sets out the problem by showing a few slides of a complex codex and explaining the problem one encounters in many current databases. Even though they record accurate information searches with multiple criteria often result in inaccurate answers. Let us for example consider a codex C, which contains both a text by Aristotle copied in the twelfth century, and a text by Chrysostom copied in the fifteenth; let us now imagine a scholar searching databases for witnesses of Chrysostom copied in the twelfth century; by far most of today’s databases will return codex C as a positive match, though it is not! Why is this so? Because the single pieces of information is unrelated to its context of production: these databases fail to consider the codex as an object evolving over time (see Andrist 2014).
            
            
                The second section presents the principles of the syntactical model. The basic idea is that all the contents are linked to a more or less conscious act of production. Let us imagine that someone orders a new copy of Homer’s 
                Iliad
                ; many years later, someone adds some texts by Hesiod to this book; to these a subsequent reader adds the commentaries of Eustathius in the margins along with some notes of her or his own; later still someone takes out the pages containing the Hesiodic texts, binds them together with Pindar’s 
                Odes
                 and adds a colophon… every stage of the transformation represents a unique act of production. The Syntactical model holds that each content in a printed or electronic description of a codex ought to be clearly and unambiguously related to its production unit (the theoretical underlying principles are explained in Andrist et al., 2013).
            
            
                The third section explains how this model has been implemented until now. A standard description according to the syntactical model operates on three data levels: the data level related to the codex as it is today; the data level related to its constitutive production units i.e. its historical parts (which are the main “description units”); and the data level of the pieces of content (mostly texts, but also images or musical pieces), always situated within a production unit. I will show how the syntactical model is implemented in our MySQL shared database (in the framework of the ERC project ParaTexBib submitted by Martin Wallraff in 2013; see Wallraff et al., 2015) and I will also show an example from the XML/TEI Beta maṣāḥǝft
                 database of Ethiopian manuscripts (unrelated to our project). 
            
            
                This very structured and hierarchical way to describe manuscripts enabled us to develop a new tool, with the specific purpose of both visually relaying the overall structure of a codex, as well as the content of each stratum; elements which may not be immediately evident in a written description. It generates graphic representations on demand from a manuscript description based on the syntactical model (an image of it is available 
                
                    here
                
                ). The whole codex, as well as its historical parts and their contents, is represented on a single screen; extra details are displayed by clicking on individual elements of this graphic representation. These are created by an open-access web application, developed through a proof-of-concept funded by the ERC (see Dirkse et al., 2019).
            
            
                A promising future development of this tool is the reconstruction of now dispersed manuscripts; by drawing elements from existing graphic representations, the users will be able to create a new representation by joining diverse parts of various manuscripts and arranging them in order. 
            
            
                The final part of the paper mentions some of the main current challenges:
            
            
                
                    the main one is a human one, that is to say, when people are unfamiliar with or misunderstand the historical layers of a codex and consequently do not represent them correctly in the database;
                
            
            
                
                    from a more technical point of view, the hierarchical way in which the syntactical model is currently implemented in the databases results in very static descriptions and poses certain problems. For example, when the production units of a codex are not easy to identify, or when one wants to simultaneously visualise all the pieces of content currently on one page even though they were produced at different stages. Moreover, other structure levels of the codex within or above the production units are not easy to represent. This is why we are currently thinking of other ways to implement the syntactical model in the databases, which would allow us to visualise the codex according to various interpretation of the syntactical model or, when needed, according to other models (see Andrist, 2015).
                
            
            
                Mapping the major layers of complexity of ancient codices in databases is possible with the syntactical model, even though there is a lot room for improvement. We hope that in the future more projects will take advantage of the potential of this model.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrist P., Canart P. and Maniaci M.
                         (2013). La syntaxe du codex. Essai de codicologie structural. Bibliologia 34. Turnhout.
                    
                    
                        Andrist P.
                         (2014). Going online is not enough! … Electronic descriptions of ancient manuscripts, and the needs of manuscript studies. In T. Andrews and C. Macé (eds.), Analysis of Ancient and Medieval Texts and Manuscripts: Digital Approaches. Lectio 1, Turnhout: 309-334.
                    
                    
                        Andrist P.
                         (2015). Syntactical description of manuscripts, in A. Bausi (et al. eds.), Comparative Oriental Manuscript Studies. An Introduction. Hamburg: 511-520.
                    
                    
                        Dirkse S., Andrist P. and Wallraff M.
                        (2019). Structural Visualization of Manuscripts (StruViMan): Principles, Methods, Prospects. Open Theology 6, forthcoming
                    
                    
                        Gumbert J.P.
                         (2004). Codicological Units: Towards a Terminology for the Stratigraphy of the Non-Homogeneous Codex. In E. Crisci and O. Pecere (eds.), Il codice miscellaneo, tipologia e funzioni. Segno e testo 2: 17-42. 
                    
                    
                        Maniaci M.
                         (2004). Il codice greco 'non unitario'. Tipologia e terminologia, in In E. Crisci and O. Pecere (eds.), Il codice miscellaneo, tipologia e funzioni. Segno e testo 2: 75-107
                    
                    
                        Wallraff M. and Andrist P.
                         (2015). Paratexts of the Bible: A New Research Project on Greek Textual Transmission. Early Christianity 6: 237-243.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The paper will present the results of the analysis and the modelling of the reading process within the Italian publishing house Einaudi (Mangoni, 1999; Turi, 1990) in the aftermath of World War II. The research focuses on the activity of one of the most important contemporary Italian publishers and, ultimately, on the dissemination of Italian literature of the last century. This is part of a larger project, which focuses on narrative works and on Natalia Ginzburg (Iannuzzi, 2012; Saita, 2009), one of the leading collaborators of the publishing house and one of the most original writers of the period. 
            Reading processes were carried out within the publishing house or thanks to external consultants, and had the purpose of verifying the economic and literary viability of a work; this activity resulted in the production of reading reports, containing a summary and an evaluation of the proposed work. Through these documents, mostly unpublished (a small selection is included in Munari, 2015), the books to be printed were selected. Reading reports embodied therefore cultural models that need to be interpreted according to a specific historical and cultural context.
            The presentation will highlight the fundamental contribution of tools and methods of Digital Humanities in the context of my research. More specifically, I will discuss data modelling and encoding as speculative activities of epistemological value (Cummings, 2008; Ciula and Eide 2014; Flanders and Jannidis, 2018). In fact, by modelling the reading process, I was able to understand and represent its complexity; in addition, by encoding the documents I was able to focus in a consistent and speculative matter on aspects such as textuality, style, rhetoric, highlighting differences of the communicative process. The potential of the DH tools and methods have yet to be exploited and applied to this research field: at present there are no digital editions of reading reports. This lack of direct reference models is one of the most stimulating challenges of my project.
            The model was created thanks to a class diagram developed in UML (fig.1). This allowed me, on the one hand, to organize a heterogeneous corpus, and on the other hand it provided the basis for the conceptualization and analysis activities necessary to the creation of a relational database. The database allows to efficiently account for sources, gathering the fundamental information for the description of the corpus in a structured way. It currently contains metadata of a sample of documents, which were then transcribed and encoded according to the TEI XML schema. The metadata in the database and the encoded texts form the basis of the work that will follow: the creation of a digital edition of the documents themselves.
            To describe the UML scheme (fig. 1), I focus my attention first on the document (
                documento), which is stored in a particular archive (
                archivio). UML calls their entities classes, where each class can have attributes that describe a series of their characteristics: the class 
                documento, for example, contains the “date”, “length”, “type of writing” and “form” fields. Each 
                documento conveys what I have called an editorial text (
                testo editoriale). It was fundamental to make the distinction between documentary unit and textual unit, considering also the fact that the same editorial text can be transmitted by several documents: often, in fact, many copies were made of the same reading report, in order to reach different collaborators who were called upon to express their opinion within a collective decision-making process. 
            
            Editorial reports (
                parere editoriale) are transmitted by different types of editorial texts, among them, of particular interest are minutes (
                verbale) of editorial meetings (Einaudi, 2001; Munari, 2011) which report upon the opinions and the sometimes heated exchanges between the various collaborators; these documents allows us to reconstruct the collegial decision-making process, although this reconstruction is, of course, only partial, since it summaries on a much denser oral communication. Other textual typologies that I have identified are:
            
            • Editorial department decisions in which the opinions of the individual collaborators were reported indirectly by the document's compiler (
                comunicazione di segreteria/redazione).
            
            • Structured reading reports (
                scheda).
            
            • Letters by the individual collaborators, which are the emblem of the dialogic and collegial character of the decision-making process within the publishing house (
                lettera).
            
            I distinguish between editorial texts and the editorial reports because a single editorial report doesn’t occupy the entirety of any given editorial texts (except in the rare cases of structured reports), and sometimes, many editorial reports are contained by a single editorial text.
            The editorial reader (
                lettore) had different natures (external or internal collaborators; if internal: collection directors, editorial director, and so on). It is not always easy to identify the reviewer: the documents can be signed or unsigned, sometimes containing an identifier of a given collaborator, but when completely anonymous, an analysis of the handwriting is required (if possible). It is important to underline that, as shown in the diagram, the editorial reader who expresses an editorial opinion may not coincide with the compiler of the document containing it. This is evident in the case of the minutes, where the writer is often a stenographer. 
            
            The model I have produced is essential for the re-organization of the corpus and for the rationalization of the reading process. This model is a preparatory work for the study of the corpus itself, which ultimate aim is the valorization of a literary micro-genre (Bricchi, 2010) that deserves to be studied through appropriate tools. The model itself will allow to understand the reasons behind the decisions and the relative weight of any given collaborator, providing an insight on how the Italian literary canon of the aftermath of World War II was built.
            
                
            
            FIG. 1
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bricchi, M.
                        (2010). La scheda di lettura come micro-genere letterario. In S. Arduini and I. Carmignani (eds), 
                        Giornate della traduzione letteraria. Nuovi contributi
                        . Roma: Iacobelli, pp. 54-66.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, A., Eide, Ø.
                        (2014). Reflections on cultural heritage and digital humanities: modelling in practice and theory. In 
                        First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage (DATeCH). Madrid, Spain, 2014. Conference Proceedings
                        , pp. 35-41.
                        
                            http://modellingdh.uni-koeln.de/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/modelling-inpractice-and-theory.pdf
                        
                         (accessed 24 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Cummings, J.
                        (2008). The Text Encoding Initiative and the Study of Literature. In R. Siemens and S. Schreibman (eds), 
                        A Companion to Digital Literary Studies
                        . Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 218-239. 
                    
                    
                        Einaudi, G.
                        (2001). 
                        Tutti i nostri mercoledì
                        . Bellinzona: Casagrande.
                    
                    
                        Flanders, J., Jannidis, F.
                        , eds. (2018). 
                        The Shape of Data in Digital Humanities. Modeling Texts and Text-based Resources
                        . London: Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Iannuzzi, G.
                         (2012). Natalia Ginzburg. Una linea editorial-creativa. In G. C. Ferretti (ed.), Protagonisti nell'ombra. Milano: Unicopli, pp. 115-133.
                    
                    
                        Mangoni, L.
                        (1999). 
                        Pensare i libri: la casa editrice Einaudi dagli anni Trenta agli anni Sessanta
                        . Torino: Bollati Boringhieri.
                    
                    
                        Munari, T.
                        , ed. (2011). 
                        I verbali del mercoledì. Riunioni editoriali Einaudi 1943- 1952
                        . Torino: Einaudi.
                    
                    
                        Munari, T.
                        , ed. (2015). 
                        Centolettori: i pareri di lettura dei consulenti Einaudi 1941-1991
                        . Torino: Einaudi.
                    
                    
                        Saita, N.
                        (2009). Natalia Ginzburg la fedeltà di una vita con “passo da soldato”. In R. Cicala and V. La Mendola (eds.), 
                        Libri e scrittori di via Biancamano, Casi editoriali in 75 anni di Einaudi.
                         Milano: EDUCatt, pp. 95-124.
                    
                    
                        Turi, G.
                        (1990). 
                        Casa Einaudi: libri uomini idee oltre il fascismo
                        . Bologna: Il Mulino.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Panel overview
                David Beavan, The Alan Turing Institute; Barbara McGillivray, University of Cambridge &amp; The Alan Turing Institute
                This panel highlights the emerging collaborations and opportunities between the fields of Digital Humanities (DH), Data Science (DS) and Artificial Intelligence (AI). It charts the enthusiastic progress of the Alan Turing Institute, the UK national institute for data science and artificial intelligence, as it engages with cultural heritage institutions and academics from arts, humanities and social sciences disciplines. We discuss the exciting work and learnings from various new activities, across a number of high-profile institutions. As these initiatives push the intellectual and computational boundaries, the panel considers both the gains, benefits, and complexities encountered. The panel latterly turns towards the future of such interdisciplinary working, considering how DS &amp; DH collaborations can grow, with a view towards a manifesto. As Data Science grows globally, this panel session will stimulate new discussion and direction, to help ensure the fields grow together and arts &amp; humanities remain a strong focus of DS &amp; AI. Also so DH methods and practices continue to benefit from new developments in DS which will enable future research avenues and questions.
                This panel has been enabled by the establishment two years ago of a new DS &amp; DH Special Interest Group (SIG), with all co-organisers forming part of this panel. The group brings together 40+ practitioners, researchers and organisations from academia, the commercial sector and the cultural heritage institutions, all with an interest in exploring the benefits to DH from DS &amp; AI and vice-versa. This includes new work in areas such as advanced statistics, algorithms, natural language processing, machine learning and artificial intelligence coupled with big data, high performance computing and high throughput computing techniques. At the same time, the SIG has created new directions and prospects for the institute in humanities scholarship, highlighting the unique challenges brought about, such as greater human interpretation and a more iterative research process, the vast potential of data sources, variety of modalities (text, audio, image, video etc.) of content and the social importance of research findings. For more information about the group, see https://www.turing.ac.uk/research/interest-groups/data-science-and-digital-humanities
                The panel is structured as a series of short papers (c. 10 minutes each), introduced and facilitated by one of the co-authors, all addressing different perspectives and personal reflections of the intersection between DH, DS &amp; AI. Starting with access to source material, the first paper will discuss the future of archives, focusing not only on the opportunities digitisation can bring, but also on how AI can enhance the role of archives, archivists and of course their users. The next paper moves to advanced Machine Learning experiments as pedagogical tools, how these can help us understand the creative process in a digital realm and what the experiments can tell us about ourselves. The infrastructure to support DS &amp; DH work is essential, and the third paper draws on extensive experience from the cultural heritage sector on building collaborations and the complexities of data available (or not). The rise of these advanced digital methods and techniques has led to the need for advanced training for those working and providing access in the cultural heritage sectors, as discussed in the next presentation. A more personal reflection on the importance of interdisciplinary work in the DH, DS &amp; AI space follows, with advice on what works and what can be improved. The final paper ends on a high, with the focus on the future, towards a manifesto of Data Science and Digital Humanities. There will be ample time (c. 20-30 minutes) to engage the panel and the audience through a moderated discussion to close the session.
            
            
                What is the role of Data Science and Digital Humanities in the Future Archive?
                Eirini Goudarouli, The National Archives
                Trust has always been central to archives. However, the intangible record is fundamentally changing the landscape as well as the role of archivists and archival institutions. Undoubtedly, the emergence of new generation technologies is rapidly leading to an epistemological shift in archival science, or, to put it in Thomas Kuhn’s words to a scientific revolution, by moving from a relatively settled scientific framework to the urgent need for a profound change to its principles, methods and practices.
                For example, the use of new technologies, such as Snapchat, Google Docs, neural networks, blockchains, hashing algorithms, cryptography and the cloud have profoundly altered the nature of archives, by disrupting how information is created, recorded, captured, encoded, curated, shared, made available and used. These shifts require fundamentally new capabilities and approaches on how best to capture, preserve, contextualise and present increasingly digital public record. Therefore, the archivist’s relationship to emergent technologies needs to become multi-layered. We need to understand the digital landscape, and the changing nature of how society creates and shares records in the light of new generation technologies, and be willing to apply these new advanced technologies in our archival response to these changes. This sparks a new era for archives, as today’s archivist must become equipped with emergent technologies as their own tools of the trade.
                As the nature of records and archives evolves more quickly and the digital contests long-standing archival practices, trust comes to the forefront of the discussion. One of the major questions related to this, is how archives retain the legitimacy they confer on the digital evidence they capture, preserve, contextualise and present. Archives and collection-holding institutions should rethink the nature of the record and our archival practices around the record in the light of digital and combine practical considerations with explorative research into infrastructure, methodology, tools, techniques and user requirements, drawing on innovation across cultural heritage, academia and relevant industries. As we moving forward to a future fully-functioning digital archive, we need to embed new generation technologies in our recordkeeping practices to help us manage our rights and responsibilities as we go about capturing, preserving, contextualising and presenting digital records.
                This paper will suggest that, in an era of AI-assisted recordkeeping, the need to demonstrate the adaptability, value and sustainability of archives has never been more acute. In this context, it will discuss the conceptual and epistemological challenges relating to trust and openness in rapidly evolving digital archives. The paper will also discuss the role of Data Science and Digital Humanities within the archival context and will argue that research plays a central role not only to inform but also to innovate around these challenges, helping to define future directions and lead to the shaping of the future archive.
            
            
                Ways of machine seeing: experiments in critical pedagogy
                Anne Alexander, University of Cambridge; Leonardo Impett, Bibliotheca Hertziana - Max Planck Institute for Art History
                This paper explores the theoretical, methodological and practical challenges of developing Machine Seeing experiments as pedagogical tools, using as a case study a set of experiments created for graduate workshops between 2016 and 2019. These workshops aimed to facilitate interdisciplinary encounters between humanities scholars and computer vision researchers, and were framed by engagement with John Berger's seminal work Ways of Seeing (Berger 1972), which we see as offering critiques of visual ideology. In the spirit of Berger’s original documentary, our design experiments aim to appropriate image-machines (Clark 2008) in his case colour television, in ours Machine Learning systems) and turn them into critical pedagogical tools for the critique and re-understanding of historical and contemporary (digital) image cultures. The object of study is not merely digital or digitally-created images, but the ways in which computation informs our ways of seeing.
                In attempting to combine hermeneutic criticism (of technology) with theoretically-engaged software development - not by alternating between them, but by doing each within the other - our workshop model is in the spirit of Critical Technical Practice (Agre 1997). It is precisely the difference of (and between) computer vision systems which makes them ideal tools for the critique of visual ideology. The object of this critique is not only contemporary digital image-culture, but historical (pre-computational) and machine-generated (post-human) images. We see this critique as fundamental to understanding creative practice in an age of computational automation, in order to develop methods of enquiry which render visible hidden social and technical dimensions of image creation and circulation, such as the production histories of commonly-used image training datasets, the mechanics of learning models (cost &amp; optimisation functions), and the impact of factors such as personalisation in web search.
                Machine visual perception is explored through several performative experiments, developed in the course of the workshops by ‘live-coding’, with technical experiments and critical discussion developing in parallel. In one experiment, Generative Adversarial Networks, twin pairs of image-generating and image-decoding networks, are used to create infinite series of images from certain classes of dataset - Google image search-results from different professions, high-rent and low-rent photographs from rental websites, or classical paintings. In another experiment, object detection networks semantically identify segments of images, and live-swap the resulting crops.
                Our experiments encouraged workshop participants to see Machine Learning systems simultaneously as lenses and mirrors. In other words, ML systems are not simply devices through which we can view the world; we can make them show us something about ourselves. Our experiments thus attempted to reveal the ways of knowing encoded in ML systems through a kind of Verfremdungseffekt where the strangeness of machine visual perception causes viewers to question aspects of the composition and context of images which they previously took for granted. Like Berger’s experiments discussing Caravaggio with school children, we utilised the GAN as a surrogate for a human ‘naive observer’ in order to encourage workshop participants to temporarily ‘unlearn’ implicit aspects of their own image culture in order to facilitate deeper human understanding.
            
            
                In search of the sweet spot: infrastructure at the intersection of cultural heritage and data science
                Mia Ridge, British Library
                This paper explores some of the challenges and paradoxes in the application of data science methods to cultural heritage collections. It is drawn from long experience in the cultural heritage sector, predating but broadly aligned to the 'OpenGLAM' and 'Collections as Data' movements. Experiences that have shaped this thinking include providing open cultural data for computational use; creating APIs for catalogue and interpretive records, running hackathons, and helping cultural organisations think through the preparation of 'collections as data'; and supervising undergraduate and MSc projects for students of computer science. 
                The opportunities are many. Cultural heritage institutions (aka GLAMS - galleries, libraries, archives and museums) hold diverse historical, scientific and creative works – images, printed and manuscript works, objects, audio or video - that could be turned into some form of digital 'data' for use in data science and digital humanities research. GLAM staff have expert knowledge about the collections and their value to researchers. Data scientists bring a rigour, specialist expertise and skills, and a fresh perspective to the study of cultural heritage collections.
                While the quest to publish cultural heritage records and digital surrogates for use in data science is relatively new, the barriers within cultural organisations to creating suitable infrastructure with others are historically numerous. They include different expectations about the pace and urgency of work, different levels of technical expertise, resourcing and infrastructure, and different goals. They may even include different expectations about what 'data' is – metadata drawn from GLAM catalogues is the most readily available and shared data, but not only is this rarely complete, often untidy and inconsistent (being the work of decades or centuries and many hands over that time), it is also a far cry from datasets rich with images or transcribed text that data scientists might expect.
                Copyright, data protection and commercial licensing can limit access to digitised materials (though this varies greatly). 'Orphaned works', where the rights holder cannot be traced in order to licence the use of in-copyright works, mean that up to 40% of some collections, particularly sound or video collections, are unavailable for risk-free use.(2012)
                While GLAMs have experimented with APIs, downloadable datasets and SPARQL endpoints, they rarely have the resources or institutional will to maintain and refresh these indefinitely. Records may be available through multi-national aggregators such as Europeana, DPLA, or national aggregators, but as aggregation often requires that metadata is mapped to the lowest common denominator, their value for research may be limited.
                The area of overlap between 'computationally interesting problems' and 'solutions useful for GLAMs' may be smaller than expected to date, but collaboration between cultural institutions and data scientists on shared projects in the 'sweet spot' - where new data science methods are explored to enhance the discoverability of collections - may provide a way forward. Sector-wide collaborations like the International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF, https://iiif.io/) provide modern models for lightweight but powerful standards. Pilot projects with students or others can help test the usability of collection data and infrastructure while exploring the applicability of emerging technologies and methods. It is early days for these collaborations, but the future is bright.
            
            
                Computing in Cultural Heritage: adventures in training GLAM staff to support digital scholarship
                Nora McGregor, British Library
                The cultural heritage sector of galleries, libraries, archives and museums (GLAMs) shares a fundamental purpose to preserve and provide access to digital and digitised culture, and to support and stimulate the innovative use of these extensive digital collections and data in research. Professionals across the sector will often have come to their role, many years ago, having deep domain expertise in a particular academic subject, yet now find themselves with increased responsibility for assisting on the design and delivery of complex digital projects (Parry, 2018), without a foundation in computing to empower them.
                Though the GLAM sector is facing a broadening digital skills gap as rapid technological transformations impact nearly every role in the sector, there is much progress and innovation to report in the area of digital skills development in the area of supporting digital scholarship. From deploying simple scripts to make everyday tasks easier, advising on the building of new digital systems &amp; services to support collaborative, computational and data-driven research, through to large-scale collaborative (Data Science and Digital Humanities) projects, today’s cultural heritage professionals require, and most importantly, are actively seeking, a grounding in computational approaches to navigate this new landscape confidently.
                Through a diverse mixture of approaches, such as bespoke course development, guest lectures, network building, reading groups and hack &amp; yacks, the British Library is finding a variety of innovative ways to provide their staff with the space and opportunity to delve into and explore all that digital content and new technologies have to offer in the research domain today (British Library, 2018). This paper will report on these latest initiatives, including a newly funded project to develop a Post-Graduate Certificate in 
                    Computing for Cultural Heritage (British Library, 2019) relaying experiences particularly from British Library, as well as other GLAM institutions, currently investing in upskilling their staff to support data science and the digital humanities. The paper will conclude with a discussion on matters of equality, diversity and inclusion, and report on efforts to identify and mitigate barriers for staff in taking up such digital skills training.
                
            
            
                Benefits and challenges of interdisciplinary Data Science and Digital Humanities research
                Beatrice Alex, University of Edinburgh
                Data science (DS) and digital humanities (DH) collaborations can be extremely successful if participants involved are willing to find common ground and value each others’ research and contributions. Speaking from experience, they often take time to develop. The following section summarizes lessons learnt at hand by one of our co-authors in a number of interdisciplinary projects and some insights overlap with those shared by Siemens et al., 2016, for example.
                Computer scientists tend to want to develop and evaluate algorithms or come up with new and interesting ways to visualize information. This requires data and in some cases manually annotated data. Humanists and social scientists tend want to prove or disprove hypotheses or study specific questions or queries using a particular dataset. Running projects successfully combining these goals requires willingness and compromise on each side. It is important to be clear about differences at the start and discuss how area-specific and joint dissemination will be handled. Project publications with many co-authors are something to embrace but they also need to be better recognized.
                It is sometimes worth running a pilot to gain common understanding and knowledge of what is possible computationally. This can help to attract further funding to be able to scale up research in a larger project. In practice, that is not necessarily how it works as one often gets involved in last-minute grant proposals and needs to make quick decisions about what is feasible computationally, which is far from ideal.
                Funding councils need to make more grants for interdisciplinary work available (with longer preparation times) both nationally and internationally. Small network grants are not sufficient. Leading on from them, we need more funding calls like 
                    Digging into Data and the 
                    Trans-Atlantic Platform allowing participants from different countries to collaborate. To drive research and innovation and to encourage interdisciplinary work, such as that between DS &amp; DH, national research funding bodies like UKRI must also provide similar opportunities on a national level.
                
                Once a project goes ahead, a lot of time is spent on data preparation. Often there is an understanding about the necessary datasets being available but complexities in terms of data access, data being spread across different collections or released in different formats and data quality are underestimated. For example, in the Trading Consequences and Palimpsest projects several large text collections were processed (Klein et al., 2014, Loxley et al., 2018). Converting them into one common format took time. Even with common guidelines being advocated (e.g. TEI or MARC), in reality most collections come with their own format and metadata, or no metadata at all. Those who have found themselves doing data wrangling will know that one rarely is able to re-use an existing conversion script. However, this initial, tedious preparation step is necessary and the experience gained doing it helps to get going faster each time.
                Finally, computational methods are not always perfectly accurate. We need to inform collaborators about what technology, for example, a text mining pipeline, is capable of and how it can be used to assist scholarship, rather than replace it. When making a tool available, it is also important to report about the data it was originally developed for or trained on to avoid disappointment when used on data from a different domain. Sharing and being transparent about a technology can lead to positive outcomes and new interesting collaborations.
            
            
                Towards a Manifesto for Data Science and Digital Humanities
                Barbara McGillivray, University of Cambridge &amp; The Alan Turing Institute; David Beavan, The Alan Turing Institute
                This paper takes the first steps towards a manifesto for the field at the intersection between Data Science and Digital Humanities. Over the past few years there has been an increasing level of activity in the area of computational humanities, quantitative humanities, and humanities computing, as testified by several initiatives, groups (cf. e.g. Computational Humanities group at Leipzig https://ch.uni-leipzig.de/about/, the Computational Humanities committee https://www.ehumanities.nl/computational-humanities/), workshops (cf. e.g. Computational Humanities 2014 https://www.dagstuhl.de/en/program/calendar/semhp/?semnr=14301, COMHUM 2018 http://wp.unil.ch/llist/en/event/comhum2018/), and publications (Biemann et al., 2014; Nyhan and Flinn, 2016, Jenset and McGillivray, 2017). Research in this area has focussed on developing new computational techniques to analyse and model humanities data. 
                Digital Humanities work has partially tackled these questions, but its scope is broader, and has historically concentrated primarily on the creation of digital resources, editions and tools, as well as the application of existing computational methods to humanities data (cf. Digital Humanities manifesto 2.0), rather than on new computational challenges.
                We believe that the development of cutting-edge computational research that aims to promote and answer new research questions, including methodological ones, in the Humanities deserves a specific and coordinated reflection. Such effort is needed to shape the scope of the field, suggest a methodological framework for it, and highlight strategic priorities to drive it forward.
                We propose to make this contribution in the form of a collaboratively-written “manifesto”. The structure of this document will first include a scoping section, which defines the types of challenges addressed by the field in question, such as: how do we automate and scale up tasks in Humanities research? How can we train machines to perform creative tasks? Further, the manifesto will briefly describe the current landscape, from the point of view of existing methods and approaches, projects, and institutional initiatives. Next, we will review the challenges and opportunities that characterize the research of this emerging field, to highlight areas of progress. Finally, we outline a future vision, providing a thought-leadership piece that suggests methodological frameworks and interdisciplinary models of collaboration to support the field, help it grow, and facilitate its broader dissemination. We will also provide grounding of an educational strategy to train the current and next generations of scholars and practitioners to operate in and interact with this field, and a reflection on the funding routes appropriate to support the research in this field.
                DH2019 is the premiere Digital Humanities conference worldwide, with many opinion leaders expected to attend. Therefore, we look forward to presenting an initial outline of the manifesto in this ideal venue, gathering feedback and stimulating a discussion amongst the panel and the audience.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Agre, P.
                         (1997) 
                        Computation and Human Experience. 
                        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
                    
                    
                        Berger, J. 
                        (1972) 
                        Ways of Seeing
                        . London: Penguin Books, 2008
                    
                    
                        Biemann, C., Crane, G., Fellbaum, C. and Mehler, A.
                         (editors) (2014). Computational Humanities - bridging the gap between Computer Science and Digital Humanities. Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 14301. 
                        
                            https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/u.osu.edu/dist/4/27964/files/2016/01/DagstuhlSeminarFinalReport-2a7n3h7.pdf
                        
                         (accessed 14/3/2019)
                    
                    
                        British Library
                        . (2019) 
                        Computing for Cultural Heritage. https://www.bl.uk/projects/computingculturalheritage 
                        (accessed 29 April 2019)
                    
                    
                        British Library
                        . (2018)
                        Digital Scholarship Staff Training Programme. https://www.bl.uk/projects/digital-scholarship-training-programme
                        (accessed 29 April 2019)
                    
                    
                        Clark, T. J.
                         (2008) “Art History in the Age of Image Machines”. In 
                        Can’t Remember
                        . London: Phaidon Press
                    
                    
                        Jenset, G. and McGillivray, B.
                         (2017). Quantitative Historical Linguistics. A corpus framework. Oxford University Press, Oxford
                    
                    
                        Klein, E., Alex, B., Grover, C., Tobin, R., Coates, C., Clifford, J., Quigley, A., Hinrichs, U., Reid, J., Osborne, N. and Fieldhouse, I.
                         (2014). Digging Into Data White Paper: Trading Consequences, March 2014. 
                        
                            http://tradingconsequences.blogs.edina.ac.uk/files/2014/03/DiggingintoDataWhitePaper-final.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        Loxley, J., Alex, B., Anderson, M., Hinrichs, U., Grover, C., Thomson, T., Harris-Birtill, D., Quigley A. and Oberlander, J.
                         (2018). 'Multiplicity embarrasses the eye': The digital mapping of literary Edinburgh. In Gregory, I., Debats, D. and Lafreniere, D. (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Spatial History. 
                        
                            https://www.routledgehandbooks.com/doi/10.4324/9781315099781-35
                        
                    
                    
                        Nyhan, J. and Flinn, A.
                         (2016). Computation and the Humanities: Towards an Oral History of Digital Humanities. Springer
                    
                    
                        Parry, R., Eikhof, D. R., Barnes, S. A., &amp; Kispeter, E. 
                        (2018). Mapping the Museum Digital Skills Ecosystem-Phase One Report.
                        
                            https://lra.le.ac.uk/bitstream/2381/41572/2/One%20by%20One_Phase1_Report.pdf
                        
                         (accessed 29 April 2019)
                    
                    
                        Several authors
                        . Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0. 
                        
                            www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pdf
                        
                         (accessed 14/3/2019)
                    
                    
                        Siemens, L. and INKE Research Group
                         (2016). “‘Faster Alone, Further Together’: Reflections on INKE’s Year Six.” Scholarly and Research Communication, 7.2, 8 pages. 
                        
                            http://src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/250/479
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
             In this poster presentation we will report on a first collaborative pilot study within the ongoing five-year project 
                Track Changes: Textual scholarship and the challenge of digital literary writing (2018-2023). The larger project aims to discover what the creative processes of present-day literary writers look like, and what the implications of their largely digital practices are for textual scholarship's theories and methodologies. There have been a few trailblazers studying born-digital literary materials (Kirschenbaum, 2008; Ries 2010; 2018; Vauthier, 2016; Fiormonte and Pusceddu, 2006; Richle. 2007, Crombez and Cassiers, 2017). But despite passionate pleas from them and others (Alamargot and Lebrave, 2010; Lebrave, 2013; Van Hulle, 2011), the field as a whole has yet to embrace born-digital textual materials as research subject. None have so far used keystroke logging to investigate the literary process, which makes our project quite innovative. The aim of this poster presentation is to show and discuss our methodology and data, and to present a small-scale example of the insights we could gain.
            
            Although born-digital processes leave traces, the conventions of word processing programmes are such that immediate corrections have become invisible. Versioning has become a matter of personal preferences; which in some cases leads to a further decrease in evidence of the writing process (Mathijsen, 2009). Related to this issue of changes in the type of traces a writing process generates, is the way in which the medium affects the process. From studies into non-literary texts, we know that digital writing processes differ from paper-based work processes – one difference is that there is more rewriting during composition (Van Waes and Schellens, 2003; Goldberg, 2003).
            
                Inputlog
                We chose to work with the keystroke logger Inputlog (Van Waes and Leijten, 2013) because of its seamless integration into a 'normal' writing experience. Once switched on, it logs writing activities performed in Word. Using keystroke logging, we are thus able to catch all traces of digital writing and editing processes, including immediate corrections, and including a separate version of the Word document at the end of every writing session.
            
            
                Project data
                This poster presents a pilot study that focusses on nine writing sessions of the Dutch author Walter van den Berg, which encompasses all his writing for one short story. This story was – together with three other stories – commissioned during our small-scale precursory study. The writing process of these stories was logged in Inputlog. In 
                    Track Changes we will analyse the writing process of the novel 
                    Roosevelt by the Flemish author Gie Bogaert – which contains 446 writing sessions – as well as 8 newly commissioned stories.
                
            
            
                Pilot study
                The pilot study shows how the logging data can help interpret revisions made during the writing process. By both focussing on small revisions and on the incipit of the story – the beginning of the story in the published text – we will try to examine if and how these small revisions can be related to the genesis of the incipit.
            
            
                Revisions
                Deletions and substitutions will be manually labelled and interpreted. Van den Berg deleted quite a bit of his freshly produced materials, sometimes 'iterating' over multiple possibilities before settling. The deletions and substitutions within each writing session present a chronological story that does not follow a linear path through the unfolding text. Thematically connected passages, distributed through the text, are connected in chronological revision patterns.
            
            
                Incipit
                Incipits are paradoxical as they are random but always decisive and primordial for the story's development (Debray Genette, 2004). Looking at the drafts of the story, what do the revisions tell us about the composition of the incipit? During the writing sessions, Van den Berg made extensive revisions to the incipit. In the first draft of the story, he starts with introducing the neighbour of the main character, but in the finished story, this neighbour is reduced to 'someone'.
            
            
                Results
                As this is a work-in-progress, we cannot yet provide results. We hope to reconstruct the genesis of the incipit through studying both the versions of the text and the process data from Inputlog; we cannot only see 
                    which revisions were made to create the ultimate incipit but also 
                    when – in the complete writing process. Revisions in the incipit could thus perhaps be linked with additions or revisions elsewhere in the text. We wish to elucidate parts of the writing processes we will study through visualisations based on TEI-XML.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alamargot, D. and Lebrave, J. (2010). The Study of Professional Writing: A Joint Contribution from Cognitive Psychology and Genetic Criticism. 
                        European Psychologist, 15(1): 12-22.
                    
                    
                        Crombez, T. and Cassiers, E. (2017). Postdramatic Methods of Adaptation in the Age of Digital Collaborative Writing. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 32(1): 17–35.
                    
                    
                        Debray Genette, R. (2004). Flaubert’s “A Simple Heart,” or How to Make an Ending. In Deppman, J., Ferrer D. and Michael Grodon (eds),
                         Genetic Criticism. Text and Avant-textes. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 69-95.
                    
                    
                        Fiormonte, D. and Pusceddu, C. (2006). The Text as Product and Process. History, Genesis, Experiments. In Vanhoutte, E. and de Smedt, M. (eds) 
                        Manuscript, Variant, Genese – 
                        Genesis. Gent: Koninklijke Academie voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde, pp. 109-128.
                    
                    
                        Goldberg, A., Russell, M. and Cook, A. (2003). The Effect of Computers on Student Writing: A Meta-Analysis of Studies from 1992 to 2002. 
                        The Journal of Technology, Learning and Assessment, 2(1): 3-51.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M.G. (2008). 
                        Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M.G. (2013). The .Txtual Condition: Digital Humanities, Born-Digital Archives, and the Future Literary. 
                        DHQ, 7(1).
                    
                    
                        Lebrave, J. (2013). Computer forensics: la critique génétique et l’écriture numérique. 
                        Genesis, 44: 137-147.
                    
                    
                        Mathijsen, M. (2009). Genetic textual editing: the end of an era. In 
                        Mitterauer, G., Müller, U., Springeth, M. and Vitzthum, V. (eds), 
                        Was ist Textkritik? Zur Geschichte und Relevanz eines Zentralbegriffs der Editionswissenschaft. Beihefte zu Editio 28. Tübingen: Niemeyer, pp. 233-240.
                    
                    
                        Richle, U. (2007). Studie zur vorbereitung eines Forschungsprojektes am Schweizerischen Literaturinstitut HKB – BFH, report for the Hochschule der Künste Bern. https://tecfa.unige.ch/perso/urs/ (accessed 12 September 2018)
                    
                    
                        Ries, T. (2010). "Die geräte Klüger als ihre Besitzer": Philologische Durchblicke hinter die Schreibszene des Graphical User Interface: Überlegungen zur digitalen Quellenphilologie, mit einer textgenetischen Studie zu Michael Speiers ausfahrt st. nazaire. 
                        Editio 24: 149-199.
                    
                    
                        Ries, T. (2018). The Rationale of the Born-Digital Dossier Génétique: Digital Forensics and the Writing Process: With Examples from the Thomas Kling Archive. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 33(2): 391–424.
                    
                    
                        Van Hulle, D. (2011, September). Digitaal Kladwerk. 
                        De Witte Raaf, 153 https://www.dewitteraaf.be/artikel/detail/nl/3682 (accessed 12 September 2018)
                    
                    
                        Van Waes, L., and Schellens, P.J. (2003). Writing Profiles: The Effect of the Writing Mode on Pausing and Revision Patterns of Experienced Writers. 
                        Journal of Pragmatics, 35(6): 829–53.
                    
                    
                        Vauthier, B. (2016). Genetic Criticism Put to the Test by Digital Technology: Sounding out the (Mainly) Digital Genetic File of El Dorado. 
                        Variants, 12-13: 163–86.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This long paper presents the 
                Digital Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum (DFHG) project (
                http://www.dfhg-project.org). The 
                DFHG is the digital version of the five volumes of the 
                Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum (FHG), which is the first big collection of ancient Greek historical fragments published by Karl Müller (1841-1873). The 
                FHG is a corpus of quotations and text reuses (fragmenta) of 636 ancient Greek fragmentary historians preserved by Classical sources. Fragmentary authors date from the 6th century BC through the 7th century CE and, except for the first volume, are chronologically distributed. Fragments are numbered sequentially and arranged by works and book numbers with Latin translations, commentaries, and critical notes.
            
            The 
                DFHG is not a new edition of ancient Greek fragmentary historians, but a new digital resource to provide textual, philological, and computational methods for representing fragmentary authors and works in a digital environment. The reason for choosing the 
                Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum depends not only on an interest in Greek fragmentary historiography, which provides a rich collection of complex reuses of prose texts, but also on the necessity of digitizing printed editions and preserving them as structured machine readable corpora that can be accessed for experimenting with text mining of historical languages. Moreover, the 
                FHG is still fundamental to understand recent editions of Greek historical fragments and in particular 
                Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker (FGrHist) by Felix Jacoby, who spent his life to change and improve the collection created by Karl Müller. Finally, the corpus of the 
                FHG is open and big enough to perform computational experiments and obtain results.
            
            This paper presents tools and services that have been developed by the project, not only for accessing the entire collection of the 
                FHG, but also for providing a new model that can be applied to other collections of fragmentary authors in order to visualize and explore their complex data and connect it with external resources for further developments. The presentation is organized according to the following topics:
            
            
                
                    Visualization of DFHG contents. The 
                    DFHG appears as an Ajax web page automatically generated by a PHP script querying an SQL database of the entire 
                    FHG, which is accessible by browsing the whole collection or single volumes through a slide in/out navigation menu. The navigation menu allows scholars to navigate the 
                    FHG with a comprehensive and detailed view of the structure of the entire collection and to jump to the relevant section without reloading the page. This kind of visualization is very helpful because the printed version of the 
                    FHG doesn’t contain detailed tables of contents of its volumes, but only short and sometimes incomplete lists of authors published in the collection.
                
                
                    Access to the DFHG. The 
                    DFHG Digger filters the whole collection according to authors, works, work sections, and book numbers, while the 
                    DFHG Search function is performed on fragments, translations, commentaries and source texts. Results show the number of occurrences in each 
                    DFHG author and searched words are highlighted in the text. They also display, when available, the lemmatization of inflected forms and the disambiguation of named entities through external resources. The 
                    DFHG provides a web API that can be queried with author names and fragment numbers. The result is a JSON output containing every piece of information about the requested fragment (e.g., 
                    http://www.dfhg-project.org/DFHG/api.php?author=ACUSILAUS&amp;fragment=10). The 
                    DFHG exports data to CSV and XML format files (both as EpiDoc XML and well formed XML).
                
                
                    Integration with external resources. One of the main goals of the project is to make the 
                    DFHG part of a bigger infrastructure of processed data. This is the reason why the 
                    DFHG is integrated with external resources such as textual collections, authority lists, dictionaries, lexica and gazetteers. These resources are fundamental for disambiguating and annotating 
                    DFHG data, which in turn offers a collection of parsed texts for enriching external libraries of Greek and Latin sources. The 
                    DFHG is currently connected to different resources that provide morpho-syntactic information and named entities disambiguation of textual data of the 
                    FHG. The 
                    DFHG provides also a 
                    Müller-Jacoby Table of Concordance, which is a complete correspondence between fragmentary historians published in the 
                    FHG and in 
                    Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker including the 
                    continuatio and the 
                    Brill's New Jacoby (
                    http://www.dfhg-project.org/Mueller-Jacoby-Concordance). The goal of this resource is to go beyond the 
                    FHG corpus and produce a complete catalog of fragmentary authors of Greek literature published in different digital editions. This resource is progressively ingested into the 
                    Perseus Catalog (
                    http://catalog.perseus.org).
                
                
                    Data citation. It is possible to retrieve and export citations of 
                    DFHG fragments and source texts down to the word level using URN identifiers. These URNs are combinable with a URL prefix (http://www.dfhg-project.org/DFHG/#) to generate stable links. The syntax of each URN represents the editorial work of Karl Müller, who has arranged the fragments in a sequence and has attributed them to fragmentary authors, works, work sections and book numbers (e.g., urn:lofts:fhg.1.hecataeus.hecataei_fragmenta.genealogiae.liber_secundus:350). The 
                    DFHG provides also CITE URNs according to the guidelines of the CITE Architecture (
                    http://cite-architecture.org/).
                
                
                    Source Catalogs. The 
                    DFHG includes a 
                    Fragmentary Authors Catalog and a 
                    Witnesses Catalog that have been created from 
                    FHG data. These catalogs allow users to search and visualize the 636 Greek fragmentary historians of the collection and each of their witnesses (i.e., authors who preserve quotations and text reuses of the fragmentary historians). Data from both catalogs has been used to generate charts for visualizing chronological distributions and statistics of 
                    FHG authors and their source texts. This data integrates also 
                    Pleiades identifiers with geo-locations that have been used for producing maps that visualize the geographical distribution of 
                    FHG authors and their witnesses.
                
                
                    Text Reuse Detection. The 
                    DFHG project offers experimental text reuse functionalities for automatic text reuse detection of 
                    FHG fragmentary historians. This resource allows users to automatically detect text reuses (fragmenta) of 
                    FHG authors in their witnesses. Users can insert an XML file URL or select one of the 
                    PerseusDL or 
                    Open Greek and Latin editions available in the 
                    DFHG. Results display quotations and text reuses of 
                    FHG authors within their source texts. The 
                    DFHG allows scholars to download complete XML files of the source texts of the fragments with dfhg attributes that mark up the presence of 
                    DFHG text reuses in the relevant passages of the source texts. 
                    DFHG text reuse detection is based on the Smith-Waterman algorithm that performs local sequence alignment to detect similarities between strings.
                
                
                    OCR Editing. The digital version of the 
                    DFHG has been produced starting from the OCR output of the printed edition of the 
                    FHG. Even if it is possible to obtain very good results when OCRing 19th-century editions of ancient Greek and Latin sources, OCRed texts still contain errors. The 
                    DFHG offers an interface for manual OCR correction of source texts, fragments, Latin translations and commentaries. Corrections are validated or rejected by the project team through an administration page.
                
            
            Further developments of the 
                DFHG project aim at implementing named entities recognition in the texts of Greek and Latin 
                fragmenta and in contributing to enrich the number of lemmata and inflected forms of Greek and Latin thesauri. The final goal of the project is to offer a new methodology based on digital and computational approaches to represent complex historical text reuse data. The 
                DFHG also offers an open collection of quotations and text reuses of Greek fragmentary historians. This resource provides the community of scholars and students with machine processable data for historical and computational research.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Berti, M. (2018). “Annotating Text Reuse within the Context: the 
                        Leipzig Open Fragmentary Texts Series (LOFTS)”. In Tischer, U., Gärtner, U. and Forst, A. (eds), 
                        Text, Kontext, Kontextualisierung. Moderne Kontextkonzepte und antike Literatur. Hildesheim, Zürich, and New York: Olms, 223-234.
                    
                    
                        Berti, M. (2019). “Historical Fragmentary Texts in the Digital Age”. In Berti, M. (ed), 
                        Digital Classical Philology. Ancient Greek and Latin in the Digital Revolution. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter, 257-276. doi: 10.1515/9783110599572-015
                    
                    
                        Berti, M., Almas, B. and Crane, G.R. (2016). “The 
                        Leipzig Open Fragmentary Texts Series (LOFTS)”. In Bernstein, N.W. and Coffee, N. (eds), 
                        Digital Methods and Classical Studies. DHQ Themed Issue 10(2). 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/2/000245/000245.html (accessed 13 April 2019)
                    
                    
                        Berti, M., Almas, B., Dubin, D., Franzini, G., Stoyanova, S. and Crane, G.R. (2014-2015). “The Linked Fragment: TEI and the Encoding of Text Reuses of Lost Authors”. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8. doi: 10.4000/jtei.1218
                    
                    
                        Berti, M., Blackwell, C. W., Daniels, M., Strickland, S. and Vincent-Dobbins, K. (2016). “Documenting Homeric Text-Reuse in the 
                        Deipnosophistae of Athenaeus of Naucratis”. In Bodard, G., Broux, Y. and Tarte, S. (eds), 
                        Digital Approaches and the Ancient World. BICS Themed Issue 59(2): 121-139. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-5370.2016.12042.x
                    
                    
                        Berti, M., Crane, G. R., Yousef, T., Bizzoni, Y., Boschetti, F. and Del Gratta, R. (2016). “
                        Ancient Greek WordNet Meets the 
                        Dynamic Lexicon: the Example of the Fragments of the Greek Historians”. In Mititelu, V.B., Forǎscu, C., Fellbaum, C. and Vossen, P. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the Eighth Global WordNet Conference, Bucharest, Romania, January 27-30. Bucharest, 34-38.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Cosme² is the Consortium Sources Médiévales (linked to TGIR Huma-Num from CNRS : 
                https://cosme.hypotheses.org/ ), it is dedicated to digital approach of the medieval sources, for french mediaevalists. It wants to bring together a large part of the French medievalist community (mainly historians) around the digital processing of medieval sources, mainly written (but not only). Its aims: to gather all mediaevalists around their sources, to build the community by proposing frameworks, standards, ideas around Digital Humanities, in collaboration with the group "Menestrel" 
                http://www.menestrel.fr/ , and help to the creation and publication on line of digital corpora. The complexity of the medieval digital landscape is due to its ancientness: medievalists were among the first to be concerned about the digital processing of their sources. Databases and corpora digitised in various forms are therefore many and varied, many remain dormant or need to be upgraded, others lack metadata, others are no longer online or on outdated media, others lack interoperability, even if their content allows them to do so. The hundreds of thousands of digitised medieval charters are not yet effectively linked. Medievalists were among the first to design electronic publishing platforms (such as TELMA 
                http://www.cn-telma.fr/ or Scripta 
                http://www.unicaen.fr/scripta/ or CBMA 
                http://www.cbma-project.eu/ ) but they are not yet interoperable. These corpora themselves are complex, associated with the sources which are just as complex, by their diversity, by the concepts implemented but also by the chronological span (1000 years of Middle Ages). 
            
            Pioneering strategic choices have been made, such as the adoption of the TEI, but paradoxically many projects stand out from it, because the creation of interoperability no longer necessarily requires fine markings but automatic indexing tools based on complex referentials, fed by artificial intelligence training. The implementation of data exploitation tools, text mining procedures, instruments for extracting named entities and qualifying data within the corpuses of digitised medieval sources, but also the development of tools for analysing these corpuses (distant and close reading), within COSME², make it possible to consider the connection of these complex and still poorly connected corpuses. The development of good practice guides and support manuals, the organisation of summer schools to train researchers in these tools and techniques are essential complements to strengthen this connection. The poster aims to present the complexity of documentary files, corpora and data, the complexity of historical uses and the complexity of the communities concerned, but also to evoke the operations envisaged to solve the complexities of communication and structuring by implementing integrated solutions.
        
    

        
            No cultural artifact lasts forever in a single, static, universal form. Texts change with editors and audiences, and tracking their changes challenges our ways of reading and understanding, heightening awareness of mediations, censorships, interventions, reinventions. Yet, telling the story of change over time in a variorum edition can be tedious, disruptive of joy in the reading experience, alien to the popular experience of “getting lost in a book.” As Brett D. Hirsch and Hugh Craig have discussed of Shakespeare editions, the print variorum has yet to be surpassed for its “highly developed economy of presentation.” (Hirsch and Craig, 2014: 26-27) Can we find a humane way—attuned to readerly impatience and excitement in the reading process—to build an edition that teaches a non-specialist how to read change over time, without sacrificing the standards of textual scholarship? Must digital methods that comprehensively document variation at their best mimic the printed critical edition in burying the experience of change over time to the footnote or the end space? Or, can we design a variorum edition that engages not only scholars but also fans and new readers in the dynamic complexity of a changing text?
            Since the early days of hypertext, Mary Shelley’s novel 
                Frankenstein has inspired experiments using electronic texts that invite new ways of reading. The novel about assembling a new monstrously superior life from dead bodies easily becomes, in the age of computers, a metaphor for attempting to unify a super-text complexly assembled from multiple variant pieces, since the process of computationally comparing texts necessitates editors to identify the smallest meaningful units to align and process. Like Victor Frankenstein's assembly of the Creature from multiple corpses, variorum editors aspire to animate a new composite reading experience. Such was the experiment to make the 1818 and 1831 editions of 
                Frankenstein simultaneously readable in the Pennsylvania Electronic Edition (PAEE) produced by Stuart Curran and Jack Lynch in the mid-1990s. Designed in a framework of small pieces like the hypercard novel popular at the time, the PAEE encouraged the reader to wander between two editions, explore hyperlinked ancillary material, and resequence the novel at will (see 
                http://knarf.english.upenn.edu/Colv1/f1101.html
                ). The transfer of this edition to Romantic Circles, a scholarly web resource in British Romanticism, conserved its textual data without exceeding its early intertextual vision of a complex, particulated reading experience with many reading paths always available (see 
                https://romantic-circles.org/editions/frankenstein). 
            
            Our project to design a new Variorum of 
                Frankenstein began with an encounter with these earlier digital editions. Originally called the “Pittsburgh Digital 
                Frankenstein project,” and inspired by the worldwide bicentennial celebrations of 
                Frankenstein’s first publication, we started work in October 2016 as a voluntary collaboration of Pittsburgh-area digital humanists with the Maryland Institute of Technology in the Humanities to update the 
                Frankenstein edition on Romantic Circles. The original goal was to revise and update the TEI code of the Romantic Circles edition to find ways to connect it with the 
                
                    Shelley-Godwin Archive
                
                
                    's
                
                
                     (S-GA)
                
                
                     diplomatic edition of the 
                
                
                    Frankenstein
                
                
                     notebooks
                . The mission shifted to design a variorum edition to collate five editions of the novel produced in the author’s lifetime, rather than simply to update and interlink the two most famous earlier editions. Our team from the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, and the University of Maryland are now producing a new variorum edition of the novel encoded and published in TEI XML. Inspired in part by Barbara Bordalejo’s 
                Online Variorum of Darwin’s Origin of Species, the 
                Frankenstein Variorum incorporates annotations and visualizations that highlight change over time to guide readers to discover the "hotspot" moments of most intense variation in the novel.
            
            The 
                Frankenstein Variorum is developing a scholarly edition that augments but does not replace previous print and digital editions. Our project pulls earlier editions into a new comparative perspective, to view the elaborately encoded S-GA edition of the manuscript through a variorum interface designed to illuminate where the manuscript contains material lost in later editions, and where later editions preserve or adapt its original content (see Fig.1). At DH2018 and at the Balisage Markup Conference in June and July 2018, Beshero-Bondar and Viglianti presented on the first phase of these efforts: preparing the differently-encoded source documents for computed collation with CollateX and building the foundational structure of the Variorum as a "spine" of standoff pointers into the separate edition files (Beshero-Bondar and Viglianti, 2018). This DH2019 paper addresses a new phase of work: developing a browser-based user interface that incorporates accessibility and responsive design features, inviting visitors to read specific editions, review variants, support edition-specific and cross-edition annotations, and visualize GIS data of the movements of characters, author(s) and co-editors in space and time. 
            
            One of the most complex elements of the 
                Frankenstein Variorum is its application of stand-off XML to point to rather than recreate the diplomatic TEI encoding of the 1816 manuscripts in the S-GA. Our interface should guide readers in navigating the complexity of the edition, how to find its most interesting moments of variation, and how to read the richly encoded textual information about the writing process available in the markup. To help guide the reader, the annotations team on the 
                Frankenstein Variorum seeks to balance contextual annotations (informing about sciences, gender and political contexts, literary allusions relevant to the novel) with a more innovative commentary designed specifically for navigating the Variorum: a set of “tunneling” annotations to highlight internal changes across the five editions. These annotations will augment previous scholarship on the persistence of various hands in the composition, emendation, and revision process. Incorporating these annotations with the variant apparatus poses a challenge for designing our interface that we look forward to discussing in our paper.
            
            The 
                Frankenstein Variorum must support traditional, linear readings of individual editions along with nonlinear explorations of textual comparison through collation units and “tunneling” multi-edition annotations. To achieve this, we build our web interfaces directly on the TEI without transforming it to HTML first. We use CETEIcean, a JavaScript library for publishing TEI documents in the browser, to display the texts, visualize the linkages among 
                Frankenstein’s sources, and scholarly annotations to the TEI-encoded texts (Cayless and Viglianti, 2018). We aspire to the principles of Universal Design (UD) to increase access for those with visual limitations or who require a less cluttered and more responsive interface. We acknowledge the near-impossibility of addressing the variety of user needs and devices used to access web-based content (Godden and Hsy, 2016); yet, if we cannot meet the ideal, we can nevertheless draw on UD principles to expand our audience and inform our creation of vision-sensitive color palettes and adaptive stylesheets for those with difficulty differentiating particular colors or low visual acuity. The UI will be optimized for those using tablets and larger displays, applying Responsive Design to prioritize tablet delivery, limit navigation clutter, and highlight primary features including the text reader, variations table, and annotation window. 
            
            We are refining a method of signaling the level of “heat” or variance of a selection across editions, based on Levenshtein distance (or edit distance), the mathematical calculation of the minimum number of edits required to change one text string into another. We are aware of the limitations of Levenshtein for evaluating intensity of variation, since a change of a single letter or mark may totally change the meaning of a passage, such as the edit distance of 1 between the words “went” and “wept”. Nevertheless, as a convenient method for surveying intensity of edits on a macro scale, edit-distance values prove helpful. The tunneling annotations and overrides to the computed color codes will help to intervene where we discover the Levenshtein values to be less meaningful. Our color-coding system applies the maximum edit-distance based on pairwise comparison of each set of divergent witnesses at given variant locations in the novel, as represented in Figure 1 below.
            
                
            
            Fig. 1: Prototype view of the Frankenstein Variorum interface.
            Features Depicted in Fig 1:
            
                A single text reading window with identifying text and navigation elements for edition, volume, chapter, and page. (Left side)
                Alternate reading frame to review collation sections with navigation by collation unit and source. (Left side, alternate)
                Variations frame holds a table that displays the strings from each edition in a collation table.
                An annotation frame will display relevant annotations for the text selection, including those shared by multiple editions, 
                Color intensity indicates intensity of the variance across a human-mediated ten-value range. Words and passages are encoded using this scale. 
            
            At DH2019 we will share a more complete view of the interface, its annotation apparatus, and visualizations that will help guide the reader to sections where the most intensive editing took place. We look forward to conducting usability testing to enhance the interactivity and responsiveness of the digital interface in the coming months. We hope to provide a user experience that invites Frankenstein fans, new readers, and scholars alike to take pleasure not only in reading multiple 
                Frankensteins but also in reading the story of how this novel changed over time.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Beshero-Bondar, Elisa E., and Raffaele Viglianti. (2018). “Stand-off Bridges in the Frankenstein Variorum Project: Interchange and Interoperability within TEI Markup Ecosystems.” 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2018. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 21. 
                        https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol21.Beshero-Bondar01.
                    
                    
                        Cayless, Hugh, and Raffaele Viglianti. (2018). “CETEIcean: TEI in the Browser.” In 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2018. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 21. 
                        https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol21.Cayless01.
                    
                    
                        Godden, Rick and Jonathan Hsy. (2016). “Universal Design and Its Discontents.” MLA position paper in 
                        Disrupting the Digital Humanities. Eds. Dorothy Kim and Jesse Stommel. 
                        http://www.disruptingdh.com/universal-design-and-its-discontents/
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, Brett D. and Hugh Craig. (2014). “‘Mingled Yarn’: The State of Computing in Shakespeare 2.0.” 
                        Digital Shakespeares: Innovations, Interventions, Mediations. Ed. Brett D. Hirsch and Hugh Craig. Special issue of 
                        The Shakespearean International Yearbook 14: 3-35. 
                        https://hcommons.org/deposits/objects/hc:10794/datastreams/CONTENT/content
                    
                    
                        Williams, George H. (2012). “Disability, Universal Design, and the Digital Humanities” in 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities.
                        http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/44
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Who were the protagonists of 19th century European literature? And what are the promises and pitfalls when it comes to the modelling of the composition and dynamics of historiographical works with the means of network analysis? These are the central questions to be addressed and displayed in this poster. 
            
                Data set
                The text, to which network analysis is applied, is Main Currents of 19th Century Literature (6 vols. 1872-1890) by the Danish literary critic Georg Brandes. Tracing the course of European thought in the first half of the nineteenth century by describing the most important movements in French, German, and English literature, it was a highly influential handbook with translations to several languages (German, English, French, Polish, Russian etc.), whereby Brandes’ somewhat personal and idiosyncratic take on the subject to some extent came to represent a common European frame for the understanding of the literature of the recent past (Larsen 2012). In 1927, Thomas Mann, the German author and Nobel Prize winner, labelled the Main Currents… “the bible of young, intellectual Europe”. 
            
            
                Data organization
                By a thorough, manual TEI-encoding through philologists establishing a digital scholarly edition of the some 3,000 pages work, different opportunities of digital explorations have been enabled and facilitated, not least, network analysis. All some 2000 historical persons featured in the work are tagged and, furthermore, identified to unique IDs, all linked to a relational database with metadata (name, year of birth/date, nationality, profession etc.). For this investigation we automatically construct an edge between two nodes every time the entity occurs in the same paragraph of the text.
            
            
                Analysis
                On the basis of these highly curated and reliable data, the poster aims to show the results of our endeavours to analyse and visualise central and, hopefully, new aspects of Brandes’ vast and complex work. More specifically, and along the lines of modern historiography (White 1973) we want to explore Brandes’ historical writings as texts reliant on strategies of narration and emplotment. 
                Firstly, inspired by network studies of dominance relations in dramatic works (Fischer et al 2018) we want to identify the central characters in Brandes’ display of nineteenth century literature. We will investigate the different common measures for centrality (degree, closeness, betweenness, eigenvector): Which are the most appropriate for our data and why? What can they tell us that we didn't know beforehand? 
                Secondly, and tentatively, following the author’s own characterisation of his work as a “drama in six parts” (Brandes 1972, p. 7), we want to study the dynamic composition of the six volumes with the help of network analysis, by extracting, visualising, analysing and comparing networks of each the six volumes comprising the work, whereby the problems of intertwining the static character of networks with the sequentiality of narrative will be addressed. Already suggested by Moretti 2011 and in recent time discussed and put to use in regards to computational methods (e.g. Fischer et al 2017), the application of network analysis as a tool for quantitative plot analysis has hitherto been restricted to works of fiction. Brandes’ essentially narrative approach to the writing of literary history as well as the biographical and sociological character of his criticism make such a combination of methods highly relevant
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brandes, Georg (1872). 
                        Emigrantlitteraturen. Copenhagen: Gyldendal. 
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Mathias Göbel / Dario Kampkaspar / Christopher Kittel / Peer Trilcke (2017). “Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis: Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts”, 
                        Digital Humanities 2017. Conference Abstracts. Montreal 
                    
                    https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/071/071.pdf
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Peer Trilcke / Christopher Kittel / Carsten Milling / Daniil Skorinkin (2018). “To Catch A Protagonist: Quantitative Dominance Relations In German-Language Drama (1730–1930)”, 
                        Digital Humanities 2018. Conference Abstracts. Mexico City &lt;
                        
                            https://dh2018.adho.org/to-catch-a-protagonist-quantitative-dominance-relations-in-german-language-drama-1730-1930/
                        .&gt;
                    
                    
                        Larsen, Svend Erik (2012). “Georg Brandes: the telescope of comparative literature”. In: Theo D’haen, David Damrosch and Djelal Kadir (eds.). 
                        The Routledge Companion to World Literature. London: Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, Frank (2011). 
                        Network Theory, Plot Analysis. Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets. No. 2, May. &lt;http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet2.pdf&gt; [accessed 27 Nov 2018].
                    
                    
                        White, Hayden (1973). 
                        Metahistory. The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The CITE Architecture is a generic framework for identification, retrieval, and alignment of information about things humanists study. The challenge of a 
                generic framework lies in how it can handle the (literally) innumerable specific kinds of data likely to appear in any non-trivial digital library. CITE allows abstraction of data from specific encodings of that data, while maintaining 
                scholarly identity. This allows a digital library an open-ended ability to incorporate new formats or retrieval methods in a self-documenting plain-text serialization that maintains backwards compatibility. This paper will describe the implementation of 
                Discoverable Data Models and 
                Extended Text Property Types serialized in the CEX format and implemented in applications. Specific examples will be ( a ) geo-spatial data, in which a place can be represented by a URI to a gazetteer, a latitude/longitude pair, or a geoJson string, ( b ) textual data represented as plain-text, Markdown, or as a TEI-XML fragment, and ( c ) image collections, where the same image may be exposed as a JPG on a filesystem, via the IIIF-API, or as a DeepZoom file. CEX, the plain-text exchange format, can serialize collections and allow an application or service to discover these extended types or ignore them gracefully. All tools and data for these examples will be downloadable from GitHub.
            
            Citation of Versioned Collections
            The acronym in the title of the CITE Architecture stands for Collections, Indices, Texts, and Extensions. ‘Texts’ are CTS-compliant texts, that is, texts canonically citable with machine-actionable CTS URNs because they implement the OHCO2 model, “an ordered hierarchy of citation objects.”(Smith and Weaver) ‘Indices’ are simple URN to URN relationships, subject-verb-object relationships akin to RDF triples, with the proviso that subject, verb, and object are canonically citable by machine-actionable URNs. ‘Collections’ are of data objects and may be ordered or unordered.
            The CITE Architecture allows collections of objects to be cited at many levels of abstraction and specificity.
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen: A citation to a notional collection of of botanical specimens collected by Mark Catesby.
            
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018: A citation to a specific version of a collection of of botanical specimens collected by Mark Catesby.
            
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018:223 A citation to a specific specimen in a specific version of the collection.
            
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen:223 A citation to a specific specimen in 
                any version of the collection. This recognizes that the 
                specimen is an object of study that might have different expressions in data.
            
            A version of a CITE Collection is defined by its properties and their values. Each property is citable by URN:
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018.label: The 
                label property in a specific version of a collection.
            
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018.binomial: The 
                binomial property in a specific version of a collection.
            
            An notional object is instantiated in a versioned collection by the sum of properties and their values:
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018.label:223 The 
                label property for object 
                223 in a specific version of a collection.
            
            
                urn:cite2:botcar:catesbySpecimen.2018.binomial:223 The 
                binomial property for object 
                223 in a specific version of a collection.
            
            Two versions of a notional collection need not have the same properties.
            Properties are 
                typed, at a very low level. CITE defines valid types as:
            
            String (optionally with a controlled vocabulary)
            Boolean
            Number
            Cite2Urn
            CtsUrn
            Compositions of Scholarly Primitives
            The CITE Architecture defines 
                scholarly primitives: texts, or objects in versioned collections. Objects in versioned collections consist of a set of typed properties, with a very limited number of types.
            
            This makes the CITE Architecture flexible and relatively simple: libraries for working with two types of URN, libraries for manipulating corpora of texts, and libraries for dealing with objects in collections, libraries for managing relations of URN to URN.
            All CITE data—texts, objects, and relations—can be expressed in plain text, and CEX, the Cite Exchange format, can serialize a digital library, or a part of a digital library, as plain text. CITE-aware services or applications can load data from CEX. 
                
                    the Homer Multitext’s interactive web-application
                , the 
                
                    Homer Multitext’s microservice
                 and 
                
                    more specific applications exposing digital libraries for teaching
                , all read CEX files as their input.
            
            Extensions I: Connecting to the Physical World
            The ‘E’ in CITE is “Extensions”, additional discoverable information providing richer interaction with the basic scholarly primitives.
            A CITE Collection can describe a collection of images. A very basic image collection might have the properties 
                label, 
                license, and 
                caption.
            
            Clearly, while we can serialize this information easily as plain-text in CEX, resolving a URN to binary image data requires a connection to the physical world. A notional ‘image’ might be resolved to a JPG file, to data delivered by the IIIF API, to a DeepZoom file, or to any combination of these.
            CITE and CEX solve this problem by means of “discoverable data models”, additional data (expressed as generic CITE collections) that can identify specific collections of images as being served by one or more binary image services. In this case, an additional Binary Image Service collection associates a collection with:
            A type of image service (JPG file, IIIF-API, DeepZoom)
            A URL to a service hosting images from the collection
            Filepath information necessary to resolve an image’s URN to files on the server.
            A working example of this is 
                
                    the Homer Multitext’s interactive web-application
                . The 
                
                    CEX of the HMT’s data release
                 identifies image collections as being expose both as DeepZoom files and via the IIIF-API. The web-application takes advantage of both of these to provide thumbnail views and interactive zooming views.
            
            Extensions II: Different Expressions of Textual Data
            An object in a version of a collection might have a property of type 
                string, and that is easily discoverable with the basic CITE tools. But of course, a 
                string might be plain text, Markdown, some form of XML, or some other encoding. It is easy to imagine a project publishing a version of a collection of comments as plain-text, and subsequently publishing a new version that adds some markup to those comments.
            
            Because the CITE2 URN allows identification of notional collections, versioned collections, individual properties in versioned collections, in each case across the collection or filtered by an object’s identifier, we can expose additional information about the nature of a property of type 
                string.
            
            By means of a discoverable data model, just as we associated whole collections of images with different binary image services, we can associate properties with different encodings, without losing scholarly identity. This paper will demonstrate a notional Collection of comments on the text of Herodotus, expressed in three different versions: one with comments in plain-text, one with comments formatted as Markdown, and one with comments formatted as TEI-XML fragements. These 
                discoverable extended string property types are ignored by any application that is unaware of them, but exploited for human display by applications that are aware of them.
            
            As a working example of 
                discoverable extended string property types, we can point to a CITE Library of lexicon data, based on the openly licensed XML versions of the 
                
                    Liddell-Scott-Jones Greek Lexicon
                , the 
                
                    Lewis &amp; Short Latin Dictionary
                , and 
                
                    Strong’s Hebrew Lexicon
                . Data for each of these serialized in a CEX file, and served through a Microservice. Querying the service shows that the lexicon entries, of type 
                StringType can be read as plain-text: 
                
                    http://folio2.furman.edu/lex/objects/urn:cite2:hmt:lsj.chicago_md:n2389
                . But because this collection identifies that property as extended by 
                Markdown, an aware application can process the plain-text expression and apply formatting: 
                
                    http://folio2.furman.edu/lsj/index.html?urn=urn:cite2:hmt:lsj.chicago_md:n2389
                .
            
            Extensions III: Different Expressions of Real World Data
            Digital Gazetteers such as the Pleiades project[^pleiades] have solved the problem of scholarly identity across historically diverse placenames, so ‘Naulochon’, ‘Smyrna’, and ‘Izmir’, different names for the same place, are canonically citable as 
                https://pleiades.stoa.org/places/550771. But for very sound technological reasons, we might want to express the location of Izmir by 
                550771, by its full Pleiades URI, by 
                38.440912, 27.14781, by 
                27.14781, 38.440912, by 
                {"type": "FeatureCollection", "features": [{"type": "Feature", "properties": {}, "geometry": {"type": "Point", "coordinates": [27.14781, 38.440912 ] } } ] }, or by 
                &lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;&lt;kml xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/kml/2.2"&gt;&lt;Document&gt;&lt;Placemark&gt;&lt;ExtendedData&gt;&lt;/ExtendedData&gt;&lt;Point&gt;&lt;coordinates&gt;27.14781,38.440912&lt;/coordinates&gt;&lt;/Point&gt;&lt;/Placemark&gt;&lt;/Document&gt;&lt;/kml&gt;.
            
            A collection of, for example, “ancient places mentioned in Herodotus”, as a publication should separate the notional scholarly objects—'Sardis', ‘Athens'—from any particular technology for locating those objects on a map. The CITE extended string property types allows different versions of such a collection to record locations in any of a variety of formats, or to mix formats within a single expression, 
                e.g. latitude and longitude for a simple point, with geoJson for describing regions. The presentation will include a demonstration dataset illustrating this.
            
            Conclusion
            CEX, as a line-based, plain-text serialization of diverse data—texts, collections, relations—is a convenient, future-proof, and open means of data exchange for small projects and large project. ( The 
                Homer Multitext 2018g release is published as a 73,000 line CEX file. ) With 
                discoverable-data-models and 
                extended-text-property-types, CEX can serve data in a variety of current and future formats; these formats are discoverable by applications that, but degrade gracefully back to generic, plain-text in generic CITE applications. The talk will point to example CEX files and applications, on GitHub, demonstrating these capabilities with scholarly data.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        D. Neel Smith and Gabriel Weaver, “Applying Domain Knowledge from Structured Citation Formats to Text and Data Mining: Examples Using the CITE Architecture,” 
                        Text Mining Services, 2009, 129.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The introduction of computerized methods for philological analysis is compounded by the richness, complexity and multidimensional nature of literary texts. As it has been coined by Ju.M. Lotman, the arts should be considered as a secondary modelling system, whilst the natural language is a primary one. (Lotman 1967). Computational models allow to extract and analyse linguistic features of the text - POS tagging, syntactic structures, word frequency, and semantic domains of word classes. Meanwhile the most important elements of textual poetics remain outside the scope of application of these tools. As a result, the most rapid development of computational methods for literary study is observed in the field of computational stylistics and stylometry (Burrows, 2002), (Rybicki, 2006), (Eder, 2015), (Franzini et al., 2018), and thematic modelling (Jockers, 2015), (Schöch, 2017), which may be deployed using bag of words approach only without any specific textual mark-up. 
            It seems that one of the most important reasons why distant reading methods are still not regarded as a mainstream in literary scholarships and are often looked at with suspicion by traditional philologists is their extremely difficult access to textual complexity, the layers of the secondary modeling system. In fact, even in the cases of modelling some complicated phenomena such as social networks of characters or plot elements extraction, the studies are more concerned on engineering but not on the research issues, which means elaboration of computational but not literary analysis methods. 
            This paper aims to introduce a new approach to the task of capturing textual complexity. We use five methods to model the character system in a novel, each one is aimed to discover one of the layers of this system. The combination of these layers gives as a result a complex view on the novel's composition enriched by computationally obtained data, quantitative and statistical metrics and graphical schemes and networks We apply slylometric and alternative non-lexical analysis to characters' direct speech, two alternative methods of network analysis to model characters interactions and clustering method for comparison of portrait descriptions in Leo Tolstoy's “War and Peace". The Tolstoy's great novel which counts hundreds of characters among which several dozen may be viewed as prominent, serves a perfect material for such a study. We claim that with the help of 
                the complex layer analysis we can reveal some new structural constituents of the novel composition, that could not be captured by traditional (close reading) interpretations of Tolstoy's poetics. 
            
            
                Preliminary preparations 
                The complex layer analysis of the character system requires thorough and precise mark-up. All automatic or semi-automatic mark-up has been checked and corrected manually if needed. First of all, all the characters have been encoded with TEI labels. This procedure was also important as far as the characters may be referred to by several different names (сf. Pierre, Bezuchov, Petr Kirillovich) and anaphorical pronouns. Secondly, all the dialogues in the novel have been identified and connected to speakers (characters) and their TEI labels. Finally, all the portrait descriptions have been elicited with the help of semantic mark-up, borrowed from the National Corpus of the Russian Language (Toldova et al., 2008). Next stage of the portraits mark-up involved encoding one of the four types of Tolstoy's way of designation of his characters' appearances - metaphorical, emotional, portrait, and value expression. Each sentence of the description was also supported by the integral sentiment assessment (positive, negative, oxymoron and neutral) 
            
            
                Methodology 
                Three major traits of literary characters have been studied with the help of computational means: speech, portrait and social interactions.
                Two methods have been used for character speech analysis. The first method exploits basic stylometric analysis (delta). It measures the distance between direct speech of different characters by calculating the distribution of top keywords for speech sentences of every prominent character. The stylometric method refers to the layer of topical connections between the characters in the novel. The main oppositions which are set by this method are the oppositions between men and women, and between the Moscow and Saint-Petersburg circles. 
                The second method presents an alternative to the stylometric approach. It compares non-lexical characteristics of the direct speech sentences, such as ratio of words and punctuation in a speech sentence, exclamation and question marks, frequency of discourse words and readability score. These parameters differentiate the characters by their manner of speech, in particular distinguishing "oral" and "written" types of sayings as a principal opposition. Each considered character has been defined by a vector, which accumulates the mean value of all the parameters. The clustering model brings together the vectors with closest distance. The PCA analysis shows that this layer is sensitive to family similarity, as it opposes Natasha and Nikolay Rostovs to Andrey Bolkonsky and his sister Princess Mary. 
                The analysis of portraits was also based on vector clustering. This method builds the vectors for each prominent character out of two metrics: the first one combined the normalized frequency values of each type of portrait description, the second referred to the frequency values of four types of sentiment assessment. The hierarchical tree of this layer brought together the vectors of the main pairs of the novel: Pierre and Natasha, and Nikolay and Marya. Surprisingly the analysis also revealed intrinsic similarity between the two "bad guys" of the novel: Napoleon and Dolokhov. This layer concerns concealed parallelism in Tolstoy’s way of thinking and describing his characters. 
                The social interaction has been measured by two semantic networks built on different bases. The first method sets the connection between the characters that talk to each other. This network reveals the main communities of the novel, the characters that have intensive communications cluster together. One could suppose that the layer captured by this network reflects the family dramatical part of the plot. 
                The second method sets as a connection the fact of two characters mentioned together. The two networks differ in a crucial way, in particular within the war parts, where the dialogue communications happen less often then in the peaceful parts. This layer stands for the epic part of the novel, thus Napoleon and Kutuzov form one cluster here, though they never communicate and are at utmost distance from each other on the previous network. 
            
            
                Discussion 
                The five layers of the character system in ”War and Peace" are defined by the five different methods of computational analysis of literary text. All the methods are in no way new to digital humanities: stylometry, clustering, PCA, corpus and network analysis. The important conclusion needs to be emphasized: all the methods when applied to clean, well marked up data give different results and lead the researcher to different interpretations. At the same time the masterpiece contains all the interpretations within itself. To say more the inner architecture of the text supports and interconnects in a very sophisticated way all the interpretative layers. This point may be proven by the following example. If we consider the whole novel excluding the epilogue, we may see that the speech and network layers group the five main characters of the novel (Natasha, Pierre, Andrey, Nikolay and Princess Mary) differently, but no grouping reflects the romantic relationships of the novel. 
                
                    
                
                Figure 1. Connections/proximity of the five main characters, revealed by the 4 layers of speech and interaction analyses of the novel without the epilogue: no romantic relations reflected on these layers 
                
                    
                
                Figure 2. Connections added by the analysis of the epilogue (dashed lines) reveal the romantic connections of the main characters)
                It is in the epilogue where the whole construction gets the stability and the romantic attractions of the characters are openly demonstrated to the reader. The Prince Andrey, though not alive in the epilogue, is still mentioned a lot in the talks of Natasha and Pierre, thus the romantic triangle which has never been defined explicitly during the novel is resolved in the epilogue. Amazingly, the fifth layer not mentioned above, which reflects the way Tolstoy depicts and presents his characters, sets the connection between the members of the two happy families of the epilogue from the very beginning. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burrows, J. (2002). ‘Delta’: a Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 3:267–287.
                    
                    
                        Eder M., (2017). Visualization in stylometry: Cluster analysis using networks, Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 1: 50-64.
                    
                    
                        Franzini, G., Kestemont, M., Rotari, G., Jander, M., Ochab, J.K., Franzini, E., Byszuk, J., Rybicki, J. (2018). Attributing Authorship in the Noisy Digitized Correspondence of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Frontiers in Digital Humanities, published 05 April, 2018: https://doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2018.00004
                    
                    
                        Jockers M. , (2015). Revealing Sentiment and Plot Arcs with the Syuzhet Package http://web.archive.org/web/20181116084544/http://www.matthewjockers.net/2015/02/02/syuzhes/ (accessed 16 November, 2018)
                    
                    
                        Lotman Ju.M., (1967) Statji po semiotike kultury i isskustva (Papers on semiotics of culture and art), Uchenye Zapisli Tartuskogo Universiteta, 198: 130-145. 
                    
                    
                        Rybicki J., (2006). Burrowing into Translation: Character Idiolects in Henryk Sienkiewicz’s Trilogy and its Two English Translations, Literary and Linguistic Computing. 1:91–103. 
                    
                    
                        Schöch C., (2017) Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama, Digital Humanities Quarterly. 2:1–53. 
                    
                    
                        Toldova S.Ju, Kustova G.I, Lyashevskaya O.N., (2008) Semanticheskie filtry dlia razreshenia mnogoznachnosti v nacionalnom korpuse russkogo jazyka (Semantic filters for word sense disambiguation in the Russian National Corpus), Computational linguistics and intellectual technologies, Moscow, RGGU, pp. 522-29. 
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The medieval civilization can only be investigated by means of the study of traces that have survived to our times. The best source of our knowledge is the texts, preserved in huge quantity and variety. Written mainly in Medieval Latin, they have not benefited from recent advances in computational linguistics and digital humanities in general. The paper briefly presents and reports on the early development of the project 
                VELUM – Visualisation, Exploration et Liaison de ressources innovantes pour le latin médiéval.
            
            The ANR-funded project (2018-2022) is a first step towards an innovative digital environment for the study of the language and culture of medieval Europe. It has a challenging and ambitious goal: to build foundations for empirical research in medieval culture, language and history, by providing an appropriate environment for textual source analysis. We aim at building, firstly, a large (100 M tokens) balanced corpus of Medieval Latin texts composed between 500 and 1500 AD all across Europe. In order to assess the population that we would like our corpus to reflect, we rely mainly on the most comprehensive list of Medieval Latin texts, namely the 
                Index Scriptorum Mediae Latinitatis (Blatt, 1973; Bon, 2005).
            
            A representative corpus should make it possible to avoid the bias that affect existing text collections, resulting from uneven and unjustified distribution of sources of different date, genre and place of composition. For example, medievalists have at their disposal big digital text collections, but none has been conceived in order to give an idea of the whole production in Medieval Latin in its variety (see References: Text Corpora). They tend to focus either on specific domains (e.g. theological texts vs. diplomas and charters) or territories (e.g. Catalan vs. Polish texts). As to the chronological variation, the texts written before 1200 are generally far better represented than the texts of the Later Middle Ages. The corpus will also attempt at remedying another shortcoming of existing text collections: since they usually are not balanced, they do not lend themselves to any sound statistical analysis (both syn- and diachronic). Apart from wide geographical and temporal coverage, the corpus will also reflect the variety of genres practised in the Middle Ages, as well as the functional richness of the medieval textual culture. In order to enable automatic processing, the texts will be annotated with part-of-speech, lemma, time and place labels. The compilation and annotation of the corpus, albeit extremely important, will be only a first step of the project.
            Secondly, a corpus search engine will be built with the help of the CQP-Web software. The users will be able to query the texts and benefit from their rich linguistic annotation through a user-friendly interface. Thirdly, the project aims at developing a set of efficient statistical analysis and data visualisation tools that researchers would embed in their own workflows. Written mostly in R, scripts, programs, wrapper functions will allow for advanced study of Medieval Latin vocabulary, but will be applicable to other languages as well. Both the texts and the tools will be made freely available to the scientific community through the project’s website and public code repositories.
            After the brief presentation of the project’s goals, we will report on the workflow and the first results of the project that has started in March 2018. During less than two years, we intend to cover every aspect of corpus compilation from digitizing paper edition to linguistic annotation of the machine-readable texts. The first stage started with intensive work of cleaning and structuring the texts; some of them already are available in interoperable formats, but many are not. Our first work consisted, then, in selecting and retrieving about 1500 scholarly editions of Medieval Latin texts, among others from the Web. Image files which drastically differed in quality needed to be cleaned and standardized. To that purpose we employed a set of optimization scripts and tools such as ScanTailor. The TIFF files were next sent to the OCR engine. We chose the Tesseract-4 as our OCR engine for both its accurateness and performance. The quality of the OCRed text was optimized through error profiling and selective manual proofreading with the latest version of the Post Correction Tool software. The PoCoTo software addresses the problem of recurrent OCR errors by making easier both their detection and batch correction by even less technically-oriented users.
            
                
                    
                Figure : Using PoCoTo for OCR correction
            
            The next phase of this early development will consist mainly in separating Latin from non-Latin text. The text blocks will be automatically annotated with ‘Latin’ or ‘Non-Latin’ labels by using a simple classifier. We will next employ Transkribus to verify the results of the automatic classification and to manually remove redundant text blocks such as editorial introductions, footnotes, indexes etc. After that, the texts will be exported to the TEI-XML format and annotated with metadata. Once a rough representativeness and balance of this corpus is achieved, the texts will be lemmatized and PoS-tagged using the Treetagger with the parameters developed for Medieval Latin during the “Omnia” Project (
                http://glossaria.eu).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        B
                        latt, F. (1973). 
                        Index Scriptorum novus Mediae Latinitatis. Hafniae: Ejnar Munksgaard.
                    
                    
                        Bon
                        , 
                        B
                        . (2005). 
                        Index Scriptorum novus Mediae Latinitatis, Supplementum (1973-2005). Genève: Librairie Droz.
                    
                    
                        Corpora. 
                        Catalan texts: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Corpora. 
                        Diplomas &amp; charters: 
                        https://deeds.library.utoronto.ca, 
                        http://philologic.cbma-project.eu
                    
                    
                        Corpora. 
                        Polish texts: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Corpora. 
                        Theological texts: 
                        http://documentacatholicaomnia.eu, 
                        
                    
                    
                        Tools. 
                        PoCoTo: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Tools. 
                        ScanTailor: 
                        http://scantailor.org
                    
                    
                        Tools. 
                        Tesseract: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Tools. 
                        Transkribus: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Tools. 
                        Treetagger: 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The annotation and linking of Named Entities - be it People, Places, or other proper names - in novels is an important task both for the creation of quality Digital Editions as well as for Digital Literary Stylistics and Spatial Humanities, which largely rely on Distant Reading techniques involving among other things spatialisation (Gregory et al., 2015) and network analysis (Elson et al., 2010). 
            Automatic NERC (Named Entity Recognition and Classification) algorithms can be crucial in this sense, but they are often developed and tested on contemporary newspaper corpora and need to be adapted. As to NEL (Named Entity Linking), namely the task of referencing entities with links to external Knowledge Bases (KB), the additional issue arises of finding the correct reference base containing knowledge from the past.
            Also, the question of formats is crucial; the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) is the format of choice for most digital editions in the humanities, but the majority of existing Natural Language Processing tools are not suited to support this type of input and require specific formats such as CONLL, which weren’t built to preserve text structure. 
            In this poster, we describe a pipeline combining two different tools - SEM for NERC (Dupont, 2017) and REDEN for NEL (Brando et al., 2016; Frontini et al., 2016) - and its adaptation for the annotation of 19th century French novels. This work is set within the context of a larger initiative aiming at creating a “Time Machine” project for the city of Paris, following the example of the “Venice Time machine” (di Lenardo and Kaplan, 2015). The input of the pipeline is an XML-TEI edition and the output is an enriched version with tagged and identified Named Entities. REDEN provides also the necessary input for a dynamic cartography, based on information in the KB.
            
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Figure 1 - The overall pipeline.
            
            
                
                The corpus consists of the first two chapters of 
                Le Ventre de Paris
                 
                (Zola, 1873) and the first chapter of 
                Cesar Birotteau
                 
                (Balzac, 1837), the size is 30,889 words and both texts were annotated for places and fictional characters by two separate annotators; an inter-annotator agreement of 0,91 (F-measure) indicates a strong overall agreement. An Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI) was added for those place names for which a reference existed in the KB.
            
            
                SEM
                 
                is a machine learning system based on conditional random fields (CRF) models; its default French model for NER performs poorly on our corpus. We thus re-trained SEM using our gold standard, and evaluated the domain adaptation with two setups: 
            
            
                Setup1: training on the first chapter of Zola and tested on the second one 
                
                    Setup2: training on the Zola subcorpus and tested on Balzac.
                
            
            
                
                    
                    Setup 1
                    Setup 2
                
                
                    Precision
                    1
                    0,7
                
                
                    Recall
                    0,69
                    0,26
                
                
                    F-measure
                    0,82
                    0,38
                
            
            Results for Setup 1 are quite encouraging: they show that the model trained on one chapter performs very well on another. This means it could  in principle suffice to manually annotate (or correct) one chapter to obtain a system that can annotate the rest of the novel with an acceptable accuracy. Results for Setup 2 show that even two novels that are relatively close from a temporal, geographical and stylistic point of view are sufficiently different to cause an important drop in performance when the model trained on one is applied on the other, with important consequences for our ongoing work to constitute an adapted NERC model for 19th century French novels.
            
                REDEN
                 
                relies on graph-based algorithms and on Semantic Web technologies (see Figure 2), and like many NEL algorithms, is composed of two phases, candidate retrieval and disambiguation. It was designed for DH applications and is adaptable to various domains thanks to the possibility of using different KBs.
            
            
                
                    
                Figure 2 - The REDEN model.
            
            
                For this experiment, REDEN was tested on the task of referencing 
                placeNames
                , using three different Kbs (see table below), a complete description of the evaluation metrics used in this table, and which are commonly used for NEL, can be found in Brando et al., (2016). The best configuration in terms of overall accuracy is the one using Wikidata; however, 
                BnF
                 
                is a more accurate source of information for old place names (e.g. it records the older name “château de Bicêtre” for the “fort de Bicêtre”). Disambiguation accuracy is an interesting measure when there is more than one candidates for a place mention, and for Wikidata the value is strong. Weak values on NIL precision tell us that REDEN, which uses exact string match for retrieving candidates, sometimes misses the correct referent, and needs to be improved in this respect.
            
            
                
                    
                        KB
                    
                    Candidate Precision
                    Candidate recall
                    NIL precision
                    NIL recall
                    Disambiguation accuracy
                    Overall linking accuracy
                
                
                    DBpedia
                    1
                    
                        
                        0,816
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            0,367
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            1
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            none
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            0,834
                        
                    
                
                
                    BNF
                    0,76
                    0,63
                    0,58
                    0,97
                    1
                    0,7
                
                
                    Wikidata
                    0,91
                    0,83
                    0,44
                    1
                    1
                    0,85
                
            
            Geo-visualisation
            
                Once the digital edition is enriched with 
                placeName
                 
                tags, REDEN allows for the exploration of the spatial dimension of texts by retrieving structured information about places. For instance, in Wikidata, resources are described according to an ontology which contains properties for coordinate locations &lt;https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P625&gt;, images &lt;https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P18&gt;. By dereferencing IRIs, it is possible to access values for the aforementioned properties and use them in the context of a Web mapping application thereby to project places as points onto a map along with media or facts about these places (see Figures below). 
            
            
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                 
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Brando, C., Frontini, F. and Ganascia, J.-G.
                         
                        (2016). REDEN: Named Entity Linking in Digital Literary Editions Using Linked Data Sets. 
                        Complex Systems Informatics and Modeling Quarterly
                        , 
                        0
                        (7): 60–80.
                    
                    
                        Boeglin, N., Depeyre, M., Joliveau, T. and Le Lay, Y.-F.
                         
                        (2016). Pour une cartographie romanesque de Paris au XIXe siècle. Proposition méthodologique. 
                        Conférence Spatial Analysis and GEOmatics
                        . (Actes de La Conférence SAGEO’2016 - Spatial Analysis and GEOmatics). Nice, France
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        (accessed 24 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Dupont, Y.
                         
                        (2017). Exploration de traits pour la reconnaissance d’entités nommées du Français par apprentissage automatiqu. Proceedings of RECITAL.
                    
                    
                        Elson, D. K., Dames, N. and McKeown, K. R.
                         
                        (2010). Extracting Social Networks from Literary Fiction. 
                        Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
                        . (ACL ’10). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational 
                        Linguistics, pp. 138–147
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        (accessed 24 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Frontini, F., Brando, C. and Ganascia, J. G.
                         
                        (2016). REDEN ONLINE: Disambiguation, Linking and Visualisation of References in TEI Digital Editions. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts
                        . Kraków: Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University, pp. 193–97
                        
                             
                        
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Gregory, I., Donaldson, C., Murrieta-Flores, P. and Rayson, P.
                         
                        (2015). Geoparsing, GIS and textual analysis: current developments in spatial humanities research. 
                        International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing
                        , 
                        9
                        (1): 1–14 doi:
                        
                            10.3366/ijhac.2015.0135
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Lenardo, I. di and Kaplan, F.
                         
                        (2015). Venice Time Machine : Recreating the density of the past. https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/214895 (accessed 25 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Piatti, B., Bär, H. R., Reuschel, A.-K., Hurni, L. and Cartwright, W.
                         
                        (2009). Mapping Literature: Towards a Geography of Fiction. 
                        Cartography and Art
                        . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 1--16
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        (accessed 11 January 2016).
                    
                    
                        Piper, A., Algee-Hewitt, M., Sinha, K., Ruths, D. and Vala, H.
                         
                        (2017). Studying Literary Characters and Character Networks. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017, DH 2017, Conference 
                        Abstracts, McGill University &amp; Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada, August 8-11, 2017
                        
                             
                        
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Vala, H., Jurgens, D., Piper, A. and Ruths, D.
                         
                        (2015). Mr. Bennet, his coachman, and the Archbishop walk into a bar but only one of them gets recognized: On The Difficulty of Detecting Characters in Literary Texts. 
                        Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
                        . Lisbon, Portugal: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 769–774
                        
                             
                        
                        
                         
                        (accessed 24 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The CWRC-Writer XML/RDF editor is the centerpiece of the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC) platform for the production, hosting, and dissemination of digital humanities scholarship. In development since 2011 and launched with the platform in 2016, the browser-based editor has reached maturity and stability. Well prior to this, the team had begun strategizing towards sustainability. We outline this strategy while highlighting features of the editor.
            Compared to some outcomes of digital dumanities tool building – such as gaining new insights into one’s own research – the effort of turning a tool into a sustainable, generalized service is less glamorous, more laborious, and less acknowledged. Tool-building is considered part and parcel of the scholarly work of DH 
                (Schreibman and Hanlon, 2010) and is beginning to be recognized by academic reward systems. Yet scant support and rewards accrue once software is up and running. This situation has changed little over the years, despite increasing concern regarding digital infrastructure sustainability generally 
                (Eghbal, 2016; Maron and Pickle, 2014) and attention to “care and repair” within DH 
                (Nowviskie, 2015; Sayers). Like all software, DH tools require maintenance, enhancement and updates, which is to say, continued funding and expertise. 
            
            Pursuing uptake seems like a natural approach to the sustainability dilemma, since:
            
                it is easier to demonstrate the success of a tool and to justify further resource allocation in light of increases in use; and
                adopters of a tool are invested in its survival and might put resources towards sustainability.
            
            However, uptake is no guarantee of sustainability. As observed by Cameron Neylon, many scholarly infrastructures are public goods, and “Finding sustainability models to support them is a challenge due to free-loading, where someone who does not contribute to the support of an infrastructure nonetheless gains the benefit of it” 
                (2017: 3). Nevertheless, unused tools are poorly positioned to request continued funding or support.
            
            The uptake or adoption of existing DH software by new users is far from guaranteed, even if it fulfills a need that it is well-documented in the research community where it originates. Fred Gibbs and Trevor Owens crystallize the ways in which tool uptake is hindered by multiple factors 
                (2012). Significant problems include:
            
            
                
                    managing expectations, while also scaling up functionality from local to more general needs (Koeser and Hicks, 2018);
                
                limited 
                    learning resources (examples, user documentation);
                
                unintuitive or complex 
                    user interfaces that discourage novice users;
                
                lack of support for 
                    standards and interoperability.
                
                community building
            
            Together with more mundane but important activities like code maintenance, stable hosting, and systems administration, these factors create challenges that can prove fatal to promising technologies. Some are proclaimed at digital humanities conferences but seldom heard from again, while others like Paper Machines 
                (Guldi and Johnson-Roberson, 2012) show immense promise but do not develop into fully robust tools. Even mature tools with uptake from a wide range of users, such as Gephi, live quite precarious lives 
                (Jacomy, 2018). In short, the challenges of sustaining tools are manifold. We use the above points as a rubric for reflecting on CWRC-Writer’s engagement with the challenges of uptake.
            
            
                Scaling features and expectations 
                The modular CWRC-Writer exists in several types of installation to suit users from novices to technical experts: 
                
                    CWRC-Writer: available to researchers within the CWRC platform, where it is integrated with an Islandora repository, 
                    Git-Writer (
                        cwrc-writer.cwrc.ca): uses GitHub’s file storage, versioning, and authentication to allow anyone to edit GitHub-hosted XML documents (Fig. 1).
                    
                    Installations by third parties in other software stacks.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                
                Fig. 1. Git-Writer document loading interface
                To support a wide variety of users, CWRC-Writer provides these core features:
                
                    an interface that renders XML in a human-readable layout using CSS (Fig. 2);
                    XML tagging, with or without tags showing, with validation and error identification;
                    raw/source XML editing for experts;
                    entities tagging in XML and/or Web Annotation RDF with built-in authority lookups.
                
                Members of the DH community, as well as literary and cultural studies scholars using XML for their texts, were involved from the beginning in the design of the tool. The user group comprises both power-users – researchers with decades of experience in markup – and novice or occasional users with little familiarity with DH. CWRC-Writer was designed from the outset as a light-weight editor to allow novices to tag XML documents and link them to named entity authorities, such as the Virtual International Authority File, in a manner that would avoid the steep learning curve associated with other, more complex editing tools 
                    (Brown, 2015). 
                
                This lightweight usage is our main use case. CWRC-Writer does not aim to replace a full-featured XML editor for heavy-duty markup or transformations. The complexity of managing XML through an HTML front-end mean that major restructuring, for instance, is very tricky. To ensure that available affordances are aligned with the needs of the users, CWRC-Writer offers three different editing modes: 
                
                    A default combined XML &amp; RDF mode creates both XML tags and Web Annotations identifying entities in the same span of text; 
                        external named entity identifiers are mapped onto the equivalent tags within supported XML schemas - which include established 
                        
                            TEI customizations
                        
                         and other schemas employed by CWRC-supported projects. 
                    
                    RDF-only mode for Web Annotations that leave the body of the XML file untouched.
                    XML-only mode for tagging without adding any Web Annotations. 
                
                
                    
                
                Fig. 2. CWRC-Writer document showing application of CSS
                In conjunction with particular user communities, we are extending CWRC-Writer functionality based on a document’s schema declaration; for example, for EpiDoc files, a popup editor for translations will allow users to create or tag a translation while viewing it side-by-side with the original. To support transcription, side-by-side display of the XML and images allows transcribers to view the scanned manuscript within the tool (Fig. 3).
                
                    
                
                
                    Fig. 3. Editing interface (XML &amp; RDF mode) with side-by-side display of manuscript scan
                    
                
            
            
                Learning resources
                We mitigate the challenge of a new interface by providing extensive, searchable 
                    
                        user documentation
                     (produced with the DITA documentation standard) and 
                    
                        tutorial videos
                    , as well as virtual office hours for real-time support. Learning to apply markup is a major challenge for the uninitiated, so there are sandbox templates for fooling around. Projects can create customized document templates that can be used to kickstart content creation and editing. These can provide highly detailed instructions, in order to promote consistency and best practices. 
                
            
            
                A user-friendly interface 
                From 2012 on, CWRC-Writer has undergone successive rounds of user testing, which have informed feature development and UX improvements. Two extensive rounds of survey-based user-testing were conducted before 2016, followed by numerous informal consultations and feedback from users and workshop participants. CWRC-Writer code is available in GitHub and a ticketing template allows adopters to submit both feature requests and bug reports. Formal announcement of the GitHub version in 2019 will be followed by another round of systematic user testing. 
            
            
                Standards and interoperability 
                CWRC-Writer editor adheres to the standards for both markup and Web Annotation. An integrated XML validator allows users to validate against the declared schema as they work on the document. TEI is supported in all version of the editor. RDF annotations adhere to the Web Annotation Data model, a W3C Recommendation that is being widely adopted within DH and in the scholarly publishing community as a standard for annotation data.
            
            
                Promoting a community of users 
                In addition to passive adopters, who employ CWRC-Writer as made available through CWRC or GitHub, we have projects joining CWRC primarily thanks to its integration of the editor with other tools. There is growing interest from members of the DH community considering it for use in TEI editing projects, as components of library-based DH tool suites, or for teaching XML. The Center of Digital Humanities Research at Texas A&amp;M has produced a containerized version and has installed it on top of Fedora 4 as part of a larger toolkit. Bucknell University is installing a version of the Git-Writer to support diverse local DH projects, and other institutional installations are planned. External partners were consulted for the development of Git-Writer, and the code is configurable, modular, and well documented in order to permit installation in a range of software environments. Users currently cohere around specific projects. We hope a broader CWRC-Writer community will develop as numbers grow, and be joined by a community of developers familiar with and willing to contribute to upkeep. However, the experience of other projects indicates that this is a major challenge.
            
            
                Future developments
                CWRC-Writer has for several years now, since its launch within CWRC, been thinking hard about how to promote uptake and long-term sustainability. Our development roadmap is constructed around current and oncoming user needs. We will continue to adapt our strategy in response to insights gained from further user testing and feedback from the community following the launch of the Git-Writer to the DH community.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brown, S. (2015). Remediating the Editor. 
                        Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 
                        40(1): 78–94 doi:10.1179/0308018814Z.000000000106.
                    
                    
                        Eghbal, N. (2016). 
                        Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure. Ford Foundation https://fordfoundcontent.blob.core.windows.net/media/2976/roads-and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behind-our-digital-infrastructure.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. and Owens, T. (2012). Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward broader audiences and user-centered designs. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        006(2).
                    
                    
                        Guldi, J. and Johnson-Roberson, C. (2012). 
                        Paper Machines. http://papermachines.org/.
                    
                    
                        Jacomy, M. (2018). Is Gephi obsolete? Situation and perspectives. 
                        Gephi Blog https://gephi.wordpress.com/2018/11/01/is-gephi-obsolete-situation-and-perspectives/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Koeser, R. S. and Hicks, Benamin (2018). Bridging Digital Humanities Internal and Open Source Software Projects through Reusable Building Blocks. Mexico City, Mexico https://dh2018.adho.org/en/bridging-digital-humanities-internal-and-open-source-software-projects-through-reusable-building-blocks/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Maron, N. L. and Pickle, S. (2014). 
                        Sustaining the Digital Humanities Host Institution Support beyond the Start-Up Phase. ITHAKA.
                    
                    
                        Neylon, C. (2017). Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The Lessons that Olson can Teach us. 
                        KULA: Knowledge Creation, Dissemination, and Preservation Studies, 
                        1(1): 3 doi:10.5334/kula.7.
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2015). On capacity and care 
                        Bethany Nowviskie http://nowviskie.org/2015/on-capacity-and-care/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Sayers, J. From Make or Break to Care and Repair 
                        MLab in the Humanities. http://maker.uvic.ca/inke16/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                         (2015). Remediating the Editor. 
                        Interdisciplinary Science Reviews
                        40, (1): 78–94 doi:10.1179/0308018814Z.000000000106.
                    
                    
                        Eghbal, N. (2016). 
                        Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure. Ford Foundation https://fordfoundcontent.blob.core.windows.net/media/2976/roads-and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behind-our-digital-infrastructure.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Gibbs, F. and Owens, T. (2012). Building Better Digital Humanities Tools: Toward broader audiences and user-centered designs. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        006(2).
                    
                    
                        Guldi, J. and Johnson-Roberson, C. (2012). 
                        Paper Machines. http://papermachines.org/.
                    
                    
                        Jacomy, M. (2018). Is Gephi obsolete? Situation and perspectives. 
                        Gephi Blog https://gephi.wordpress.com/2018/11/01/is-gephi-obsolete-situation-and-perspectives/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Koeser, R. S. and Hicks, Benamin (2018). Bridging Digital Humanities Internal and Open Source Software Projects through Reusable Building Blocks. Mexico City, Mexico https://dh2018.adho.org/en/bridging-digital-humanities-internal-and-open-source-software-projects-through-reusable-building-blocks/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Maron, N. L. and Pickle, S. (2014). 
                        Sustaining the Digital Humanities Host Institution Support beyond the Start-Up Phase. ITHAKA.
                    
                    
                        Neylon, C. (2017). Sustaining Scholarly Infrastructures through Collective Action: The Lessons that Olson can Teach us. 
                        KULA: Knowledge Creation, Dissemination, and Preservation Studies, 
                        1(1): 3 doi:10.5334/kula.7.
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2015). On capacity and care 
                        Bethany Nowviskie http://nowviskie.org/2015/on-capacity-and-care/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Sayers, J. From Make or Break to Care and Repair 
                        MLab in the Humanities. http://maker.uvic.ca/inke16/ (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Schreibman, S. and Hanlon, A. M. (2010). Determining Value for Digital Humanities Tools: Report on a Survey of Tool Developers. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        004(2).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, like other cultural heritage objects, have lengthy and complex histories of production and ownership, involving events as varied as sales, gifts, and even outright theft. Research into these histories can reveal a great deal about the changing value placed on such objects over the centuries, not just in a monetary sense but also in terms of their cultural significance and meaning. Manuscript studies has been a very active interdisciplinary research area in recent decades, and researchers and curators have been intensely involved in the development of digital resources.
            This workshop will focus on methods for deploying Linked Data methodologies to aggregate complex data relating to the history and provenance of manuscripts, and to address large-scale research questions in this field through analysis and visualization. The presenters of the workshop have extensive expertise across manuscript provenance research, database development, and Linked Data technologies, and include members of a major international project in this field: “Mapping Manuscript Migrations” (MMM), one of the “Digging into Data” projects funded in 2017.
            The workshop will be of considerable interest to the DH community for its focus on Linked Data and on practical methods for transforming, aggregating and reconciling complex existing digital resources to a common data model, whilst preserving the integrity of the data sources. It will also be of particular value for DH researchers, curators, and librarians interested in new approaches to documenting, analysing and visualizing the histories of cultural heritage objects, especially manuscripts.
            The workshop will begin by reviewing the field of manuscript history and provenance, and identifying research questions which are representative of the types of research being carried out. It will also examine existing digital resources for this field, including the Schoenberg Database of Manuscripts (University of Pennsylvania), Bibale and Medium (Institut de recherche et d’histoire des textes), and library databases like the Bodleian Library’s new manuscript catalogue. This introductory session will conclude with an overview of the place of Linked Data in the humanities, including the selection and use of ontologies for data modelling.
            The middle session of the workshop will focus on the practicalities of mapping a range of different data structures into compatible RDF, including pipelines for transforming standard relational database models (like the Schoenberg Database of Manuscripts) and TEI-XML documents (like the Bodleian Library catalogue). The content will include discussion of the levels of complexity involved, the types of difficulties likely to be encountered, and suggested approaches to problem resolution. Participants will have the opportunity to carry out an introductory hands-on exercise in data analysis for transformation. The session will include an evaluation of suitable reconciliation processes used for matching vocabularies for persons and places across a variety of different source datasets.
            The final session of the workshop will provide participants with a hands-on opportunity to work with aggregated manuscript provenance data, through the user interface developed for the MMM project. This will include browsing and searching the aggregated data, and creating various different visualizations based on the data. Participants will be asked to test a variety of research questions against the data and to provide structured feedback on the functionality and usability of the interface and on the data structures. 
            The workshop will end with an invited reflection and response from an eminent manuscript researcher coordinating a major new international investigation.
            Detailed programme of the workshop
            • Overview:
            
                Manuscript history and provenance: research questions, existing digital resources and projects
                Linked Data in the humanities: why and how, RDF 
                Selection of ontologies: CIDOC-CRM, FRBR
                    OO
                
            
            • Data mapping and transformation: 
            
                Transformation pipeline: relational database to RDF [SDBM and Bibale]
                Transformation pipeline: bespoke XML to RDF [Medium]
                Transformation pipeline: TEI documents to RDF [Bodleian]
                Hands-on exercise - data analysis
                Reconciliation processes: vocabularies, identifiers
            
            • Aggregated data in action: hands-on exercises
            
                Browsing and searching the data
                Visualizing the data
                Testing – research questions
                Feedback on the interface and the data structures
            
            • Response and summing-up
            Workshop leaders 
            Dr Toby Burrows is a Senior Researcher in the Oxford e-Research Centre at the University of Oxford who is coordinating a major international Digging into Data project (2017-19) focused on manuscript provenance data. He is a medieval studies researcher and librarian with considerable experience in designing and managing digital humanities projects. His current research interests and areas of expertise include: digital technology and the humanities (particularly the relevance of e-research, Linked Open Data and ontologies); medieval manuscripts (particularly their curation, description and digitization); the history of cultural heritage collecting, especially in the 19th and 20th centuries. Email: toby.burrows@oerc.ox.ac.uk
            Emma Cawlfield Thomson, University of Pennsylvania, is the Project Coordinator for the Schoenberg Database of Manuscripts. She has worked on the Schoenberg Database for over seven years, in roles evolving from data entry and quality control to instructional design and user support. In her training as a librarian, she specialized in digital librarianship and information architecture. Her current research interests revolve around the linked data environment and its application in authority metadata management. Email: emmacaw@upenn.edu
            Dr Laura Cleaver, School of Histories and Humanities, Trinity College Dublin, is an expert in the art and architecture in the High Middle Ages, concentrating particularly on medieval manuscripts. Her current interests include the illumination of histories, medieval diagrams, and the trade in medieval manuscripts in the early twentieth century. She is the recipient of a European Research Council Consolidator Grant, beginning in May 2019, for a major project to analyse the collecting of medieval manuscripts in the early twentieth century. Email: cleaver@tcd.ie
            David Lewis is Research Associate, Oxford e-Research Centre, University of Oxford. Having trained as a musicologist, he focuses his research on ways that computers and computational approaches can help musicology and other musical activities. He has worked on online resources for instrumental music, music theory and work catalogues. His current research at the Centre explores uses of Linked Data to support and extend the exploration and sharing of musical information and research. Email: david.lewis@oerc.ox.ac.uk
            Dr Kevin Page, University of Oxford, is a senior researcher and associate member of faculty at the University of Oxford e-Research Centre, where he applies Linked Data to the Digital Humanities through several research projects including 'Unlocking Musicology', 'Digital Delius', 'Mapping Manuscript Migrations', and 'Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis'. As Technical Director of Oxford Linked Open Data (OXLOD) he works with collections across the Gardens, Libraries, and Museums of the University, and has participated in standards activities including the W3C Linked Data Platform (LDP) working group and Linked.Art editorial board. Email: kevin.page@oerc.ox.ac.uk
            Dr Jouni Tuominen, University of Helsinki, is a coordinating researcher at Helsinki Centre for Digital Humanities (HELDIG), and a researcher at Department of Computer Science, Aalto University. His research interests include ontology repositories and services, linked data publishing methods, ontology models for legacy data, and tooling for digital humanities. He has collaborated with museums, libraries, and archives on their collection cataloging and cultural heritage data publishing processes. Email: jouni.tuominen@helsinki.fi
        
    

        
            
                State of research and problem outline
                In the course of the continuing upswing in writing process research, source types that document processes of authorial self-organization, notation, or reading have come into focus of literary and cultural studies. These include, among others, notebooks (Hoffmann 2008; Efimova 2018), card indexes (Gfrereis and Strittmatter 2013; Krajewski 2011; Schmidt 2016) and author libraries. While digital presentation techniques based on transcriptions and TEI editions are being developed for notebooks and card indexes (cf. Radecke 2018, Schmidt 2016), the digital presentation of author libraries is currently limited to the provision of either digital catalogs that make library metadata available (cf. Paul Celan’s library) or of simple digital copies, which are offered in a viewer and/or as a PDF download (cf. the Grimm library). These forms of presentation, however, do not succeed in grasping the autographical character of these book collections, whose particularity lies in the reading traces that the author (or heirs, estate administrators, owning institutions, etc.) has left in them. At the same time, the aim of an online presentation of such libraries cannot be an edited text; rather, they are intended to enable the reproduction of creative reading and usage practices.
                Three objectives can be phrased for such a presentation, with reference to research needs: 1) the provision of the entire volumes of an author's library; 2) the implementation of (re-)search opportunities; 3) the provision of novel applications with which the profile of the collection and reading patterns emerging in it can be discovered, recognised, and researched.
                For objective 1), common techniques for presenting digitized books (mostly based on METS/MODS) are already available; for objective 2), similarly, solutions are being offered (librarian or archival discovery tools). For objective 3), which constitutes the focus of our project, no solutions or conceptualizations have been presented so far, although there have been calls for the supplementation of search-based interfaces by concepts that enable serendipitous encounters (Dörk et al. 2011; Thudt et al. 2012; Whitelaw 2015). Even if the establishment of so-called explore modes has already partly contributed to the fulfilment of these goals, there is still a lack of flexible navigation along the relations between the objects in digital collections (Kreiseler et al. 2017).
            
            
                Project, procedure and corpus
                We present a draft of an explorable and scalable representation of an author's library, developed in a research-based rapid-prototyping process. Our prototype study combines the presentation of author’s libraries, which is usually addressed as a philological problem, with design-oriented research on the visualization of cultural collections (Glinka et al. 2017; Dörk et al. 2017; Windhager et al. 2018). With this research we present a prototypically implemented approach of how to digitally represent author’s libraries (
                    
                        video demo
                    ). The project takes up two impulses: On the one hand, it is committed to distant reading (Moretti 2013), which looks for possibilities of pattern recognition in (parts of) an author’s library; on the other hand the representations should be scalable (Weitin 2017), which raises questions about transitions between different granularities.
                
                The basis for the prototype is the library of Theodor Fontane (1819–1898), which comprises approximately 170 volumes. The significance of this author's library is primarily due to its provenance. It is irreplaceable because of the marginal notes and glosses written inside the books by Fontane and valuable because of numerous presentation copies (Rasch 2005).
                In addition to the complete digitization of the holdings according to archival standards, and the indexing of individual volumes according to bibliographic standards, data is collected at both page and corpus level. Access to the data is possible at four levels: overall corpus, object, page, and individual phenomenon (note, comment, etc.). The visualization enables various access and analysis options, which ideally reveal the broad spectrum of thematic and personal clusters and the different uses of commentary within the author’s library. 
            
            
                Visualization concept
                The visualization places a special focus on continuous navigation through zoom and filters on several granularity levels. This allows for the exploration of individual objects as well as their comparison and broad overviews of the whole inventory. The interactive prototype offers three basic levels for navigating the collection: the level of the individual authors, books, and pages.
                
                    
                
                Fig.1: Landing page/book level with overview of all books
                The starting point for the exploration of the visualization is the book level, which provides an overview of all books in the library, sorted by authors—starting with the author with the most books (Fig.1). Each book is represented by a vertical bar, in which each page of the respective book is represented by a segment, ordered from top (first page of the book) to bottom (last page). The page segments are color coded according to the category of occurring reading traces. While pages without traces are displayed in white, pages containing traces are colored, divided into four categories: 1) provenance (grey tones), 2) markings (red tones), 3) marginalia (blue tones), and 4) additional material (yellow). Hovering over a segment displays a preview of the respective page scan and the book title (Fig.2).
                
                    
                
                
                    Fig.2: Page level with a book selected, filtered by marginalia, and hovering over an element
                
                Giving an overview and resembling individual bar codes for each book, the book level visualizes the number of pages of a book (total length of the bar) as well as the distribution and patterns of reading traces (color coding). Above the visualization, a filter navigation serves as a legend for the color coding and offers the possibility to focus on certain categories of reading traces. The selection of a filter triggers the unfolding of the corresponding subcategories in the filter bar (Fig.2,3). In addition, a search bar enables specific keyword search in all transcribed marginalia, highlighting respective occurrences in the visualization. By selecting a book, the other books are compressed and a detailed view of the selected book is unfolded, revealing additional metadata and details.
                The browser's scroll function can be used to reach the other two granularity levels of the visualization. Following the principles of semantic zoom (Perlin and Fox 1993), scrolling upwards leads to a higher level of abstraction and downwards to a higher level of detail—thus allowing a change between three main granularities: authors, books, and pages. Scrolling enables continuous, meaningful transitions between the views and offers the possibility to go back and forth at one's own speed with the aim of making transitions between views more comprehensible.
                
                    
                
                Fig.3: Author level, filtered by marks, the colors of various mark types are unfolded
                In contrast to the book level, on the author level (Fig.3) all books of an author are combined by presenting the total distribution of the reading traces in form of an area chart. It is therefore possible to compare Fontane's reading traces, distributed over the works of different authors. However, the higher abstraction also allows insight into broader patterns. 
                Navigating from the book level towards the other direction to the lower page level (Fig.2), the page fragments of books of a selected author are zoomed in, enabling interaction with individual reading traces. Furthermore, selecting a book on this level unfolds a visualization of the transcribed marginalia.
                All selections, filter options and the selected level of granularity are encoded via a fragment identifier in the URL, allowing the sharing and bookmarking of specifics views and the use of the browser's history functions.
            
            
                Reflection of results
                The novel visual approach to author’s libraries developed within the framework of the prototype combines design-oriented approaches to the visualization of cultural collections with philological, archival, and library research questions. By means of visual filters, subsets can be identified and categories can be created that enable pattern recognition within the collection. Users should be enabled to grasp concepts and themes within dedicated categories and across their boundaries. The focus of the project lies on the integration of search functions, visibility and scalability in visualizations, and how further exploration possibilities can be opened up by different access options to a collection.
                The development of new research questions during the prototyping process and the associated readjustment in the indexing process illuminate the interactions between visual research, metadata management, and philology. It became clear that the collection is to be understood as a construct that is only generated retrospectively. In the process, 'the' collection emerges from the unity of perspective and object. The resulting consequences of offering multiple views of 'the' object(s) are reflected in the various granularity levels of the prototype and result in an observation-dependent visualization of the available source data. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dörk, M., Carpendale, S. and Williamson, C. (2011). The information flaneur: A fresh look at information seeking. 
                        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 1215–1224.
                    
                    
                        Dörk, M., Pietsch, C. and Credico, G. (2017). One view is not enough. 
                        Information Design Journal, 
                        23(1): 39–47.
                    
                    
                        Efimova, S. (2018). 
                        Das Schriftsteller-Notizbuch Als Denkmedium in Der Russischen Und Deutschen Literatur. Vol. 22. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink.
                    
                    
                        Gfrereis, H. and Strittmatter, E. (eds.) (2013). 
                        Zettelkästen. Maschinen der Phantasie. Ausstellungskatalog. Deutsche Schillergesellschaft: Marbach a.N.
                    
                    
                        Glinka, K., Pietsch, C. and Dörk, M. (2017). Past Visions and Reconciling Views: Visualizing Time, Texture and Themes in Cultural Collections. 
                        DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        11(2).
                    
                    
                        Haber, P. (2010). Autorenbibliotheken im digitalen Zeitalter. In 
                        Quatro. Zeitschrift des Schweizerischen Literaturarchivs 30/31: 39-43.
                    
                    
                        Höppner, S., Jessen, C. and Münkner, J. (eds.) (2018)
                        . 
                        Autorschaft und Bibliothek. Sammlungsstrategien und Schreibverfahren. Mit einem Vorwort von Reinhard Laube. Göttingen: Wallstein.
                    
                    
                        Hoffmann, C. (2008). Wie lesen? Das Notizbuch als Bühne der Forschung In Griesecke, B. (ed.): 
                        Werkstätten des Möglichen 1930-1936: L. Fleck, E. Husserl, R. Musil, L. Wittgenstein, Würzburg: Königshausen &amp; Neumann, pp. 45-57.
                    
                    
                        Knoche, M. (ed.) (2015). Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
                    
                    
                        Krajewski, M. (2011). 
                        Paper Machines. About cards &amp; catalogs, 1548-1929. Cambridge: MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Kreiseler, S., Brüggemann, V. and Dörk, M. (2017). Tracing exploratory modes in digital collections of museum web sites using reverse information architecture. 
                        First Monday, 
                        22(4).
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). 
                        Distant Reading. London: Verso.
                    
                    
                        Perlin, K. and Fox, D. (1993). Pad: an alternative approach to the computer interface. 
                        Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques. ACM, pp. 57–64.
                    
                    
                        Rasch, W. (2005). Zeitungstiger, Bücherfresser. Die Bibliothek Theodor Fontanes als Fragment und Aufgabe betrachtet. In Schneider, U. (ed.): Imprimatur. Ein Jahrbuch für Bücherfreunde. N.F. [Bd.] XIX. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 103-144.
                    
                    
                        Rohmann, I. (2015). Aspekte der Erschließung und Rekonstruktion nachgelassener Privatbibliotheken am Beispiel der Büchersammlungen Herders, Wielands, Schillers und Goethes. In Knoche, M. (ed.). Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 17-59.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, J. (2016). Niklas Luhmann´s Card Index: Thinking Tool, Communication Partner, Publication Machine. In Alberto Cevolini (ed.). Forgetting Machines. Knowledge Management Evolution in Early Modern Europe. Leiden: Brill, pp. 289-311.
                    
                    
                        Thudt, A., Hinrichs, U. and Carpendale, S. (2012). The bohemian bookshelf: supporting serendipitous book discoveries through information visualization. 
                        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, pp. 1461–1470.
                    
                    
                        Weitin, T. (2017). Scalable Reading. In 
                        
                            Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik
                         47(1): 1-6.
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1007/s41244-017-0048-4
                        
                    
                    
                        Wieland, M. (2015). Materialität des Lesens. Zur Topographie von Annotationsspuren in Autorenbibliotheken. In Knoche, M. (ed.).  Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 147-173.
                    
                    
                        Windhager, F., Federico, P., Schreder, G., Glinka, K., Dörk, M., Miksch, S. and Mayr, E. (2018). Visualization of Cultural Heritage Collection Data: State of the Art and Future Challenges. 
                        IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
                    
                    
                        Whitelaw, M. (2015). Generous Interfaces for Digital Cultural Collections. 
                        DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        9(1).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                In March 2018 the project Eurasian Latin Archive was started with the aim of building a digital platform for a large corpus of Latin texts and documents from medieval and early modern times. The corpus encompasses text from East Asia, including Latin-Chinese texts, on which a group of researchers began to work addressing specific multilingual issues. The corpus will be available within a digital library provided with tools for textual and thematic analysis. The goal of the project is the comparative linguistic analysis, both internal with other Latin texts from different eras and areas, and external with non-Latin texts on homogeneous subjects. The ultimate purpose of the project is to highlight relationships by extracting and investigating 1) historical-cultural data about religion, law, science, art, and customs; 2) linguistic data, to be compared with homologous values in European Latin literature, in order to determine the specificity of East Asian Latin and investigate overlappings and mismatches between Latin words and their local (mostly Chinese) equivalents. The start-up phase of the project (
                    DAS-MeMo), which will end by February 2020, is co-financed by Regione Toscana and QuestIT, an IT company specialized in NLP and Artificial Intelligence. The working group is interdisciplinary and brings together medievalists, digital humanists, engineers and IT specialists. The platform is inspired by the digital archive 
                    ALIM (Archivio della Latinità Italiana del Medioevo), which acts as a starting point for the new archive. However, unlike ALIM, the project is geared towards providing textual analysis also with machine learning tools; ALIM focuses instead on digital representation of editions (including editiones principes) and takes into account texts of Italian Latinity exclusively (Ferrarini, 2017; Stella, 2015).
                
            
            
                Preliminary complexities: defining and creating the corpus
                To define the corpus, a first census of over three hundred texts has been made (also thanks to online resources, such as 
                    Sinica 2.0 and 
                    CCT-Database). The amount of documents is due to increase, but it is sufficiently large to collect some preliminary results in the main projects’ tasks. It seems useful to classify documents into four main categories: 1. Born-digital editions, freely available or to request for; 2) modern (critical and non critical) editions that have entered the public domain; 3. editions with possible issues with OCR; 4. manuscripts. With the exception of the born-digital editions, the categories can a) be already digitized and made available by other Institutions; b) still need to be digitized. At this stage, besides the born-digital editions already acquired, seventy more documents of the type 2a and 2b have already been processed. In the case of critical editions, we chose to provide the text without encoding the critical apparatus. Items are being encoded in TEI P5, with a particular attention for the essentials metadata, such as VIAF and Wikidata ID when available, OCLC references, reliability both for external and internal processes of the item (i.e. responsible for digitization and/or OCR, checking, date history of all changes, evaluation of the resource, and so on), possibly opening the way to integration with semantic models (Ciotti, 2018; Ciotti et al., 2016).
                
            
            
                As a non-conclusion: a structure that is modular and can grow more complex with time
                For such an ambitious project it is obviously necessary to proceed by ensuring a modular architecture from the very beginning, so that it can be implemented within this project progressively and can possibly merge, through its interoperability features, with open source projects from other Institutions. For this purpose, a requirement analysis has been carried out, and a list of specifications has been redacted in order to provide a basis of guidelines for the subsequent implementation.
                The aim of this paper is to display the architecture of the project and some of the early results: a prototype based on the ElasticSearch search engine has been developed, which includes a search module (with multiple filter methods) and a browse module, with the possibility to investigate the corpus by authors, dates and periods, collections, sources, places mentioned within the document, languages used in the text, keywords. A particular attention is being paid to the recognition of entities. For the moment being, we are working on recognition of places, dates and people. For the particular case of places, we also need to take into account that location names often differ significantly from the ones used nowadays, to the point that many researchers actually disagree on the current location of cities mentioned in these texts. More tools will be added to the preliminary ones, in order to pursue a text analysis (Stella, 2018: 72-100; Eger et al., 2015). One of the most important issues remains however the encoding of multilingual documents, currently under examination by handling Prospero Intorcetta’s Sapientia Sinica, which contains chinese text, and transliterations in latin of the chinese terms.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ciotti, F.
                         (2018). A Formal Ontology for the Text Encoding Initiative.
                        Umanistica Digitale
                        , 
                        3
                        (2018). doi: 
                        
                            10.6092/issn.2532-8816/8174
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F., Daquino, M. and Tomasi F.
                         (2016). Text Encoding Initiative Semantic Modeling. A Conceptual Workflow Proposal. In Calvanese, D., De Nart, D. and Tasso, C. (eds), 
                        Digital Libraries on the Move
                        , vol. 612. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 48-60. doi:
                        
                            10.1007/978-3-319-41938-1_5
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Eger, S., Brück, T. vor der, and Mehler, A. 
                        (2015). Lexicon-assisted tagging and lemmatization in Latin: A comparison of six taggers and two lemmatization methods. In 
                        Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH)
                        . Beijing, China, pp. 105-13. doi: 
                        
                            10.18653/v1/W15-3716
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Russo, L.
                         (2005). ALIM, Archivio della latinità italiana del Medioevo. 
                        Reti Medievali Rivista,
                        6
                        (1): 149-151. doi: 
                        
                            10.6092/1593-2214/181
                        
                        . 
                    
                    
                        Stella, F.
                        (2015). Il problema della codifica nelle edizioni critiche digitali. In Del Corso, L., De Vivo, F., Stramaglia, A., 
                        Nel segno del testo. Edizioni, materiali e studi per Oronzo Pecere
                        . Firenze: Gonnelli, pp. 347-360.
                    
                    
                        Stella, F. 
                        (2018). 
                        Testi letterari e analisi digitali
                        . Roma: Carocci.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium 
                        (2019). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                         Version 3.5.0. Last updated on 29th January 2019.
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction 
                Les éditions critiques traditionnelles, imprimées sur papier et regroupées dans des collections spécialisées, répondent à des codes stricts de structuration du contenu. C’est un jeu complexe de normes de lisibilité, élaborées au fil des siècles, qui a donné au texte imprimé son maximum d’efficacité et en a permis une lecture facile et rapide (Vandendorpe, 1999). Lorsque l’on passe au support numérique, ces conventions disparaissent en partie. A l'écran, il s'agit donc de reprendre les normes élaborées pour l’imprimé et de les faire évoluer afin qu'elles s'adaptent aux particularités du format numérique (Souchier, 2012).
                Il existe un standard dévolu à l’encodage des documents textuels dont font partie les éditions critiques : il s’agit bien entendu du langage XML/TEI. Mais si la structuration des données est régie par les règles de la TEI, la présentation finale de l’information n’a pas fait, jusqu’à ce jour, l’objet d’une quelconque normalisation (Pierazzo, 2015).
            
            
                Pour une étude sémiotique des éditions savantes numériques
                Dans notre présentation, nous nous concentrerons précisément sur les dispositifs de visualisation qui soutiennent une mise en discours de l’information dans les éditions critiques numériques. De fait, comment l’éditeur met-il en discours l’information qu’il souhaite présenter aux lecteurs ? Ce qui nous intéresse est de savoir quelles sont les règles empiriques de structuration, de disposition et de présentation de l’information qui peuvent être observées dans les éditions numériques. Nous ferons une étude sémiotique de l’édition critique numérique et nous pourrons ainsi voir si l’édition critique numérique actuelle est, ou non, en voie d’inventer de nouveaux codes de structuration de l’information et de lecture du contenu.
                Pour ce faire, nous allons nous appuyer sur un corpus conséquent d’éditions critiques numériques et sur leurs données de description. Des chercheurs de l’
                    Austrian centre for digital humanities ont récemment mis en ligne un catalogue des éditions critiques numériques
                    
                         Dirigé par Greta Franzini, ce projet est consultable à l’adresse suivante : https://dig-ed-
                        cat.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/browsing/editions/
                    . Appelé à être enrichi au fil des années, ce catalogue recense à ce jour plus de 300 éditions, qui sont décrites au travers d’une trentaine de critères. Plusieurs d’entre eux concernent les outils de traitement et de visualisation de l’information. Pour mener notre étude, nous allons nous appuyer sur ces données de description spécifiques. Interrogeables directement sur la plateforme, elles sont également librement téléchargeables sur Github (sous une licence CC BY 4.0). Nous allons donc nous servir de ces données pour les analyser et répondre à nos questions de recherche.
                
                La communication que nous proposons s’organise en deux axes :
                - une analyse quantitative des données du catalogue nous permettra de dresser un tableau générique des dispositifs de visualisation qui portent la mise en discours de l’information ;
                - une analyse qualitative d’un corpus resserré de ces éditions critiques numériques nous permettra d’étudier plus précisément les parcours de lecture élaborés dans les éditions.
            
            
                Analyse quantitative des données de description du 
                    Catalogue of Digital Editions
                
                L’analyse quantitative de ces données nous permettra de répondre à des questions de recherche telles que les suivantes :
                - quels outils de visualisation sont utilisés dans ces éditions critiques numériques, et dans quelles proportions ? Observe-t-on des tendances générales ? Distingue-t-on une normalisation des pratiques ?
                - la définition d’un type de lectorat particulier auquel s’adresse les éditeurs (lectorat étudiant, professionnel, universitaire, grand public, public jeune) a-t-elle une influence sur les outils intégrés à l’édition, et sur les formes de visualisation de l’information proposées ? Le cas échéant, quelles tendances peut-on relever ?
                - le type de documentation-source (textes littéraires, scientifiques, patrimoniaux, etc) et la période (Antiquité, Moyen-âge, époque moderne, époque contemporaine) concernées ont-elles un impact sur les formes de visualisation privilégiées par les éditeurs ?
            
            
                Analyse qualitative des parcours de lecture proposés dans les éditions critiques
                Après avoir dressé un tableau général des outils de visualisation de l’information récurrents dans les éditions critiques numériques, nous allons nous intéresser à une forme de visualisation de l’information qui nous semble constituer un enjeu majeur dans les éditions de textes : il s’agit de la mise en discours de l’information au moyen des parcours de lecture. Il s’agit d’un enjeu important dans l’édition numérique, car celle-ci permet aux éditeurs de démultiplier les discours critiques.
                En effet, lorsque les corpus présentés dans les éditions sont de tailles importantes ou bien sont très spécialisés, il devient essentiel de guider le lecteur dans sa découverte des textes. Les parcours de lecture constituent alors des modes de visualisation transversaux de l’information. Mais que sont ces parcours de lecture ? Sur quels outils techniques s’appuient-ils ? Comment assurent-ils la mise en discours de l’information ? Quelle part d’innovation les éditeurs détiennent-ils et dans quelle mesure sont-ils contraints par les structures éditoriales qui portent leurs travaux ?
                L’analyse préalable des données de description du catalogue permet de cibler certaines éditions critiques numériques dans lesquelles les éditeurs attachent une importance particulière aux outils de visualisation et à la mise en discours de l’information. Nous allons donc mener notre étude qualitative des parcours de lecture sur ces éditions numériques repérées au préalable. 
                 Ces dernières sont au nombre de dix, et constituent ainsi notre corpus d’observation restreint, présenté ci-après. A l’examen de ces éditions, il nous est apparu clairement que les parcours de lecture peuvent prendre deux directions principales, suivant qu’ils se polarisent sur le texte édité ou bien qu’ils prennent l’ensemble de la documentation comme objet de discours. Ces parcours se partagent entre parcours savants dans le texte établi (parcours philologiques et d’actualisation) et les parcours transversaux dans l’ensemble de la documentation (parcours didactiques et de recherche). 
                Les observations que nous ferons dans cette communication nous permettront de dégager des tendances et caractéristiques des éditions critiques numériques afin de comprendre comment ces éditions sont organisées et comment s’y créent des normes de design et de structuration de l’information. 
            
            
                Corpus d’observation des éditions critiques numériques :
                Ainsworth, Peter et Croenen Godfried, « The Online Froissart ». &lt; http://www.hrionline.ac.uk/onlinefroissart&gt;
                Biet Christian et Ravel Jeffrey, « Les Registres de la Comédie française ». 
                    
                        http://cfregisters.org/fr/
                    
                
                Burgio Eugenio, Buzzoni Marina et Ghersetti Antonella, « Dei Viaggi di Messer Marco Polo ». &lt; http://virgo.unive.it/ecf-workflow/books/Ramusio/main/index.html&gt;
                Carrasco Raphaël et Clavaud Florence, « Le Petit Thalamus de Montpellier ». &lt;http://thalamus.huma-num.fr/&gt;
                Fianu Kouky, Fortier Anne et Clavaud Florence, « L’année 1437 dans la pratique de Pierre Christofle, notaire du Châtelet d’Orléans ». &lt; http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/christofle/&gt;
                Ghelardi Maurizio, « Burckhardt Source. ». &lt; http://burckhardtsource.org&gt;
                Huber Alexander (éd.), « Thomas Gray Archive ». &lt; http://www.thomasgray.org/&gt;
                McGann Jerome, « The Complete Writings and Pictures of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, A Hypermedia Archive ». &lt; http://www.rossettiarchive.org/&gt;
                Nougaret Christine et Clavaud Florence, « Les carnets de prison d’Henri Delescluze à Belle-Île (1851-1853) ». &lt; http://elec.enc.sorbonne.fr/delescluze/&gt;
                Stinson Timothy L., Duggan Hoyt N. et Turville-Petre Thorlac, « Piers Plowman Electronic Archive ». &lt; http://piers.iath.virginia.edu/&gt;
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L., Zundert, J. (2018). « What are you trying to say? The interface as an integral element of Argument ». In Bleier, R., Klug H. W., Andrews, T. L. et al. (2018) 
                        Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces. Vol. 12., p.3-33. Norderstedt : BoD. 
                    
                    
                        Apollon, D., Belisle, C., Régnier, P. (2014). 
                        Digital Critical Editions. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
                    
                    
                        Barthes, R. (1964) « Rhétorique de l’image », 
                        Communications, vol. 4, p. 40–51.
                    
                    
                        Bleier, R., Klug H. W., Andrews, T. L. et al. (2018) 
                        Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces. Vol. 12. Norderstedt : BoD. 
                    
                    
                        Burdick, A. et al. (2012). 
                        Digital humanities. Cambridge: MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Duval, F. (dir.) (2006). 
                        Pratiques philologiques en Europe : actes de la journée d’étude organisée à l’École des chartes le 23 septembre 2005. Paris : École nationale des chartes. 
                    
                    
                        Gold, M. (dir.) (2012). 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
                    
                    
                        Franzini, G., Andorfer, P., Zaytseva, K. (2016-). 
                        Catalogue of Digital Editions: The Web Application. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1250796
                    
                    
                        Peeters, B. (1998). 
                        Lire la bande dessinée, Paris : Flammarion.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: 
                        Theories, Models and Methods. Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate. 
                    
                    
                        Souchier, E. (2012). La « lettrure » à l’écran. Lire &amp; écrire au regard des médias informatisés, 
                        Communication et langages, 174 : 85-108. 
                    
                    
                        Terras, M., Nyhan, J., Vanhoutte, E. (2013). 
                        Defining Digital Humanities. A Reader. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. 
                    
                    
                        Vandendorpe, C. (1999). 
                        Du papyrus à l’hypertexte. Essai sur les mutations du texte et de la lecture. Montréal: Boréal et Paris : La Découverte. 
                    
                    
                        Vanhoutte, E. (2010). « Defining electronic editions: a historical and functional perspective ». In 
                        Text and Genre in Reconstruction. Effects of Digitalization on Ideas, Behaviours, Products and Institutions. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp. 119-144. 
                    
                    
                        Warwick, C., Terras, M., Nyhan J. (2012). 
                        Digital humanities in practice. London:Facet Publishing.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Literature and history, writ large, are fields with prominent voices in the digital humanities community. Art history, film studies, archaeology, and anthropology form recognizable disciplinary clusters within the international discourse of digital humanities as well. Since the mid-20th century, “area studies” have offered their own interdisciplinary organizing principle for drawing together scholars who work with a variety of materials and approaches. While on one hand, this arrangement would appear to be naturally conducive to international collaboration, geopolitical tensions and restrictions have at times formed a barrier between area studies scholars in the United States, and their colleagues working in and around the “areas” in question. This has been especially true in the field of Slavic and East European studies, which have been knit together in the United States through two major professional organizations that have -- through a combination of circumstance, necessity, and then habit -- cultivated a distinct and somewhat insular scholarly community in Slavic studies.
            The fall of the Iron Curtain, the fluctuations in the perceived threat of Russia to the United States, and the spread of the Internet as a medium for communication have provided scholars worldwide with opportunities to engage with Slavic area studies through a global and collaborative lens in ways that were not conceivable earlier in the history of the field. While many U.S. scholars have taken advantage of the possibility to travel to Slavic and East European countries, the scholarly networks of citation and discourse remain centered within the communities formed by the U.S.-based professional organizations.
            The emergence of digital humanities tools and methodologies has provided an opportunity for rethinking the collaborative landscape for Slavic and East European studies. Much as in the humanities as a whole, the percentage of scholars in the field actively using digital tools and methodologies is fairly small. For Slavic and East European studies, however, any effort to develop a community around digital humanities is compounded by the comparatively small overall size of the field. Indeed, while there have been efforts to run a digital humanities interest group through one of the major professional organizations, the work of sustaining the group has fallen on one or two people, as there is not enough of a critical mass to spread around the necessary but time-consuming work of cultivating and growing the group. Rather than working within existing scholarly organizational frameworks, some U.S.-based scholars have turned towards international collaboration to further their engagement with digital tools and methodologies. This panel brings together Slavists and East Europeanists from the United States, Western Europe, and Russia whose research, teaching, and infrastructure development is shaped by engagement with colleagues who share similar materials and methods despite widely varying national and institutional contexts. In addition to presenting highlights of their own work, panel participants will reflect on the ways in which digital humanities provides a different organizing principle for their scholarly networks and community. 
            
                Cultural Heritage and Critical Multiperspectivity: Building Research Infrastructures on Eastern Europe
            
            Due to the constantly increasing number of digitally available sources, those working in the fields of History and Cultural Studies are faced with a significant challenge, namely, to develop new practices and procedures around the verification of sources and the provision of digital material. Of central importance here are questions relating to the provenance, validity, and critical analysis of sources. These matters are particularly pertinent in the case of East Europe, where transnational conflicts around shared historical and cultural heritage have given rise to a special need for research-based information, digital source criticism, and questions of research ethics.
            As a leading European research institute on the history of Eastern Europe, we continue to develop our shared research infrastructure in collaboration with other partners, and we need to keep these goals in mind. This presentation aims at addressing the challenges and opportunities of building up a multi-national infrastructure for a digital and critical documentation of cultural heritage in Eastern Europe. This process involves not only developing research software and a standardized vocabulary, but also mapping out multi-perspective approaches relating to the exegesis of digital sources within metadata structures and, last but not least, providing dialogue-based formats for reflecting on historical sources in the digital age.
            
                Being an Englishman in New York, or How to Launch an International DH Lab in St. Petersburg
            
            DHlab, the international digital humanities lab launched in at our technical university in St. Petersburg (Russia) in October 2018, is dedicated to exploring how technology facilitates new possibilities in understanding society and global culture. This is a collaboration between our institution and a private university in the United States, and intends to draw in partners from DH communities all over the world. In this presentation, we will discuss our priorities when starting a humanities-focused initiative at a technical university. These include 1) the importance of humanistic disciplines in the discourse of Information Technologies, Computer Science and Engineering; 2) motivating women in science; 3) applying STEM methods to Arts and Humanities research problems; 4) managing different approaches while working on digital humanities projects; 5) involving students of different majors and interests in interdisciplinary projects; and 6) highlighting digital humanities among wide audience using social networks. We will share our experience in training the next generation of DH scholars, developing innovative DH projects, contributing to creating useful software, providing women within Humanities and STEM with equal opportunities to conduct interdisciplinary research etc.
            We will also discuss one of our most significant projects, a web application that maps historical and cultural heritage data about key landmarks of St. Petersburg, Russia. With input from scholars of history, library science, cultural studies and information technologies, the project team has conducted semantic analysis on a large, multilingual textual corpus that includes memoirs, documentaries and periodicals, and uses Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) to encode information about people, relationships, and events, and Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) to identify locations. All landmarks are being mapped onto an interactive city map of St. Petersburg with a user-friendly interface to facilitate easy navigation and filtering.
            
                Edges of Slavic Studies: Network Analysis of an Areas Studies Field from the Cold War to the Present
            
            This presentation uses DH tools to turn a lens to the Slavic Studies professional community. In 2018, the Association for Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies (ASEEES) the main North American-based international academic professional organization in the field, celebrates its 70 th anniversary. As part of the anniversary, the association published the programs for thirty-four of its conventions. These programs are a valuable guide not only to individual contributions but to the institutional networks embedded in the Slavic Studies field. This paper uses network analysis to analyze the shifting intellectual motivations and professional ties in Slavic Studies.
            Before the fall of the USSR, Slavic Studies was not only an academic field but a front in the Cold War. US government funding motivated by fear of communism also produced works in the humanities with no immediate political value and created a new field of area studies (Engerman 2009). Network analysis can assess Engerman’s qualitative research and go beyond it. After the Cold War ended, Slavic Studies undertook a “post-mortem” of the USSR. How did the constellation of intellectual and professional networks shift? After the financial crisis of 2007-08 that brought cuts in research spending, how did Slavic Studies change? What institutions remained in the field and with what institutional concerns? Similarly, network analysis can help understand early academic reactions to Russia’s more aggressive stance in the world since 2011.
            This study can also contribute to understanding how digital humanities is growing in fields outside of Western Europe and North America. By isolating the networks in panels whose papers use relevant keywords (e.g., “digital,” “dh,” “computational”) the paper will ask how the impact of digital humanities has and has not impacted the Slavic field.
            
                International DH Collaboration as Pedagogy
            
            Pedagogy has long been a major topic of interest in the DH community. An opportunity for engaging students in DH that has not been addressed is through involvement in international partnerships. In this presentation, we discuss our institution’s emerging Slavic DH Working Group, our decision to prioritize collaboration with international partners, and our efforts to include both graduate and undergraduate students in our work. As an alternative - or supplement - to the curricular or project-based learning models that are most common in many DH programs, involvement in international partnerships provides not only skills, competencies and exposure to professional practice, but opportunities for cross-cultural knowledge exchange that are key for the advancement of both field-specific and DH scholarship.
            The Slavic DH Working Group at our research university is the only one of its kind in the United States. Established in 2017 through the joint effort of faculty, graduate students, librarians and DH staff, the Slavic DH Working Group is a community of scholars at all levels, from various disciplines, and engaged in a variety of professional fields. Promoting the exploration of digital humanities in Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies, the group meets monthly during the academic year for events, trainings, and mentorship . In this presentation, we will discuss our collaboration with a research institute in Germany whose focus is Eastern European history. In the summer of 2018, we took eight members of the Slavic DH Working Group - including two graduate students and two undergraduates - to Germany for a 5-day DH workshop called “Digital Mapping Eastern Europe.” Besides our US group, the workshop brought in early-career scholars from Germany, Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic, Ukraine, Belarus, Russia and Israel. We will discuss how the format of the workshop allowed the graduate students to make significant strides in their dissertation work. The workshop was a unique opportunity for what Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair call “acculturation” (Rockwell and Sinclair, 2012) - not just academic professionalization, but broader exposure to the culture of a field that includes different types of jobs, and in various national and international contexts. We will also discuss the opportunities this experience afforded the undergraduate participants, and the kind of both collaborative and independent work that the workshop generated. By contrast to the more conventional contexts in which undergraduates learn DH - either in the classroom setting or as paid laborers on faculty-led DH projects - participation in the international exchange allowed students to become involved in the community as scholars in their own right.
            We will suggest that international collaborations in DH are particularly beneficial for smaller fields like Slavic where use of digital methods are relatively new, and where formal and fruitful international exchange by groups of scholars can difficult to sustain. Bringing DH into the graduate and undergraduate Slavic Studies experience exposes students to new scholarly approaches while animating Russian and East European cultural heritage and collections for young scholars.
            
                Conversational Versus Co-occurrence Models in Networking the Russian Novel
            
            The Russian novel has been traditionally regarded as the novel of ideas, in which the conflicting views on the national identity and Russia’s relationship with the “other” are presented in the dramatized narrative. Especially after Mikhail Bakhitn’s pioneering ideas of dialogism and polyphony of Fyodor Dostoevsky’s novels, it became common to view the novel as a balanced dramatization of conflicts among polar opposites. In my ongoing research project on the network novel in the late imperial Russian culture, I approach Tolstoy’s and Dostoevsky’s novels as models of an emerging liberal society. These narratives are not merely depictions of individual experiences manifested in text, but also represent complex societies whose imaginary social forms can be quantified and analyzed.
            In British and American nineteenth-century novels, a shift occurred between the novel of domesticity and the network novel which exaggerated contrast within texts to expose the search for a resolution in the world outside. This study aims to examine a corpus of Russian novels to see whether they have the same clear dichotomy between a nuclear family type and a social panorama type.
            This study takes the approach of comparing the conversational and with co-occurrence methods for collecting data from the novels. The conversational method is based on the participation of the characters in a “speech act,” defined as a continuous span of narrative time featuring a set of characters co-located in space and time, where they take turns speaking, are mutually aware of each other, and each character’s speech is intended for the other to hear. The co-occurrence method uses the automatic extraction of interactions based on the appearance of two characters in one sentence or short paragraph. This study compares networks created in Gephi using each method and argues that the co-occurrence of the characters in one scene does not yield significantly different results compared to measuring associations via speech acts. The relative simplicity of identifying speech acts, versus identifying all instances of speaking and non-speaking characters’ co-location in space and time, makes an approach based on speech acts even more attractive.
            Examining the effectiveness of different methods for generating networks from novels has implications for technical developments that can further research in Russian literature. If speech act-based networks reliably capture the nodes and edges of the Russian realist novels, that presents an opportunity to develop algorithms that can identify speech acts with a reasonable degree of accuracy. This, in turn, has implications for corpus development, and ensuring that those corpora are formatted in machine-readable ways (e.g. encoded in UTF-8 and available as plain text files, rather than in proprietary formats). This talk will reflect on experiences, challenges, and successes in sharing corpora and tools with an international group of colleagues who use similar digital approaches in their research on Russian literature.
            
                Rethinking Scholarly Networks Through the Lens of Digital Humanities
            
            Scholarly societies are core social and community infrastructure in the humanities. Presenting at conferences sponsored by these societies is a crucial component for gaining visibility in a field, and bolsters the legitimacy of one’s candidacy for jobs, awards, and other forms of recognition. In North America, these societies are typically scoped nationally, and attending a major annual conference for a society is an expensive endeavor — a situation only compounded for scholars who work interdisciplinarily. The professional necessity of directing significant amounts of one’s travel budget towards these conferences, combined with the limits of their national scope, impede international collaboration, particularly for early-career scholars.
            Digital humanities provides a different axis for finding and engaging with colleagues across national boundaries. Particularly for the text-centric scholarship commonly found in literature and history, building corpora is time-consuming and expensive endeavor. Once completed, such corpora can be a transformative resource for colleagues pursuing a wide range of research questions. For scholars whose work involves applying natural-language processing tools to languages other than modern English, there are resources like stopword lists, word embeddings, and pre- and post-processing scripts that can meaningfully be shared between projects.
            Collaborative development of tools, resources, taxonomies, and infrastructure that are directly related to Slavic studies is itself a significant step forward for the field -- but in the long run, perhaps the most significant impact of DH-centered collaboration is the “downstream effects” of the relationships established between scholars. Scholarly networks are valuable not only for research collaboration, but also as a source of advice when dealing with institutional challenges, and connections and opportunities for one’s students.
            This paper will draw together unifying themes from the presentations given by other panelists and consider the ways in which digital humanities could reshape the current insular, nationally-centered landscape of Slavic and East European area studies in the U.S., and foster the emergence of new international scholarly networks that have an impact beyond the field of Slavic studies itself. It will also reflect on the ways that existing disciplinary scholarly societies could take a more proactive role in breaking down the national boundaries that have emerged through their current structure, for instance, by fully engaging with digital tools and platforms with roots in the digital humanities / scholarly communications communities, such as Humanities Commons.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Engerman, D. (2009). 
                        Know Your Enemy: The Rise and Fall of America's Soviet Experts. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
                    
                    Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S. (2012). Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. In Hirsch, B. (ed), 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: UK, OpenBook Publishers.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The proposed paper aims to present the development of 
                Oralia diacrónica del español
                
                    
                        Funded by MINECO/AEI/FEDER, UE (reference: FFI2017-83400-P).
                    
                 (ODE corpus, University of Granada), a new digital resource for the study of historical dialectology, thanks to TEITOK, “a web-based framework for corpus creation, annotation, and distribution, that combines textual and linguistic annotation within a single TEI based XML document” (Janssen, 2016). 
            
            The digital resource consists of a diachronic corpus of Spanish texts from the south of Spain (mainly, from the old Kingdom of Granada, comprising of the current provinces of Granada, Málaga and Almería) written between 1492 and 1833. These texts, characterised by communicative immediacy or conceptional orality (Koch and Oesterreicher, 2007), include inventories of goods, witnesses’ testimonies in criminal trials and surgeons’ reports on the state of an injured or dead person, where doctors and surgeons use both colloquialisms and learned words. Furthermore, there are texts from different archives in the south of Spain, which makes the corpus an excellent source for historical dialectology studies. 
            The corpus follows the successful model of the ERC-funded project 
                Post Scriptum: A Digital Archive of Ordinary Writing, based on TEITOK. This model allows the combination of two methodological approaches, which represent two subsequent stages in the creation of the corpus (Vaamonde, 2015; Carvalheiro, 2016: 177-78): 
            
            1) A philological approach that involves the digital edition of the manuscripts (selection of documents and metadata, transcription based on TEI-XML). The texts have been encoded following the 
                TEI P5 Guidelines. Furthermore, as proposed by CHARTA, the texts in the corpus can be visualised in three different formats: images of the manuscripts, diplomatic transcriptions and critical editions. Each text is presented with metadata, such as date, place and text type.
            
            2) A corpus linguistics approach, in which texts are tokenized, normalized and annotated by PoS (Janssen, 2014), based on the international standard for European languages EAGLES (Expert Advisory Group on Language Engineering Standards), although the tagset has been adapted. NeoTag, a PoS tagger (Janssen, 2012), has been trained with another corpus of early modern Spanish: Post Scriptum. When a considerable amount of data has been annotated and manually corrected in ODE, this will be used as the training corpus to automatically annotate new texts, improving this way the accuracy of the PoS tagger.
            Thanks to the user-friendly interface offered by TEITOK, it is possible to revise and modify the following information online: TEI tags, metadata, lemmas and PoS. Encoded information can be retrieved and visualised in different ways, such as KWIC, indexes and maps (visualised on Open Street Map). It is possible to search and browse by different filters (including text typology, place, date, archive), which can be applied simultaneously, and combined with other filters like lemma and PoS. A friendly-interface query builder allows the exploration of the corpus by a general audience with no background in computational linguistics (Janssen et al., 2017).
            Finally, we would like to emphasize that the new online corpus has successfully overcome the following difficulties:
            a) It combines digital textual scholarship (TEI) and corpus linguistics (based on the EAGLES international standard for morphosyntactic annotation and lemmatisation).
            b) It allows working in a single edition that can be visualised in different formats by the end user in the digital resource.
            c) Furthermore, it permits independent management, since scholars can upload and edit their work, having control over their own research without the need for an external person in charge of the digital resource.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Calderón Campos, M. and García Godoy, M. T. (coords.). 
                        Oralia diacrónica del español (ODE). Granada: Universidad de Granada. Online at: &lt;
                        
                            http://corpora.ugr.es/ode/index.php?action=home&amp;lang=en&amp;lang=es
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Carvalheiro, C., et al. (2016). A idade dos “desvios”: diacronia, variaçao social e linguística de corpus. In Kabatek, J. (ed), 
                        Lingüística de corpus y lingüística histórica iberorrománica. Walter de Gruyter, pp. 175-96.
                    
                    
                        CHARTA International Network (2015). 
                        Corpus Hispánico y Americano en la Red: Textos Antiguos (CHARTA). Online at: &lt;
                        
                            http://www.corpuscharta.es/
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Janssen, M. (2012). NeoTag: a POS tagger for grammatical neologism detection. 
                        International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 2012: Conference Proceedings. Istanbul: ELRA, pp. 2118–24.
                    
                    
                        Janssen, M. (2014). 
                        TEITOK, a Tokenized TEI environment. Online at: &lt;
                        
                            http://alfclul.clul.ul.pt/teitok/site/index.php
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Janssen, M. (2016). TEITOK: Text-Faithful Annotated Corpora. 
                        International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 2016: 
                        Conference Proceedings. Paris: ELRA, pp. 4037-43.
                    
                    
                        Janssen, M., Ausensi, J. and Fontana, J. M. (2017). 
                        Improving POS Tagging in Old Spanish Using TEITOK. 
                        NoDaLiDa Workshop on Processing Historical Language 2017: Conference Proceedings. Gothenburg: NEALT, pp. 2-6.
                    
                    
                        Koch, P. and Oesterreicher, W. (2007). 
                        Lengua hablada en la Romania: español, francés, italiano. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (eds). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Online at: &lt;
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/
                        &gt;.
                    
                    
                        Vaamonde, G. (2015). 
                        P. S. Post Scriptum: dos corpus diacrónicos de escritura cotidiana. 
                        Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 55: 57-64.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Theatre ‘constitutes itself through disappearance’ (Phelan 1993) and its ephemerality poses methodological problems for researches. Before the twentieth century, most theatre scholarship focused exclusively on texts, whether they were produced before or after a performance. This is true for many theatre traditions around the world (including Javanese theatre, the case study in this paper). A textual model of theatre has serious limitations, as many of the social and improvised aspects of performance are rarely reflected in the texts. Audiovisual documents constitute better (if still imperfect) records, but they have yet to be adopted as authoritative critical editions in theatre studies. Several online platforms offer full length recordings of key theatre performances (for example digitaltheatreplus.com), but they don’t usually include the level of detailed annotation found in literary editions, where individual words or phrases are annotated to report their genesis, elucidate interpretations and trace variations across versions. Audiovisual theatre resources are often accompanied by interviews with performers or introductory notes, but there are no standard formats to annotate specific moments in a performance (the intonation of a word, the movement of a performer, the laughter of the audience) and explain their significance within larger historical and cultural contexts. A scholarly infrastructure for the critical annotation of audiovisual documents has yet to emerge, even though relevant resources and technologies exist. We suggest that a digital philology of performance can be used to imagine new formats for scholarly analysis and communication, at the intersection of theatre studies and digital humanities.
            
                Why philology?
                Conventionally, philology has been associated with the study of literary material and the production of textual editions. However, the principles of philology can be used to interpret all aspects of a theatre performance: the audiovisual, social, and kinesthetic aspects of a performance can all benefit from a philological perspective. Theatre studies tends to be presentist, placing emphasis on novelty rather than tradition (Arps 2016). A philological perspective offers a principled method to study the historical layering of a performance (contemporary performance included), countering this narrow focus on the present. There are many ways in which a text-based philological edition of a performance can document the emergent, interactive and multimedia aspects of a performance, by using notational conventions to represent vocal parameters (an approach pioneered by Tedlock in 1978), tinkering with the spatial arrangement of text on a page, and using extensive notes to describe emergent and interactive aspects of a performance. However, the potential of philological editions can be more fully realized in digital editions that can combine audiovisual sources with careful philological attention. 
                There are calls for born-digital scholarship in performance studies (Mee 2018) in response to impressive growth of digital archives that offer full-length recordings of performances around the world (Caplan 2016). However, the authoring platforms suggested by Mee (such as blogs or Scalar) are not sufficiently malleable to accomplish the level of critical attention required by a scholarly, multimedia edition of performance. For example, it is important for scholars to link specific sections of audiovisual media to textual transcription and translations, in ways that transcend subtitles. These different media should all be amenable to meticulous cross-reference and annotation in ways that are sustainable, findable and reusable. There is no straightforward way to achieve these objectives with most available tools. How does a digital edition of a theatre performance look? What should it seek to achieve? Textual editions are standard critical objects that have benefited from a long history of continuous experimentation in both print and born-digital formats. There is an extensive corpus of influential digital editions and an extensive literature that explores how digital editions modify and continue traditions of textual editing (for example Dsicoll et al. 2016). But this level of experimentation and theoretical discussion has yet to be extended to multimedia editions in theatre studies. 
                To sketch a prototype for such scholarly, multimedia editions, the present authors embarked on a collaborative journey of creativity and discussion. Both authors have an interest in the Javanese tradition of wayang kulit (shadow puppet theatre). A has worked as a scholar of Javanese language and culture for more than three decades; B is an early-career digital humanities scholar and web developer. In 2016, A published a philological, annotated translation of the work of an influential wayang kulit artist, based on the recording of a performance. The first version of this translation was published in book format. A and B are currently collaborating on an interactive, multimedia version of this translation. The development of a digital portal for this purpose is not just a matter of ‘adding’ audiovisual materials but a dialogical experimentation with the format and possibilities of a digital philology of performance.
            
            
                Conceptualizing multimedia editions
                Spatz (2015) suggests that video can document several aspects of performance, such as training (2015). Although he refers to these videos as ‘editions’, it is unclear how they constitute scholarly interventions. As Sahle (2016) notes, an edition without additional material that makes the document understandable or accessible is just a facsimile or an item in an archive. A critical attitude is required to determine what additional materials are required, and how they should be included. Their inclusion should follow rules derived from the relevant scholarly context, and these rules should be transparently and rigorously applied. An example from A’s print edition is that the symbol • indicates that the dhalang (the puppet-master in wayang kulit) knocks a mallet against a wooden box. The specific sequence of such knocks is of great significance to a performance: it might constitute a cue to the gamelan musicians or indicate that a different personage is speaking, while also contributing to the aural aesthetic of the performance. The transcription of these sounds is surrounded by explanations, and linked to detailed notes (indicated by the symbol ⓐ). For example:
                [T]he dhalang raps the puppet chest to signal an accelerando and sforzando in the gamelan. ⓐ At the appropriate point in the structure of the piece he raps the pattern •• • as a cue to the gamelan to play slowly and pianissimo. 
                In the print version, the symbols substitute for the experience of listening to the actual sounds of these rhythmical pattern. In the multimedia version, the passage above is time-linked to the recording. The user can play the recording, and the appropriate segment of the transcript will be highlighted in a different color (Fig. 1). The user can also click on any portion of the transcript to navigate trough the audiovisual recording. This description is no longer a stand-in for an absent sound, but an interpretive scholarly layer. People who are not familiar with the tradition might not be able to identify the •• • pattern just by listening to the recording. Thus, the co-presence of audio and annotation, linked through time-based playback directs the attention of the users, making the material more accessible, understandable and usable for future research. 
                This example shows that even the simplest inclusion of audiovisual material is never just an appendage. The audiovisual material changes the function and potential of scholarly annotation. We are at the early stages of discovering the full implications of linked transcripts, annotations and audiovisual documents. Besides producing a specific web portal for this wayang kulit performance, we are documenting our process and producing an open-source software package that can be adapted by other scholars to tackle the problems a performance philology poses for other theatrical traditions.
                We aim to develop tools that are usable by theatre scholars (even if they are not interested in web development) in ways that are citable, reusable and sustainable. The transcripts, translations and annotations of our edition are all TEI-complaint and we are working with both an academic publisher and a digital archive to preserve our edition and to manage its metadata records. We are also committed to making our materials available as data: this will enable the perusal of the materials online through customizable portals, as well as their eventual integration within computational, data-driven research projects. We believe that more collaborative work on this area will open new avenues for the digital transformation of theatre scholarship. 
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Figure 1. As the recording plays, the appropriate section of the transcript is highlighted.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arps, B. (2016). 
                        Tall Tree, Nest of the Wind: The Javanese Shadow-Play Dewa Ruci Performed by Ki Anom Soeroto: A Study in Performance Philology. ( Book, Whole). Singapore: NUS Press.
                    
                    
                        Caplan, D. (2017). Reassessing Obscurity: The Case for Big Data in Theatre History. 
                        Theatre Journal, 
                        68(4): 555–73 doi:
                        10.1353/tj.2016.0106.
                    
                    
                        Mee, E. (2018). Born-Digital Scholarship. 
                        TDR/The Drama Review, 
                        62(3): 8–9.
                    
                    
                        Phelan, P. (1993). 
                        Unmarked: The Politics of Performance. London; New York: Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P. (2016). What is a Scholarly Digital Edition?. 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing, vol. 4. 1st ed. (Theories and Practices). Open Book Publishers, pp. 19–40 
                         (accessed 23 February 2018).
                    
                    
                        Spatz, B. (2015). 
                        What a Body Can Do: Technique as Knowledge, Practice as Research. London and New York: Routledge 
                         (accessed 22 June 2017).
                    
                    
                        Tedlock , Dennis (1978). 
                        Finding the Center. Narrative Poetry of the Zuni Indians. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Although there have been some infrastructural developments of late, the main 
                    modus operandi in digital literary studies is still to apply a certain research method to an ephemeral corpus. In a best-case scenario, the results are 
                    somehow reproducible, in a worst-case scenario they are not reproducible at all. At best, there is an openly accessible corpus in a standard format such as TEI, another markup language, or at least TXT. At worst, the corpus is not even accessible, i.e., the research results cannot be questioned.
                
                However, there are signs that this is slowly changing. Some projects provide interfaces that allow for multiple ways of access to corpora. One of these projects is DraCor, an open platform for research on (European) drama, which will be introduced in this paper (accessible at 
                     or via its GitHub repositories or its API). DraCor transforms existing text collections into 'Programmable Corpora' – a new term we bring into play with this talk.
                
            
            
                Building Blocks
                
                    Vanilla Corpora
                    Similar to the COST Action on European novels (Schöch et al. 2018), the DraCor project seeks to establish a bundle of multilingual drama corpora encoded in basic TEI as basis for digital comparative studies. To date, the platform enables access to a Russian-language (
                        ) and a German-language corpus of plays (
                        ). Similar to Paul Fièvre's collection "Théâtre classique", these corpora are designed as vanilla corpora, which initially contain hardly any special markup beyond the necessary, but are freely available and can therefore be forked, enriched and expanded. To demonstrate that other corpora can be easily linked to the platform, we forked the Shakespeare Folger Corpus and the Swedish Dramawebben corpus and connected it, and all existing extraction and visualisation methods of the platform are readily applicable to the newly added corpora (
                         and 
                        ). Other corpora of dramatic texts are to follow; the only prerequisite is that they are encoded in TEI.
                    
                    The advantages of a freely available corpus hosted on GitHub are obvious. Not only can the corpus be cloned and loaded directly into an XML database like eXist-db. Using the SVN wrapper from GitHub, the entire corpus can also be downloaded directly, in its current state and without version history if this is not needed:
                    svn export https://github.com/dracor-org/rusdracor/trunk/tei
                    An openly accessible GitHub repository also means that pull requests for error correction are possible and welcome.
                
                
                    XML Database (eXist-db) and Frontend
                    DraCor relies on eXist as XML database to process TEI files and to provide functions for researching the corpora. The frontend is built with React (
                        ), it is responsive and easily extensible. However, the focus is not on the GUI, but on the API (on the general differences between these two approaches to interfaces cf. Bleier/Klug 2018).
                    
                
                
                    API
                    To come close to the ideal and the possibility of applying "all methods to all texts" in a simple manner (Frank/Ivanovic 2018), it takes more than open corpora. The article by Frank/Ivanovic advocates SPARQL endpoints (for which there is also a readily-available app for eXist-db: 
                        ).
                    
                    DraCoroffers such endpoint, but also features a rich general API documented and explained via Swagger (
                        ). In a subarea of corpus philology, the digital scholarly editions, discussions about more proactive use of APIs have already begun (for background information cf. Bleier/Klug 2018), the Folger Digital Texts API may serve as an example (
                        ). The advantage of a more modern solution like Swagger is that API queries can be executed live and directly and that the output can be controlled more precisely.
                    
                    A simple use-case scenario would look like this: using RStudio you can throw a quick glance into a corpus with just a few lines of code, maybe regarding the development of the number of characters in Russian drama between 1740 and 1940, stored in the metadata table (
                        ). This table, which can be obtained in JSON or CSV format, is read into a Data.Table, whereupon the values of two columns (year of publication and number of speakers) can simply be visualised via ggplot (Fig. 1).
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            Figure 1: Number of characters per play in chronological order (source: RusDraCor).
                        This very simple example is able to show the starting point of a decisive structural diversification of the Russian drama landscape. Pushkin's historical drama "Boris Godunov" (1825), result of his reading of Shakespeare, features speech acts of 79 characters, a number previously unthinkable in Russia drama.
                    
                    However, the possibilities are not limited to using ready-made API functions. New research ideas always create new needs for easily obtainable and reproducible data and metrics; the API can be extended accordingly, i.e., new research ideas can be implemented centrally in the API layer. This is made even easier by the fact that Apache Ant can be used to rebuild the entire development environment on your own system.
                    In addition to structural data and metadata, full texts without markup can also be obtained, e.g., if methods such as stylometry or topic modelling are the purpose, i.e., methods that need a "bag of words" and do not require markup.
                    All in all, the structure and documentation of open APIs makes it much easier to reproduce research results, which up to now has often been a time-consuming (or impossible) process.
                
                
                    Shiny App
                    An example of the versatility of the DraCor API is the Shiny App created by Ivan Pozdniakov (
                        ). Shiny is a framework based on R, which makes it possible to display interactive visualisations in the browser. The DraCor Shiny App does just that, relying entirely on the DraCor API for data retrieval. Thus, visualisations of the current database can be used for teaching and research purposes, but also for easier data correction.
                    
                
                
                    Didactics
                    The formalisation of literary texts, for example via markup, is not self-explanatory. Although the community can rely on some standards, every operationalisation depends on the actual research question. To give an example: if you would like to extract network data based on character interactions in a literary text, you would have dozens of different ways of doing this (e.g., Grayson et al. 2016 test different extraction methods for novels and compare the results). This also applies to plays. In order to sharpen the senses for this in teaching, we developed the tool "ezlinavis" (
                        ) and integrated it into the DraCor toolchain. Network data can be extracted from literary texts manually, also to raise the awareness for the contingency of this process, an important preliminary step to the eventual step of operationalisation.
                    
                    In addition to an approach to the gamification of the process of correcting TEI-encoded corpora (Göbel/Meiners 2016), we also developed a card game for teaching purposes in order to playfully train the understanding of network values (Fischer at al. 2018).
                    These didactic tools wrapped around the platform are an integral part of the whole project as they are based on the project data and operationalisations. While building the platform, it was important to recognise that data can take several forms and be equally important for research and teaching.
                
                
                    Linked Open Data
                    The TEI files contain GND [Integrated Authority File of the German National Library] and Wikidata identifiers for both authors and works. In this way, various data and facts that lie beyond one's own corpus work can be included. Something like an automatically created gallery of authors has a more illustrative character (de la Iglesia/Fischer 2016). But using the same identifiers, we can also determine if a corpus has a regional bias. Via Wikidata, we can easily display the distribution of the authors' places of birth and death on a map (by doing so, we could rule out that our German-language corpus GerDraCor has a regional bias, cf. Göbel/Fischer 2015).
                    Similarly, the Wikidata ID of the plays can be used to find out where they were first performed (example query: 
                        ), i.e., aspects of the performance history can be switched on, even though they are not the focus of the core project and based on data curated elsewhere.
                    
                
                
                    Infrastructure Instead of Rapid Prototyping
                    Projects like DraCor seek to provide the digital literary studies with a reliable and extensible infrastructure so that the research community can focus on research questions.
                    An important conclusion for us was that we would give up the further development of our all-in-one Python script collection "dramavis" (Kittel/Fischer 2014–2018 and Fischer et al. 2017), which we have been developing for four years now. From here on, we would rather devote our time to the API. "Dramavis" followed the idea of rapid prototyping and had to do all by itself, including the preprocessing of data (Trilcke/Fischer 2018), which is not untypical in the Digital Humanities. The code base has grown quite a bit in the meantime and its maintenance has become difficult and often enough led away from actual research questions.
                
            
            
                Outlook
                In allusion to the project "ProgrammableWeb" – which maintains a database of open APIs and whose slogan is: "APIs, Mashups and the Web as Platform" (accessible at 
                    ) – we propose the term 'Programmable Corpora' for research-oriented corpora providing an API.
                
                Programmable Corpora facilitate the implemention of research questions around corpora. It is to be expected that infrastructural efforts of this kind will pay off for the entire community with effects such as those listed by John Womersley in his presentation at the ICRI2018 conference in Vienna: a) dramatically increase scientific reach; b) address research questions of long duration requiring pooled effort; c) promote collaboration, interdisciplinarity, interaction.
                The are numerous ways to connect to Programmable Corpora, no matter if you don't want to code at all and only need a CSV file for Excel or LibreOffice Calc or a GEXF file for Gephi, if you want to research a corpus via its connections to the Linked Open Data cloud or just want to get specific data for your R or Python script without having to worry about the corpus and its maintenance and reproducibility (all this remains an option, though). Programmable Corpora make it easier to decide on which level of the platform your own research process starts.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bleier, Roman; Klug, Helmut W. (2018): Discussing Interfaces in Digital Scholarly Editing. In: 
                        Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces. BoD, Norderstedt, pp. V–XV. URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        de la Iglesia, Martin; Fischer, Frank (2016): 
                        The Facebook of German Playwrights. URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank; Dazord, Gilles; Göbel, Mathias; Kittel, Christopher; Trilcke, Peer (2017): Le drame comme réseau de relations. Une application de l‘analyse automatisée pour l’histoire littéraire du théâtre. In: 
                        Revue d'historiographie du théâtre. № 4 (2017). URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank; Kittel, Christopher; Milling, Carsten; Schultz, Anika; Trilcke, Peer; Wolf, Jana (2018): Dramenquartett – Eine didaktische Intervention. In: 
                        Conference proceedings of 
                        DHd2018. University of Cologne, pp. 397–398. DOI: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Göbel, Mathias; Fischer, Frank (2015): 
                        The Birth and Death of German Playwrights. URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Göbel, Mathias; Meiners, Hanna-Lena (2016): Play(s): Crowdbasierte Anreicherung eines literarischen Volltext-Korpus. In: 
                        Conference proceedings o
                        f
                         
                        DHd2016. University of Leipzig, pp. 140–143. URL: 
                        http://www.dhd2016.de/abstracts/vortr%C3%A4ge-007.html
                    
                    
                        Grayson, Siobhán; Wade, Karen; Meaney, Gerardine; Greene, Derek (2016): The Sense and Sensibility of Different Sliding Windows in Constructing Co-Occurrence Networks from Literature. In: 
                        2nd IFIP International Workshop on Computational History and Data-Driven Humanities. Trinity College Dublin 2016. PDF: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Kittel; Christopher; Fischer, Frank (2014–2018): 
                        dramavis. Python script collection. Repository: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christoph et al. (2018): Distant Reading for European Literary History. A COST Action [Poster]. In: 
                        DH2018: Book of Abstracts / Libro de resúmenes. Mexico: Red de Humanidades Digitales A. C. URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, Peer; Fischer, Frank (2018): Literaturwissenschaft als Hackathon. Zur Praxeologie der Digital Literary Studies und ihren epistemischen Dingen. In: Martin Huber and Sybille Krämer (eds.): 
                        Wie Digitalität die Geisteswissenschaften verändert: Neue Forschungsgegenstände und Methoden. (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 3). DOI: 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Corpus 14, a corpus of correspondences from World War I
                The processing of correspondences for a digital edition presents similarities with other textual genres, and therefore common methodologies and tools can be applied. However, as correspondence corpora display a reticular presentational organisation and since the related projects often require to progressively gather various sources, publishing through digital media has several advantages with respect to print publishing.
                As opposed to most correspondence projects, dedicated to well-known authors or scholarly writings
                    
                        For a list of projects see Stadler 
                            et al., 2016.
                        
                    , the 
                    Corpus 14 project deals with correspondences from ordinary people
                    
                        Another project dealing with the digitisation of this kind of correspondences is 
                            Digitising experiences of migrations: 
                            The development of interconnected letter collections, by Moreton and Nesi (2013-2014, 
                            http://lettersofmigration.blogspot.com). For further information, see also Moreton, 2016; Moreton 
                            et al., 2014.
                        
                    . In conjunction with the commemoration of the centenary of WWI, the project coincides with the French initiative to appeal to families in order to gather documents or objects related to the war (the 
                    Grande Collecte was initiated by the 
                    Mission Centenaire
                    
                        
                            http://www.centenaire.org/fr
                        
                     in 2013). The project allowed for the digitisation and the publication of a vast amount of data (letters, postcards) aimed at specialists in two fields:
                
                
                    the study of the Great War and its legacy on social memory, including the cultural transformations that occurred during and because of the war,
                    the evolution of the linguistic uses that happened at that time, in particular among less-literate people (from different areas of France, mostly with rural origins), the propagation of a slang (the so-called 
                        “argot des Poilus”) or the influence of regional variations, especially in areas characterised by diglossia situations.
                    
                
                As of August 2018, the corpus is comprised of almost 1800 correspondences written by 37 writers in 11 areas, for a total of almost 500,000 tokens
                    
                        The current size of the corpus is limited, but future additions are planned; the effort was so far concentrated on establishing a methodology, selecting relevant texts that have been accurately transcribed.
                    . The construction of the corpus has been carried out with the following requirements:
                
                
                    the selection of exclusively less-literate writers,
                    the preference for writings that can be followed up over time for a network of related writers (although it is generally impossible to build a complete set of correspondences), 
                    the accuracy of the transcription in terms of the encountered spelling, punctuation or syntax as well as characteristics of the sources (legibility, layout).
                
                The transcripts were encoded in conformance with the TEI guidelines
                    
                        See 
                            http://www.tei-c.org/activities/sig/correspondence/
                        
                    , which preserves the alignment between the text and the facsimiles, to mark up the logical structure of the text as well as features of readability. Two versions of the text are kept: one accurate and one with a normalised orthography.
                
                The metadata, described by the 
                    TEIheader, includes the 
                    correspDesc element (as defined by the TEI SIG on Correspondence and introduced in the 2.8.0 version of TEI P5), allowing for the identification of sender(s), addressee(s), relationship, date and place of sending.
                
                In addition to the methodological approach followed in the transcription process, 
                    Corpus 14 relies on the data representation model provided by the TXM platform
                    
                        You can access the 
                            Corpus 14 from 
                            http://textometrie.univ-montp3.fr/
                        
                    , which is used for text querying and analysis. TXM distinguishes properties for structural units (either inherited from the TEI encoding or defined by the user annotation) and lexical units (through an automated morphosyntactic tagging and lemmatisation, which in fact is of limited usefulness for non-standard language). 
                
                The corpus is also available for download from the Ortolang platform
                    
                        Access via permanent identifier 
                            https://hdl.handle.net/11403/corpus14
                        
                    , a repository for language resources, which provides long-term archiving and allows for metadata harvesting by means of the OAI-PMH protocol.
                
            
            
                Semantic annotation of persons and places
                Recent developments of the project mainly concern the semantic annotation of Named Entities, especially persons and places. These are identified following a workflow including both an automated tool, REDEN Online (Frontini 
                    et al., 2016) and a manual annotation, and eventually marked up according to the guidelines of the TEI module for names, dates, people and places. Place references are linked to an external knowledge bases (DBpedia) whenever possible, whereas persons are referenced to an internal index. NEs in the 
                    correspDesc and in the 
                    body are annotated in the same way, but their position in the TEI tree determines their role, so that a simple XPath can return for instance only people and places that are mentioned in a letter. Such analysis shows that places and persons evoked in the correspondences between soldiers and their families are more likely to refer to their previous lives at home. This may be due to the wish of soldiers to maintain the connection with their network and their link to the household environment, which is one of the main functions of these letters (Caffarena, 2005; Gibelli, 2014).
                
            
            
                Ongoing work: organisation of correspondence networks
                Various ways of visualising information related to people, places and dates in correspondences, especially when it concerns metadata, have been developed by several projects. We cite among others 
                    The Migrant letter (O'Leary and Moreton
                    , 2017); 
                    Visual Correspondence
                    
                        
                            http://www.correspondence.ie
                        
                    ; 
                    Mapping the Republic of Letters
                    
                        
                            http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/
                        
                    ; 
                    Early Modern Letters Online
                    
                        
                            http://emlo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/home
                        
                    ; 
                    Clavius on the Web
                    
                        
                            http://claviusontheweb.it/
                        
                    . Specifically, the investigation of spatial references can be facilitated by a cartographic visualisation. Our main aim in developing our own visualisation interface is to adhere to and exploit existing standards, such as TEI and Semantic Web technologies, so as to create a framework that could ideally be reused for similar corpora.
                
                The visualisation proposed for the 
                    Corpus 14 project displays each set of correspondences (a soldier and his wife/relatives at home) on the map, with its sender and receiver addresses identified by two distinct colors, as well as markers for places mentioned in the letter
                    
                        
                            The visualisation (which will be available as a demo on the project's website) was developed in collaboration with Pietro Barbieri, Chiara Capone and Luca Ciccone, MSc students in computer science, supervised by Marina Ribaudo, associate professor at DIBRIS, Università degli Studi di Genova.
                        
                    .
                
                This way of visualising spatial and personal information contained in letters brings an additional layer to the reading, as well as to the analysis of 
                    Corpus 14 correspondences, which have already been carried out in Steuckardt 
                    et al. (2015) and Roynette 
                    et al. (2017) 
                    inter alia.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Caffarena, F. 
                        (2005). 
                        Lettere dalla Grande Guerra. Scritture del quotidiano, monumenti della memoria, fonti per la storia. Il caso italiano
                        . Milano: Unicopli.
                    
                    
                        Frontini, F., Brando, C. and Ganascia, J. G.
                         (2016). REDEN ONLINE: Disambiguation, Linking and Visualisation of References in TEI Digital Editions. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts
                        . Kraków: Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University.
                        
                            http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/362
                        
                         (accessed 21 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Gibelli, A.
                         (2014). 
                        La guerra grande: storie di gente comune
                        . Bari: Laterza
                    
                    
                        Moreton, E. 
                        (2016). Ph.D. thesis: The emigrant letter digitised: markup and analysis. Birmingham: University of Birmingham. Available from: 
                        
                            http://etheses.bham.ac.uk/6416 
                        
                        (accessed 18 March 2019)
                        .
                    
                    
                        Moreton, E., O'Leary, N. and O'Sullivan, P. 
                        (2014). Visualising the emigrant letter. 
                        Revue Européene des Migrations Internationales. Special issue: Traces of Dispersion
                        , vol. 
                        30 - n° 3 et 4. 
                        
                            https://journals.openedition.org/remi/7081
                        
                         (accessed 18 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        O'Leary, N. and Moreton, E.
                         (2017). The Migrant Letter Digitised: Visualising Metadata. 
                        Journal of Cultural Analytics
                        . doi: 
                        
                            10.31235/osf.io/89xbp
                             
                        
                        
                            http://culturalanalytics.org/2017/03/the-migrant-letter-digitised-visualising-metadata
                        
                         (accessed 19 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        Praxiling
                         (2014).
                        Corpus 14
                        .
                        
                            https://hdl.handle.net/11403/corpus14
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Roynette, O., Siouffi, G. and Steuckardt, A. (eds).
                        (2017). 
                        La langue sous le feu : mots, textes, discours de la Grande Guerre
                        . (Histoire). Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes.
                    
                    
                        Stadler, P., Illetschko, M. and Seifert, S.
                         (2016). Towards a Model for Encoding Correspondence in the TEI: Developing and Implementing &lt;correspDesc&gt;. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 
                        (Issue 
                        9
                        ) 
                            doi:
                        
                        10.4000/jtei.1433.
                        
                            http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1433
                        
                         (accessed 21 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Steuckardt, A. (ed) 
                        (2015). Entre villages et tranchées: l’écriture de poilus ordinaires. Uzès: Inclinaison.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            It is usually understood that literary authors have style, and numerous papers have been published about the usefulness of digital approaches and techniques for identifying stylistic specificities of a writer, for confronting styles, for attributing texts, etc. (see Holmes, 1994; Brunet, 2004; Herman et al., 2004). However, another traditional type of stylistic analysis in literary studies has been less operationalized in a digital paradigm, aimed at observing how the characters speak (see however Brynes 2010 and 2012). This paper contributes to the testing of digital tools for such an approach; in other words, it tries to answer, with digital tools, whether literary characters have a style, or if the signal of the author that creates them is prevalent over all other kinds of linguistic specificities. 
            In order to answer this question, the paper focuses on theatrical texts from the 17
                th and 18
                th French centuries. To the contrary of what happens in narrative texts, character’s discourses have clear boundaries in plays, and can be easily extracted from an XML/TEI encoded text. Also, characters in plays have been somewhat less studied with digital tools than characters in novels (Jockers and Kiriloff, 2016; Jockers 2013).
            
            A sample of 8 comedies staged approximately from 1630 to 1740 has been put together; the sample tries to balance well known play writers, such as Molière, Corneille Destouches and Marivaux, with more obscure authors (Dancourt, Regnard, Boissy, Boursault). However, all the plays are “grandes comédies” in 5 acts and in verses, with comparable lengths and quite similar numbers of characters. A total amount of 82 discourses has been extracted using an XQuery under BaseX.
            First, the plays as a whole (but without the stage directions or any kind of meta-discourse) have been submitted to a PCA using the stylometric library under R written by (Eder and al., 2016). As expected, differences between author styles are well underlined by their distribution on the graph, with Molière in the middle and Regnard closer to him than to the authors from the 18
                th century.
            
            
                
            
            This first analysis has been conducted only to confirm that the tool works on the type of texts it has been fed to, and yields sensible results.
            Second, character’s discourses have been submitted to the same kind of analysis. After further adjustments, such as the exclusion from the corpus of too short roles that were skewing the general distribution on the graph, and the testing of various algorithms (covariance, correlation or cluster analysis? Classic Delta, Canberra or Eder’s Delta?), the following representation has been obtained:
            
                
            
            As it can be observed, characters do not group by “origin” (i. e., more often than not characters from a play do not appear together), nor do they display a clear historical split - to the difference to what was happening with the authors. This tends to confirm that characters do have a style, whose parameters are to be further identified and tested. Moreover, when merging in a same txt file discourses of feminine, respectively masculine, characters from the same play/ author, significant differences appear in certain cases, with Molière’s Agnès and other feminine characters being the most intriguing case:
            
                
            
            In a third stage, an analysis of characters’ speeches is conducted with TXM (see Heiden, 2010), so as to delineate the stylistic differences pointed to by the PCA and to attempt an explanation. Verbs do not seem to be useful discriminators, even when the texts are lemmatized. The calculus of specificities shows that personnel pronouns, names and possessives are the most discriminant features. To these, one may add the adjectives, which appear more frequently as a characteristic of male speeches according to the table of preferred words built with the “oppose” function under stylo library in R. While the importance of “pronouns of dialogue” for characterizing plays has already been underlined (Muller, 1979), the other features are a bit more surprising, since one would have expected, for instance, verbs to play a more prominent role, related to the actantial position of the characters. Also, it is not clear why male characters would use more adjectives than their feminine counterparts; sensibility and a trend towards pathos are more often evoked in relation to the second ones. After further inquiries with a new set of discourses, from other plays by the same authors, but also from other authors, so as to confirm the above mentioned phenomena, the paper will try to propose some explanations based on a close analysis of the contexts.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brunet, Étienne. (2004). Où l’on mesure la distance entre les distances. 
                        Texto!
                        http://www.revue-texto.net/Inedits/Brunet/Brunet_Distance.html
                    
                    
                        Brynes, R. (2010). A statistical analysis of the ‘Eumaeus’ Phrasemes in James Joyce’s Ulysses
                        . JADT 2010: Conference Proceedings, Rome: Edizioni Universitarie di Lettere Economia Diritto, pp. 289-96.
                    
                    
                        Brynes, R. (2012). The Stylometry of Cliche Density and Character. 
                        Proceedings of JADT 2012, Liège/ Bruxelles: Université de Liège/ Facultés Universitaires Saint-Louis, pp. 239-46.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Kestemont, M. and Rybicki, J. (2013). Stylometry with R: a suite of tools. 
                        Digital Humanities 2013: Conference Abstracts. University of Nebraska--Lincoln, NE, pp. 487-89.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation. Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, pp. 389-98.
                    
                    
                        Herrmann, J. B., van Dalen-Oskam, K. and Schöch, C. (2015). Revisiting style, a key concept in literary studies. 
                        Journal of Literary Theory, 9(1) : 25-52.
                    
                    
                        Holmes, D.I. (1994) Authorship attribution. 
                        Computers and the Humanities, 28(2): 87-106.
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. and Kiriloff, G. (2016) Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century Novel. 
                        Journal of Cultural Analytics. DOI 10.22148/16.010
                    
                    
                        Jockers, M. (2013) 
                        Macroanalysis. Digital Methods and Literary History, Urbana, Chicago and Springfield: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    
                        Kastberg Sjöblom, M. (2004) L’indice pronominal est-il encore d’actualité? 
                        Lexicometrica, (5): 1-21
                        .
                    
                    
                        Malrieu, D.
                         (2001). Stylistique et statistique textuelle. À partir de l’article de C. Muller sur les ‘pronoms de dialogue’. 
                        Texto !
                        http://www.revue-texto.net/index.php?id=611
                    
                    
                        Muller, C. (1979). 
                        Langue française et linguistique quantitative. Genève : Slatkine.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Nous proposons d'exposer une modélisation et des outils de visualisation pour l’étude de paratextes. À partir du corpus des commentaires de Juste Lipse aux 
                    Annales de Tacite, nous défendons l’intérêt de solutions propres aux objectifs scientifiques du projet tout en respectant des standards et en permettant la documentation et la réutilisation des outils : nous parlons de laboratoire numérique. Notre démarche est fondée sur les principes suivants : le questionnement préalable de la nature de l'objet d'étude et sa définition ; la volonté de servir avant tout les objectifs scientifiques du projet ; et la mise en place de solutions permettant la réutilisation tant des données que des outils et méthodes.
                
            
            
                Le projet et son corpus
                Tacitus On Line a pour but d’interroger le rapport entre le texte de Tacite et les savoirs qui se sont développés à partir des commentaires à ses œuvres, afin de produire une synthèse sur le développement de la pensée des humanistes dans ce qu’elle doit à l’antiquité romaine, en particulier chez Juste Lipse (1547-1606) à qui on doit la véritable découverte de Tacite.
                De manière volontairement paradoxale, on cherche à comprendre non pas ce que le commentaire apporte au texte antique mais comment le texte antique a pu donner naissance aux commentaires humanistes et ouvrir ainsi à de nouveaux modes de pensée : les commentaires ne sont pas des « parasites » du texte antique mais occupent une place centrale.
                La démarche consiste à partir d’une édition de 1608 qui présente les commentaires de Juste Lipse aux 
                    Annales de Tacite et des commentaires d’érudits antérieurs, de la numériser pour faciliter des études ciblées (sur les citations, l’établissement du texte, le vocabulaire politique, etc) et arriver à une étude synthétique sur Lipse et Tacite.
                
                Le corpus d’étude est composé du Livre I des 
                    Annales de Tacite (80 paragraphes, soit 326 sous-paragraphes) et des 273 commentaires de Lipse à ces sous-paragraphes.
                
                
                    Modélisation et enrichissements
                    Le corpus a été transcrit et encodé en XML-TEI (schéma TEI All). Plusieurs arguments soutiennent ce choix parmi lesquels sa qualité pour représenter les manuscrits, la pérennité du format (qui existe et évolue depuis plus de 30 ans) et sa large utilisation dans la communauté (Burnard, 2013). Il existe de nombreux articles et ouvrages qui décrivent ce format (Burghart, 2010 ; TEI Website). Pour nous, un avantage majeur du format est qu’il ne présage pas des utilisations du corpus et incite à encoder la source le plus objectivement possible tout en laissant la place aux enrichissements et annotations scientifiques.
                    Les commentaires étant notre objet central d’étude, nous avons fait le choix de les encoder dans la balise &lt;text&gt;. Ils sont organisés dans des &lt;div&gt; indiquant grâce aux attributs @resp et @xml:id l’auteur et l’identifiant du commentaire. Le repérage du sous-paragraphe des 
                        Annales auquel un commentaire se rapporte est encodé avec la balise &lt;ref&gt;. Les 
                        Annales sont quant à elles au sein du &lt;front&gt;, dans des &lt;div&gt; de type “paragraphe” ou “sous-paragraphe” ayant pour @xml:id les identifiants des 
                        Belles Lettres. Cette structure front/text reflète de fait notre point de vue sur les données.
                    
                
                
                    Catégorisation des commentaires
                    Les commentaires peuvent concerner différents aspects du texte. Afin d'étudier la façon dont Lipse travaille et commente Tacite, une catégorisation des commentaires a été effectuée. La proposition est de travailler à partir d'un ensemble d'étiquettes de base, de les confronter aux données et de faire émerger une typologie en même temps que l'étude des commentaires se fait.
                    Pour chaque commentaire, une ou plusieurs catégories est attribuée dans l’attribut @ana. Une catégorie de travail a été ajoutée et apparaît sous l'étiquette « À corriger » permettant de repérer les commentaires pour lesquels les catégories n'ont pas encore été définies.
                
            
            
                Des outils pour exploiter les données en cours de construction
                Nous avons fait le choix d’une interface web répondant à des critères propres au projet : voir les commentaires et texte de Tacite en vis-à-vis, pouvoir faire des recherches plein texte ; observer les catégories des commentaires et rendre compte de la présence de citations.
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Interface de Tacitus Online présentant les commentaires et leur(s) catégorie(s), le texte des Annales et les filtres de visualisation (colonne de gauche)
                    
                
                L'interface proposée est le résultat d'un développement utilisant des technologies web et XML classiques (HTML/CSS/JavaScript/Bootstrap pour le web ; XML/XSLT pour les données). Les sources sont accessibles surhttps://gitlab.com/litt-arts-num/tacitus-on-line et sous licence CC-BY-4.0 ce qui permet leur réutilisation et modification.
                Dans la figure 1, on observe un ensemble de filtres permettant d’afficher les commentaires soit par exclusion (option “ou”), soit par inclusion (option “et”) selon différents critères : catégories du commentaire, des citations, auteur… D'autres filtres sont en cours de développement en particulier le filtrage par paragraphe.
                La vue obtenue peut être partagée par un lien contenant l'ensemble des filtres actifs facilitant le travail collaboratif et la citation des sources.
            
            
                La frise des commentaires
                L'importance accordée à la catégorisation des commentaires fait qu'il est intéressant d'avoir une vue dédiée à ces catégories. Nous avons ainsi créé une frise (fig. 2) permettant de voir les commentaires comme des événements qui occurrent au fil du texte de Tacite. Elle est cliquable et permet d'aller au contenu correspondant.
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Figure 2: Frise synoptique des commentaires
                    
                
                Cette vue synoptique permet de refléter l'abondance ou la rareté (§1.3.1 vs. §1.1.3) de commentaires pour certains paragraphes ou encore la variété ou la spécificité (§1.5.2 vs. §1.2.1) pour d’autres. Elle permet aussi de rendre compte de zones de texte plus ou moins commentées.
            
            
                Conclusion
                Le laboratoire numérique proposé permet de se libérer de la contrainte de publication des données : celles-ci sont accessibles en ligne, mais servent avant tout les objectifs propres au projet. La réutilisation des données est permise par plusieurs biais : l'accessibilité du site, le partage des filtres de recherche et l’utilisation du standard XML-TEI. Les développements sont accessibles, réutilisables et, à condition de respecter nos choix d'encodage TEI, l’outil peut héberger des données autres. De nombreuses évolutions sont envisagées comme des vues statistiques ou l’intégration d'outils issus de la linguistique de corpus (concordanciers, etc.).
                
                    Remerciements
                    Les autrices souhaitent remercier la MSH-Alpes,les Éditions des Belles Lettres, la Bibliothèque Municipale de Lyon, le réseau national des MSH ainsi que l’UMR Litt&amp;Arts et ELAN, et les étudiants ayant participé au projet : accès aux sources, encodage, développement de l’outil, conceptualisation et modélisation du corpus, déplacement à Utrecht n’auraient pu se faire sans leur soutien financier, administratif ou encore humain.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burghart, Marjorie (2010). 
                        Éditer des sources historiques en ligne grâce à XML – Un guide pratique. Lyon : Online. 
                        http://mutec.huma-num.fr/sites/www.mutec-shs.fr/files/Guide%20Editer%20des%20sources%20historiques%20%20gr%C3%A2ce%20a%20XML.pdf (accès au 26 novembre 2018).
                    
                    
                        Burnard, Lou (2013). The Evolution of the Text Encoding Initiative: From Research Project to Research Infrastructure. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], Issue 5 | June 2013, 
                         (accès au 26 novembre 2018).
                    
                    
                        TEI Website. 
                        TEI: Teach Yourself TEI, Online, 
                         (accès au 26 novembre 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Place and space are critical elements of medieval popular romance, both in the journeys undertaken by the romance protagonist (and imaginatively recreated by the romance reader), and in the transmission of texts across space and time. These phenomena have driven critical interest in spatial markers in literary texts. The Morrois (Mapping of Romance Realms and Other Imagined Spaces) project, a digital geographic concordance of literary spaces, collects line-by-line instances of explicitly geographic place-name usage in Middle English manuscripts. The end goal of Morrois is to explore the research possibilities afforded through distant reading and various data visualizations (including GIS). Our poster will present data migration from Omeka Classic to RDF. 
            In its current form, Morrois uses the Omeka Classic content management system (encoded using Dublin Core metadata schema), and maps the places associated with the Alliterative Morte Arthure (found in the Lincoln Cathedral Library MS 91, “the Thornton MS”) through the Neatline framework. Since the beginning of this academic year until August 2020, we will be migrating this and other datasets to a new triple-store database platform with more nuanced and transferrable metadata schema. The rest of the texts from the Lincoln Thornton MS and Edinburgh, National Library of Scotland Advocates’ MS 19.2.1 (“the Auchinleck MS”) will also be added to the database, and we hope to offer a series of new visualizations via SPARQL Queries, as well as a more robust GIS that will allow for fuzzy spaces, a critical element of medieval geodata. 
            Our poster highlights our methodology, including the selection and customization of flexible and transferable ontologies and the benefits of RDF metadata modelling. We address some of the challenges inherent in data migration from a traditional relational database format to one geared for Linked Open Data. In the case of Morrois, Omeka Classic’s implementation of Dublin Core was effective for information about the manuscript texts themselves (the metatextual data), but unsuited for the line-by-line references found within the texts (the intratextual data). Migrating data from this “shoehorned” format to more accurate schema required considerable overhaul. Finally, we will address the current state of Middle English manuscript studies, wherein texts can be found in editions preserved in simple HTML format, printed and non-digitized critical and diplomatic editions, or in hard copy or digital manuscript facsimile. This situation means that data collection must follow different methodologies and different forms of data storage, including CSV or TEI.
        
    

        
            The main goal of the 
                
                    correspSearch web service
                
                
                     https://www.correspsearch.net
                , developed and hosted by Berlin Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, is the aggregation of open and freely accessible metadata from printed and digital editions of correspondences.
                
                     For a general overview see Dumont (2016).
                 Over the last four years we have successfully aggregated metadata for about 52.000 letters. Most of the data is obtained from external contributions ranging from a wide variety of scholarly editions and institutions. With this recap we aim to infer successful recipes and practices for the decentralized aggregation of domain specific open metadata. Furthermore we will show the possibilities which arise from the aggregation of such metadata on a bigger scale and discuss ways to manage as well as explore the complex realities of our data.
            
            Gathering a large quantity of suitable metadata about published letters is the precondition and one of the basic functions of the web service 
                correspSearch. The format used in a data aggregation project such as ours has to fulfill a wide array of requirements, ranging from interoperability with existing standards to ease of use and a straightforward creation process. The TEI Correspondence SIG
                
                     https://www.tei-c.org/activities/sig/correspondence/
                 developed a format for the purpose of simplifying correspondence metadata and thus offering a way for a standardized exchange of data, the Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (CMIF)
                
                     https://correspsearch.net/index.xql?id=participate_cmi-format&amp;l=de
                . The flat hierarchy and simple node structure of CMIF offers an easy way to process metadata not only in a machine readable way but also in a way that does not require much prior knowledge to get in touch with (see also Stadler et al., 2016). Given the specific nature of correspondence metadata, the focus of CMIF lies on people, places and dates. The format also encourages the extensive usage of authority control data. By relying on metadata as the core of the exchange format, it is not only of use for editions that are already present in a digital form, but can also be employed to print editions (see Stadler, 2014).
            
            Since the aggregated data is stored decentralized with each edition, participating editions and data providers preserve full ownership and control over their data. Based on the TEI-XML standard, CMIF follows strong guidelines and utilizes the strengths of XML to prevent faulty or ambiguous data while taking into account the heterogeneity of metadata. Furthermore, CMIF requires the usage of authority files for names and places in order to account for their ambiguity and linguistic heterogeneity (see Stadler, 2012). All in all, CMIF successfully provides a model for describing correspondences in an easy and rather flat hierarchical way, while relying on a strict ruleset in favor of standardized and machine-processable data.
            As the metadata aggregated by our service is licensed under CC BY, it remains open and thus stands for an Open Access-based approach to correspondence metadata aggregation. Open Data provides an easier ground on which research can be conducted without having to take care of licensing beforehand and with a much larger data pool. The analysis of a specific network of letters, as for example in 
                csLink, can only benefit from this approach. In addition and in accordance to the licensing for the aggregated data, all software developed by 
                correspSearch is published as Free Software.
            
            The 
                
                    CMIF Creator
                
                
                     https://correspsearch.net/creator/index.xql, https://github.com/correspSearch/CMIF-Creator
                 that was released in its second version in 2018 pursues our approach to an easy handling of CMIF-based data. It enables the creation of correspondence metadata without any prerequisite knowledge about XML/TEI or the CMI format. With the 
                CMIF Creator we offer a clean graphical user interface to enter available metadata and transform the entered data to valid XML. Lowering the barrier of generating and contributing data has been a key factor for successful and lively external data contributions in the last years. As the 
                CMIF Creator is implemented as a browser-based application, all entered and processed data is saved locally and thus stays within the control of the user at any time. As CMIF heavily relies in authority control data, authority files data for names and places can be acquired directly from GND
                
                     https://www.dnb.de/
                 and GeoNames
                
                     https://www.geonames.org/
                 via the lobid
                
                     https://lobid.org/gnd/api
                 and GeoNames APIs (see Tasovac et al., 2016). The
                 CMIF Creator also offers a validation service as well as the option to locally save drafts in JSON format so that work can be continued at any time. The final CMIF files can then be provided for aggregation into the 
                correspSearch database. The benefits of using the 
                CMIF Creator are obvious when it comes to the actual experiences we made: Besides the low barriers for data entry – it does not require any prior knowledge and experience of TEI-XML – the average time for a student assistant to process and enter the metadata of a single letter out of a printed letter edition is approximately 30 to 60 seconds, depending on the necessity to further disambiguate authority control data. Thus, large quantities of letters can be processed in a reasonable amount of time. The output format is standardized and does not deviate from TEI specifications, which reduces the incidence of errors in the final XML.
            
            Another potential of the open data approach with a rather analytical purpose is followed in our development of the application 
                
                    csLink
                
                
                     https://github.com/correspSearch/csLink
                . 
                csLink is a widget for websites that can be implemented and included in existing digital editions of letters. It establishes a “network of letters”, displaying the correspondence network of a certain person and reaching beyond the scope of a single edition of letters. Customized by optional parameters given, 
                csLink provides a list of other letters from the same network of letters, as well as a list of persons, who are part of the wider correspondence network. By relying on CC BY licensed metadata the widget is available for anyone interested in such a visual representation of the correspondence network belonging to a person. Being able to acquire a visual impression of different letter networks and the corresponding persons offers immediate epistemological gains in the study of complex network relationships. Utilizing the aggregated metadata enables 
                csLink to situate letters in a single edition within a wider context of correspondence and communication. Examples for applications of 
                csLink are the digital editions 
                
                    humboldt digital
                
                
                     https://edition-humboldt.de
                
                , as well as 
                
                    Weber Gesamtausgabe
                
                
                     https://weber-gesamtausgabe.de/de/Index
                . We are currently developing additional ways to visualize the aggregated data and to make it more accessible for analysis and valuable for academic purposes. This necessarily includes a critical discussions of the interpretational character of visualisations, as for example in which ways a network visualisation already is making statements based on the composition of nodes on a canvas (see Dunne, 2013; Biehl et al., 2015; and Szafir, 2018).
            
            In opposition to closed data services, the open data approach of CMIF and its potential in enabling any edition (be it printed or digital) to provide their very own correspondence metadata is extremely beneficial to mapping wider networks of communication. Since any letter network to be explored (for example in 
                csLink) only shows the information that is available as data already entered into 
                correspSearch from letters that are already edited and in some way published, a larger base of people actually committing reliable data substantially improves the database and reliability of epistemological gains from this data (see Grüntgens/Schrade, 2016). The development and usage of the 
                CMIF Creator has proven very valuable for increasing the amount of aggregated metadata. Further addition of data and increasing connections between the letters in our data form a kind of crowd based validated open metadata that does not rely on a single contributor or institution. It is thus not only beneficial for network analysis in a strict analytical sense but also contributes to and implements an agenda to further establish open data principles in the digital humanities.
            
            As a leading provider for the decentralized aggregation of metadata from letter editions with the purpose to facilitate research on letter editions and correspondence networks on the basis of a standardised and open XML-format, 
                correspSeach, together with 
                CMIF and 
                correspDesc, were awarded with the Rahtz Price for TEI Ingenuity 2018.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Biehl, T., Lorenz, A. and Osierenski, D. (2015). Exilnetz33. Ein Forschungsportal als Such- und Visualisierungsinstrument. In 
                        Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities, edited by Constanze Baum and Thomas Stäcker. Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften 1.
                        
                            http://dx.doi.org/10.17175/sb001_011
                        .
                    
                    
                        Dumont, S. (2016). correspSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters“. In 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative Issue 10 (2016),
                        
                            http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1742
                        .
                    
                    
                        Dunne, C. (2013). Measuring and Improving the Readability of Network Visualizations. University of Maryland. 2013. http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/trs/2013-14/2013-14.pdf (accessed 11/27/2018).
                    
                    
                        Grüntgens, M. and Schrade,T. (2016). Data repositories in the Humanities and the Semantic Web: modelling, linking, visualising. In Adamou, A., Daga, E. and Isaksen, L. (eds): 
                        WHiSe 2016. Humanities in the Semantic Web. (CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Bd. 1608). Aachen 2016, p. 53-64. URL:
                        
                            &lt;http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1608/#paper-07&gt;
                        .
                    
                    
                        Stadler, P. (2012). Normdateien in der Edition. In 
                        editio 26 (2012), S. 174–183.
                    
                    
                        Stadler, P. (2014). Interoperabilität von digitalen Briefeditionen. In Wolzogen, D. and Falk, R. (eds): Fontanes Briefe ediert, Fontaneana 12, Würzburg: Königshausen &amp; Neumann 2014, S. 278–287. (doi:10.1515/editio-2012-0013).
                    
                    
                        Stadler, P., Illetschko, M. and Seifert, S. (2016). Towards a Model for Encoding Correspondence in the TEI: Developing and Implementing &lt;correspDesc&gt;. In 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online] 9.
                        
                            https://dx.doi.org/10.4000/jtei.1742
                        .
                    
                    
                        Szafir, D. (2018). The good, the bad, and the biased: five ways visualizations can mislead (and how to fix them). Interactions 25, 4 (June 2018), 26-33. (
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1145/3231772
                        ).
                    
                    
                        Tasovac, T., V.Barbaresi, T., Clérice, T., Edmond, J., Ermolaev, N., Garnett, and Wulfman, C. (2016). APIs in Digital Humanities: The Infrastructural Turn. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2016, 93–96. Digital Humanities 2016 Conference Abstracts. Cracovie, Poland.
                        
                            https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01348706
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                This paper presents the guiding principles and ongoing development of 
                    Manuscripta, a digital catalogue of medieval and early modern manuscripts in Sweden, which started as a project specific database but has since evolved to become a national infrastructure. The manuscript descriptions are encoded in 
                    TEI, which is a highly suitable metadata format for detailed, scholarly catalogues since the hierarchical structure of TEI corresponds to the four parts traditionally used in cataloguing: description of contents, codicological description, provenance, and bibliography. The digitised manuscripts are presented using the 
                    IIIF API, and the images are available free of restriction under the CC0 public domain dedication. The infrastructure is built entirely using open source software, and the source code, together with the TEI-files, are available on 
                    GitHub.
                
            
            
                Cataloguing and encoding principles
                Medieval and early modern manuscripts are seldom monographs, but often contain multiple texts by different authors. Furthermore, they have usually gone through several stages of production and use, e.g. been expanded, taken apart, lost certain parts, or been rebound with new additions. Occasionally new texts may have been inserted on previously blank pages. This historical stratigraphy has not, until recently, been taken into account in manuscript cataloguing, but recent scholarship and methodological developments have shown that the notion of codicological units is an essential requirement for detailed, scholarly catalogues, not least to distinguish different dates and provenances of various units, and to clearly indicate this information for each particular unit, which has previously not been the case (Gumbert, 2004; Andrist et al., 2013).
                The manuscript descriptions are therefore structured around the notion of codicological units, and the customised TEI encoding schema, which also provides cataloguing guidelines with examples and documentation of the elements and attributes used, has been tailored to this end. This is one of the first digital catalogues to implement this state-of-the-art research, which at times has been called a codicological revolution. There have so far only been a few printed catalogues offering this form of stratified cataloguing.
                The structure of the TEI-encoded descriptions follows as closely as possible the hierarchical structure of the manuscripts: the intellectual content, physical description, and history, where applicable, of each unit are described in separate &lt;msPart&gt; elements, whereas information common to all units, e.g. the binding, provenance, and bibliography, is described one level higher, directly under the &lt;msDesc&gt; element. The &lt;msPart&gt; element is always used, even when a manuscript consists of only one codicological unit, to reflect the notion of the ‘monomerous codex’, a term coined by Gumbert (Gumbert, 2004:26).
            
            
                Technology
                The infrastructure is built entirely using open source software which is an essential requirement for transparency and for ensuring long-term maintainability. It runs on an XML database called 
                    eXist-db, which offers advanced indexing and search functionality through XQuery, and built-in functions for converting TEI to HTML and PDF. The digitised manuscripts are displayed adjacent to the descriptions, with page references linked to the digitised manuscript, enabling immediate access to specific locations in the manuscript. Part of the description is given in running text, and TEI provides a variety of possibilities for tagging words and phrases, e.g. information such as names, places, dates, writing material, and watermarks. These tags then allow for advanced text search queries. In addition, names, places, and bibliographical references are linked to authority files which have information on alternative name forms, short biographical and geographical data, and links to other external resources. Since TEI is based on XML, it can easily be converted into other formats like HTML, PDF, MODS, JSON, RDFa. This is an essential requirement for the data to be transferable between different platforms and to enable Linked Open Data.
                
                Cataloguing is done using a web-based editing interface, which does not require any knowledge of TEI encoding and therefore simplifies and reduces the time required for the cataloguing process. The interface is built with 
                    React.js. Previously, it has been necessary to use an XML editor which had a steep learning curve, and was time-consuming as well as error prone, even when validating with an encoding schema and using detailed cataloguing guidelines. 
                
            
            
                Future plans
                More descriptions will be added to Manuscripta continuously, not only born digital descriptions, but also descriptions from legacy databases like Microsoft Access and FileMaker, and printed manuscript catalogues, using OCR and data extraction. These will then be encoded into the same schema as the born digital descriptions. Further development will include adding a controlled vocabulary for technical terms used in the manuscript descriptions and authority files for works preserved in the manuscripts; enriching the HTML with 
                    Microdata, i.e., machine-readable data for the semantic web which would enable search engines to give users more accurate search results; creating stylesheets for converting the TEI of the authority files into linked open data formats like RDF and JSON-LD.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrist, P., Canart, P. and Maniaci, M. (2013). 
                        La syntaxe du codex : essai de codicologie structurale. Turnhout: Brepols.
                    
                    
                        Gumbert, J. P. (2004). Codicological Units: Towards a Terminology for the Stratigraphy of the Non-Homogeneous Codex. 
                        Segno e testo 2: 17-42.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Despite the fact that the first copyright acts were written “for the Encouragement of Learning” (Statute of Anne) or “to promote the progress of Science” (Constitution of the United States, Art I, 8, 8), the research community regards today’s copyright law as a foe, rather than as a friend. In the digital world (where every use of a digital work necessitates its reproduction), copyright has evolved into a framework regulating access and re-use of all sorts of contents. This evolution did not spare the research community whose activities were, even until quite recently, regarded as de minimis from the point of view of copyright. As copyright is within the scope of national legislation, international cooperations to carry out research in a digital environment have to deal with a highly complex legal situations.
            Largely based at universities, cultural heritage institutions or other public research institutions, humanities research is usually non-commercial and based on a public mandate for education. Open (and free) access to sources and results of this research gains further importance because most national funding agencies demand open access to research publications and data as a requirement for funding. On the other hand, researchers themselves have a keen interest in defending their own intellectual property rights, in part due to economic concerns but also in terms of academic credit. This conflict of interest is summarized in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, which sets the premise that “(everyone has) the right freely […] to share in scientific advancement and its benefits” (Art 27, 1), but goes on to say that “everyone has the right to protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he [sic] is the author” (Art 27, 2). 
            For digital humanities scholars, this axiomatic situation combined with recently developing trends towards open licensing has created an urgent necessity to educate themselves on legal issues and discuss how copyright legislations impact and shape what we (are able to) do; “[t]he rapid worldwide expansion of digital humanities work demands that we begin to deal with the complex tangle of rights around digital humanities knowledge production before others do it for us.” (Zafrin et al. 2017) One of the most important reasons for the necessity to deal with copyright issues from the scholars’ perspective is that copyright laws are the framework within which we have to negotiate our research ethics, especially with regards to questions of the possibility of access to our work for all (Faull et al. 2016). For this reason, Zafrin et al. began the discussion of copyright issues for DH in a global context with their panel session at the 2017 DH conference in Montréal. 
            At this year’s DH conference, we would like to build on Zafrin et al.’s work and continue the discussion in the framework of a full-day workshop. Zafrin et al. presented perspectives on copyright from Mexico, India, and the USA. We would like to broaden the scope and discuss the topic on a global scale, as the concept of copyright has developed in manifold ways in different areas of the world for historical reasons (see Ng 2012). The continuation of this discussion is especially important for the digital humanities community because the transcending of national borders is inherent to the nature of digital research. 
            In most countries across the globe - today also in the USA, which was not always the case -, “authors don’t need to apply for copyright protection because it ‘follows the author’s pen across the page’”. (Stodden 2009, 36 quoting von Hippel 2005, 85) This might sound reasonable in principle, especially for cultural works. However, it has been argued that “copyright is an unsuitable legal structure for scientific works [because] scientific norms guide scientists to reproduce and build on others’ research, and default copyright law by its very purpose runs counter to these goals” (Stodden 2009, 35), the de facto situation of copyright legislations requires us to consider them when developing our research, both in a national context and from a global perspective. 
            However, copyright legislations by nature stop at national borders. While international agreements can smoothen this contrariety to some extent, it is still vital to know and understand the different concepts of copyright in the diverse legal traditions across the world. The European Union has taken a first step in the direction of copyright law harmonization by accepting the Copyright in a Digital Single Market Directive (COD) proposal, by means of which copyright is supposed to be modernized and adapted to the realities of the digital world throughout the EU. From the point of view of the research community, the proposal has its upsides and downsides; while it does aim to implement a general permission of text and data mining in a scientific context (Art 3), the articles on “Protection of press publications concerning digital uses” (Art 11, “link tax article”) and “Use of protected content by information society service providers storing and giving access to large amounts of works and other subject-matter uploaded by their users” (Art 13, “upload filter article”) are being discussed controversially. As the directive proposal was approved by the EU Parliament in September 2018, but has not yet been formalized, the effects on the legal conditions of research in Europe are not yet clear.
            Another example of the harmonization lack discussed by Darling (2012, 486f.) is the possibility to grant rights to unknown uses, a topic of interest in the context of open licensing: “[c]onsistent with notions of freedom of contract, United States copyright law allows authors to grant publishers the rights to all known or unknown uses of a work. Despite the ostensible clarity of this norm, courts have struggled considerably with cases where the scope of rights transferred is uncertain. New media developments have generally prompted litigation and the issue of which exclusive rights can and should be implicitly licensed has never been resolved with consistency. [...] Looking across borders, it is apparent that other countries have been dealing with similar issues within their copyright systems. Many countries, however, have chosen a different approach to the problem.” This diagnosis is true for many aspects of copyright legislations. The problem of different approaches to intellectual property is not only true on a global scale, but can even be an issue within a relatively harmonized area such as the EU: “As IP law in the European Union is merely harmonized and not unified, the exact scope of copyright and similar rights may differ between Member States (e.g. some Member States recognize an exclusive right for ‘scientific and critical editions’, while others don’t).” (Kamocki et al. 2016, 2534) It is thus vital to foster exchange between scholars coming from different national situations in order to better understand the situation we are dealing with in the borderless land that is the internet.
            Therefore, a call for contributions to the workshop will be issued, inviting scholars from all over the globe with expertise in handling copyright issues in the context of digital research to discuss the following questions:
            
                What are the specific benefits and pitfalls of the copyright legislation in your country for digital scholarship?
                Are the existing international copyright-related agreements (Berne Convention, TRIPS agreement) sufficient?
                What aspects of digital scholarship do current copyright legislations and agreements (in your country and beyond) not cover or even actively hinder?
                Does the copyright legislation in your country facilitate or hinder the attribution of free licenses or certain types of free licenses in any way (e.g. in the Germanic legislative tradition, authors cannot waive their right to attribution)?
                What exceptions for research purposes (e.g. data mining exceptions) does the copyright legislation in your country foresee? Are they sufficient?
            
            Contributors can address one or more questions from this non-comprehensive list of issues. Discussion of further aspects is welcome, especially relating to data privacy issues, licensing questions, and new challenges arising from emerging trends towards open science.
            Workshop leaders
            Vanessa Hannesschläger
            ACDH-OeAW - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (Austrian Academy of Sciences)
            
                E-mail: 
                
                    Vanessa.Hannesschlaeger@oeaw.ac.at
                
            
            Vanessa Hannesschläger is a researcher at the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (ACDH-OeAW). She is the leader of the ACDH-OeAW’s task force on legal issues, co-chair of the DARIAH working group on ethical and legal issues (ELDAH), member of the CLARIN legal issues committee (CLIC), and co-chair of the Open Science Network Austria’s working group “Legal Aspects of Open Science”. Her interest in legal aspects of humanities scholarship and cultural heritage was initially sparked during a project dealing with archival material carried out at the Austrian National Library. In the course of her Wikimedia Germany Open Science Fellowship (2017/18), she has gained further expertise in the area of legal and licensing issues relating to open knowledge. Her research interests include legal frameworks of digital research, data modelling, and contemporary developments of gender issues in society. 
            Pawel Kamocki
            ELDA - European Language Resources Distribution Agency
            
                E-mail: 
                
                    pawel.kamocki@gmail.com
                
            
            Pawel Kamocki received university training in both law (PhD, Dr. iur.) and linguistics (MA) in France, Germany and Poland. Currently a Project Manager at ELDA (European Language Resources Distribution Agency), he worked with many European and international projects, including CLARIN, EUDAT and Research Data Alliance. His main field of interest are legal issues affecting data-intensive science, including copyright and data protection. He is a corresponding member of the editorial team of the Multimedia und Recht law review.
            Walter Scholger
            ZIM-ACDH - Centre for Information Modelling, Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (University of Graz)
            E-Mail: 
                
                    walter.scholger@uni-graz.at
                
            
            
                Walter Scholger studied history and applied cultural studies in Graz and Maynooth and has been the deputy director of the Centre for Information Modelling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities at the University of Graz since 2008. 
                    Having been active in several Working Groups in the context of DARIAH-EU and the DH umbrella organisation of the German-speaking countries (DHd) for years, he is currently co-chair of the DARIAH-EU working group on "Ethics and Legality in Digital Arts and Humanities", member of the CLARIN legal issues committee (CLIC), and convenor of the DHd working group on "Digital Publishing".
                    He has been dealing with legal aspects of digitisation - with a focus on cultural heritage (e.g. in the Creative Europe project "CO:OP"), research and teaching - and Open Science in projects, international workshops and university courses.  In addition, he works on on aspects of DH teaching and training like OER, reference curricula and the international exchangeability of academic credit systems.
                
            
            Andreas Witt
            Leibniz-Institut für Deutsche Sprache Mannheim, Mannheim University, Heidelberg University &amp; University of Cologne
            
                E-mail: 
                
                    witt@ids-mannheim.de
                
            
            
                Andreas Witt (
                
                    http://www1.ids-mannheim.de/zfo/personal/witt.html
                
                ) is professor for Computational Humanities and Text Technologies at the University of Mannheim and heads of the department of Digital Linguistics at the Leibniz-Institute for the German Language in Mannheim. His research is situated in the field of annotation science. Andreas Witt is an active member of standards bodies, viz. chair of an ISO working group on linguistic annotation and, together with Piotr Bański, co-chair of the TEI Special Interest Group, TEI for Linguists. Since many years he is involved in research on the legal situation linguists have to deal with.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Darling, K. “Contracting About the Future: Copyright and New Media.”
                         Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 
                        10/7 (2012): 485–530.
                    
                    
                        
                            http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/njtip/vol10/iss7/3
                        
                    
                    
                        Faull, K., Jakacki, D., O'Sullivan, J., Earhart, A., Kaufman, M. Access, Ownership, Protection: The Ethics of Digital Scholarship. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts
                        . Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University, Kraków (2016): 66-68. 
                        
                            http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/6
                        
                    
                    
                        von Hippel, Eric. 
                        Democratizing Innovation
                        . Cambridge / London: MIT Press, 2005. 
                        
                            http://bibliotecadigital.org:8080/bitstream/001/183/7/0-262-00274-4.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        Ng, A. “Literary Property and Copyright.”
                         Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 
                        10/7 (2012): 531–577. 
                    
                    
                        
                            http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/njtip/vol10/iss7/4
                        
                    
                    “Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on copyright in the Digital Single Market COM/2016/0593” (Copyright Directive / COD). 
                        
                            https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52016PC0593
                        
                    
                    
                        Stodden, V. “The legal framework for reproducible scientific research: Licensing and copyright.” 
                        IEEE Computing in Science and Engineering
                         11/1 (2009): 35–40. 
                        
                            https://web.stanford.edu/~vcs/papers/Legal-STODDEN2009.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        United Nations General Assembly (UN GA). “Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).” 
                        
                            http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
                        
                    
                    
                        World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO). “Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.” 
                        
                            http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/
                        
                    
                    
                        World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO). “WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT).” 
                        
                            http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/wct/
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        Zafrin, V., Galina Russell, I., Gil, A., Ray Murray, P. Copyright, Digital Humanities, and Global Geographies of Knowledge. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017: Conference Abstracts. McGill University, Montreal (2017). 
                        
                            https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/278/278.pdf
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                TXM is a software platform offering textual corpora analysis tools and services. It is delivered as a standard desktop application for Windows, Mac and Linux and as a web portal server application (Heiden, 2010), &lt;
                    &gt;.
                
                TXM provides a consistent set of analysis tools combining qualitative (or close reading) tools such as word frequency lists, concordancing or text edition hypertextual navigation with synthetic quantitative (or distant reading) tools such as factorial analysis, clustering, keywords or co-occurrence statistical analysis.
                To work on texts, the platform first imports the corpus sources to create a rich XML-TEI based internal pivot representation via the following general workflow:
                
                    
                        first the “base text” of each text is established: this operation implements “digital philology” principles and consists of decoding information in the various formats of the source documents to decide primarily where are the text limits, possible internal textual structures boundaries and the words of the text.
                        To do this, TXM can analyze and represent three main types of corpora:
                        
                            corpora of 
                                written texts, possibly including paginated editions including display side-by-side of the transcription and the images of facsimiles;
                            
                            
                                record transcriptions corpora, possibly time synchronized at the word or at the speech turn level with the audio or video source to provide playback;
                            
                            and parallel 
                                multilingual corpora aligned at the level of textual structures such as sentences or paragraphs.
                            
                        
                        The result of this operation is represented in a pivot XML format especially designed for TXM called “XML-TEI TXM” extending the standard encoding recommendations of the Text Encoding Initiative consortium (TEI Consortium, 2017);
                    
                    then, natural language processing (NLP) tools are optionally applied to the base text to automatically add linguistic information like sentence boundaries, grammatical categories (pos = part of speech) and lemma of words by eg TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994). As NLP tools generally don’t take XML format as input, the pivot representation is first converted to plain text for NLP processing and results are injected back into the XML-TEI TXM representation;
                    finally a specialized representation of the texts is built into TXM for efficient execution of its different tools (by indexing for search engines or by rendering in HTML 5+CSS+Javascript for text editions navigation).
                
                From a methodological point of view:
                
                    the XML tags of the initial XML-TEI TXM representation in a) can be seen as 
                        manual annotations added to the base text (or raw text), typically philologically edited with the help of specialized XML editors (like Oxygen XML Editor
                        
                            https://www.oxygenxml.com
                        ) outside of TXM when the source is XML native, or as 
                        automatic annotations added by TXM when converting the sources from other digital formats (like TXT, DOC, etc.) into XML-TEI TXM.
                    
                    NLP tools processing results in step b) can be seen as 
                        automatic annotations added to the initial XML-TEI TXM representation of texts built in work step a);
                    
                    All TXM tools can then be applied indiscriminately to all types of annotations through a unified textual corpus data model regardless of their origin (automatic or manual).
                
                Thus, so far TXM has implemented a traditional digital philology workflow combining an initial “text source encoding and annotation” step to a following “application of analysis tools on annotated texts” step. The text analysis tools use text annotations (for example word pos or some internal textual structure) to offer their services and produce their results (for example the frequency index of all infinitive verbs found in a section). The workflow is unidirectional and the whole of it must be passed through again completely if any annotation needs to be corrected. To add or correct annotations, the user has to edit the sources or the annotations outside of TXM. For example word properties can be exported from the XML-TEI TXM representation in a file in tabulated format, edited in a spreadsheet and injected back into the texts before re-import into TXM
                     see for example this tutorial based on TXM macros: 
                        .
                    .
                
                This paper introduces new services developed in TXM to annotate directly texts from within the results view of specific tools for a better integration of philological and analytical work. Indeed, results views are great places to be aware of annotation errors or annotation needs, and to access what needs to be corrected or annotated.
            
            
                Interactive annotation services in TXM
                The three new annotation services concern both adding and correcting information, and all the annotations edited are meant for further exploitation by usual TXM tools.
                
                    Concordance based SyMoGIH entities annotation
                    The first service, developed in partnership with the LARHRA research laboratory in history
                        
                            
                                http://larhra.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr
                            
                        , is based on the annotation of concordance pivots: any sequence of words composing the pivots can be annotated with any semantic category
                         pivotscan also optionally be annotated with simple keywords or with key-value pairs, managed by TXM in a local repository. of the SyMoGIH
                        
                            
                         historical knowledge base (Beretta, 2015). In this architecture, the SyMoGIH platform hosts the ontology of historic facts and knowledge, and TXM concordances provide the user interface to link identifiers of those data to text spans for further analysis.
                    
                    As an illustration, see figure 1 the annotation of the “Faculté de droit d’Aix” entity (of id CoAc13562) in unverified OCRed texts of the “Bulletin administratif de l'Instruction publique" corpus
                         see the Bibliothèque historique de l'éducation (BHE) project: 
                            
                        .
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        Figure 1. TXM screenshot of a Concordance of a “Faculté de droit d’Aix” word sequence pattern to annotate (top) and of browsing SyMoGIH semantic categories to find the CoAc13562 identifier to use for the annotation (bottom).
                    
                    TXM internal management of those annotations is equivalent to a re-import of the current pivot representation with the new annotations. After re-import (after saving annotations) the new annotations are available for all TXM tools to work on like any original “annotation” of the texts (with internal textual structures and their properties).
                
                
                    Concordance based word properties annotation
                    The second service is based on the annotation of words of concordance pivots: a word present in the pivots
                         in TXM, pivots of concordances can be composed of a sequence of words. of a concordance can be annotated with any property. The primary goal of that service is to annotate and correct pos and lemma properties of words, but it can help to annotate any property at the single word level.
                    
                    As an illustration, see figure 2 the correction of the “pos” property of some “vers.” words used in biblical references in Hobbes works lemmatized by Morphadorner (Burns, 2013).
                    
                        
                            
                         Figure 2. TXM screenshot of a Concordance to set the “pos” property to the “n-ab” value of two occurrences of the "vers." word, selected by their concordance line.
                    
                    TXM internal management of those annotations is equivalent to a re-import of the current pivot representation with new annotations encoded in XML-TEI TXM at the word level.
                
                
                    Full text URS annotation in text edition
                    The third annotation service is based on manual annotation of sequence of words inside text editions with elements of a Unit-Relation-Schema (URS) annotation model (Widlöcher &amp; Mathet, 2009). URS type annotations are designed to encode complex discourse entities like co-reference chains in texts (Schnedecker et al., 2017).
                    As an illustration, see figure 3 the annotation of the “ses loix” sequence of words with a URS unit of type MENTION, having its grammatical category to the value “GN.POS” and its referent to the value “les lois de la divinité”, in the first chapter of the 1755 edition of 
                        De l'esprit des lois by Montesquieu.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        Figure 3. TXM screenshot displaying the first page of an edition of 
                        De l'esprit des lois highlighting in light yellow all URS units of type MENTION and in bold the unit currently selected (top window), and displaying the current unit properties value input form (bottom window): CATEGORY property at value “GN.POS”...
                    
                    TXM import/export management services represent those annotations as XML-TEI stand-off annotations anchored to the word elements of the XML-TEI TXM representation of texts (Grobol et al., 2018).
                
            
            
                Discussion
                By using a common XML-TEI TXM pivot representation for internal management of corpora for all the annotation services, TXM unifies transcription, encoding and annotation activities in a single framework. In this framework, annotations can represent manual (user), semi-automatic (machine+user) or automatic (machine) interpretation results used further for analysis and interpretation work. The reflexive nature of the resulting text analysis workflow is schematized in figure 4. Texts are first digitized by OCR, transcribed or converted from digital formats. They are then possibly philologically corrected and established through XML-TEI manual encoding. Then automatically processed by NLP tools while being imported into TXM to produce the TXM internal corpus model. Corpus analysis is then assisted by TXM tools applied to the corpus model. The pivot representation that gathers all annotations produced by annotation tools is figured as the node labeled « Pivot rep. » and the interpretation workflow itself is figured as a digital hermeneutic circle.
                
                    
                        
                    Figure 4. Digital hermeneutic circle integration into TXM.
                
                Legend
                
                    
                        blue box:
                        manual annotation activity
                        black box:
                        tool
                    
                    
                        red box:
                        automatic annotation activity
                        green box:
                        TXM corpus data model
                    
                    
                        purple disk:
                        data representation
                        black arrow:
                        activity
                    
                    
                        green arrow:
                        annotation equivalence
                        
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                All the new annotation services integrated into TXM are building a comprehensive annotation-based digital text corpora analysis platform. From an epistemological point of view, the integration in TEI of the different annotation models and tools into the platform helps its users to better define and trace what comes from the source corpus they analyze and what comes from their own or from others interpretation work.
                This work was funded by the ANR and the DFG under grant numbers 
                    ANR-15-CE38-0008 (DEMOCRAT project) and 
                    ANR-14-FRAL-0006 (PaLaFra project).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Beretta, F. (2015). Publishing and sharing historical data on the semantic web : the SyMoGIH project – symogih.org. Presented at the Workshop: 
                        Semantic Web Applications in the Humanities. Retrieved from https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01136533.
                    
                    
                        Burns, P. R. (2013). MorphAdorner v2: A Java Library for the Morphological Adornment of English Language Texts. Evanston, IL. Northwestern University.
                    
                    
                        Grobol, L., Landragin, F. 
                        and
                         Heiden, S. (2018). XML-TEI-URS: using a TEI format for annotated linguistic resources. 
                        CLARIN Annual Conference 2018. Pisa, Italy https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01827563.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, S. (2010). The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In Otoguro, R., Ishikawa, K., Umemoto, H., Yoshimoto, K. and Harada, Y. (eds), 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation – PACLIC24. Sendai: Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, pp. 389-98. &lt;https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00549764/en&gt; (accessed 15 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic Part-Of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees. In 
                        Proceedings of the International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing (Vol. 12).
                    
                    
                        Schnedecker, C., Glikman, J., 
                        and
                         Landragin, F. (2017). Les chaînes de référence : annotation, application et questions théoriques. 
                        Langue française, (195), 5–16. https://doi.org/10.3917/lf.195.0005
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium. (2017). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. TEI Consortium. Retrieved from http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5
                    
                    
                        Widlöcher, A., 
                        and
                         Mathet, Y. (2009). La plate-forme Glozz: environnement d’annotation et d’exploration de corpus. In 
                        Actes de la 16e Conférence Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN’09), session posters (p. 10). Senlis, France, France. Retrieved from https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01011969
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Ancient languages have recently become a research field gaining more and more attention from researchers in the DH community. This has led to various standards of digitization for different application cases which could be applied by other researchers to achieve easily accessible and often interlinked datasets.
                Among those research areas gaining momentum in digitization, archaeology and cuneiform languages have been assessed in several past and ongoing projects.
                For this DH2019 conference, the PaleoCodage encoding system for cuneiform languages has been accepted as a short paper presentation. This poster publication following (Brandes 2019) likes to introduce developments in this year in relation to PaleoCodage to create a cuneiform digital processing pipeline involving 3D-Scanning, paleography, transliteration, dictionary and signlist creation, automated font generation, linguistic annotations, semantic annotations and show how to publish said data in a sustainable form using a versioning system such as git.
                
                    Related Work
                    (Chiarcos 2018) created a proposal to annotate Sumerian cuneiform linguistically by extending the common CoNLL format (Chiarcos 2017) to support RDF (Miller 1998). While this concept works very well for linguistic annotations and natural language processing purposes we would like to present a solution which once setup can be used by nontechnical endusers and is at the same time usable by a variety of research communities. In addition to linguistic annotations our concept also contains paleographic sign variant descriptions of the respective cuneiform sign and conceptually the inclusion of 3D images.
                
                
                    Digital Processing Pipeline
                    
                        
                            
                        The proposed pipeline is shown in Figure 2 and its stages are described in detail in the following sections. The pipeline is still a work in progress and feedback as well as suggestions are very welcome. The pipeline could be incorporated into a project workflow as shown in Figure 1 which is included into an currently pending project proposal.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        
                        
                        Figure 1 
                        (left)
                        
                        : 
                        Workflow of a research project utilizing the proposed cuneiform processing pipeline. The color green indicates the usage of a versioning system, the color yellow indicates exports which can be used by various communities.
                        
                    
                    
                        Figure 
                        2 (right): Digital Processing pipeline – schematic. A first a cuneiform tablet is 3D scanned, then transliterated and paleographically processed until it is further enriched and a semantic dictionary is created. Finally, several applications can produce domain-specific outputs which are useful for a variety of application fields.
                    
                
                
                    Stage 1: Transliteration and Paleography
                    At first, cuneiform tablets are 3D scanned and character positions annotated by a professional. Next, a manual transliteration is created by the professional. In this step, the professional uses PaleoCodage (Homburg 2019) to create a machine-readable description of each cuneiform sign, thereby producing a sign list. The sign list refers to the unicode representations of the cuneiform signs if applicable and is modelled using Semantic Web standards. It needs to be noted that one unicode codepoint may refer to multiple cuneiform representations in PaleoCodage as sign variants are quite common. An example of this is given in Figure 3.
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    Figure 3: Cuneiform Sign Disambiguations of the same cuneiform sign E: Scholars consider these cuneiform signs to represent the same Cuneiform Unicode representation depending on the context of the cuneiform tablet
                    By describing sign variants using PaleoCodage, it is possible to automatically create a cuneiform OpenType
                        
                            
                         font from the sign list which is able to display the original cuneiform representations of the transliterations including sign variants digitally, which is a novelty in this community. The current State Of The Art merely includes drawing of cuneiform tablets as shown in Figure 4.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        While such drawings can also capture the shape and broken parts of the cuneiform tablet they are currently not machine-readable. Using the PaleoCodage encoding, texts can be enabled to be searched by sign variant form which may be interesting for applications in philology. By using the OpenType font, the cuneiform text representation can be recreated in any application supporting OpenType fonts such as LibreOffice or MS Word ensuring the interoperability of the text. 
                    
                    
                        Figure 
                        4
                        :  Cuneiform Sketch by the UniversityOf Pennsylvania
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Ligatures
                        The OpenType font is enriched with sign variant descriptions as ligatures. For example, if we were to describe the cuneiform sign E in the signlist and discover that variants of E exist in the cuneiform texts, the variants can be described as 
                            E\_v1...E\_vn and can be shown in the sign list. Using this given description, a ligature 
                            E,\_,v,1 is created which is subsequently substituted using OpenTypes GSUB table to display the correct version of the character encoded in the automatically created OpenType font. The idea is the same as the concept of 
                             in which latin characters are replaced using appropriate emojis. An example text
                            
                                
                             shows the font creation and the application of the font using an example text.
                        
                    
                
                
                    Stage 2: Annotation and Enrichment
                    At the start of this stage cuneiform texts have been manually transcribed into transliterations and have been saved in the Git repository in the ATF format
                        
                            
                         for cuneiform. We use an automized process to translate ATF documents to TEI XML (DeRose 1999) building up on specifications provided by the ETCSL project
                        
                            
                        . Having converted ATF into TEI XML, it can be annotated in CWRCWriter (Rockwell 2012) (Figure 5) which we intend to extend to support linguistic annotations.
                    
                    The result of this enrichment process is a TEI XML which is a first publishable result on the project homepage. Using TEI Boilerplate (Walsh 2013), the texts can be visualized in a way that is suitable for scholars. An appropriate template is created during the work with CWRCWriter and can be seen in (Figure 5). In addition the annotation process results in RDF representations of important elements in the text. We hereby annotate:
                    Linguistic Elements as well as Semantic Elements (Persons, Places, Wares) with the goal to interlink as many facts about the artifacts and texts as possible in established Semantic Web vocabularies (e.g. Wikidata(Vrandečić 2014), DBPedia (Auer 2009), GeoSPARQL (Battle 2012), Pleiades (Simon 2016)).
                    
                        
                            
                        
                        Figure 5: CWRCWriter using a cuneiform TEI template for enriching contents
                    
                
                
                    Stage 3: Dictionary Creation
                    Linguistic Elements become the basis of a semantic dictionary of the corpus which is worked on the outlines of which have been discussed in (Homburg 2017, 2018) and shown online
                        
                            
                        . This dictionary is created on-the-fly as the annotation progresses and is based on the Lexicon Model for Ontologies (Lemon) (McCrae 2010) (Figure 6) combining Semantics with linguistic annotations.
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    Figure 6: Lexicon Model for Ontologies: Bridging the gap between semantic web concepts and text (McCrae 2010)
                
                
                    Stage 4: Analysis, Evaluation and Deployment
                    In this stage, project specific analysis on texts can be conducted. One example could be the extraction and location of interesting at best spatiotemporal localizable information such as names of emperors, cities or typical goods that were traded during the time of cuneiform tablet creation. The created resources are also interesting for other research communities: The annotated 3D scans in combination with PaleoCodage can be used to improve cuneiform character recognition using machine learning (Mara 2010), annotated lingustic resources can be used as gold standard data to experiment with automated POSTagging or further text analysis. Also deployment options are implemented which include:
                    
                        SPARQL Endpoint for the Semantic Web Community providing access to every resource (dictionary, annotated texts, images) in the project and provides interlinks
                        TEI XML and ATF Repository with Webservice access
                        Annotated 3D Image Data Storage using Git LFS 
                            https://git-lfs.github.com
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Background
                We provide a survey over the main strategies to harmonize and to integrate TEI/XML documents and Linked Open Data resources. As a highly popular community standard, the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) provides a the most frequently adopted model for the semantic markup of text data in the Digital Humanities. Likewise, applications of Linked Open Data technologies and resources in Digital Humanities are manifold, and where commonly used LOD and RDF technology is employed, the scientific challenges involved are comparable to those in other areas of application. A scientific problem specific to Digital Humanities is, however, how these technologies can be related to the TEI as the current de facto standard for computational philology. 
                While benefits of LOD technologies have long been recognized in the DH community, and lead to the formation of a LOD SIG in 2014, there is no agreement on possible technological bridges between TEI/XML and LOD technology. With this paper, we provide an overview over existing solutions and their characteristics, and contribute to the discussion of the further standardization — and possibly, revision — of these possibilities. We focus on in-line XML, because Web Annotation (Sanderson et al., 2017) already provides a convenient and established W3C standard for establishing LOD as a standoff layer over XML documents.
            
            
                Complementary Intentions: The Text Encoding Initiative and Linguistic Linked Open Data
                Founded in 1987, the TEI is the authoritative body that develops and maintains an XML-based interchange format for textual data, in particular for the electronic edition of printed (or printable) publications. Beyond its historical focus on literary science and linguistics, the current edition of the TEI guidelines, P5, represents a de facto standard for the entire field of Digital Humanities.
                The TEI defines an XML format that aims to provide a compromise between a formal description of layout elements (e.g., italics) and their abstract function (e.g., emphasis): Its markup elements are given interpretable names, but the provided definitions are informative only, not normative, as the TEI standardizes only their form, context and structure using standards such as modular DTDs, Schematron or RelaxNG. For practical applications, the TEI thus takes a document-centric, and text-driven approach: the form, content and structure of the underlying text is preserved, and are enriched by markup elements. Markup elements can be validated with respect to syntactic constraints, but not directly with respect to their semantics. 
                In application to objects of linguistic and philological interest, Linked Open Data and RDF technology have been applied with increasing intensity in the last years – as manifested in the Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud
                    
                         See 
                            http://linguistic-lod.org/ for the LLOD diagram; for specifications for lexical data, see 
                            https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/; for annotations, see 
                            https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-vocab.
                        
                    , — but with a clear emphasis on semantics and data structures rather than markup: The original sequential structure of a document can only be preserved in RDF if explicit data structures (relations) are being created. In opposition to that, sequential structure is inherent to and implicit in XML. 
                
                The focus of XML technologies on structure (rather than semantics) also affect its modes of validation: XML technology is capable of validating structure, and semantic information can only be validated in terms of constraints for their occurrence. In opposition to that, LOD technology, on the other hand, is based on knowledge representation by means of ontology languages (RDFS, OWL, SKOS) and graph technology (RDF, ShEx, SHACL), and allows to perform inferences (and, by extension, validation), resp. pattern validation over semantic data structures — regardless of their sequential and hierarchical organization.
                In this regard, LOD and XML can be considered complementary approaches for the digital philologies. Not in the sense of contradiction, but in the sense that they specialize in different aspects and that synergies can be expected from their harmonization. Such a harmonization, however, requires the development of interfaces, and the re-interpretation or the modification of TEI vocabulary elements whose introduction preceded the emergence of Linked Open Data.
            
            
                Three Paths to Go, and How to Choose
                As it has previously been extended by necessary modules as they were needed, the TEI today provides a very rich vocabulary of markup elements, in the current TEI P5 guidelines (literally, ‘proposal’) covering 569 XML elements and 231 attributes. The analogy-driven extension of semantics and syntax of markup elements (‘tag abuse’) is a common strategy to counter the unrestricted growth of the TEI vocabulary. However, this is not a recommended practice, as it leads to compatibility issues (as the same information can be represented in different ways) and semantic indeterminism (if the same markup is used for two distinct functions, the intended meaning cannot be automatically recovered). In addition to TEI-native strategies to represent RDF and Linked Data, we thus describe an alternative approach whose first implementation was reported in 2018: The generic extension of TEI with W3C-recommended vocabulary elements to represent RDF in XML attributes (RDFa).
                We will give an overview over these three common strategies to formalize LOD references and data within the TEI, we present their original use cases, inherent limitations for each of them, and the implications of these limitations for future use. For reasons of brevity, this is summarized in in bullet points, only:
                
                    Representing LOD references with TEI attributes, e.g., 
                        @ref in the “Text Database and Dictionary of Classic Mayan” (Diehr et al., 2017)
                    
                    Emulating RDF triples with TEI elements, e.g., 
                        &lt;relation&gt; in “Sharing Ancient Wisdoms” (Tupman, 2013)
                    
                    TEI+RDFa: extending att.global.linking with 
                        @about, 
                        @property, and 
                        @resource, e.g., in the “Diachronic Spanish Sonnet Corpus” (Ruiz Fabo et al., 2018)
                    
                
                We analyze these approaches along two main dimensions: TEI P5 compliance and LOD expressivity and discuss implications and advantages of the respective limitations for prospective use cases, with main results as given in the following table:
                
                    
                
                Strategy 1 allows to refer to LOD resources, it does not support typed links.
                Strategy 2 allows to refer to LOD resources with typed links (i.e., to emulate RDF triples), but is not compliant with LOD standards or technologies.
                Strategy 3 allows to publish LOD data directly as TEI, and to provide an LOD view on TEI data within a single data source.
                In the following table we present different strategies to encode triples in the TEI:
                
                    
                
                In our presentation, we discuss the impact of the different modelling choices in terms of their support by existing infrastructures, off-the-shelf databases and APIs.
            
            
                Acknowledgements
                We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for valuable insights and feedback. This abstract is a result of discussions that have been on-going in the TEI community for about a decade already, and to which the first author contributed since 2013. We would like to thank the members of the TEI discussion list (TEI-L@listserv.brown.edu) for their input and feedback to our earlier inquiries about the topic. The research presented in this paper was primarily conducted in the context of the independent research group “Linked Open Dictionaries (LiODi)”, funded 2015-2020 from the eHumanities programme of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Science (BMBF).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burnard, L. (1988). Report of workshop on Text Encoding Guidelines, Literary and Linguistic Computing 3(2), 131.
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F., Silvio P., Francesca T. and Fabio V. (2016). An OWL 2 formal ontology for the Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016, Kraków, Poland, 2016.
                    
                    
                        Diehr, F., Brodhun, M., Gronemeyer, S., Diederichs, K., Prager, C., Wagner, E. and Grube, N. (2018). Ein digitaler Zeichenkatalog als Organisationssystem für die noch nicht entzifferte Schrift der Klassischen Maya. 
                        Proceedings of Wissensorganisation 2017: 15. Tagung der Deutschen Sektion der Internationalen Gesellschaft für Wissensorganisation (ISKO) (WissOrg17). Berlin, Germany, November 2018.
                    
                    
                        Eide, O., Felicetti, A., Ore, C., D’Andrea, A. and Holmen, J. (2008). Encoding cultural heritage information for the Semantic Web. Procedures for data integration through CIDOC-CRM mapping. In Arnold, D., Niccolucci, F., Pletinckx, D., Van Gool, L. (eds.) 
                        Proceedings of the EPOCH Conference on Open Digital Cultural Heritage Systems (EPOCH/3D-COFORM Publication, Congresso Rospigliosi, Rome, 2008), pp. 47–53
                    
                    
                        Ide, N.M. and Sperberg-McQueen, C.M. (1995). The TEI: History, goals, and future. In 
                        Text Encoding Initiative: Background and Context. Ide N., Véronis, J. (eds.) (Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1995), pp. 5–15.
                    
                    
                        Ruiz Fabo, P., Bermúdez Sabel, H., Martínez Cantón, C., González-Blanco, E. and Navarro Colorado, B. (2018), The Diachronic Spanish Sonnet Corpus (DISCO): TEI and Linked Open Data encoding, data distribution and metrical findings. 
                        Digital Humanities 2018. Puentes-Bridges. Mexico City, Mexico, June 2018.
                    
                    
                        Sanderson, R., Ciccarese, P. and Young, B. (2017). Web Annotation Data Model. W3C Recommendation 23 February 2017. 
                        https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-model/
                    
                    
                        Tittel S., Bermúdez-Sabel, H. and Chiarcos C. (2018). Using RDFa to Link Text and Dictionary Data for Medieval French. 
                        Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2016): Towards Linguistic Data Science. Miyazaki, Japan, May 2018.
                    
                    
                        Tupman, C. (2013). TEI for Gnomologia, version of 2013-07-17. 
                        http://www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk/method/guidelines/
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                This half-day tutorial will introduce DH scholars to spaCy, a free and open- source library for text analysis. Developed by Matthew Hannibal and Ines Montari in Berlin, spaCy offers a suite of tools for applied natural language processing (NLP) that are fast, practical and allow for quick experimentation and evaluation of language models. These tools make it possible for individual scholars to quickly train models that can infer customized categories in named entity recognition tasks, match phrases, and visualize model performance. While comparable to the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK), spaCy offers neural network models, integrated word vectors, dependency parsing and a variety of new features that are not available elsewhere. Participants will learn how to use spaCy for common research tasks in the Digital Humanities and gain an understanding of how spaCy compares with other tools for NLP. We will also work with Prodigy, which is an annotation and active learning tool from the makers of spaCy. Prodigy allows a single researcher to quickly fine-tune a model for greater accuracy on a specific task or to train new categories and entities for recognition. This simple web- application can also be used to crowd source annotations.
            
            
                
                    Target audience and expected number of participants
                
                
                    This tutorial would appeal to a similar audience as attended DH2018's distant viewing and word vectors workshops. Given attendance at those workshops, we expect around 25-30 participants would register for our tutorial. Our participants will probably have some existing familiarity with natural language processing, text analysis, and TEI. Participants will leave the tutorial with the skills needed to install dependencies, train a model on categories that are relevant to their research and run inference on a text. They may have heard of spaCy and are interested in learning how it differs from NLTK.
                
                
                    Our instructors come from a range of backgrounds in machine learning, the humanities, and information science. This diversity of perspectives and use cases of spaCy will appeal to a large DH audience and help participants to connect what they've learned with their own research.
                
                
                    Each participant should bring a laptop computer to the tutorial. No other technology is required. Links and instructions to install spaCy and Prodigy will be provided in advance of the tutorial, but installation can also be completed in the first few minutes.
                
            
            
                
                    Brief outline
                
                
                    Our tutorial is composed of three 45-minute sessions with ten-minute breaks in between, followed by a 15-minute concluding discussion.
                
                
                    In the first session, we will discuss the installation and basic use of spaCy. We will introduce existing models and available tasks for language analysis.
                
                
                    These include basic phrase matching, part of speech identification (POS) and named entity extraction. We will demonstrate displacy, which is a highly useful tool to visualize a model's results.
                
                
                    By the end of the session, participants will be able to load a model and use it to identify basic linguistic features, such as the base form of words (lemma), part of speech, syntactic dependency, word shape and stop words. In a small introductory project, participants will use spaCy code in a prepared notebook to generate individualized vocabulary lists for foreign language learning. The script will take a text as input and output a list of lemmata. These lemmata can then be compared against a second text to produce a customized vocabulary list for a reader to consult when reading the second text.
                
                
                    The second session will cover more advanced capabilities of spaCy. TEI XML is the de facto standard for digital scholarly editions. In order to make spaCy usable in the context of DH scholarship we present the design principles for conversion and show code examples to load TEI XML into spaCy for two different corpora: The German Text Archive (deutschestextarchiv.de, DTA) and the Berlin Intellectuals (berliner- intellektuelle.eu, BI). In the case of DTA, a basic parser for plain text will be developed during the tutorial with metadata annotation on document level. The resulting spaCy document objects will be used for classification such as authorship attribution. For this classification task, the Convolutional Neural Network of the spaCy TextCategorizer
                
                
                    In the case of BI which encompasses genetic encoding, character-level annotation techniques for document variants are presented. The resulting document variants are presented using displacy to offer a highly interactive exploration tool for such genetic editions.
                
                
                    Finally, the integration of word vectors in spaCy is presented by neglecting the built-in word vectors and loading pre-trained fasttext vectors. SpaCy itself currently (Dec. 2018) only encompasses seven languages and only word vectors for four of them. To emphasize the pursuit of language diversity within the DH community we show how to load and apply word vectors for 157 different languages into spaCy.
                
                
                    The third session will focus on Prodigy, which is an annotation tool used to train and evaluate spaCy language models. Building on knowledge from the second session, participants will learn how to use Prodigy to quickly train new categories and entities on existing language models. Prodigy utilizes a method called active learning in which human input and automated learning are both used to update the model. Prodigy sorts the model's uncertain results and strategically asks for user input. These annotations are then used to update the model on new categories or to improve accuracy with a specific task. In this session, participants will learn how to train custom language categories and entities using Prodigy.
                
                
                    Participants will leave the session with a clear end-to-end workflow from an initial text, to training, to the application of trained models. Building on Unit II, we will use the new model to automatically update a TEI document with the new categories and data.
                
                
                    After the sessions, the instructors will open a group conversation about the strengths and weaknesses of spaCy and Prodigy for DH scholarship based on the experiences in the tutorial. The discussion should allow participants to identify specific use cases for their scholarly work.
                
                
                    
                        Session I, Seth Bernstein -email:
                        
                            sfbernstein@gmail.com
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Seth Bernstein is Assistant Professor of History at the Higher School of Economics (Russian Federation). He holds a PhD in history from the University of Toronto (Canada). He is the author of Raised under Stalin: Young Communists and the Defense of Socialism (Cornell, 2017). His current project is "Return to the Motherland: The Repatriation of Soviet Citizens after World War II." Seth's work also uses digital techniques like GIS and massive textual databases to extract and visualize data.
                    
                
                
                    
                        Session II, David Lassner -email:
                        
                            lassner@tu-berlin.de
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        David Lassner graduated (M.Sc.) in computer science at TU Berlin in 2017, focussing on machine learning with a minor in German literary studies. Mr. David Lassner is now a PhD candidate researching machine learning in the digital humanities at the group of machine learning at TU Berlin, where his main focus is the (machine-driven) analysis of literature.
                    
                
                
                    
                        Session III, Andrew Janco -email:
                        
                            ajanco@haverford.edu
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Andrew Janco is the Digital Scholarship Librarian at Haverford College. He completed his Ph.D. in History at the University of Chicago and MS in Information Science at the University of Illinois. Andy has a passion for inquiry-driven and community-engaged digital projects. He is the lead developer of a digital archive and research application for the Groupo de Apoyo Mutuo, Guatemala's oldest human rights organization. Andy has experience organizing two previous tutorials on spaCy and Prodigy. He works on applied machine learning for research applications in humanities and social science scholarship.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Recent years have been marked by the emergence of the ‘Open Science’ movement. It encourages, among other practices, ‘open data’, ‘open publication’, and ‘open edition’. Boosted by the digital turn, it has radically transformed research and academic communities and on academic communities. From now on, the EU requires funded scientific papers to be published open access and their full availability ensured in order to be reused by anyone. The EU's deadline is 2020, but many people think that it is unrealistic. Other initiatives, by NASA in the USA for example, decided that the time for conversing about Open Access is now past and that current discussion must focus on how we are going to achieve it in practice. What is the situation concerning SSH?
            
            This panel proposes to question the existing scientific publishing paradigm linked to the current changing relationship between the necessary publication of primary data and review papers and the SSH perspective. The challenge is to break with the descriptive model which links raw data and original research articles, and to offer the opportunity to combine data and review papers in order to ensure the link with evidence and to highlight interpretation and reasoning.
            It is widely recognized that the number of papers currently published in SSH is such that we only consult some of them, following our own selection strategies. However, we still write as if our work were to be read, without any attempt to redraft it from an alternative perspective. Digital publishing does not solve the problem: it makes it worse while, at the same time, the increasing accessibility of online data is not sufficiently exploited in conjunction with publications.
            Corpora made available for the sharing, interoperability and reuse of data sets are rarely considered in connection with scientific publications. Yet these are the bodies of evidence on which the published analyses and demonstrations are based. A special challenge when consulting publications is to quickly assess their relevance to our work, and to do so, to have easy access to the scientific reasoning and the provenance of the diverse items (observations, comparisons, references) on which it is based. This new paradigm raises a new challenge: how to provide papers linked to open access datasets.
            A spectrum of possibilities is available, ranging from short, scholarly publications that describe datasets accessible online, to full papers that integrate datasets from repositories (either as part of the paper or externally maintained) or datasets linked to data papers.
            
                By bringing together representatives of various SSH communities and infrastructures, including through the SSHOC H2020 project this panel aims at reflecting on these questions. The introduction will briefly describe the different points presented in such a way that we can see the common points between the disciplines and the way in which the tools proposed can bring communities together around the practice of data-publications. Each talk will try to go in this direction without using too much disciplinary jargon in order to be understandable by all.
            
            
                It will review the specificity of each research community and how they are facing these challenges by focusing on the particular case of the French Infrastructure Huma-Num and its consortia. Experts from two research infrastructures for digital publishing in SSH will also contribute to this reflection. Is it possible to build a standardized model for SSH? How are French infrastructures dealing with scientific (digital) publishing? Are the research communities and their infrastructures capable of working together in order to link and structure their syntheses with their data to highlight the chain of inference to evidence?
            
            
                
                    Talk 1 = “Simplifying the Writing of Logicist Publications in Archaeology: An Attempt by the French MASA Consortium through LogicistWriter”
                
                
                    Within the MASA Consortium, the Digital Document Centre of the
                    
                        Caen
                    
                     MRSH and CITERES-LAT are collaborating on the electronic publication of the Rigny excavation (Indre-et-Loire, France) by Elisabeth Zadora-Rio in a logicist format developed by Jean-Claude Gardin. The objective is to highlight the chain of inferences in order to ensure the administration of evidence from the archaeological synthesis. As the archaeological experiment is not reproducible, field records are the main data on which researchers will rely. The publication of archaeological data is therefore essential since this data constitutes the evidence on which the reasoning that led to the synthesis is based.
                
                
                    The logicist publishing interface set up by the Digital Document Centre of the MRSH of Caen provides different levels of access to content, allowing both quick reading and in-depth consultation. It is thus possible to visualize all the inference strings in the reasoning structure through synthetic diagrams but also to consult the ArSol database containing the field records that provide evidence for the initial propositions. The XML file containing the whole argumentation structure is based on the entities of CIDOC CRM to ensure the interoperability of this publication within the semantic web. The inference chains are mapped to CRMinf (extension of CIDOC dedicated to the modeling of reasoning) and ArSol records are mapped to CIDOC and its extensions CRMSci (scientific observations) and CRMArchaeo (archaeology).
                
                
                    For the implementation of the electronic publication of Rigny's archaeological excavations in logicist format, the researcher must inform all his/her logicist proposals in an XML-TEI file. From this XML-TEI source file, the Digital Document Centre of the Caen MRSH has set up a tool to automatically generate the reasoning graph in an SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) format.
                
                
                    However, writing logicism proposals in an XML-TEI file is difficult for the researcher. In order to simplify the writing of archaeological publications that respect the precepts of logicism, the MASA Consortium provides an online tool to assist in logicist formalization, based on a more intuitive process: LogicistWriter. In this application, the researcher begins by writing propositions in a schematic form and graphically linking them together in a graphical interface. The researcher can thus set up the structure of logicist propositions by building the tree structure of his/her reasonings in a visual way, linking the propositions to each other from the initial propositions (the evidence) to the final propositions (the synthesis) in the form of a graph. A TEI-XML file containing the entire logicist structure of the reasoning is created on the fly from this graph. The XML-TEI file generated can then be expanded in an XML editor to enhance proposals with text, illustrations, bibliography or cross-references.
                
                
                    Although the corpora of archaeological data does not allow the experiment to be replayed as in the experimental sciences, logicism highlights the sequence of reasoning and will ultimately make it possible to produce reusable databases of inferences.
                
            
            
                
                    Talk 2= “Validation of scientific results and FAIR principles in linguistic research within the French CORLI consortium”
                
                
                    Corpus research in linguistics has a long existence but has induced huge changes in the community in the last 30 years (Laks, 2011). The advent of high-speed Internet connections and large storage possibilities, with the generalization of the use of mathematical models and statistical software, have made it easier to build linguistic research on data attested by language corpora.
                
                There is a classical opposition in linguistics between theories based on examples (introspective or not) and theories based on data and corpora. The second approach corresponds to a large body of authors and linguistic models. The use of corpora makes it theoretically possible to control or reproduce the published research, which is not the case in studies based on examples. This control might be possible in linguistic fields that adopt an experimental framework, similar to other experimental sciences such as cognitive psychology for instance.
                
                    In the field of First Language Acquisition, the use of corpora has been mandatory since the 1970s and researchers rapidly realized the interest of sharing corpora and working hand in hand, due to the high development cost of such corpora. For instance, Pine et al. (2005) were able to respond to the work of Schütze and Wexler (1996) because the three corpora used by Schütze and Wexler were available on CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000). Pine et al.’s response was based on a corpus that is also available on CHILDES (Manchester Corpus, Theakston et al., 2001). The existence and the reusability of the different corpora is a crucial element here to make it possible to replay or enrich a previous work. More importantly, these corpora follow the same well-known guidelines (CHAT format) to ensure interoperability and have been freely available on the CHILDES website for 30 years for the oldest data, and for 15 years for the more recent ones to ensure their accessibility, two key concepts in the CHILDES initiative.
                
                These new approaches in linguistics are an important step for the linguistic field as they make it possible to significantly control, replicate, and enrich research. Control of the proof is also something that might be possible today, if not only the corpus but also the methods and the tools are made publicly available. This is an important point we are trying to develop and reflect on within the French consortium in linguistics in CORLI. What are the conditions of such a procedure? How can colleagues be encouraged to deposit their corpora? What anonymization procedures need to be developed in the case of sensitive data? What are the legal frameworks for data?
                
                    In this paper, we will address these questions, particularly in the framework of Huma-Num and within CORLI in France, or CLARIN in Europe. Indeed, they follow the guidelines of the FAIR principles (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability) to promote and help develop the use of clear and rich metadata, common open formats, accessible tools, open archives and a correct citation of data or tools. Such methods and practices may benefit linguistics research by saving time, encouraging researchers to reuse already existing, documented and multi-level annotated data as well as tools, to increase our knowledge on languages.
                
            
            
                
                    Talk 3 = “Dealing with Literary Scholars’ Data and Evidence: the Perspective of the French CAHIER Consortium”
                
                
                    With digital editions of texts, sources and scientific literature, literary scholars are dealing with unprecedented changes, in particular regarding the publication of the data their analyses are based on. To administer their evidence, they have to tackle two major challenges: on the one hand, the publication of all their data and on the other, its storage. The two aspects cannot be separated. What solutions are available for literary scholars? How are they dealing with these challenges?
                
                
                    In the French context, part of the digital humanities data storage problem has been solved thanks to the HumaNum infrastructure: HumaNum provides a GITLAB to store software codes and a technical tool, Nakala, to carry out SSH data storage. Nakala also offers a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) that unambiguously identifies resources. Thus, one might think that literary scholars' papers could be based on these URI and gits, and that it would be enough to have more data papers, with more reproducible experiments and new ways of writing papers. However it is not that easy. That’s why CAHIER has organised three actions in order to facilitate:
                
                a) data interoperability by sharing models (such as the XML-TEI schema) and organising data visibility by providing sitemaps (for XML-TEI encoded texts for example) and OAI repositories for projects;
                b) data storage by helping researchers to model their data in an interoperable format from the very beginning of their project;
                c) data reuse by promoting data deposit and its visibility.
                
                    For each action, we have to deal with different challenges because of the complexity of the scientific questions raised in literary research that includes a hermeneutical framework. One way of solving the problem might be to provide highly flexible data models and to develop researchers’ skills. That's why we are also investing in training courses, but lack of time is the main obstacle for the researchers. Moreover, if we consider that we could have a pool of experts, where are the journals and data journals that would enable them to publish their results?
                
            
            
                
                    Talk 4= “Towards New Forms of Integrated Publications in Medieval History: the Exploratory Research of the COSME Consortium”
                
                The construction of digital corpora for medieval sources has always been associated with specific scientific methodologies. These are related to particular historical approaches, such as quantitative codicology 25 years ago, the deep search in Medieval Latin texts in recent years or, very recently, studies on medieval spaces based on GIS or, more broadly, geomatics. 
                Currently, corpora of raw data and corpora of qualified data, metadata/referentials are being built and cross-comparisons are being increasingly carried out. Rather than developing tagged textual/documentary corpora, the search by automatic detection and extraction of named entities from repositories (established within the framework of the COSME consortium in particular: names of persons, places, topics, values...) makes it possible to envision specific and multiple enrichments of these corpora in an automatic way as well as their historical exploitation. However, these qualified and requalified corpora are source places that must be associated each time with the published results.
                As part of the development of next-generation open archives (
                    
                        https://www.coar-repositories.org/files/NGR-Final-Formatted-Report_english-version.pdf
                    ), each publication should have its own metadata-/referential datasets, specific, appropriately qualified corpora and intermediate data (extracted data tables). The traditional publishing model must therefore be completely overhauled with the implementation of the necessary permanent, open warehouses capable of preserving and visualizing complex content. Several test solutions are envisaged: the development of the TELMA platform for the electronic edition and publication of medieval sources; the creation of an Overlay Journal dedicated to medieval sources and studies on literacy and medieval writing practices; or the connected and joint development of these solutions. 
                
                The paper will aim to review the development of these solutions, the advantages and disadvantages and the potential proposal of new complementary solutions (in relation to EquipEx Biblissima, for example).
            
            
                
                    Talk 5= “How does 3D Influence Scientific Research and Publications in Digital Humanities?”
                
                3D technologies have offered researchers in the Humanities (archaeologists, anthropologists, architects, art historians...) new and effective tools to process, analyse and disseminate their scientific data.
                As a true research tool, 3D enables one to examine and visualize digital data and also facilitates dialogue and exchange between researchers by providing digital models and visual support to test different hypotheses and confront different documentary resources to find solutions to historical questions that traditional methods of investigation cannot solve. It also raises new questions.
                3D makes it possible to present information in a more coherent form and to support a demonstration by making it more comprehensible for the observer. Thus, the 3D solution presented in the publication will clarify the scientific purpose of a text or a speech that might be too abstract without this visual transcription.
                Thanks to their flexibility, 3D models can be used to follow the historical evolution of an object from cultural heritage or more specifically from an archaeological site: such a digital replica can be updated at will and viewed from different angles.
                With the online publication of these 3D models, researchers have rapid access to information through an organized database synthesizing all the scientific documentation. Moreover, by this digital medium, researchers can continue their investigation without any need to remain on the site.
                Furthermore, 3D models can also be used as support for an information system by associating a coherent spatial coordinate system in order to offer researchers all the data associated with a humanities object of study. However exploitation of the large amount of 3D data remains difficult for humanities scholars who are not used to manipulating such data.
                
                    In order to help the Digital Community, resultats of the ReSeed project, currently funded by the French National Agency for Research and associated with an axis of the 3D-SSH consortium will be detailed by the author. It aims at the development of a new technology: a tool and an interoperable format in order to digitize both historical semantic data and 3D physical objects. ReSeed will implement an ethical code assigned to guarantee the authenticity and uniqueness of the future semantically augmented numerical objects.
                
            
            
                
                    Talk 6= “From Papers to Data in the Open Access Context: Use Cases from OpenEdition Platforms”
                
                OpenEdition is the French national infrastructure for open scholarly communication in the humanities and social sciences. OpenEdition portal brings together four platforms dedicated to open access digital resources in the SSH: OpenEdition Books (monographs and edited volumes); Hypotheses (research blogs); Calenda (a calendar of academic events; and OpenEdition Journals (academic journals). 
                 
                With 20 years of experience and more than 500 open access journals and 7000 books in all disciplines of the humanities and the social sciences, OpenEdition platforms are an interesting observation deck from where researchers' needs in terms of linking their data to their publications can be observed.
                 
                My communication will present several cases of academic publications disseminated on OpenEdition platforms from different disciplines (such as geography, sociology, history, archeology) that reflects the variety of ways authors and editors try to create links with data whereas no specific feature exist on the platforms. It will be also an opportunity to measure how those actors play with the technical constraints imposed by the existing publishing tools to elaborate an extended scientific argumentation that integrate direct access to data. This communication will be the start of a collaborative project with Huma-Num on that topic, both on a national level and with the framework of SSHOC project.
            
            
                
                    Talk 7= “Linked Open Data for Heritage Content: an example of implementation within Persée infrastructure”
                
                
                    Persée is a digital platform for the digitization, structural markup, online publishing and long-term preservation of heritage content. Persée deals mainly with the “collections of old, rare and valuable documents housed by libraries and archives” in particular, but not exclusively, academic journals, serials, books, proceedings, grey literature, maps and iconography. The originality of the Persée platform is the accuracy and the standardization of item description and structuring (article, chapter, illustration, named entity, etc.) and the use of standards (TEI, METS, MODS, MADS, DC, OAI-PMH). 
                
                
                    Currently, the Persée portal (
                    
                        www.persee.fr
                    
                    ) provides open access to archives of scholarly publications in French in the humanities and social sciences, with more than 740,000 documents available. The oldest article dates from 1837 and the most recent one from 2017. This set of documents can be considered from a double point of view: on the one hand, they are published research results that constitute a documentary resource which is still relevant for students and researchers; on the other hand, they are a mass of structured and qualified data that researchers can consider as a digital corpus.
                
                
                    The presentation will focus on the methods used by Persée to ensure the usability of these datasets outside the digital library framework and their sustainability for digital humanists. Persée provides web services and implements the methods and techniques of Linked Open Data. Data Persée (data.persee.fr) gathers all the metadata produced by Persée and makes them available in a structured way (RDF graph) according to the principles of the semantic web (DCMI, FRBR, FOAF, CITO, BIBO, SKOS). The mapping with international information systems makes it possible to explore and link not only Persée databases but also data offered by the library community (IdRef, data.bnf.fr), the scientific community (Cairo Gazetteer, GBIF) and other crowd-sourced databases (DBpedia). To ensure quality and relevance, we have prioritized human expertise over automated processes. 
                
                
                    So, all the links are checked. In addition to that, Persée is involved in a long term preservation programme to guarantee the durability of the links and of the identifiers.
                
            
        
    

        
            1. Introduction: “Christian Materials”
            We constructed a corpus of “Christian Materials,” which is invaluable material for the study of the Japanese language in the sixteenth to the seventeenth century CE(Muromachi period). They comprise documents written by Catholic missionaries who came to Japan for the purpose of proselytization. 
            We chose “Feiqe no monogatari” and “Esopo no Fabulas” (Figure 1, herein after called Feiqe and Esopo) from these materials and constructed a corpus. Feiqe is a digest text of the Japanese epic, the Tale of the Heike. Esopo is a Japanese translation of Aesop’s Fables. These have special characteristics among the Christian materials: they were written in the Japanese colloquial language of the time using the Roman alphabet with Portuguese spellings. They were written as readers for missionaries to learn Japanese. In order to propagate Christianity, it was necessary for the missionaries to converse naturally with the Japanese people, so they had to study the current colloquial language. Writing the materials using the Roman alphabet made it possible for missionaries to read these books even if they had not learned Japanese characters.
            Many of the existing Muromachi-period Japanese documents are written in the literary language; the rare materials written in the colloquial language are very valuable. The Roman alphabet spelling reveals information about the phonology of the Japanese language, which is not apparent when referring only to Japanese characters. For example, voiceless or voiced consonants or open or closed o-vowels (ŏ or ô) are not clear from the Japanese characters.
            There are no other materials that include these two characteristics. It should be noted that only one single copy of Feiqe and Esopo still exists, housed in the British Library in London. As there is no doubt that these materials are extremely valuable for the study of colloquial Japanese in the Muromachi period, they need to be more widely and conveniently available.
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Images of “Feiqe” and “Esopo”
            2. Construction of the corpus
            One of the features of our corpus is that it has two texts, the Roman alphabet text and the Japanese character text. 
            We referred to the original prints and faithfully converted the original Roman alphabet text to electronic text. Letters like “à,” “ã,” and “ſ” are replicated by Unicode.
            We also prepared the Japanese character text and encoded it in XML files. We studied tags and document type definitions with reference to TEI P5. Based on that, we selected and added required tags for the structure of Feiqe and Esopo. We also referred to Kawase et al. (2014) to design the tag set. We carried out morphological analysis on these XML files. We used the UniDic and MeCab morphological analysis tools to divide the entire text into linguistic units and add morphological information such as lemma, readings, and parts of speech. MeCab is a morphological analyzer based on the conditional random field (CRF) analytical method that achieves state-of-the-art performance in contemporary Japanese morphological analysis. UniDic is a dictionary for the morphological analysis of Japanese that can lemmatize variations of orthography and word forms. 
            The grammar and vocabulary of Feiqe and Esopo reflect the transition of Early Middle Japanese to Modern Japanese. We therefore used UniDic for Late Middle Japanese (Ogiso et al., 2015) for accurate morphological analysis. This dictionary was developed using the same method as UniDic for Early Middle Japanese (Ogiso et al., 2012). We have added the vocabulary specific to the Feiqe and Esopo to the dictionary and performed machine learning using corpora of the relevant era as training data. As a result of the morphological analysis using this dictionary, the accuracy of the distinction of allomorphs (including verification that word segmentation, part-of-speech tagging for items, and lemmatization are all correct) is 0.932 (F measure). The corpus size is approximately 140,000 words. By utilizing the appropriate dictionary, we were able to keep the manual effort required for correcting errors to a minimum.
            We then aligned the Roman alphabet text and the Japanese character text counterparts into parallel texts. By morphological analysis using UniDic, morphological information about its pronunciation was added to each word using a Katakana character. For example, the pronunciation of “涙”(tears) is “ナミダ.” We romanized each Katakana character using the modern Hepburn system, like “ナ” into “na,” “ミ” into “mi,” “ダ” into “da.” In this way, we generated a modern Roman alphabet text and compared it to the original Roman alphabet text (Figure 2). Both Roman alphabet texts are quite similar, thus we were able to align these texts into parallel texts in an efficient manner. The accuracy of automatic alignment is 0.982 (F measure). By carrying out morphological analysis on the Japanese character text and aligning both texts into parallel texts, we succeeded in creating a corpus that can access morphological information from both the Japanese character text and the original Roman alphabet text.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Comparing the modern Roman alphabet and the original Roman alphabet text
            3. Publication of the corpus and link to the image of the original print
            The corpus has been made publicly accessible through an online search application called “Chūnagon.” With “Chūnagon,” it is possible to perform searches that specify complex combinations of different morphological information. The Roman alphabet text is displayed in parallel with the Japanese character text (Figure 3). 
            Another important feature of our corpus is that it includes a direct link to a clear photographic image of the original print in the British Library. Based on a memorandum with the British Library, we received permission to make the photographic image of the original print accessible in the public domain. The image files are one file per page of the original, and the size of each file is one megabyte or less. The photographic image is now on available on the NINJAL website, which is open access. “Chūnagon” has a link that allows you to access the page that contains the corresponding word.
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Search results for “Chūnagon” 
            Acknowledgement: The work reported in this presentation was supported by the NINJAL collaborative research project “Construction of Diachronic Corpora and New Developments in Research on the History of Japanese.”
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Kawase, A., Ichimura, T., and Ogiso, T. (2014). Problems in Encoding Documents of Early Modern Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the conference on Digital Humanities 2014, http://dharchive.org/paper/DH2014/Paper-934.xml (accessed 17 April 2019). 
                    
                    
                        Kudo, T. (2006). MeCab: Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological Analyzer. http://taku910.github.io/mecab/ (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (2016). UniDic for Late Middle Japanese. https://unidic.ninjal.ac.jp/download_all#unidic_kyogen (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (2018). Corpus of Historical Japanese, Muromachi Period Series, Volume II: Christian Materials. https://pj.ninjal.ac.jp/corpus_center/chj/muromachi-en.html (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        National Institute for Japanese Language and Linguistics (2019). Images of the Amakusa edition of Heike monogatari, Isoho monogatari and Kinkushū in the British Library. https://dglb01.ninjal.ac.jp/BL_amakusa/en.php (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Komachi, M., Den, Y., and Matsumoto, Y. (2012). UniDic for Early Middle Japanese: a Dictionary for Morphological Analysis of Classical Japanese. 
                        Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC2012), pp.911-915. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/906_Paper.pdf (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Ogiso, T., Kono, T., and Ichimura, T. (2015). Morphological Analysis of Japanese Kyōgen Text. 
                        Proceedings of the conference on Digital Humanities 2015, http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/OGISO_Toshinobu_Morphological_Analysis_of_Japanes/OGISO_Toshinobu_Morphological_Analysis_of_Japanese_Ky_g.html (accessed 17 April 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                This workshop will allow DH practitioners to exchange experiences in DH education, and to voice and explore ideas and hopes for the near future. The topic of education is explored, firstly, from the perspective of the pedagogies for DH practices and, secondly, regarding the ways in which DH resources facilitate learning via digital means across broader society. The workshop seeks to create a forum that brings together DH practitioners with specialists in educational sciences and digital innovation. The workshop is open to anyone who is involved or interested in the creation of educational resources in DH. The organisers have made a special effort to include specialists from outside the DH community with expertise in educational sciences and digital innovation. The outcome of this workshop is primarily one of community building, whereby DH practitioners interested in pedagogy can discuss ways to move forward in the near future and to potentially consider the idea of composing a shared strategic agenda on this topic.
            
            
                Background
                Well over half a century since the beginning of computational approaches to the humanities, digital methods have become more and more embedded in the academic establishment. The primary outputs of much DH work are of course the digital editions, archives, libraries, databases and various tools that, among other purposes, can act as educational resources for the humanities. Additionally, Digital Humanities provides pedagogical resources for its practitioners in an abundant multitude of forms. A clear example of this extreme diversity is the 
                    Digital Humanities Course Registry maintained by DARIAH and CLARIN (2014). This list is one example of attempts currently underway to bring this complex web of educational resources into some sort of manageable form, further examples include the online learning platform 
                    dariahTeach (DARIAH, 2017) and the MLA's 
                    Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities (Davis et al, 2015). 
                
                It comes as no surprise that such a vast array of educational resources have been developed in DH. The community is characterised by its high level of interdisciplinarity, its commitment to digital innovation and experimentation, and a strong DIY mentality. However, it might also be fair to say that the approach to pedagogy in the creation of such digital tools has been largely ad-hoc. The valuable efforts after-the-fact to map the complex web of educational materials mentioned above opens up the question of what DH would look like with more shared and planned pedagogical strategies.
                Over the last two years a conglomeration of all research universities and universities of applied sciences in the Netherlands drew up and agreed upon what was called the 
                    Acceleration Plan for Educational Innovation with ICT (VSNU et al, 2018). This four-year plan identifies eight areas in which Dutch universities could benefit from a shared approach to educational innovation on a national level. These include transitioning to digital open teaching aids and materials; and evidence-based educational innovation with ICT. Sessions in this workshop will focus on both the question of ‘openness’ in DH educational resources and the extent to which pedagogical approaches can be seen as evidence-based. Using this strategic plan as a focal point and inspiration for DH, the workshop asks the question: If we innovate together strategically, using open and evidence-based approaches, can we achieve more as a community in DH education?
                
            
            
                Topics
                Topics of the workshop include (but are not limited to) the following:
                
                    DH pedagogy in practice
                    We intend to take stock of existing types of DH educational resources, course materials and pedagogical approaches, focusing largely on the question of how DH practitioners develop their skill sets and on the resources that are available to them. On what grounds can a selection of necessary skills be made, working towards establishing foundational DH skills? At the same time, can we successfully deal with the persistent view that one needs to know ‘everything’, from traditional humanities to computer science skills? Furthermore, we consider the pedagogical strategies that are being implemented to teach DH skills to students. This includes identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the current status quo, and looking at the possibility to evaluate the effectiveness of teaching through an evidence-based discussion. Topics may include (but are not limited to): 
                    
                        DH methodologies
                        Coding and text encoding
                        Programming languages
                        Tools and tool evaluation/criticism
                        Data modelling
                        Interdisciplinary collaborations; collaborative grant writing 
                    
                
                
                    Open Education
                    This topic explores the question of openness in DH educational resources both from an educational sciences perspective and from the experience of developing and running open DH education in practice. 
                    
                        What does ‘open’ mean in the context of Digital Humanities education? 
                        The term ‘open’ has been applied to a wide variety of contexts, including government, science, data and education. The increased use of the term ‘open’ has made its meaning become increasingly ambiguous, which could also lead to misinterpretation and unrealistic expectations in terms of outcomes (Kalz, 2014). In other words, ‘open’ often means different things to different social actors, confirming an early statement of Hyland (1979) who described the field as ‘eclectic’. In this part of the session we will address the term in its multiple formulations, zoom in on the aspects that could be of relevance to Digital Humanities education and discuss some of the implications.
                    
                    
                        MOOCs in DH
                        There are increasing numbers of MOOCs being developed by the DH community. Recent examples include those available by the 
                            dariahTeach platform, which provides courses on introducing DH, TEI encoding, digital scholarly editions, digitisation and multimodal literacies. Many of the MOOCs from the DH community are developed with a certain consideration and awareness of good pedagogical practices, to the extent that there even exists a meta-MOOC or a MOOC on MOOCs (Stommel, 2012). This part of the session will include guest speaker(s) that have been recently involved in the development and implementation of a MOOC in DH to discuss their experience about this format and engage in debate around the theories of open educational resources.
                        
                    
                
                
                    Agenda for innovation
                    The focus of this topic is to identify potential shared strategies for the future of DH Education. The aforementioned Dutch Acceleration Plan for Innovation in Education with ICT will form one of the focal points and will be discussed in more detail both on a conceptual and content level as an exercise in strategic thinking. By doing this, the aim is to explore if this kind of method could be applied to DH and what that might look like, in other words, how to practically formulate a shared strategy for DH education.
                    It will raise a number of questions for debate, such as:
                    
                        Can we assemble a shared set of key desiderata for innovation in DH education?
                        How can we move towards evidence-based innovation in education?
                        Can we promote a structured rather than ad-hoc approach to developing learning resources, do we need to keep it disruptive, or can some sort of balance be found, and how?
                    
                
            
            
                Format
                This workshop will take place over a half-day on the morning of Monday 8 July and will include three sessions. Each session will begin with presentations followed by discussions. The final session will be a summative discussion with a focus on future strategies. Participants are welcome to submit in advance a 5 to 10 minute lightning talk relating to one of the three sessions in an area in which they have experience or expertise (deadline 6th May).
            
            
                Outcome(s)
                The outcome of this workshop is primarily one of community building, whereby DH practitioners interested in pedagogy can discuss ways to move forward in the near future and to potentially consider the idea of composing a shared strategic agenda on this topic.
            
            
                Contributors (alphabetical)
                
                    Elli Bleeker
                    
                        Elli Bleeker is a postdoctoral researcher in the Research and Development Team at the Humanities Cluster, part of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. She specializes in digital scholarly editing and computational philology, with a focus on modern manuscripts and genetic criticism. Elli completed her PhD at the Centre for Manuscript Genetics (2017) on the role of the scholarly editor in the digital environment. As a Research Fellow in the Marie Sklodowska-Curie funded network DiXiT (2013–2017), she received advanced training in manuscript studies, text modelling, and XML technologies.
                    
                
                
                    Johanna de Groot
                    
                    Johanna de Groot is programme manager of the Acceleration Plan for Educational Innovation with ICT that was initiated by the Association of Universities in the Netherlands, the Association of Universities of Applied Sciences and SURF. Johanna’s main expertise is in project management and educational policy. After working for eight years as a project manager at VU University, she moved to the Hague to work as a policy adviser on education at the Association of Universities. Currently Johanna works at SURF: the collaborative ICT organisation for Dutch education and research. 
                
                
                    Aodhán Kelly
                
                
                    Aodhán Kelly is a postdoctoral researcher at the Welten Institute in the Open University of The Netherlands and visiting researcher at the Centre for Education and Learning at Leiden-Delft-Erasmus. Aodhán completed a PhD in 2017 at the Centre for Manuscript Genetics at the University of Antwerp on ‘Disseminating digital scholarly editions of textual cultural heritage’. His doctoral funding and training was provided by DiXiT (2013-2017), an EU funded Marie Sklodowska-Curie network. Aodhán is currently engaged as a researcher investigating the digitalization of learning and education within the ‘Digital Society’ national initiative of the Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU).
                
                
                    Martine Schophuizen
                
                
                    Martine’s background lies in Psychology and Learning Sciences, she obtained her bachelor and masters degree at Maastricht University. She is now working as a PhD candidate at the Welten Institute of the Dutch Open University in Heerlen. Her research is centered around the question to what extent Open Online Education is embedded in higher learning institutions. She will mainly focus on the organisational (pre)conditions that lead to success, the effect of Open Online Education on the organisation, and the contribution it has towards the quality of education and educational innovation.
                
                Sally Wyatt
                
                    Sally Wyatt is Professor of Digital Cultures at Maastricht University. She originally studied economics (at McGill University in Canada and the University of Sussex in England). Her main intellectual affinity is with Science and Technology Studies (STS). For many years, her research has focused on digital technologies, both how they are used by people wishing to inform themselves about health-related issues, and how scholars themselves use digital technologies in the creation of knowledge. She is one of the three coordinators of the ‘Digital Society’ initiative of the VSNU.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    DARIAH. (2017). DH teaching material open-source, high quality, multilingual teaching materials for the digital arts and humanities. 
                        
                            https://teach.dariah.eu/
                         (accessed 10 January 2019).
                    
                    DARIAH and CLARIN. (2014). Digital Humanities Course Registry. 
                        
                            https://registries.clarin-dariah.eu/courses/
                         (accessed 10 January 2019).
                    
                    Davis, R. F., Gold, M. K., Harris, K. D. and Sayers, J
                        . (2015). Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and Experiments. 
                        
                            https://digitalpedagogy.mla.hcommons.org/
                         (accessed 10 January 2019).
                    
                    Hyland, J. T. (1979). Open education: a slogan examined. 
                        Educational Studies, 5(1), 35-41. 
                    
                    doi: 10.1080/0305569790050105
                    Kalz, M. (2014). Lifelong learning and its support with new technologies. In J. D. Wright 
                    (Ed.), 
                        International Encyclopedia of the Social &amp; Behavioral Sciences, 14 (2), 93–99.
                    
                    Stommel, J. (2012). MOOC MOOC. 
                        
                            http://www.moocmooc.com/
                         (accessed 10 January 2019).
                    
                    VSNU, VH, SURF. (2018). Acceleration plan for educational innovation with ICT. 
                        
                            https://www.surf.nl/binaries/content/assets/surf/en/2018/versnellingsplan-en-def.pdf
                         (accessed 10 January 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction: Publishing Print Dictionaries as TEI-XML and RDF 
                The trend towards the retrodigization of print dictionaries -- especially those considered to have a historical as well as a scientific importance -- has been given a new impetus in recent years thanks to improvements in optical character recognition as well as to developments in the creation and promotion of standards and technologies (Khemakhem et al., 2017; Khemakhem et al., 2018) which enable machine actionable versions of such texts to be published and shared much more easily than before. Traditionally the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) (Budin et al., 2012) has been the favoured standard for the encoding of retrodigitised print dictionaries, but there is now starting to be a move towards the publication of electronic editions of print dictionaries as Linked Data
                    
                         A recent project, ELEXIS (
                            
                                https://elex.is/
                            ), which aims to create a platform for accessing and working with dictionary data, and linking senses together across dictionaries in different languages, works with both TEI-XML and RDF versions of editions of dictionaries. 
                        
                     (LD). 
                
                The prior popularity of TEI for this task reflects the dual nature that digital editions of print dictionaries can often have: namely, both as representations of dictionaries as texts, that is as printed artifacts that follow particular typographical conventions and have specific styles of page layout, etc; and at the same time, as computational resources that serve to make the lexicographic and, more broadly speaking linguistic, information contained in the original texts more accessible for querying and further machine processing. 
                On the other hand one of the greatest strengths of Linked Data (LD) lies in its core emphasis on interoperability between datasets, heterogeneous as to subject area and type, through the use of a common semantic model, that of the Resource Description Framework (RDF), as well as the use of common vocabularies across datasets. Not only does LD encourage the mutual enrichment of individual datasets by facilitating the creation of extensive links between them, it also gives modellers access to a whole ecosystem of Semantic Web technologies and standards, including several out-of-the-box tools for manipulating and visualising structured data. In addition, formal languages such as RDF, RDFS and OWL, which make up part of the Semantic Web stack, allow us to specify and to elaborate on the semantics of the classes and properties used to structure dictionary data. 
                Modelling a dictionary using RDF requires us to represent the information contained within it as a series of subject-predicate-object statements, which taken together describe a formal graph structure. As a consequence it is much less successful -- which in this case means much less verbose -- than TEI at representing things like the layout and formatting of the original text, or properties relating to the status of the text as a series of tokens, as well as in encoding certain kinds of deeply nested structures. This might suggest that RDF is better suited to describing the more abstract linguistic content of retrodigitised dictionaries, e.g., describing grammatical and semantic information for each entry (along with dictionary metadata), and for embellishing this content through links to other salient datasets and vocabularies. However as we will see, there often exist aspects of print dictionaries that although strictly speaking they concern 
                    how information is presented in the text -- and relate, for example, to the dictionary as a historical artifact -- and not the lexical information contained in the text itself, are still worth explicitly encoding in RDF. This is both because RDF allows us to make this extra-lexical information more accessible and usable and because it helps to ensure that each RDF version of a dictionary is a more self-contained resource. 
                
            
            
                Modelling Le Petit Larousse illustré
                In order to flesh out some of the issues outlined in the preceding section, especially from the point of view of elucidating the potential benefits of using RDF as a means of publishing historic dictionaries, we will focus on a particular case study which concerns the French national project, Nénufar
                    
                        
                            http://nenufar.huma-num.fr
                        
                     (Bohbot et al., 2018). One of the main goals of Nénufar is to make different consecutive editions of the illustrated French language dictionary
                     Le Petit Larousse illustré (PLI), published during the first half of the 20th century, publically available both via an online interface as well as as downloadable TEI-XML digital editions and as a linked data dataset. So far all of the editions of PLI published between 1906 and 1924 have been digitised, encoded and made searchable. The native digitisation format is TEI, although the encoding adheres as much as possible to the TEI-Lex0 format (Bański et al., 2017; Romary and Tasovac, 2018); the conversion of entries into RDF is currently ongoing. 
                
                The PLI frequently includes encyclopedic information pertaining to its lexical entries along with the more typical kinds of lexicographic data which means that it possesses a strong socio-cultural and historic interest in addition to its significance as a legacy lexicographic resource; indeed, to some extent it can be considered a hybrid resource, dictionary-encyclopedic. Take, for instance, the entry for the word 
                    aviation from three different editions of PLI, from 1906, 1912 and 1915
                    
                         See the different versions of this entry at 
                            http://nenufar.huma-num.fr/?article=3807
                        
                    . It’s interesting to track how changes in the entry reflect contemporary discoveries that were taking place in the field of aeronautics at the time.
                
                Here the three successive versions of the entry each contains slightly different encyclopedic glosses. Note also that in the last of the three versions of the entry a reference appears to the lexical entry for the word 
                    aéroplane. In this case two aspects of the same entry have changed over the course of different editions: the textual content of the encyclopedic gloss and the appearance of a new reference to another entry. 
                
                As regards the linked data version of the PLI, we made the decision to include as much of the encyclopedic and bibliographic information from the original dataset as possible and to model the evolution of entries across editions since, as we mentioned in the last section, this helps to ensure that the dataset is relatively self-contained -- and prevents users of the RDF version of the PLI having to constantly refer back to the TEI encoding
                    
                         Go tho the “resources” section of each Nénufar entry to inspect the TEI xml.
                    , something which would go against the universalising spirit of the Semantic Web -- and also because some of this information is well suited to being represented in RDF. By explicitly modelling the editions in RDF using bibliographic and temporal vocabularies and associating each with a specific year, we can query the data for date-specific information.
                
                Furthermore we used the well-known Ontolex-Lemon vocabulary (McCrae et al., 2017) for publishing lexicon-ontologies as linked data as the basis of our encoding in addition to making extensive use of other standards and vocabularies such as the 
                    lexinfo registry, SKOS and DEO
                    
                        
                            http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/deo
                        
                    . However these did not always provide the properties and classes we needed and so in several cases we decided to create our own. Note that although at the time of writing the Ontolex-Lemon lexicography module is still in the process of being finalised for publication (Bosque-Gil et al., 2016) we have tried our best to make sure that we don’t define any new classes or properties similar to those likely to be in the former. In order to model links between entries we utilised the already existing class 
                    Reference from the DEO vocabulary, and defined a new class 
                    DictionaryGloss to represent any written explanation of a lexical element in a dictionary. 
                
                To reiterate, our intention was to model the changes between PLI editions, and indeed in some cases between reprints of the same edition. We decided to model all the separate editions in one graph, since individual changes between entries in different editions usually weren’t comprehensive enough to warrant a separate graph per edition, and in addition there were also differences between reprintings of the same edition and we wanted to avoid creating too many different graphs. To this end we created a class 
                    PLIDictionary to represent 
                    separatePLI editions, along with the object properties, 
                    appearsIn, 
                    firstAppearsIn and 
                    lastAppearsIn to allow us to associate elements with different editions. In our RDF encoding of the PLI, then, we model changes within entries by creating an individual entry component, whether this is a form, sense or gloss, etc, for every change and associating it with one or more PLI editions using 
                    appearsIn, 
                    firstAppearsIn and 
                    lastAppearsIn. 
                
                We will explain the strategy which was followed using the example of the RDF encoding of 
                    aviation. In Figure 1 we represent the entry for 
                    aviation and its relationships with its senses. Note that we have added information to the entry regarding its first appearance in the PLI by associating it with the individual 
                    1906_001, which represents the 1906 edition of the work, using the property 
                    firstAppearsIn. Each of the two senses of 
                    aviation has a gloss apiece neither of which changes over different editions in the example. 
                
                In Figure 2 we show the three notes associated with the 
                    aviation entry each of which has been modelled as an individual of the class 
                    DictionaryGloss and each of which is associated with a different edition of the dictionary. We are still looking into the best, read most efficient, way of adding information about what is contained in each edition. The simplest way would be to link each lexical element to each of the editions in which it appears, but this would obviously lead to an explosion of triples. Our provisional solution is to focus on adding version information to the elements that change between versions and linking them together using the Dublin Core relation 
                    isVersionOf.
                
                
                    
                
                Figure 1. The PLI entry for aviation and its senses and their gloss.
                
                    
                
                Figure 2. The PLI entry for aviation and the various versions of the entry note associated with it.
            
            
                Future Work
                At the time of writing we are carrying out the conversion of the dataset into RDF using the approach outlined above. By the middle of 2019 we plan to make whole of the dataset available both via a SPARQL endpoint and downloadable both in RDF and TEI-XML formats. In the final version we also plan to add links to external conceptual/ontological resources (such as DBpedia and WordNets) using the Ontolex 
                    reference property.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bański, P., Bowers, J. and Erjavec, T. (2017). TEI-Lex0 Guidelines for the Encoding of Dictionary Information on Written and Spoken Forms. 
                        ELex2017.
                    
                    
                        Bohbot, H., Frontini, F., Luxardo, G., Khemakhem, M. and Romary, L. (2018). Presenting the Nénufar Project: a Diachronic Digital Edition of the Petit Larousse Illustré. 
                        GLOBALEX 2018 - Globalex Workshop at LREC2018. Miyazaki, Japan, pp. 1–6 
                        
                            https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01728328
                         (accessed 21 April 2018).
                    
                    
                        Bosque-Gil, J., Gracia, J., Montiel-Ponsoda, E. and Aguado-de-Cea, G. (2016). Modelling Multilingual Lexicographic Resources for the Web of Data: the K Dictionaries case. 
                        
                            http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/workshops/LREC2016Workshop-GLOBALEX_Proceedings-v2.pdf
                         (accessed 23 April 2017).
                    
                    
                        Budin, G., Majewski, S. and Mörth, K. (2012). Creating Lexical Resources in TEI P5. A Schema for Multi-purpose Digital Dictionaries. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(Issue 3) doi:
                        
                            10.4000/jtei.522
                        . 
                        
                            http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/522
                         (accessed 23 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Khan, F., Frontini, F., Boschetti, F. and Monachini, M. (2016). Converting the Liddell Scott Greek-English Lexicon into Linked Open Data using lemon. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Kraków: Jagiellonian University &amp; Pedagogical University, pp. 593–96 
                        
                            http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/236
                        .
                    
                    
                        Khemakhem, M., Foppiano, L. and Romary, L. (2017). Automatic Extraction of TEI Structures in Digitized Lexical Resources using Conditional Random Fields. 
                        Electronic Lexicography, ELex 2017. Leiden, Netherlands 
                        
                            https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01508868
                         (accessed 28 February 2018).
                    
                    
                        Khemakhem, M., Herold, A. and Romary, L. (2018). Enhancing Usability for Automatically Structuring Digitised Dictionaries. 
                        GLOBALEX Workshop at LREC 2018. Miyazaki, Japan 
                        
                            https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01708137
                         (accessed 21 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        McCrae, J. P., Bosque-Gil, J., Gracia, J., Buitelaar, P. and Cimiano, P. (2017). The OntoLex-Lemon Model: Development and Applications. 
                        ELex2017.
                    
                    
                        Romary, L. and Tasovac, T. (2018). TEI Lex-0: A Target Format for TEI-Encoded Dictionaries and Lexical Resources. 
                        JADH 2018 ‘Leveraging Open Data’. Tokyo, pp. 274–75 
                        
                            https://tei2018.dhii.asia/AbstractsBook_TEI_0907.pdf
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Retrodigitization of both printed and handwritten material is a common prerequisite for a diverse range of research questions in the humanities. While optical character recognition on printed texts is widely considered to be fundamentally solved in academia, with the most commonly used paradigm (Graves et al., 2006) dating back to 2006, this hasn't translated into increased availability of adaptable, libre-licensed OCR engines to the technically inclined humanities scholar.
                The nature of the material of interest commands a platform that can be altered with minimum effort to achieve optimal recognition accuracy; uncommon scripts, historical languages, complex or archaic page layout, and non-paper writing surfaces are rarily satisfactorily addressed by off-the-shelf commercial solutions. In addition, an open system ameliorates the severe resource constraints of humanities research by enabling sharing of artifacts, such as training data and recognition models, inaccessible with proprietary OCR technology.
            
            
                Kraken
                The Kraken text recognition engine is an extensively rewritten fork of the OCRopus system. It can be used both for handwriting and printed text recognition, is easily (re-)trainable, and great care has been taken to eliminate implicit assumptions on content and layout that complicate the processing of non-Latin and non-modern works.
                Thus Kraken has been extended with features and interfaces enabling the processing of most scripts, among them full Unicode right-to-left, bidirectional, and vertical writing support, script detection, and multiscript recognition. Processing of scripts not included in Unicode is also possible through a simple JSON interface to the codec mapping numerical model outputs to characters. The same interface provides facilities for efficient recognition of large logographic scripts.
                Output includes fine-grained bounding boxes down to the character level that may be used to quickly acquire a large number of samples from a corpus to assist in paleographic research. Kraken implements a flexible output serialization scheme utilizing a simple templating language. Templates are available for the most commonly used formats ALTO, hOCR, TEI, and abbyyXML.
                While including implementations of all the subprocesses needed in a text recognition pipeline, most functional blocks can be accessed separately on the command line, allowing flexible substitution of specially optimized methods. A stable programming interface allows total customization and integration into other software packages.
            
            
                Recognition
                
                    
                        
                        Network architecture (H: sequence height, W: sequence length, C: alphabet size)
                    The recognition engine operates as a segmentation-less sequence classifier using an artificial neural network to map an image of a single line of text, the input sequence, into a sequence of characters, the output sequence. The artificial neural network employed is a hybrid convolutional and recurrent neural network trained with the CTC loss function (Graves et al., 2006) that reduces training data requirements to line-level transcriptions (Figure 3). Regularization is mainly provided by dropout (Hinton et al., 2012) after both convolutional and recurrent layers. User intervention in determining training duration and model selection is largely eliminated through early stopping.
                
                Specialized networks, e.g. for particularly complex scripts, can be assembled from building blocks with a simple network specification language although the default architecture shown in Figure 1 is suitable for the vast majority of applications.
                Processing of dictionaries and library catalogues with extensive semantic markup such as italic, underlining, and bolding, is also possible through specially prepared training data.
            
            
                Layout Analysis and Script Detection
                
                    
                        
                        Sample output of the trainable segmentation method.
                    Kraken's layout analysis extracts text lines from an input image for later processing by the recognition engine. Apart from a basic segmenter taken from OCRopus a trainable line extractor is in the process of being implemented. Full trainability of layout analysis is of utmost importance to a truly universal OCR system, as text layout and its semantics varies widely across time and space, e.g. hand-crafted methods for printed Latin text are unlikely to work reliably on Arabic text or manuscripts with extensive interlinear annotation.
                
                The trainable layout analysis module consists of a two-step instance segmentation method: an initial seed-labelling network operates on the whole page labelling the area between baseline and mean of each line. As the output of the network is a probability of each pixel belonging to a baseline it is binarized using hysteresis thresholding after smoothing with a gaussian filter. The binarized image is then skeletonized and end point are extracted with a discrete convolution. Finally, the vectorized baseline between the endpoints is rectified and a variable environment calculated based on the distance of connected components from the labelled area is extracted.
                The seed-labelling network is a modified U-net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) on the basis of a 34-layer residual network (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet. 
                Preliminary results on a page from a publicly available dataset of Arabic and Persian manuscripts (Kiessling et al., 2019) can be seen in Figure 2.
                Script detection, the basis for multi-script support in the recognizer, is implemented as a segmentation-less sequence classification problem, similar to text recognition. Instead of assigning a unique label to each code point or grapheme cluster we assign all code points of a particular script the same label. The network is then trained to output the correct sequence of script labels (Figure 3). The output sequence is then used to split the line into single-script runs that can be classified with monolingual recognition models (Figure 4).
                
                    
                        
                        Original and modified ground truth (top: original line, middle: transcription, bottom: assigned script classes)
                    
                
            
            
                Results
                
                    
                        
                        Mean character accuracy
                        Standard deviation
                        Maximum accuracy
                    
                    
                        Prints
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        Arabic (Kiessling et al., 2017)
                        99.5%
                        0.05
                        99.6%
                    
                    
                        Persian
                            Mid-20th century printing
                        
                        98.3%
                        0.33
                        98.7%
                    
                    
                        Syriac
                            Late-19th century printing in Serṭā form
                        
                        98.7%
                        0.38
                        99.2%
                    
                    
                        Polytonic Greek
                            Late-19th century printing
                        
                        99.2%
                        0.26
                        99.6%
                    
                    
                        Latin (Springmann et al., 2018)
                        98.8%
                        0.09
                        99.3%
                    
                    
                        Latin incunabula (Springmann et al., 2018)
                        99.0%
                        0.11
                        99.2%
                    
                    
                        Fraktur (Springmann et al., 2018)
                        99.0%
                        0.31
                        99.3%
                    
                    
                        Cyrillic
                        99.3%
                        0.15
                        99.6%
                    
                    
                        Manuscripts
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        Hebrew
                            Midrash Tanhuma, BNF Héb 150
                        
                        96.9%
                        -
                        -
                    
                    
                        Medieval Latin
                            Josephus Latinus, Bamberg 78 with augmentation
                        
                        98.2%
                        -
                        -
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Sample output of the script detection on a bilingual French/Arabic page. Note that Eastern Arabic are always classified as Latin text
                    Kraken has been used on a wide variety of writing systems, achieving uniformly high character accuracy (CER). Sample accuracies for a diverse set of scripts spanning across multiple centuries of printing are shown in Table 1.
                
                As a special use case we evaluated recognition of text and emphasis in a mixed English and romanized Arabic library catalog on a training set of 350 lines (50 lines in the validation set) resulting in an averaged CER of 99.3% (σ=0.16) over 10 runs with 95.38% CER on cursive and text with increased spacing (σ=1.46). When using only emphasized text accuracy as the stopping criterium mean accuracy rises to 99.03% (σ=0.28).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Graves, A., Fernández, S., Gomez, F. and Schmidhuber, J. (2006). Connectionist temporal classification: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. 
                        Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning. ACM, pp. 369–376.
                    
                    
                        He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. 
                        Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 770–778.
                    
                    
                        Hinton, G. E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. and Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2012). Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. 
                        ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:1207.0580.
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B., Miller, M. T., Maxim, G., Savant, S. B. and others (2017). Important New Developments in Arabographic Optical Character Recognition (OCR). 
                        Al-ʿUṣūr Al-Wusṭā, 
                        25: 1–13.
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B., Stoekl Ben Ezra, Daniel and Miller, Matthew Thomas (2019). BADAM: A Public Dataset for Baseline Detection in Arabic-script Manuscripts.
                    
                    
                        Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. and Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. 
                        International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 234–241.
                    
                    
                        Springmann, U., Reul, C., Dipper, S. and Baiter, J. (2018). Ground Truth for training OCR engines on historical documents in German Fraktur and Early Modern Latin. 
                        ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:1809.05501.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Spice up your e-mail with open access research data
                
                    quoteSalute aggregates salutes (closings of letters) from various openly available digital scholarly editions of letters based on the encoding of the TEI‑element &lt;salute&gt;. The project website hosts a corpus of curated salutes, so they can be copied into an e-mail with a single button press. Thus users can quote historically important persons and use these quotes in their daily correspondence. The project is available as part of the web service 
                    correspSearch which aggregates metadata of various scholarly editions of letters. The complete source code (data, scripts, etc.) is accessible on 
                    GitHub. Furthermore, templates as well as an extensive documentation are provided, so other projects can quickly incorporate their own data into the corpus of salutes.
                
            
            
                Subject matter and contents
                Salutations were and are essential elements of written communication, especially in letters. They serve as an "indicator of the relationships that the letter writer has or believes to have with the recipient" (Ermert, 1979, p. 104; translation by the author). Thus the mark-up of salutations is extremely important when encoding letters digitally. The guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative (2018) have long been offering a corresponding encoding option by providing the &lt;salute&gt;‑element. In the context of quoteSalute exactly those &lt;salute&gt;‑elements are automatically extracted and subsequently transformed into the project’s TEI‑XML‑based interchange format. During an additional manual curation process, duplicate entries and inappropriate content are removed. The remaining data is enriched with semantic information to enable users to filter the corpus for: politeness (informal/friendly or formal); gender of sender and recipient how the grammar of the salute suggests (neutral, female or male); and language (currently German, English, French, Italian, Spanish, Latin and Greek).
                The curation process has shown that the use of the &lt;salute&gt;‑element is not yet common practice in digital scholarly editions of letters, although it provides important insight into the relationship between correspondents. Editors are encouraged to use the &lt;salute&gt;‑tag more in their daily work.
                The web application is implemented by using HTML, 
                    Bootstrap and the JavaScript framework 
                    VueJS. The salutes are stored in an 
                    eXist‑db instance. A random quote is fetched by performing asynchronous requests to the database server, query the eXist‑db using XQuery and serialize the response as JSON.
                
                Currently, the corpus contains 981 salutes originating from 14 different scholarly editions of letters (13 digital, 1 analogue). All incorporated editions have licensed their data under a compatible free Creative Commons license.
            
            
                Relevance
                In the light of the conference topic “Complexities” quoteSalute demonstrates how complex research data can be provided in a creative and easily accessible way without losing ties with the original scholarly resource. Since each quote is accompanied with a link to the letter of its respective edition, digital editions should enjoy greater popularity the more broadly quoteSalute is being used. The project aims to open up new contexts for the use of research data from the Digital Humanities and to promote the public presence of cultural data and research results. In September 2018 quoteSalute was awarded the 
                    DARIAH-DE Digital-Humanities Award.
                
                »I have the honour to be with the highest consideration, Sir, your most obedient &amp; most humble servant«
                John Pickering to Wilhelm von Humboldt, 27.11.1827
                    Wilhelm von Humboldt - Spachwissenschaftliche Korrespondenz
                    https://wvh-briefe.bbaw.de/Brief?section=all&amp;id=447
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ermert, K. (1979). Briefsorten. Untersuchungen zu Theorie und Empirie der Textklassifikation. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2018). &lt;salute&gt;. TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [Version 3.4.0 23rd July 2018]. Retrieved from http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-salute.html
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Research Question
            
                The FWF
                
                    
                         FWF - Austrian Science Fund, 
                            
                                https://www.fwf.ac.at/en
                             (2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                
                -funded project about the mediality of diplomatic communication examines the exchange of information of Habsburg’s diplomats in Constantinople with the imperial court in Vienna. Written sources (letters, final and secret reports, as well as a long-lost travelogue) from the 17
                th
                 century are the basis of the study. They provide a deep insight into problems of peacekeeping, intercultural and interreligious coexistence, consequential conflicts and strategies to solve them (Meienberger 1973; Droste 2006
                ). However, the information is not “objective”; discourse traditions, personal interests, the self-portrayal of the agents, as well as transmission conditions (postal routes, information security) are of importance. In summary: the media had a great impact on information and knowledge transfer between Habsburg’s diplomats and the Viennese Court. Moreover, the media determined what people learned and knew about the Ottoman Empire (Faulstich et al. 2007). Thus, the computer-aided analyses of the selected sources is conducted from a media-scientific viewpoint. The study will provide a better understanding of the constructed knowledge about Ottomans and the Islam in (Central) Europe, which has still an impact until today. 
            
            Digital Edition
            The travelogue and the correspondence, as well as research results and analyzes, will be open access and publicly available as a digital edition
                
                    
                         The digital edition will meet the evaluation criteria for digital scholary editions by the Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik (IDE) (Sahle, 2014), the Quality criteria for electronic source editions of the Porta Historica Porta Historica (2008) and the Minimum Standards for Electronic Editions of the Association for Documentary Editing (Hajo 2002).
                    
                . The edition will offer different perspectives
                
                    
                        
                             Digital methods create a transmedial representation of text. On transmediality of text, see: Sahle (2016), Sahle (2010).
                        
                    
                 on the texts, which include not only the digital facsimiles and the transcriptions, but also semantic enrichments and visualizations to uncover the ways of knowledge transfer and discourse traditions. Additional historical background information provide the contextualization of the sources. 
            
            The historical critical edition of the travel report and letters will be realized in TEI-P5
                
                    
                         TEI, Text Encoding Initiative, 
                            
                                http://www.tei-c.org
                             (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                 and follow wherever possible the DTA-Basisformat
                
                    
                         DTA-Basisformat (Deutsches Textarchiv, 2018) is a guideline for historical texts, recommended by CLARIN-D and the DFG
                            .
                        
                    
                . A detailed encoding definition for research specific annotations will be documented in TEI ODD
                
                    
                         ODD stands for "One Document Does it all". It is a TEI XML-conformant specification format that allows customizing TEI P5.
                    
                . It includes major transcriptional observations (line breaks, damages, corrections), text structures (divisions, paragraphs, headings) and historical interpretation (persons, places, general terms, events, correspondence formulas or plagiarism). Especially the latter annotations get identifiers to interlink text passages within the sources. By merging the specific events, persons or places direct comparisons and analyses of the reports can be made. 
            
            The travelogue will also be described with the methods of the manuscript-description module of the TEI
                
                    
                         TEI Modul Manuscript Description, 
                            
                                http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/MS.html
                             (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                . Besides, the digital resources are described in METS
                
                    
                         METS. Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard, 
                            
                                http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets
                             (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                 for the representation in book viewers and system-internal in Dublin Core
                
                    
                        
                             DC. Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, 
                            
                                http://dublincore.org
                            
                            (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                . The data model of the letters also include the TEI extension “correspondence description”
                
                    
                         TEI element &lt;correspDesc&gt;, http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-correspDesc.html
                    
                 to enable data exchange with the web service CorrespSearch
                
                    
                        
                            correspSearch. Search scholarly editions of letters, https://correspsearch.net (accessed 2018-10-31), see: Dumont (2016).
                        
                    
                . 
                Semantic Web technologies are used for data enrichment: SKOS
                
                    
                         SKOS. Simple Knowledge Organization System, https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ (accessed 2018-10-31). 
                    
                 representations of concepts for indexing and to integrate the data in the Linked Open Data context, the project will make use of public identifiers from international authority files
                
                    
                         e.g. GND. Gemeinsame Normdatei, 
                            
                                http://www.dnb.de/DE/Standardisierung/GND/gnd_node.html
                             (accessed 2018-10-31), VIAF. Virtual International Authority File, 
                            
                                http://viaf.org
                             (accessed 2018-10-31), GeoNames, 
                            
                                https://www.geonames.org
                             (accessed 2018-10-31), Deutsche Biographie, 
                            
                                www.deutsche-biographie.de
                             (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                
                .
            
            
                Based on the encoding, content analyzes for a comparison of the content in the two media types and visualizations will be realized. This will include for example space-time visualization of the named locations from the itinerary or the scenes of the events described, evaluations of categorized passages to reveal dominant topics, or network analyses to identify main actors and their relationships to each other. 
            
            Part of the data will be experimentally processed with natural language processing (NLP) tools. For example, Named Entity Recognition (NER) to identify spatial information or persons, n-grams and part-of-speech tagging for analyses of the use of words and word frequencies. The outcomes should help to uncover plagiarism or help answer the question of how information is conveyed and what opinions (positive, negative or neutral) have been expressed about an entity, in particular in connection with the characterization and description of persons or the self-presentation of the writers. It is experimental because applying natural language processing (NLP) methods and tools to historical texts is problematic, especially because of a lack of standardized orthography (Piotrowski 2012). 
            Digital Repository
            
                The described analysis, processing and presentation as well as the archiving will take place via an in-house digital research data repository GAMS
                
                    
                        
                            GAMS - Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System, 
                            
                                https://gams.uni-graz.at
                            
                             (accessed 2019-04-26).
                        
                    
                
                 (Stigler, Steiner 2018). It is an OAIS
                
                    
                         OAIS. Open Archival Information System, http://www.oais.info (accessed 2018-10-31). 
                    
                
                -compliant Asset Management System for the management, publication and long-term archiving of digital resources from all disciplines of the humanities. The infrastructure is based on the open source software project FEDORA
                
                    
                         FEDORA. Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository Architecture, https://duraspace.org/fedora (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                
                 and is continuously further developed since 2003. T
                he citability of all data objects in the system is guaranteed with persistent identifiers based on the Handle System
                
                    
                        
                             Handle System, 
                            
                                https://www.handle.net/
                            
                             (accessed 2018-10-31).
                        
                    
                
                and the reusability as well as the compatibility of the research data, the data models and the transformation scripts by the use of data standards (TEI, DC, RDF, SKOS, METS).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        CLARIN-D
                        , 
                        
                            https://www.clarin-.net
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        correspSearch
                        . 
                        Search scholarly editions of letters
                        , 
                        
                            https://correspsearch.net
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        DC
                        . Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, 
                        
                            http://dublincore.org/
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Deutsche Biographie
                        , 
                        
                            www.deutsche-biographie.de
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Deutsches Textarchiv
                         (2018). DTA-Basisformat, 
                        
                            http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        DFG
                        . Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 
                        
                            http://www.dfg.de/
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Droste, H.
                         (2006). Im Dienst der Krone. Schwedische Diplomaten im 17. Jahrhundert, Berlin: LIT.
                    
                    
                        Dumont, St.
                         (2016). "correspSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters". Journal of Text Encoding Initiative 10, 
                        
                            https://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1742
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-11-14).
                    
                    
                        Faulstich, W. et al.
                         (2007). Medialität. In Anz, T. (ed), Handbuch Literaturwissenschaft, Bd. 1: Gegenstände und Grundbegriffe, Stuttgart, pp. 203-264.
                    
                    
                        FEDORA
                        . Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository Architecture, 
                        
                            https://duraspace.org/fedora
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        FWF
                        . Austrian Science Fund, 
                        
                            https://www.fwf.ac.at/en
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        GeoNames
                        , 
                        
                            https://www.geonames.org
                        
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        GND
                        . Gemeinsame Normdatei, 
                        
                            http://www.dnb.de/DE/Standardisierung/GND/gnd_node.html
                        
                        , (accessed 2018-10-31). 
                    
                    
                        Hajo, C. M.
                        . Association for Documentary Editing (2002). Minimum Standards for Electronic Editions of the Association for Documentary Editing, 
                        
                            http://www.documentaryediting.org/wordpress/?page_id=508
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Handle System
                        , 
                        
                            https://www.handle.net
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Meienberger, P.
                         (1973). Johann Rudolf Schmid zum Schwarzenhorn als kaiserlicher Resident in Konstantinopel in den Jahren 1629-1643. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der diplomatischen Beziehungen zwischen Österreich und der Türkei in der ersten Hälfte des 17. Jahrhunderts, Bern: Lang.
                    
                    
                        METS
                        . Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard, 
                        
                            http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets
                        
                         
                        (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        OAIS
                        . Open Archival Information System, 
                        
                            http://www.oais.info
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).  
                    
                    
                        Piotrowski, M.
                         (2012). Natural Language Processing for Historical Texts, Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies. San Rafael, Calif: Morgan &amp; Claypool.
                    
                    
                        Porta Historica
                         (2008). Quality criteria for electronic source editions of the Porta Historica, 
                        
                            http://www.portahistorica.eu/editions/quality
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31). 
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P.
                         (2010). Zwischen Mediengebundenheit und Transmedialisierung. Anmerkungen zum Verhältnis von Edition und Medien. editio 24, pp. 23-36.
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P.
                         (2014) in collaboration with Georg Vogeler and the members of the IDE. Criteria for Reviewing Scholarly Digital Editions, version 1.1, 
                        
                            http://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/criteria-version-1-1
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31). 
                    
                    
                        Sahle, P.
                         (2016). What is a scholarly digital edition (SDE)? In Driscoll, M. and Pierazzo, E. (eds), Digital Scholarly Editing. Theory, Practice and Future Perspectives. Open Book Publishers, pp. 19-39.
                    
                    
                        SKOS
                        . Simple Knowledge Organization System, 
                        
                            https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        Stigler, J. and Steiner, E.
                         (2018). GAMS – Eine Infrastruktur zur Langzeitarchivierung und Publikation geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungsdaten. In Mitteilungen der VÖB 71 (2018) Nr. 1: Repositorien in Österreich, DOI: 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.31263/voebm.v71i1.1992
                        
                        (accessed 2019-04-26).
                    
                    
                        TEI Modul Manuscript Description
                        , 
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/MS.html
                        
                           (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        TEI
                        . Text Encoding Initiative, 
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/
                        
                         (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                    
                        VIAF. Virtual International Authority File, 
                        http://viaf.org/ (accessed 2018-10-31).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The Text Encoding Initiative has long been the defacto standard for constructing digital scholarly editions of humanities as the interoperable data. As beginners often worry about the high cost of learning TEI, those seeking to disseminate TEI commonly provide markup guidelines (Terras et al. 2009). Compared with European sources, however, there are fewer projects to create TEI documentation for East Asian materials (Bingenheimer 2009; TEI EAJP SIG 2018; Nagasaki et al. 2013; Nagasaki 2019). Therefore, it is necessary to construct basic texts with the TEI and distribute them internationally because they function as the basis for research on East Asian culture and history.
            This poster presents the importance of creating a TEI documentation for East Asian sources through the markup project of the Engi-Shiki and demonstrates the documentation itself. The Engi-Shiki is a 50-volume work compiled between in 907 and 927 C.E. The first ten volumes are Imperial Shinto regulations, and the last 40 are codifications of criminal and administrative law (Brown 2010). This abstract explains why the Engi-Shiki matters in the context of East Asian studies, and describes the contents of the TEI documentation.
            There are three reasons why the Engi-Shiki has a further implication for East Asian studies. Firstly, as the general characteristics of East Asian text, the Engi-Shiki contains Chinese characters which flow vertically, double-line annotations contained within a single line, written in Kuzushiji —classical calligraphic renderings of Japanese text— (Hashimoto et al. 2016) without the space for word-separation, and Chinese numerical values with the non-International System of Units for measurement (Kokaze et al. 2017). All of these features require customized schemes when processing East Asian texts by computers.
            Secondly, the documentation will be referencable for various markup projects, because the Engi-Shiki has several styles of texts. For example, the one is the Shito ritual prayer Norito 
                祝詞 with the classical Chinese grammar, and the other is the bookkeeping entry containing the explanation of administrative law. Concerning the bookkeeping entries, it has already been clarified the compatibility between the Engi-Shiki and the “Transactionography” —the markup strategy of historical financial records (Tomasek and Bauman 2013)— (Nagasaki et al. 2018). Therefore, the TEI documentation of the Engi-Shiki offers the high versatility for other projects.
            
            Thirdly, the Engi-Shiki has useful connections with Chinese history. Because the Engi-Shiki was detailed enforcement of the Chinese ancient administrative codes 
                令, it helps us to understand how the Chinese Tang 
                唐 administrative rules were used in Japan. Primarily, the Engi-Shiki provides information on the division of administrative counties based on their socio-political power, so it has something valuable with such geographical modeling of administrative regions as some researchers in Kyoto University investigated (Ushine et al. 2007). Although this poster focuses on the Japanese source, we will address to reach out scholars whose interests lie in East Asian history and culture, as a prospect.
            
            As for creating the documentation, we need to determine how profoundly and informatively we encode the texts. According to “Best Practices for TEI in Libraries” (Hawkins et al. 2018), our markup project applies the deepest Level 5. The contents are the following:
            1. Metadata Description
            2. Encoding the Overall Structure
            3. Detailed Markup according to Your Research Interests
            4. Dealing with Multi-Lingual Texts
            5. Scheme Customization
            6. Examples of the Display and Applications
            Among them, the Scheme Customization is crucial for East Asian texts. Notably, Japanese texts often contain the “parallel embedded small-font size texts (called ruby in HTML5) which explain the pronunciation of a word” (Nagasaki et al. 2016). A TEI ODD file for Ruby, created by Kiyonori Nagasaki, is now available at http://www.dhii.jp/nagasaki/tei_all_ja_20190417.xml.
            Finally, the target audiences should be specified. They are (a) Encoders of the Engi-Shiki, (b) Research institutions that create TEI files of East Asian pre-modern materials mainly in Japan, (c) DH scholars utilizing TEI data, and (d) people who analyze data after the end of our project. The documentation also works as a traceable record of research which describes what kind of intention we have had during the markup.
            Though it may be a too magnificent notion in the academic field, we are willing to make efforts toward a “digital ecosystem.” Once we have provided the documentation in the interoperable way where scholars can edit, develop, and share the contents, it can be said that this documentation function as a platform of the digital scholarly edition. In the presentation at the conference, we welcome critical feedback on building a research platform, such as connecting the relevant researchers and institutions and maintaining the data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bingenheimer, M. (2008). TEI 
                        使用指南: 
                        運用TEI
                        處理中文文獻
                         (TEI User Guide: How to Use TEI to Process Chinese Documents). 2nd ed. Taiwan: Taiwan E-learning and Digital Archive Program 
                        http://mbingenheimer.net/publications/TEI-ChinLoc-2ndPrintEd.pdf (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Brown, Delmer. (2010). “Engi Shiki”. In University of California Berkeley (ed.), 
                        Japanese Historical Text Initiative
                        https://jhti.berkeley.edu/Engi%20shiki.html (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Hashimoto, Y., Iikura, Y., Hisada, Y., Kang, S., Arisawa, T. and Kobayashi-Better, D. (2016). The Kuzushiji Project: Developing a Mobile Learning Application for Reading Early Modern Japanese Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        11(1) 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000281/000281.html (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Hawkins, K., Dalmau, M., Mylonas, E. and Bauman, S. (2018). Best Practices for TEI in Libraries: A Guide for Mass Digitization, Automated Workflows, and Promotion of Interoperability with XML using the TEI (Version 4.0.0) 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/SIG/Libraries/teiinlibraries/4.0.0/bptl-driver.html (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kokaze, N., Nagasaki, K., Goto, M., Hashimoto, Y., Shimoda, M. and Muller, A. C. (2017). TEI/XML Methodological Examination on Unit Conversion not Based on the Metric System. Victoria, Canada 
                        https://hcmc.uvic.ca/tei2017/abstracts/t_107_kokazeetal_unitconversion.html (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Nagasaki, K. (2019). Contexts of Digital Humanities in Japan. In Wong, S. R., Li, H. and Chou, M. (eds), 
                        Digital Humanities and Scholarly Research Trends in the Asia-Pacific. Hershey: IGI Global 
                        https://www.igi-global.com/book/digital-humanities-scholarly-research-trends/204633 (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Nagasaki, K., Muller, A. C. and Shimoda, M. (2013). A Challenge to Dissemination of TEI among a Language and Area: A Case Study in Japan. Rome 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/MembersMeetings/2013/program/posters/abstracts-posters/index.html#C143 (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        TEI East Asian/Japanese Special Interest Group. (2018). SIG:East Asian - TEIWiki 
                        https://wiki.tei-c.org/index.php/SIG:East_Asian (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Terras, M., Van den Branden, R. and Vanhoutte, E. (2009). Teaching TEI: The Need for TEI by Example. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        24(3): 297–306 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqp018. 
                        https://academic.oup.com/dsh/article/24/3/297/968729 (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Tomasek, K. and Bauman, S. (2013). Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 
                        6 doi:
                        10.4000/jtei.895. 
                        http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/895 (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Ushine, Yasuhiro, Hiroyuki Shirasu, and Takahito Yamada. (2007). 
                        唐代行政地理の概念モデル (Conceptual Model for Administrative Geography in Chinese Tang Period). 
                        IPSJ (Information Processing Society of Japan) SIG Technical Report, 
                        2007(9(2007-CH-073)): 49–56. 
                        https://ipsj.ixsq.nii.ac.jp/ej/index.php?active_action=repository_view_main_item_detail&amp;page_id=13&amp;block_id=8&amp;item_id=55004&amp;item_no=1 (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Nowadays most Digital Editions are created or at least distributed in TEI-XML as scholarly research data. In epigraphy 
                EpiDoc: TEI XML for epigraphic documents  is the subset of choice.
            
            While consistency within an encoded corpus or collection of sources is enforced via schema files, experience has shown, that different scholars for sensible scholarly reasons decide to encode similar phenomena slightly differently, moving back and forth between a more flat structured as well as data centered approach on the one hand and a more narrative as well as verbose approach on the other hand. 
            RDF as high level data model enables researchers to make statements about scholarly resources as well as their constitutive parts and the relations among them. These RDF statements themselve are formulated in a way abstract enough to transcend the individualized usages essential to TEI XML encoded resources. Thus RDF as a bridge technology provides the means to mirror more individualistically encoded TEI XML resources onto an abstract metadata layer of more easily processable data points (see Brodhun, de la Iglesia, Moretton (2015), Grüntgens, Schrade (2016), 61–62); also compare Ciotti, Tomasi (2016), Ciotti (2018)).
            Two challenges are associated with RDF from a Humanities point of view:
            Firstly, statement extraction may degenerate into complex data wrangling tasks done once more by every single scholar. A solution for this may be provided by web services like Torsten Schrade’s XTriples that centralize functionality and provide a relatively low-threshold approach: triple extraction via XPath and triple building via a basic XML configuration file. 
            Secondly, most RDF ontologies are either seen as being to complicated for low-threshold statement building for individual scholarly activity in the Humanities or as capturing the scholarly domain in question not adequately enough. This challenge may be remedied by advising scholars to first build “flat” statements for explorative in-house research. These basic statement patterns, however, have to be none the less formalized and operationalized in regard to their scholarly approach. Thus, after constructing a prototype, the scholars may subsequently lift the prototypical extraction on to a distributable level by means of inclusion of complex ontologies (see Eide, Ore (2019), 194–195).
            The poster will demonstrate a workflow for easy prototyping of cross-corpus research questions by means of RDF-Lifting from TEI XML via XTriples. The material used comes from two epigraphical collections: DIO and EPIDAT (see Grüntgens, Kollatz (2018), Kollatz (2018)).
            Both repositories make medieval inscriptions of the German City of Worms available. DIO provides Christian inscriptions in German and Latin, EPIDAT provides inscriptions from the Jewish cemetery “Im Heiligen Sand”, one of the oldest Jewish cemeteries still in existence in Europe. Both repositories provide 
                EpiDoc: TEI XML for epigraphic Documents. Therefore XML can serve as a starting point for RDF-Lifting with the XTripels webservice.
            
            As a minimal prototype, we want to approach gender distributions in both collections. Information about persons is contained in the data of both repositories (figure1).
            
                
                    
                
            
            Figure 1. Gender attribution implicitely given in the sex-attribute within the person-element; full record: http://www.steinheim-institut.de/cgi-bin/epidat?id=wrm-1253-teip5 (1=male, 2=female)
            The transformation of the “implicit” semantics of XML given into the “explicit” semantics of RDF is done by means of the XTripels webservice (see Grüntgens, Schrade (2016), 54, 56). XTripels has proven itself to be an effiecient and easy-to-use tool to crawl XML-resources and extract RDF-statements. The configuration is based on XPath expressions (figure2). 
            
                
                    
                
            
            Figure 2. Configuration of the XTripels webservice
            As soon as the data of both repositories are available as RDF triples, the RDF data as a whole is stored in a triplestore, and queried via SPARQL (figure 3). 
            
                
                    
                
            
            Figure 3. SPARQL-Query
            The result of the above simple SPARQL-query shows that gender distribution in both repositories differ significantly: The proportion of inscriptions about men and women are equally balanced in EPIDAT, whereas in DIO inscriptions about women are outweight by inscriptions about men. (figure 4).
            
                
                    
                
            
            Figure 4. Simple gender distribution in DIO (above) and EPIDAT (below). Visualization realised with RawGraphs 
                http://app.rawgraphs.io 0=unknown; 1=male; 2=female; 9=not defined
            
            
                Repositories
                EPIDAT – research platform for Jewish epigraphy: 
                    
                
                DIO – Deutsche Inschriften Online | German Inscriptions Online 
                    
                        http://www.inschriften.net
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brodhun, M., de la Iglesia, M., Moretto, N.
                         (2015). Metadaten, LOD und der Mehrwert standardisierter und vernetzter Daten. In Neuroth, H. et al. (eds), 
                        TextGrid: Von der Community – für die Community
                        , Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen, pp. 91–102, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F.
                         (2018). A Formal Ontology for the Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        Umanistica Digitale
                        , 3, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Ciotti F. and Tomasi, F.
                         (2016). Formal Ontologies, Linked Data, and TEI Semantics. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                        ,
                         9, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Eide, Ø., Ore, C.-E. (2019). 8. Ontologies and Data Modeling. In Flanders, J., Jannidis, F. (eds), 
                        The Shape of Data in Digital Humanities Modeling Texts and Text-based Resources. London, pp. 178–196.
                    
                    
                        EpiDoc. 
                        Epigraphic Documents in TEI XML,
                        
                    
                    
                        Grüntgens, M., Kollatz, T. (2018). Korpusbasiertes Arbeiten und epigraphische Datenbanken: Möglichkeiten und Herausforderungen am Beispiel von EPIDAT und DIO. In Gessinger, J. et al. (Eds.) 
                        Osnabrücker Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie (OBST), 92: pp. 157–174.
                    
                    
                        Grüntgens, M., Schrade, T.
                         (2016). Data repositories in the Humanities and the Semantic Web: modelling, linking, visualising. In Alessandro, A. et al. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Humanities in the Semantic Web co-located with 13th ESWC Conference 2016 (ESWC 2016),
                         Anissaras, pp. 53–64 URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Kollatz T. 
                        (2018). 18 EPIDAT – Research Platform for Jewish Epigraphy. In Annamaria De Santis, Irene Rossi (Eds.), 
                        Crossing Experiences in Digital Epigraphy: From Practice to Discipline
                         
                        (pp. 231–239). Warsaw, Poland: De Gruyter.
                          
                        
                    
                    
                        Schrade, T.
                        (2016). 
                        XTriples. A generic webservice for RDF lifting from XML resources,
                          
                        
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The tutorial focuses on scholars, who want to acquaint themselves with a “low threshold” — generic, simple yet powerful, and explorative — workflow of modelling, extracting, processing (queries, visualizations), and publishing of “structured data” (LOD, Semantic Web) from heterogeneous XML-sources by means of XPath. The instructors assume basic acquaintance with XML and XPath (both will be quickly revised, “cheat sheets” will be provided).
            
                Number of Participants
                12 persons.
            
            
                Special Requirements
                Own laptop with an XML-Editor (we recommend the oXygen XML editor with a trial license) and a modern web browser.
            
            
                Focal points
                Triple-Statement-Extraction from heterogeneous XML-Resources, Basic-Research-Workflow (Statement-Formulation, Statement-Extraction, Triple-Store-Import, SPARQL-Querying, Visualization).
            
            
                Introduction
                RDF is an abstract and high level data model and RDF statements themselve are therefore to such an extent abstractly formulated that they inevitably transcend the data heterogeneity ingrained in individualized notations and practices essential to XML encoded resources. Printed as well as digital scholarly editions in this regard for the most part oscillate between more data centered and more narrative centered verbose approaches. RDF may thus function as a bridge technology providing the means to mirror several heterogeneous XML resources onto one common abstract (meta) data layer of interconnected as well as outward pointing data points, that is easily and efficiently queryable and visualizable. In this way RDF and LOD are extending the capabilities of XML resources without cluttering of the underlying documents or imposing of external restrictions for the encoding scholars (see Brodhun, de la Iglesia, Moretton (2015), Grüntgens, Schrade (2016), 61–62); also compare Ciotti, Tomasi (2016), Ciotti (2018)).
                One of the main focus points of the workshop is thus to make it clear to the participants that it is pivotal to make an effort to recognize the ‘implicit semantic potential’ already inherent in human-readable XML-resources, e.g. in the form of markup like
                
                    
                        
                    (‘implicit’ in this context means not being formally expressed as RDF triples in a RDF serialization format, like e.g. RDF-XML; for more detailed examples see Grüntgens, Schrade (2016), 54, Ciotti, Tomasi (2016), pars. 46–49). This potential accordingly “[has] to be transformed into explicit semantic annotations (e.g. RDF) to make the data usable for Semantic Web approaches [...]. On the whole, the process of translating XML to RDF is therefore mainly focused on the determination of general statement patterns, which can then be applied to and extracted from all resources of the data set in question.” (Grüntgens, Schrade (2016), 56).
                
            
            
                Relevance
                In the above mentioned context, many scholars may well enough know about the obvious advantages of supplementing their XML resources with an additional RDF layer and nevertheless may find it difficult to bridge the gap between XML and RDF. A common obstacle is in this regard, that statement extraction from XML may deteriorate into overly complex or semi-manual data wrangling. Additionally, most ontologies, like CIDOC-CRM, are — or rather may at least be perceived as being — too complicated and intricate for a 
                    first “low-threshold” explorative approach to statement extraction in particular and the structured data ecosystem in general.
                
                The tutorial thus wants to mitigate both hurdles by teaching how to utilize T. Schrade’s 
                    XTriples web service for RDF statement extraction (see Grüntgens, Schrade (2016)). The web service provides a low-threshold approach to statement extraction from 
                    any well formed XML resource — be it a full-fledged REST-API serving TEI-XML or the entrails of a word processor file like .DOC, .ODF, or .FODT — via XPath and triple building via simple XML statements. With the aid of a configuration template written in simple XML scholars are quickly enabled to build first statements for prototypical research that are “flat”— e.g. not build upon a complex ontology — and in this regard to gradually acquaint themselves further with the extended toolbox around RDF (different serialization formats, triplestores, SPARQL, ontologies, …). These “flat” patterns, however, have nevertheless to be properly formalized and operationalized in regard to the research question. Thus, after having worked out a prototype, the scholar may (and should) subsequently lift the prototypical extraction on to a distributable level by incorporating more complex ontologies into the statements described in the configuration template hereby providing the semantic interoperability needed, e.g. for LOD (concerning this necessity see f.e. Eide, Ore (2019), 194–195).
                
            
            
                Tutorial
                The tutorial will start with a short introduction into the basic assumption behind the RDF data model, a short overview of a workflow in regard to statement extraction with XTriples, and a quick recap of the basics of XPath.
                The tutorial will then use research data provided by the API of the scholarly edition “Der Sturm: Digitale Quellenedition zur Geschichte der internationalen Avantgarde” (
                    ; see Trautmann (2017)). The edition provides several APIs that provide data about encapsulating persons, places, works, letters, and files. The participants will form small work groups, evaluate the APIs contents, and will henceforth formulate whiteboard-friendly “flat” and verbose statements about the 
                    resources, e.g. not corresponding to an established ontology.
                
                Subsequently the participants will inscribe these statement patterns into the XTriples configuration file in order to automatically extract the desired statements by means of form-style POST requests.
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                The participants will subsequently reiterate the process of adding statements to the configuration, extracting, and subsequently evaluating the statements. When a (first) sound basis has been achieved, the participants will make a final extraction and then import their RDF-XML files into the web based RDF4j triple store (provided for the tutorial by the instructors), where the separate graphs will be merged automatically.
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Then the participants will be introduced to the basics of SPARQL. Subsequently the groups will — instructed by the instructors — perform some simple queries to become acquainted with SPARQL and the corresponding query endpoint.
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Further more complicated queries that aggregate information in a tabular form, may be executed from ‘saved queries’, written earlier by the lecturers, in order to facilitate the process.
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                The aggregate will then be visualized with the web based service 
                    https://rawgraphs.io. To make it clear: This section’s focal point lies not on performing the most intricate queries, but rather on showing in a lucid way how and based on what kind of technological foundation a simple aggregation and subsequent visualization of RDF data may be performed, thus clearly outlining the conceptual side of the workflow as a whole.
                
            
            
                Outline
                
                    
                        Time
                        Topic
                        Mode
                        Note
                    
                    
                        10:00–10:30
                        Short introduction to RDF and the basic structure of an extraction workflow via XTriples; very short recap of basics of XML &amp; XPath.
                        lecture
                        Slides; XPath cheat sheet
                    
                    
                        10:30–11:45
                        Modelling statements and writing of the XTriples configuration file. First extractions.
                        Group work (instructed); supported by the instructors
                        Via web based Form-style POST request on 
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        11:45–12:00
                        Final statement extraction
                        Group work
                        
                    
                    
                        12:00–13:00
                        Lunchbreak
                        
                    
                    
                        13:00–13:15
                        Import into Triplestore
                        Group work (instructed)
                        Web based RDF4j-triplestore provided by instructors.
                    
                    
                        13:15–13:45
                        Basic querying of Triplestore via SPARQL endpoint
                        Group work (instructed)
                        SPARQL-endpoint provided by instructors; SPARQL cheat sheet
                    
                    
                        13:45–14:00
                        Visualization via rawgraphs.io
                        Group work (instructed)
                        
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Brodhun, M., de la Iglesia, M., Moretto, N.
                         (2015). Metadaten, LOD und der Mehrwert standardisierter und vernetzter Daten. In Neuroth, H. et al. (eds), 
                        TextGrid: Von der Community – für die Community
                        , Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen, pp. 91–102, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F.
                         (2018). A Formal Ontology for the Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        Umanistica Digitale
                        , 3, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Ciotti F. and Tomasi, F.
                         (2016). Formal Ontologies, Linked Data, and TEI Semantics. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                        ,
                         9, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Eide, Ø., Ore, C.-E. (2019). 8. Ontologies and Data Modeling. In Flanders, J., Jannidis, F. (eds), 
                        The Shape of Data in Digital Humanities Modeling Texts and Text-based Resources. London, pp. 178–196.
                    
                    
                        Grüntgens, M., Schrade, T.
                         (2016). Data repositories in the Humanities and the Semantic Web: modelling, linking, visualising. In Alessandro, A. et al. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Humanities in the Semantic Web co-located with 13th ESWC Conference 2016 (ESWC 2016),
                         Anissaras, pp. 53–64 URL: 
                        
                    
                    
                        Schrade, T.
                         (2016). 
                        XTriples. A generic webservice for RDF lifting from XML resources
                        , 
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        Trautmann, M., Schrade, T.
                         (2018).
                         DER STURM. Digitale Quellenedition zur Geschichte der internationalen Avantgarde
                        . Mainz: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur, 
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Trautmann, M.
                         (2017). 
                        Eine digitale Edition. Ausgewählte Briefe von Jacoba van Heemskerck und Franz Marc an Herwarth Walden (1914–1915)
                        . Mainz, 
                        
                         
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The presented tool – web search engine – is being created as part of the project funded by the National Science Centre in Poland (no. 2017/26/E/HS2/000083): 
                Origins of Polish language and religious culture in the light of the medieval Apocrypha of the New Testament. A universal tool for the study of Polish apocryphal texts. It will serve for multifaceted, multidisciplinary analysis of all saved Old Polish (i.e. until the middle of the 16th century) New Testament apocrypha.
            The religious Polish language from a historical point of view constitutes the most important variety of Polish – it formed the basis for the shaping of the Polish literary language. These texts are fundamental not only for the history of Polish culture, but also for the literature and language of the East Slavdom. This is also the most extensive body of the Polish mediaeval writing – the New Testament apocrypha consist of more than 2000 pages of manuscripts. Unfortunately, those texts are largely inaccessible or poorly accessible (unpublished, published only in transliteration) or available only in excerpts. Moreover, the editions remaining in circulation are not sufficient to conduct in-depth research. This is true for not only philological (linguistic studies, literary studies, the studies of sources), but also religious or cultural studies.
            Due to their complexity and diverse character the above mentioned texts require a digital way of presentation. Consequently, one of the aims of the project is to develop a tool enabling fully interdisciplinary and multifaceted studies. This tool will be an advanced search engine with the functionality of comparing results based on a meticulously developed database, including, among others, Latin sources, Slavic contexts and the employed themes.
            New transliterations and transcriptions of these texts will be prepared for the needs of the search engine, taking into account the latest research on them and Old Polish language in general. Due to the fact that the project engages not only philologists, the engine will meet the needs of researchers specializing in other fields:
            
                Including sources (such as Latin) or themes should help to conduct traditional historical-lexical interpretations. Owing to this, it will be possible to analyse these texts in the context of the studies concerning orality and literacy, vernacularism and also the art of memory. Indication of the texts used by the Old Polish writers will also enable the reception of theological works of selected Church Fathers in medieval Poland.
                The compilation of themes will make it be possible to carry out an analysis of theological awareness or spirituality of particular writers and their way of understanding the described events. It will also be possible to examine the customs connected with commenting biblical texts and to deepen knowledge about biblical studies in mediaeval Poland.
                Indication of parallel locations will enable research on the medieval creative process (unique ways of working out topics, translation techniques, ways of organizing the text – e.g. introducing quotations), it can also be a starting point for further comparative studies of Slavonic apocryphal narratives.
            
            An additional help for non-philologists users will be a grammatical comment – another functionality facilitating understanding of the Old Polish text (grammatical forms that no longer exist in a language like dualis or aorist). The already existing tools for morphological analyses of natural languages are not suitable for the analysis of the Old Polish language. The application created for the needs of the project will facilitate annotation of grammar forms.
            The web portal designed in this way will be a modern research tool, answering the needs of not only philologists, but also theologists or culture experts. It will be implemented in Java programming language with the usage of Play Framework (backend) and in JavaScript programming language with the usage of the React library (frontend). The system will import apocrypha in the form of MsWord files and automatically transform them to TEI P5 files. Next these files will be stored in the relational database PostgreSQL associated with the portal. These texts will be simultaneously indexed in many ways in the search engine Apache Solr, due to this, the portal will offer an advanced search, not only by a phrase, but also by words taking into account the lemmatization of Old Polish language developed in the project. Other above-listed relationships, like sources or themes will also be stored in this database and indexed in Apache Solr. The portal will provide user-friendly browsing and searching according to these relationships as well as user-friendly views for comparing matching parts of texts.
            
        
    

        
            
                Manuscripts in a digital necropolis
                This story really began during the Middle Ages, with the creation of manuscripts by copyist monks
                    
                        
                            Un manuscrit naturellement (Foreword from The Name of the Rose / Umberto Eco 1980)
                        
                    .
                
                In 1930, Félix Grat a French archivist paleographer, experimented with a sophisticated camera to create microfilms of manuscripts in order to make them widely available and facilitate their study. This resulted in the creation of IRHT
                    
                        
                            Institut de Recherche et d’Histoire des Textes. See 
                            https://www.irht.cnrs.fr/?q=en
                        
                    , an institute devoted to fundamental research mostly on medieval manuscripts.
                
                In 1979, an agreement was signed with the Ministry of Culture and IRHT to digitize all the manuscripts stored in French public libraries. This corpus is among the largest digitized medieval sources: the work is still in progress!
                The “original digital” copy was stored on Huma-Num’s
                    
                        
                            Huma-Num is the French national infrastructure for humanities which provides mostly digital services. See http://www.huma-num.fr/about-us
                        
                     infrastructure: it was made of files for the manuscript pages encoded in TIFF format representing a huge volume of data, around 40 TBs distributed in 2 million files.
                
                The fantasy of digital immortality is widely shared, but in reality, digital resources are highly fragile. Even if we are able to store them safely in a readable format, they prove to be totally unusable if we don’t provide related information to understand their content and their organization.
                In short, over many years, we have built a very safe digital necropolis progressively covered by layers of digital sand rather than a clean organized library.
            
            
                The context
                As the original material of this set of data is clearly part of French cultural heritage, it is important to conserve both the manuscripts themselves, some of which are no longer physically available for consultation due to their poor condition, and the scientific work already done on them. It was becoming a matter of urgency to take action as the memory of the project began progressively to disappear mostly because of the numerous changes in human resources.
                We have an institution in France, the CINES
                    
                        
                            Centre Informatique National de l'Enseignement Supérieur. See http://www.cines.fr
                        
                    , dedicated to the long-term preservation of research data. But the cost of preservation in our case was too high. In the meantime, the French National Library had successfully converted part of its resources from TIFF format into JPEG2000, thereby reducing the data to one-third of the original size, and prices at CINES had fallen dramatically.
                
                It now became financially reasonable to consider the preservation with the CINES using the JPEG2000 format.
                We therefore decided to begin the preservation project.
            
            
                Dealing with the data abundance and imperfection
                The first need was to sort and organize the huge number of files: deleting files is a serious decision to take. We made a copy of the corpus on the new storage system, and began to clean the data. We kept track of every single step in order to be able to go back over all the changes.
                Eventually, we succeeded in getting rid of one million files, mainly technical files and redundant images. The file tree also required some transformations as it was based on library names, and of course some of them had changed over this long stretch of time. We also needed to solve traditional encoding problems and special characters in both file and directory names.
                The analysis of the technical metadata also showed that some files were missing. A further check showed that some other files were empty or corrupted. All these files were manually checked, and some were regenerated from a copy.
                The next step was to transform all the files into JPG2000 format.
                The goal was to ensure that the transformation was technically correct but also that the image was still human-readable and of good quality. The result of this test workflow on a small sample of pictures showed that different TIFF encodings caused many errors and that it was again necessary to carry out a manual check on some files.
                It took us no less than two years just to do this part of the work.
            
            
                Documenting data
                Then, it was time to retrieve the corresponding metadata from various technical and scientific databases. During this process, we discovered that for some manuscripts, the identification number was not correct: it was again necessary to re-adjust the file tree. To encode metadata, we chose a mix of different standards encapsulated in METS format to describe all the metadata available: TEI for scientific metadata and XMP for technical stuff.
                Lastly, we had to abide by French law on archives, which complicated matters even further.
                At last, we were able to create nice packages compliant with the needs of the CINES platform based on the OAIS
                    
                         Open Archival Information System. See https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Archival_Information_System
                     model.
                
            
            
                What we learned 
                To achieve this project, it was necessary to assemble a team of people with very different skills and backgrounds: it was not easy, to say the least, to make this team operate smoothly! We had on board Huma-Num’s system administrator and also people from IRHT, the database experts to take care of all the relevant metadata and the manuscript photographer who also happened to be the living memory of the project, and last but not least some archivists.
                It’s impossible do this kind of work if you don’t have access to a proper infrastructure: we had around 80 TBs to deal with, and we also needed computing power to proceed with the format migration. You can’t use the same approach with millions of files as you do with a standard corpus.
                The person who was the “memory of the project” was the key whenever decisions needed to be taken: this is due to the complexity of dealing with material created over a long period of time (nearly 40 years) by different persons.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baude, O. and Joffres, A. and Larrousse, N. and Pouyllau, S. (2017) Huma-Num, DH Conference 2017, 
                        Une infrastructure française pour les Sciences Humaines et Sociales. Stratégie, organisation et fonctionnement Available at &lt;https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/242/242.pdf&gt;
                    
                    
                        CINES - Centre Informatique National de l'Enseignement Supérieur (2019), 
                        A digital archiving solutions for long term preservation, Available at &lt;https://www.cines.fr/en/long-term-preservation&gt; 
                    
                    
                        Jacobson M. and Larrousse N. and Massol M. (2014), ICA/SUV Conference, 
                        La question de l'archivage des données de la recherche en SHS (Sciences Humaines et Sociales), Available at &lt; https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01025106&gt;
                    
                    
                        Loebbecke C. and Thaller M. (2005), ECIS conference 2005, 
                        Preserving Europe's Cultural Heritage in the Digital World Available at &lt;https://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&amp;context=ecis2005&gt; 
                    
                    
                        Mounier P. (2018), 
                        Les humanités numériques, Une histoire critique, Editions de la Maison des sciences de l’homme, Available at &lt;https://books.openedition.org/editionsmsh/12006&gt; 
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This study explores the relation between repetition and popularity in Dutch historical songs. Previous studies on song lyrics have shown that contemporary songs stand a greater chance of reaching #1 of the 
                Billboard’s hit chart when their lyrics are more repetitive (Nunes, Ordanini, and Valsesia 2015; Alexander 1996; Ellis et al. 2015; Bradlow and Fader 2001). This preference for repetitive structures is a well-known cognitive bias (see e.g. Rubin 1995), yet little is known about whether similar preferences were at play in 
                historical popular song lyrics. The current study aims to address this question by quantitatively modelling the relationship between popularity and various forms of repetition in the lyrics of a large-scale collection of historical songs and, subsequently, relating our findings to observations in the modern era. While we acknowledge the effect of 
                musical repetition on a song’s popularity and the way this can affect our results, we focus in this study on 
                textual repetition.
            
            As our object of scrutiny, we investigate a large sample of historical song lyrics from the 
                Dutch Song Database (Nederlandse Liederenbank) hosted at the KNAW Meertens Institute. This database contains data of over 175.000 descriptions of Dutch songs, from the Middle ages up to the twentieth century. We focus on material from 1550-1750 – since the 17th century was characterized by Grijp (1991, 29) as the golden age of the Dutch Song – and analyze a sample of approximately 22k song lyrics and available metadata. All songs have been encoded with TEI compliant XML, which provides both metadata (e.g. publication date, geographical location, melody, classification category) and the actual lyrics of a song.
            
            Investigating the interaction between popularity and repetition in historical songs poses two important challenges. The first challenge is to establish a ranking of songs reflecting their contemporary popularity: after all, what is the historical equivalent of the modern Billboard’s hit chart? We solve this problem by approximating an early modern hit chart, in which the popularity of a historical song is defined as the interaction of several variables that affect the popularity of a song. Inspired by studies of Farmer and Lesser (2005a, 2005b, 2013) on the ‘structure of popularity’ of early modern print sources, we define the popularity of a song as the interaction of 
                (i) the number of reprints of a song in a fixed time period (measured with Gries’ dispersion method 
                DP (Gries 2008)) and 
                (ii) the geographical distribution of places of print of a song, as a reflection of the either local or wide-spread popularity of a song (Farmer and Lesser 2005a, 2005b, 2013).
            
            The second challenge involves measuring repetition. Repetition in text can be measured on various dimensions, such as words, lines, letters, consecutive onsets and n-grams. In this study, we quantitatively estimate a song’s degree of repetitiveness using a variety of information-theoretical measures. More specifically, we employ different methods of text compression, such as 
                (i) the Shannon Entropy and 
                (ii) the Lempel-Ziv-Welch-algorithm (LZW). Drawing inspiration from prior work by Alexander (1996), we measure repetitiveness of words using the Shannon Entropy, which estimates the degree of uniformity in a message, and can be expressed as follows: 
            
            
                
            
            where 
                p represents the relative frequency of item 
                i in collection 
                A with 
                n items. To control for differences in document length, we use the normalized entropy (Yang et al. 2016):
            
            
                
            
            The second compression method is the LZW algorithm (Welch 1984), which, put simply, incrementally encodes 8-bit data (e.g. ASCII characters) as fixed-length 12-bit codes. We compute the LZW score for song fragments as the number of characters in fragment x divided by the number of codes used to encode x.
            Using the above-described compression methods as predictors, we model the relationship between popularity and repetition with regression models. Being at the intersection of several disciplines, the current study aims to contribute to literary and computational research, but also gives insight in the appreciation of the human brain for repetitive and nonrepetitive patterns.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Alexander, Peter J. 1996. ‘Entropy and Popular Culture: Product Diversity in the Popular Music Recording Industry’. American Sociological Review 61 (1): 171–74.
                    Bradlow, Eric T., and Peter S. Fader. 2001. ‘A Bayesian Lifetime Model for the “Hot 100” Billboard Songs’. Journal of the American Statistical Association 96 (454): 368–81.
                    Ellis, Robert J, Zhe Xing, Jiakun Fang, and Ye Wang. 2015. ‘Quantifying Lexical Novelty in Song Lyrics’. ISMIR, 694–700.
                    Farmer, Alan B., and Zachary Lesser. 2005a. ‘Structures of Popularity in the Early Modern Book Trade’. Shakespeare Quarterly 56 (2): 206–13.
                    ———. 2005b. ‘The Popularity of Playbooks Revisited’. Shakespeare Quarterly 56 (1): 1–32.
                    ———. 2013. ‘What Is Print Popularity? A Map of the Elizabethan Book Trade’. In The Elizabethan Top Ten : Defining Print Popularity in Early Modern England, edited by Emma Smith and Andy Kesson, 19–54. Material Readings in Early Modern Culture. Surry, England: Routledge. http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=nlebk&amp;AN=597438&amp;site=ehost-live.
                    Gries, Stefan Th. 2008. ‘Dispersions and Adjusted Frequencies in Corpora’. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 13 (4): 403–37. https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.13.4.02gri.
                    Nunes, Joseph C., Andrea Ordanini, and Francesca Valsesia. 2015. ‘The Power of Repetition: Repetitive Lyrics in a Song Increase Processing Fluency and Drive Market Success’. Journal of Consumer Psychology 25 (2): 187–99.
                    Rubin, David C. 1995. Memory in Oral Traditions: The Cognitive Psychology of Epic, Ballads, and Counting-out Rhymes. New York: Oxford University Press.
                    Welch, Terry A. 1984. ‘Technique for High-Performance Data Compression’. Computer, no. 52.
                    Yang, Yu-Guang, Peng Xu, Rui Yang, Yi-Hua Zhou, and Wei-Min Shi. 2016. ‘Quantum Hash Function and Its Application to Privacy Amplification in Quantum Key Distribution, Pseudo-Random Number Generation and Image Encryption’. Scientific Reports 6 (January): 19788.
                
            
        
    

        
            Recent work on digital scholarly editions by Elena Pierazzo (2011, 2016), Hugh Cayless (2010), and Joris van Zundert and Peter Boot (2012) describe the complex array of choices confronting editors of digital scholarly editions who wish to preserve their work beyond the life of current platforms, tools, and even standards. Here we describe a preservation model developed by the ARCScholar Digital Publishing Cooperative during tenure of a planning grant (February 2018-January 2019) awarded to Texas A&amp;M by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. 
            Digital preservation is really two-pronged: libraries are working on the technological infrastructure, in the broadest sense, for maintaining assets (National Digital Stewardship Alliance, 2014), while creators and publishers of digital editions must use established standards in order to prepare the content so that it can be accessed and used via this infrastructure. ARCScholar is doing the latter.
            The Advanced Research Consortium or ARC (http://www.ar-c.org) consists of a community of scholars that began to approach digital aggregation in 2003. In that year, Jerome McGann organized a steering committee to launch his Mellon-funded project, NINES, or the Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth-century Electronic Scholarship (nines.org). NINES served as a model for launching 18thConnect.org — focused on the preceding century — and the Mellon-funded MESA community, the Medieval Electronic Scholarly Alliance (mesa-medieval.org). This group of field-specific scholarly communities and online-finding aids needed to create an overarching organization that would make available for other groups the technical model spearheaded by NINES, provide infrastructure and programming support, and negotiate on behalf of all the groups with vendors that might contribute data. ARC is that organization. 
            ARCScholar, a subsidiary of ARC, is a digital edition publishing cooperative focused on helping publishers of digital editions, both large, institutionally backed publishers and scholar who have published their digital editions on the Internet without institutional support (peer-review, sustainability plans). Our goal is to make those digital editions interoperable and preservable in the most findable way possible, which is in keeping with the mission of ARC.
            During our planning grant, we created a process for preserving digital editions in university libraries’ digital asset management systems. The model has been developed at Texas A&amp;M which has a Fedora 4 repository. We are creating a preservation model based upon on one edition, the Digital Donne Variorum. 
                The Variorum Edition of the Poetry of John Donne, edited by Gary Stringer, won a prize from the Modern Language Association in 2015-2016, and the press release explicitly mentioned the value of Digital Donne (Stringer, 1995). The 
                Variorum, both print and digital, was created using primarily assets held by the Cushing Memorial Library at Texas A&amp;M University. The Digital Initiatives Group at TAMU-L created a pipeline for ingesting the TEI files of the edition that is stored in their instance of Fedora 4. Next, the metadata librarians are in the process of creating a catalog record of the digital edition that will appear not only in the local library catalog but in other library catalogs that use EBSCO’s Discovery System (EDS). The record will contain a) a link to the current, live digital edition; b) a link to the downloadable TEI file and its schema; and c) a IIIF Manifest of the manuscript page images available on a IIIF server (Figure 1):
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1.
            We will be working with Cushing directly so that the IIIF Manifest references the page images digitized by TAMU-L which reside on their IIIF server. This would allow future researchers to access the page images along with TEI transcriptions (saved as “annotations” in the IIIF manifests) so that, once the Digital Donne website no longer exists, users can still access the edition through software such as Mirador (Figure 2):
            
                
            
            Figure 2.
            Although enabling access to Digital Donne via EDS and eventually WorldCat does make the edition findable outside of its home institution, more is needed. Findability is critical to digital preservation: the more that digital content is accessed, used, and downloaded, the higher the probability of effective preservation. In order to maximize discoverability, access, and use, we also need to go beyond making metadata available. Future researchers may not know that the information they need is connected to authors, titles, dates of specific digital editions. In other words, the information needed in the future may be part of the content of a digital edition that is not exposed by its metadata. Fedora 4 natively exports RDF Triples: Resource Description Framework statements about the object which render the digital edition findable via the semantic web. However, the triples automatically generated by Fedora 4 reveal metadata only. We are setting up a SPARQL endpoint for ARCScholar that allows depositing much more detailed RDF, exposing the content of the edition as well as its metadata. For instance, in the case of 
                The Collected Letters of Robert Southey, published by Romantic Circles (Pratt, et al., 2009), we would like future generations of scholars to be able to find letters that British Poet Laureate Robert Southey wrote to Humphrey Davy a scientist, creator of the Pneumatic Institute, and developer of electricity. Beyond the life of any particular platform, the research embedded in scholarly editing would then be preserved for and discoverable by future generations.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Cayless, H. (2010). 
                        Ktêma es aiei: Digital permanence from an ancient perspective. In Gabriel Bodard, G. and Mahony, S. (eds), 
                        Digital Research in the Study of Classical Antiquity. Aldershot: Ashgate Press, pp. 139-50.
                    
                    National Digital Stewardship Alliance (NDSA). (2014). 
                        National Agenda for Digital Stewardship, https://ndsa.org/national-agenda/ (ccessed 9 May 2019).
                    
                    Pierazzo, E. (2016). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. New York: Routledge Press.
                    
                    ---. (2011). A rationale of digital documentary editions. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing: 26.4. doi:10.1093/llc/fqr033
                    
                    Pratt, L., et al. (eds). (2009 to present). 
                        The Collected Letters of Robert Southey. http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu/ (accessed 9 May 2019).
                    
                    Stringer, G. (ed). (1995 to present). Digital Donne. http://donnevariorum.tamu.edu/ (accessed 9 May 2019).
                    Van Zundert, J. and Boot, P. (2012). The digital edition 2.0 and the digital library: services not resources. 
                        Bibliothek and Wissenschaft 44: 141-52.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            John Quincy Adams (JQA, 1767–1848) was one of America’s great statesmen. The oldest son of John and Abigail Adams of Quincy, Massachusetts, his public service career spanned six decades and included roles as diplomat, secretary of state, president, and congressman. For more than 68 years, JQA kept a diary of his public and private experiences. Begun in 1779, the diary grew to over 15,000 pages by the time the final entries were penned before his death in 1848. The resulting 51 diary volumes comprise the longest continuous record of any American of the time and provide an unparalleled resource for students, scholars, and all lovers of history. The value of JQA's diary lies beyond the study of one important individual. It can help inform broader historical discussions, such as gender, race, and scientific progress. This digital project is making the diary truly accessible for the first time by presenting a verified and searchable transcription of each date’s entry. 
            The project has been informed by the theories and practices of the documentary editing community. The purpose of documentary editing is not just to make historical primary source material available, but to facilitate engagement with the text by providing context and topical access through the editorial apparatus of annotations, an introduction, and an index. This project serves to address that overarching purpose but within a new approach. Instead of annotations and an index, it will incorporate an innovative context for usability via personal name and topical identifiers to facilitate deeper use by a broader audience. We are using a defined subset of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) tagging language to encode our transcriptions, which are in XML files. 
            Given the fact that JQA’s diary spans 68 years, work on this project has been divided into five chronological periods: early (November 1779 – December 1788), diplomatic (January 1789 – August 1817), secretary of state (September 1817 – February 1825), presidential (March 1825 – December 1829), and congressional (January 1830 – February 1848). The project is being undertaken by a combination of institutional staff, interns (graduate students, undergraduates, and high schoolers), and volunteers. This presentation will discuss the challenges and benefits of utilizing such a varied workforce on a digital humanities project.
            Enhanced access to the project will include keyword and personal name search ability, along with topical search features based on themes in middle and high school history curricula. The unique needs of this community were identified through consultation with educators in an effort to understand how to make the diaries more useful to this particular audience. From these discussions we learned that while online transcriptions address the accessibility issue for students who have difficulty reading handwritten documents, keyword searching alone cannot adequately reveal the full, rich content of these materials.
            Throughout his life, JQA interacted with thousands of individuals. A names list is regularly updated with an individual’s name, birth and death dates, date first mentioned in the diary, brief biography, and a unique identifier. This list will allow our web developer to build a search tool to enable users to search for individuals, even when they have not been elucidated by JQA in the text. For example, if JQA mentions “father and mother,” the analysis provided by a staff member allows the names to be encoded with the identifiers adams-john and adams-abigail.
            To facilitate topical searches of the diary, project staff consulted with educators to identify approximately 100 themes related to American history. These form the basis of the subject analysis where a staff member assigns the relevant topical headings for each diary entry. For example, in a particular date entry, topical access could be added for Industrialization, Native Americans, Science and Technology, and Slave Trade—topics of particular interest to students and teachers and utilized in history courses—even though JQA may not have written any of those specific words in his diary. Once this search tool is created, we envision a browse list of subject headings that will enable more complex and informed discoverability on historical topics than a keyword search alone could provide.
            The project currently has two websites. The original site, produced in 2006, provides images of the diary manuscript pages that are date searchable. The new website, launched in 2017, provides transcriptions along with short and long versions headnotes for chronological periods of the diary. In the future, we will combine the content from these two websites to allow for display of the manuscript page images alongside the transcriptions.
        
    

        
            The use of imperial media in representing India and its people was an important aspect in the consolidation of colonial rule. This poster examines how the analysis of the representation of Indian individuals’ links to colonial consolidation of power using highly detailed encoded metadata in sources. I will be demonstrating how the development of an overlapping and layered approach to metadata in encoding can better represent and therefore aid research into media representations. 
            The portrayal of the Indian nobility exemplifies a powerful, exotic, yet ultimately submissive form of Imperialism to the British, and the presentation of the dynasty of the female rulers of Bhopal is a prime example of this. My work charts the ways in which these female rulers were represented and misrepresented as a means of demonstrating Indian animosity and consolidating imperial power. As favoured rulers of a ‘native state’, the Begums are frequently discussed in newspapers or as the subject of photographs and while authoring letters and other personal papers.
                
                     Shaharyar M. Khan, 
                        The Begums of Bhopal: A Dynasty of Women Rulers in Raj India, (London: I.B. Tauris) p. 102, p. 171
                    
                 Combining colonial textual and visual sources allows for a comprehensive view of how these rulers were envisioned to live. Yet, the overall image of the Begums is highly contradictory; for example, in text, these women are typically portrayed as being veiled or in purdah while photographs show them to have almost masculine characteristics, embodying features of any great Indian ruler.
                
                     Bourne and Shepherd, 
                        Sultan Shahjahan Begum, Begum of Bhopal: Prince of Wales Tour of India 1875-6, 1875-6, 27.3 x 23.3 cm, Albumen print
                    
                    Sydney Prior Hall, 
                        The Reception of the Begum of Bhopal, 1877, 16.0 x 24.3 cm, Pencil and watercolour
                    
                
            
            The contradictory nature of representation has been a central theme in my research. How were the Indian nobility represented by the British? Were these contradictions central to the way in which Indian nobles were represented, or were they discrete mistakes, demonstrating inconsistency in the understanding of these figures by various British and Indian commentators? Answering these questions required me to uncover patterns in the depiction of these individuals, and their world, to develop a model of the perceived colonial Indian aristocrat. Moreover, it requires understanding how these patterns can transfer from textual to visual sources. 
            To contrast physical and conceptual elements within a multi-modal dataset in a robust and reproducible manner requires detailed and nuanced hermeneutic encoding.
                
                     mhbeals.com/the-platonic-ideal-of-a-newspaper-article
                 This poster will, therefore, explore the use of digital metadata analysis in the field of representation. It will demonstrate the cross-referencing of digitalised newspaper material from the British Library, Trove (Australia), Papers Past (New Zealand) and Chronicling America (USA), with biographies, autobiographies and personal letters held by the British Library and the India Office Collection and digitalised and physical photographs and drawings from throughout the Commonwealth in various combinations and at multiple resolutions. Current text encoding practises, TEI specifically and XML more broadly, do not allow for two overlapping elements of metadata, nor does annotation of visual material do so without damaging or destroying the integrity of the image.
                
                     ids-pub.bsz-bw.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/5878
                    Tufte, Edward, Beautiful Evidence, Graphics Press LLC, 2006
                
                Although multiple layers of analysis within XML documents, namely multi-rooted trees or using XML linkages and then subsequent transformations to fully represent multiple hierarchies are possible, this is technically complex and requires both a definitive and transformed version of the document for recording and analysis. My system allows for straightforward annotation of a single text document with multiple overlapping segments in the same manner as it annotates full or segmented images.  This unity of input and analysis is more appropriate to my specific case, comparing visual and textual representations of a common event or group. My poser will demonstrate a custom-designed database system that allows for consistent layering of metadata on textual and material historical objects, digital reproductions, and enhanced fragments – sections of textual or visual objects that have been transcribed, cropped or otherwise computationally transformed. Building upon concepts from the semantic web, the system allows the user to apply metadata and provenance details recursively between the original object and discrete fragments as well as an encoded controlled vocabulary on the content of those objects. This layering of metadata allows for a much deeper analysis of historical sources, as well as being able to maintain the integrity of the original object in the project’s documentation. 
            
            The database, written in Python 3.6 and stored in a plain text JSON file, functions as both an input and retrieval mechanism, allowing users to input data sources either manually or through templated input files. In addition to standardised MARC and Dublin Core provenance metadata, the database will encode both the aesthetic and artistic properties (source medium, structure, composition), and the historical characteristics (subject matter and historical relevance). This will allow for consistent cross-referencing that may be difficult if not impossible to determine by human eye alone. Using metadata allows for a much more robust comparison between textual and visual sources, highlighting trends that may otherwise never be brought to light. Finally, although this level of metadata analysis requires a significant temporal commitment to data entry, the deep data created will inform not only the present research regarding representation but provide consistent training for unsupervised computation analysis in the future. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Khan, M. Shaharyar, (2000) 
                        The Begums of Bhopal: A Dynasty of Women Rulers in Raj India, London: I.B. Tauris 
                    
                    
                        Beals, M. H., (2016) 
                        The Platonic Ideal of a Newspaper Article, mhbeals.com/the-platonic-ideal-of-a-newspaper-article
                    
                    
                        Tufte, Edward, (2006), 
                        Beautiful Evidence, 
                        Graphics Press LLC, ids-pub.bsz-bw.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/5878
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                This poster introduces an editor software specifically designed for graphic narratives, including graphic novels and comics, but also other kinds of illustrated still-image media. Users are able to mark up these documents in XML via a Java-based GUI. The annotation language used in the system, which we call “Graphic Novel Markup Language” (GNML), is an extension of the TEI-based “Comic Book Markup Language” (Walsh). Figure 1 presents an overview of the object types and relationships that have been implemented so far.
                
                    
                
                Fig. 1: Overview of object types in GNML
            
            
                Features
                A number of automatic processes in the M3 editor facilitate a simple annotation process. The system localizes outlines of panels by using processes used in computer graphics, such as the marching squares algorithm. Annotators may select simple structures such as speech bubbles or captions with a single click on element backgrounds, thus prompting a flood-fill process that recognizes the entire structure. For more complex representations such as characters, the system interprets annotators’ selections with the help of livewire segmentation (Mortensen &amp; Barrett) to identify high-contrast edges and, subsequently, contours of characters. In order to mitigate the error rate of manual transcription, the system has a built-in spell checker and autocomplete function for text and character names.
                One of the main goals of the annotation system is quantitative analysis, which aims to provide empirical evidence of narratological terminology, establish character networks, or provide access to comics text in the absence of automatic recognition. In the case of the former, a narratological annotation scheme that includes mark-up options for focalization and story worlds has been integrated into GNML. Theories of cognitive and transmedial narratology as well as empirical data (gathered with the help of the annotation system and subsequently analyzed) serve as a basis for this scheme. Figure 2 shows the annotation system GUI and a sample annotation.
                
                    Fig. 2: GUI and sample annotation of "Pepper &amp; Carrot" (Revoy)
                
            
            
                Conclusion &amp; Outlook
                The editor software facilitates the analysis of multimodal corpora with complex text-image interactions. Such evidence-based investigation may help revise existing theories of graphic narrative or falsify more qualitative scholarship. The software can also be used in classrooms for hands-on case studies and has been tested successfully in several university seminars. We are currently working on OCR integration, which presents particular challenges as graphic narratives often use handwritten or pseudo-handwritten fonts and existing OCR/ATR systems do not as yet provide satisfying results. We hope to integrate OCR either directly or as an optional step prior to manual annotation in future versions. The annotations system’s latest version can be downloaded at: 
                    
                        http://graphic-
                    
                    
                        literature.upb.de/?page_id=3592
                    . An FAQ to help annotators is available at: 
                    
                        http://graphic-
                    
                    
                        literature.upb.de/?page_id=4123
                    
                    .
                     An open-source version will be made available by February 2020.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Dunst,
                         A.,
                         Hartel,
                         R.,
                         &amp;
                         Laubrock,
                         J.
                         (2017).
                         The
                         Graphic
                         Narrative
                         Corpus
                         (GNC):
                         Design,
                         Annotation, and
                         Analysis
                         for
                         the
                         Digital
                         Humanities.
                        
                            2nd 
                            International
                             Workshop on 
                            coMics
                             Analysis, Processing, and Understanding, 14th IAPR 
                            International
                            Conference
                             on Document Analysis and Recognition. 
                        Kyoto,
                         Japan.
                    
                    Mortensen,
                         E.,
                         &amp;
                         Barrett,
                         W.
                         (1995).
                         Intelligent
                         scissors
                         for
                         image
                         composition.
                        
                            Proceedings of the 22nd annual 
                            conference
                             on Computer graphics and interactive 
                            techniques
                        (pp.
                         191-198).
                         ACM.
                    
                    Revoy,
                         D.
                         (2017).
                        
                            Pepper
                             &amp; 
                            Carrot
                            .
                            Episode
                             21: The 
                            Magic
                            Contest
                        .
                         (Pepper
                         and
                         Carrot)
                         Retrieved September
                         10,
                         2018
                         from
                         https://
                        www.peppercarrot.com/en/article400/episode-21-the- magic-contest
                    
                    Walsh,
                         J.
                         A.
                         (2012).
                         "Comic
                         book
                         markup
                         language:
                         An
                         introduction
                         and
                         rationale."
                        
                            Digital Humanities Quarterly
                        , 6
                         (1).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                1 Historical linguistics and the Americas
                Minority, non-European languages — such as indigenous American ones — are critically under- represented in the literature on language change. This not only narrows our view of the historical interaction of peoples and languages predating European expansion, but also limits our under- standing of language change as a whole. In the absence of the hundreds of years of philological study available for Old World languages, digital methods emerge as ideal means for systematically compiling and exploring the available data for historical languages in the New World. This said, carefully tagged, historically-oriented corpora for Native American languages are still few and far between, despite the general growth in Digital Humanities scholarship throughout the region.
            
            
                2 Mapudungun, a prime candidate
                Mapudungun (arn, ISO:639-3), the ancestral language of the Mapuche people of present-day Chile and Argentina, has been fairly well documented for over 400 years. While the types of available historical material for the language are fairly typical — including missionary, military and ethnographic works (see Villena 2017: for an overview) — the historical depth, as well as the number of texts available for Mapudungun is better-than-average for the region. Current Mapudungun varieties are mostly well described and remain in use, nevertheless, there is very little explicit work on their history. This availability of historical and contemporary data, coupled with a gap in historical research, makes Mapudungun an excellent candidate for a first corpus-based historical account of a language of the Americas. The building of such a resource, The Corpus of Historical Mapudungun (CHM), is the focus of an ongoing research project at the Angus McIntosh Centre for Historical Linguistics, Edinburgh, and the topic of this talk.
                Beyond the empirical and methodological advantages to working with historical data for Mapudungun, there are also theoretically interesting reasons to do so. Features such as nominal incorporation, verb serialisation, agglutination and polysynthesys raise interesting questions about the diachrony of units of sound and meaning, which cannot be probed by better-studied, yet typologically distinct languages.
                Overall, the rich word-internal morphology of Mapudungun challenges traditional domains for sound change. In particular, the fact that morphological transparency is paramount to the language’s system, means that there is little indication of word-level reduction and neutralisation processes, which are key to the study of sound change in Indo-European languages (Molineaux 2017, 2018). These facts of Mapudungun will be key both to our analysis of change in the language and to the practicalities of corpus-design.
            
            
                3 Building the corpus
                The majority of texts included in the CHM are printed material dated between 1606 and 1930, making up some 400k words (see 
                    https://benmolineaux.github.io/bookshelf/). Using both archival images and newly digitised materials from the 
                    Biblioteca Nacional de Chile and the 
                    Archivo Rodolfo Lenz in Santiago, Chile, the relevant texts have undergone optical character recognition. This was done via the 
                    Digital Humanities Dashboard (Tarpley 2018) and followed up by hand-checking. The result is a collection of digital text covering the first 324 years of written Mapudungun. While the texts are gathered from all major language areas, they inevitably remain imbalanced in nature — both temporally and spatially —, as tends to be the case for historical corpora.
                
                As the objective of the corpus is to provide a view into the synchrony and diachrony of lexical, morphological and phonological features, texts are being parsed at all three of these levels. The first stage of this process — lemmatisation — identifies the key root-elements, as well as the part-of-speech (POS) category for each word, providing a single identifiable label and reducing both morphological and spelling heterogeneity (see 1).
                (1)
                
                    
                        
                        Form
                        Lemma
                        Translation
                        POS
                    
                    
                        a.
                        
                            ⟨kude-kefuingu
                            ⟩
                        
                        
                            kuden
                        
                        ‘to play’ 
                        V
                    
                    
                        b.
                        
                            ⟨kuthe-kalape
                            ⟩
                        
                        
                            kuden
                        
                        ‘to play’ 
                        V
                    
                
                XML
                
                    &lt;w xml:lang=“arn” lemma=“kuden” pos=“V” corresp=“play”&gt;kudekefuingu&lt;/w&gt; 
                    &lt;w xml:lang=“arn” lemma=“kuden” pos=“V” corresp=“play ”&gt;kuthekalape&lt;/w&gt;
                
                The second stage is morphological parsing, which identifies individual morphemes beyond the root and labels them according to function (as in 2). The result of both these processes is a TEI-standard XML text with the relevant tags embedded. A full 10% of the total word-types in the corpus texts is soon to be completed, after which an AI algorithm, developed at the University of Edinburgh’s NLP Group, will be trained to tag the remainder of the material both at the level of the lemma and the morpheme. Additional hand corrections will be necessary in order to complete the process.
                (2)
                
                    
                        
                        Form
                        Morphemes
                    
                    
                        a.
                        
                            ⟨kude-ke-fu-ingu
                            ⟩
                        
                        
                            root(play)-
                            habit-broken.implicature-ind.3.dual
                        
                    
                    
                        b.
                        
                            ⟨kuthe-ka-la-pe
                            ⟩
                        
                        
                            root(play)-
                            cont-neg-imp.3.sg
                        
                    
                
                XML
                
                    &lt;w&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“kude” type=“root” corresp=“play”&gt;kude&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“ke” type=“habit”&gt;ke&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“fu” type=“BI”&gt;fu&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“ingu” type=“ind.3.d”&gt;ingu&lt;/m&gt;&lt;/w&gt;
                    &lt;w&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“kude” type=“root” corresp=“play”&gt;kude&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“ka” type=“cont”&gt;ke&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“la” type=“neg”&gt;la&lt;/m&gt;&lt;m baseForm=“pe” type=“imp.3.sg”&gt;pe&lt;/m&gt;&lt;/w&gt;
                
                The final stage of the tagging will be grapho-phonological parsing (Kopaczyk et al. 2018), which entails providing sound values for each word (as in 3), following a list of spelling-based rules for each text. The results should effectively reconstruct the phonic structure of each text, such that it can be compared with others from different periods and locations, helping to map phonological change from the bottom up.
                The front end of the corpus — soon to be available in beta form — will provide search options (in both English and Spanish) at all three levels of tagging (word, morpheme and sound), as well as allowing users to correlate these features across texts and with relevant non-linguistic metadata such as date, location, author, genre, etc. A simpler browser version will also be available for non-linguists, allowing for texts to be browsed and downloaded with parallel translations. 
                (3) 
                
                    
                        
                        Form
                        Sound
                        Lemma
                        Translation
                        Source
                        Dialect
                    
                    
                        a.
                        
                            ⟨vúta
                            ⟩
                        
                        [vɨta]
                        fücha 
                        ‘old/big’
                        Valdivia 1606
                        North
                    
                    
                        b.
                        
                            ⟨fücha
                            ⟩
                        
                        [fɨʧa]
                        fücha
                        ‘old/big’
                        Augusta 1916
                        Central/Coast
                    
                
                XML
                
                    &lt;m&gt;&lt;c ipa=“v”&gt;v&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“ɨ”&gt;ú&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“t”&gt;t&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“a”&gt;a&lt;/c&gt;&lt;/m&gt; 
                    &lt;m&gt;&lt;c ipa=“f ”&gt;f&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“ɨ”&gt;ü&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“ʧ”&gt;ch&lt;/c&gt;&lt;c ipa=“a”&gt;a&lt;/c&gt;&lt;/m&gt;
                
            
            
                4 Applications
                In this talk I will give example applications of the CHM to language change, looking into (a) the spread of Quechua lexical borrowings and (b) the evolution of morpheme-boundary epenthesis. More generally, however, the CHM paves the way for the application of digital methods to the history of minority, non-standard languages, creating transferable tools, and foregrounding under-studied typological features. Such outcomes will broaden our understanding of language change overall, by allowing a detailed view of the interaction of the lexicon, morphological structure, and sound systems over time and space.
                Locally, the project will provide teachers, learners and advocates of Mapudungun with a repository of words in their historical usage and forms, which may be used to enhance word-building strategies, revitalise dialectal vocabulary and more generally improve transmission, both through written and spoken medium.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Augusta, F. J. (1916). 
                        Diccionario araucano-español y español-araucano. Santiago: Imprenta Universitaria.
                    
                    Kopaczyk, J., Molineaux, B., Los, B., Karaiskos, V., Alcorn R. and Maguire, W. (2018). Towards a grapho-phonologically parsed corpus of medieval scots: database design and technical solutions. 
                        Corpora 
                        13(2). 255–269. 
                    
                    Molineaux, B. (2017). Native and non-native perception of stress in Mapudungun: Assessing structural maintenance in the phonology of an endangered language. 
                        Language and Speech 
                        60. 48–64. 
                    
                    Molineaux, B. (2018). Pertinacity and change in Mapudungun stress assignment. 
                        International Journal of American Linguistics 
                        84(4). 513–558. 
                    
                    Tarpley, B. (2018). Digital humanities dashboard. 
                        Center of Digital Humanities Research, Texas A&amp;M University.
                    
                    Valdivia, L. de (1606). 
                        Arte y gramatica general de la lengua que corre en todo el Reyno de Chile, con un vocabulario y confessionario. Seville: Thomás López de Haro. 
                    
                    Villena, B. (2017). Fuentes para el estudio del mapudungún: propuesta de periodización. 
                        Lenguas y Literaturas Indoamericanas 
                        1(19). 141–167.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                In this paper, we present a strategy for the integration of existing heterogeneous language resources such as texts and dictionaries by connecting these resources and making them available for internal projects and third-party applications through (Web) APIs. We describe our approach in the context of the C-SALT initiative (
                    Cologne South Asian Languages and Texts
                    
                        
                            
                                http://c-salt.uni-koeln.de
                            
                        
                    ), which gathers projects and resources hosted at the University of Cologne covering South Asian languages. To illustrate the potential use of our approach, we first introduce VedaWeb, a web-based platform that provides access to ancient Indian texts composed in Vedic Sanskrit, the oldest form of ancient Indo-Aryan. Then we describe the C-SALT APIs for dictionaries
                    
                        
                            
                                https://api.c-salt.uni-koeln.de
                            
                        
                    . These APIs make several large Pāli and Sanskrit dictionaries available online. Building on that, we present the architecture behind these APIs, and finally we summarize by analyzing the potential role of APIs in Digital Humanities (DH) projects.
                
            
            
                About VedaWeb
                The cornerstone of VedaWeb is a digital edition of the Rigveda, one of the oldest and most important texts of the Indo-European language family, which comprises approx. 160,000 words. VedaWeb can be accessed either via a web application
                    
                        
                            
                                https://vedaweb.uni-koeln.de/rigveda
                            
                        
                     or directly via an API
                    
                        
                            
                                https://dh-cologne.github.io/vedaweb/#description-of-the-api
                            
                        
                    .  VedaWeb provides several layers of linguistic and philological information, alongside various editions of the text of the Rigveda. A search function with multiple linguistic parameters is available (including lemma, word form, morphological and metric information), which allows to execute queries across different levels of annotation by means of complex, combined search criteria. Besides the annotated version of the text, further layers include the display of translations (including Geldner, 2003; Grassmann, 1876; Griffith, 1896, Renou, 1956-1969) as well as commentaries to the Rigveda (Oldenberg, 1909/1912, Renou, 1956-1969). Parallel to the morphological annotations, all of these additional information layers can be accessed via full-text search as well as a more structured search function. The possibility to combine these multiple layers is crucial for enabling novel perspectives on the data, e.g. by means of quantifying feature combinations or by identifying context-dependent phenomena such as different types of constructions. VedaWeb is meant to advance research in all areas of Vedic studies, for example in syntax (e.g. referential null objects (Keydana &amp; Luraghi 2012), non-configurationality (Reinöhl, 2016)), morphology (e.g. the Vedic 
                    vr̥kī-type (Widmer, 2007), 
                    ya-presents (Kulikov, 2012)) or word formation (e.g. compounds (Scarlata &amp; Widmer, 2015)). 
                
                
                    
                    A Screenshot of the VedaWeb Application, with two layers selected. Rigveda data and the Dictionaries are proportioned via the C-SALT APIs
                
                An important feature of VedaWeb is the enrichment of the Rigveda text by linking each word with entries from the standard dictionary for the Rigveda by Hermann Grassmann (Grassmann, 1873). Instead of encapsulating the data in the application, our approach is to leave the resource ‘in place’ and obtain the data via the C-SALT APIs for Sanskrit Dictionaries
                    
                        
                            
                                https://cceh.github.io/c-salt_sanskrit_api
                            
                        
                    .
                
            
            
                C-SALT APIs for Dictionaries
                The C-SALT APIs for Dictionaries
                    
                        
                            
                                https://api.c-salt.uni-koeln.de
                            
                        
                     have been developed to provide access to existing lexicographic resources in Pāli and Sanskrit without doubling work or hosting efforts. The dictionaries available via these APIs are also accessible through traditional monolithic web applications, like the Critical Pāli Dictionary Online
                    
                        
                            
                                http://cpd.uni-koeln.de
                            
                        
                    , and the Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries
                    
                        
                            
                                http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de
                            
                        
                    , which are a product of a major Sanskrit digitization project (Kapp &amp; Malten, 1997).
                
                
                    
                    C-SALT APIs Overview
                
            
            
                API Architecture
                The basis of the APIs and of the VedaWeb application are versions of the texts and dictionaries encoded in TEI
                    
                        
                             Text Encoding Initiative: 
                            https://tei-c.org/
                        
                    -XML
                    
                        
                             Extensible Markup Language
                        
                    . We employ a TEI schema
                    
                         https://github.com/cceh/c-salt_dicts_schema
                     developed initially for the three most complex Sanskrit dictionaries (Apte,1920; Böhtlingk &amp; Roth, 1855-1875; Monier-Williams 1899). By using one TEI schema, we not only achieve data persistence, but we also achieve a consistent structure for all dictionaries. While software such as frontend applications or APIs change over time, TEI offers the DH community the safest way to assure data persistence. For this reason, all the data accessed through APIs is ultimately based on TEI files. The different C-SALT projects use different technologies as ‘middleware’ between TEI and endpoints and also different Web API technologies: REST (Fielding, 2009) and GraphQL
                    
                        
                            
                                https://graphql.org/
                            
                        
                    . Independently of the technology employed, our APIs focus on performance and on providing well-documented access to curated linguistic data.
                
            
            
                Summary and Outlook
                Developing APIs means the separation of concerns. In the specific case of APIs: Well-curated data that should be efficiently accessed, through a clearly defined structure. For web applications this means
                    : Focusing on a specific user target, employing, if required, multiple APIs. We have described the potential use of APIs for lexicographic resources. There are several advantages to making the data accessible through APIs instead of encapsulating the data within the application. Instead of forcibly homogenizing diverse data sets into a general data model, it is more efficient to provide a common interface for accessing them. This also opens up opportunities to employ the different resources in the context of other applications. The main goal in developing C-SALT is to keep all resources as modular as possible, so that they can be used and reused in different research scenarios. In the case of VedaWeb, this currently applies to the dictionaries involved, but we see the potential to transfer the concept onto the other information layers as well, in particular the Rigveda text and its translations. In general, we believe that an API based approach to digital resources and data in the Digital Humanities provides efficient access to data and encourages the reuse of available resources. It thus facilitates novel uses by other researchers while avoiding repetition of work and unnecessary redundancy of resource instances. Applications are transient, but the knowledge, represented by the data, may stay and be reused.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Apte, V.S (1920)
                        3. The student's English-Sanskrit dictionary. Pune. 
                    
                    
                        Böhtlingk, O. and Roth R. (1855-1875). Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. St. Petersburg: Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften.
                    
                    
                        Fielding, R. T. (2009). Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures. Dissertation. Irvine: University of California. URL: 
                        
                            https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/fielding_dissertation.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        Geldner, K. F. (2003)[1951-57]. 
                        Der Rig-Veda. Aus dem Sanskrit ins Deutsche übersetzt und mit einem laufenden Kommentar versehen von Karl Friedrich Geldner. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.
                    
                    
                        Grassmann, H. (1873). Wörterbuch zum Rig-veda. Wiesbaden, O. Harrassowitz.
                    
                    
                        Grassmann, H. (1876). Rig-veda. Übersetzt und mit kritischen und erläuternden Anmerkungen versehen von Hermann Grassmann. Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus.
                    
                    
                        Griffith, R. T. H. (1896). The Hymns of the Rigveda. Benares: Lazarus.
                    
                    
                        Kapp, D. and Malten, T. (1997). Report on the Cologne Sanskrit Dictionary Project. URL: 
                        
                            http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de/CDSL.pdf
                        
                    
                    
                        Keydana, G. and Luraghi, S. (2012). Definite referential null objects in Vedic Sanskrit and Ancient Greek. Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 44 (2):116–28.
                         https://doi.org/10.1080/03740463.2013.776245.
                    
                    
                        Kulikov, L. (2012). The Vedic -ya-Presents: Passives and Intransitivity in Old Indo-Aryan. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi.
                    
                    
                        Monier-Williams, M. (1899). A Sanskrit-English dictionary, new edition. Oxford:Clarendon.
                    
                    
                        Oldenberg, H. (1909/1912). R̥gveda. Textkritische und exegetische Noten. Berlin: Weidmann.
                    
                    
                        Reinöhl, U. (2016). Grammaticalization and the Rise of Configurationality in Indo-Aryan. Oxford: Oxford University Press
                    
                    
                        Renou, L. (1956-1969). Études védiques et paninéennes. Paris: Boccard.
                    
                    
                        Scarlata, S. and Widmer, P. (2015). “Vedische exozentrische Komposita mit drei Relationen”, Indo-Iranian Journal 58(1):26-47.
                    
                    
                        Widmer, P. (2007). “Der altindische vrkī́-Typus und hethitisch nakki-: Der indogermanische Instrumental zwischen Syntax und Morphologie”, Zeitschrift für Sprachwissenschaft (1-2):190-208.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This poster reports on a fruitful collaboration between specialists in the fields of medieval French literature, lexicography, and digital humanities. The outcome will be the first fully lemmatized digital edition of a medieval French text, with a search page directly linked to the 
                Dictionnaire Étymologique de l'Ancien Français (
                DEAF).
            
            As part of the ERC Advanced Grant project 
                The Values of French Language and Literature in the European Middle Ages, we are editing the two most important manuscript copies of the earliest universal chronicle in French, the 
                Histoire ancienne jusqu’à César. In addition to being the first edition of the whole text, it will provide an extensive corpus (over 350,000 words) of lemmatized and searchable linguistic data. We hope it will complement existing medieval French databases, such as the impressive 
                Base de Français Médiéval (BFM) (Guillot-Barbance et al., 2017), which while largely based on edited texts is gradually increasing its content from manuscript sources.
            
            The two manuscripts we are editing were created in regions where French was not a native language (13
                th-century Acre and 14
                th-century Naples). In order to analyse their philological as well as linguistic complexities, the edition design engages with the singularity of each witness. Following TEI guidelines, the XML transcription files are structured according to the presentation of the text on the manuscript page. Each manuscript is divided into multiple files saved on cloud storage, facilitating the distribution of labour. The semi-diplomatic transcription replicates scribal word division and medieval punctuation. The addition of a custom editorial shorthand renders the edited version, which has modern punctuation, diacritics, regularized word division, and minimal editorial corrections. 
            
            Thanks to a collaboration with colleagues at the 
                DEAF, we are lemmatizing the edited text using a custom-made digital tool called Lemming. A ‘key word in context’ (KWIC) index generated from the edited text is uploaded to Lemming, which operates on the fly. Lemming enables the attribution of the same lemma to numerous keywords, the annotation of ambiguous cases, and multiple users to work at the same time. When users identify inaccuracies in the editorial work (e.g. missing accents, incorrect word division or letter forms, etc.), corrections are made to the TEI source files and the content is then re-uploaded to Lemming. The deciphering of changed or new keywords/contexts posed a particular challenge. In response to this issue, a new interface was created where “unverified imports” can be reviewed individually or en bloc, and new lemmas attributed if necessary. This conflict resolution has had significant benefits for our collaborative editorial workflow, making it possible to work in parallel on editing and on lemmatizing, and enhancing the accuracy of both. 
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Faceted search page 
            Over the last six months, the primary development has been the integration of the output KWIC from Lemming into the edition’s search page (see Fig. 1). Using a faceted search, users can filter results by lemma, form, prose/verse, direct/indirect speech, manuscript, and narrative section. Most notably, it is possible to sort the results according to the context immediately following the keyword. This offers us an important opportunity for the study of syntax, in particular the syntax of Old French negation and the conditions for the expression of pronominal/nominal subjects in subordinate clauses. For example, we are able to explore occurrences of the conjunction “que” immediately followed by the adverb of negation “ne”: “Quant Phutiphares oi ces paroles, sachiés 
                que ne li pleurent mie” (Fr20125, § 281.1). In such cases, sentential negation is stated in a way that is not possible in later French. Whereas middle and modern French would need the overt and compulsory expression of the subject between “que” and “ne”, old and very old French do not (see Schøsler and Völker, 2014; and Ledgeway, forthcoming). This is just one of the exciting opportunities the lemmatized search results offer for the study of specific linguistic features, and in this case influences not only our understanding of the manuscripts that we are editing but, more importantly, of the history of the French language. 
            
            The first iteration of the search page will be published on the public site in summer 2019. The data will therefore be available for other researchers working on linguistics, lexicography, discourse analysis and literary studies, before and after the end of the project.
            
                
            
            Figure 2. Editorial workflow
            Underlying these developments is our workflow (see Fig. 2), which features custom-designed scripts that automatically aggregate the TEI source files, convert the editorial shorthand, tokenize the words (whilst maintaining the XML structure), and generate the KWIC index for Lemming as well as preview-able outputs on the project’s staging site. The fully automated and frequent conversion of the fragmented TEI sources takes place every two hours, enabling the verification of the final output as the end-users will see it. Furthermore, a custom-made printable proof-reading page (see Fig. 3) further facilitates incremental publication and pre-emptive problem-solving. By the project’s completion, the aggregated and converted TEI content will be available open access. 
            
                
            
            Figure 3. Printable proof-reading page
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Guillot-Barbance, C., Heiden, S. and Lavrentiev, A. (2017). Base de français médiéval : une base de référence de sources médiévales ouverte et libre au service de la communauté scientifique, 
                        Diachroniques, 7: 168-84.
                    
                    
                        Ledgeway, A. (forthcoming). Word Order in the 
                        Histoire ancienne jusqu’à César. Secrets of Success. Or: How to preserve a Verb Second word order? (Oslo, 10-11 January 2019)
                    
                    
                        Schøsler, L. and Völker, H. (2014). Intralinguistic and extralinguistic variation factors in Old French negation with 
                        ne-Ø, 
                        ne-mie,
                         
                        ne-pas and
                         
                        ne-point across different text types, 
                        Journal of French Language Studies, 24(1): 127-53.
                    
                    
                        Morcos, H., Gaunt, S., Ventura, S., Rachetta, M. T. and Ravenhall, H. (eds). (2017-). 
                        The Histoire ancienne jusqu’à César
                        . A digital edition. With technical support from P. Caton, G. Ferraro, M. Husar and G. Noël. Available at: 
                        https://tvof.ac.uk/histoire-ancienne (Accessed 30 May 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            A couple of years ago our institutions started a DH project to process and study a large 18th century text corpora (roughly 1,5 million words). During this project we faced many challenges like text digitalization and encoding, creating a large author's dictionary, processing critical annotations, storing available texts and data, providing search, retrieval and display functions, and finally performing various data analysis experiments. We applied and also developed many kinds of software to cope with these challenges.
            The result of this multi-year system development is the DHmine toolkit (
                https://github.com/
                mtwebit
                /
                dhmine), a collection of software tools for DH projects. During its development we characterized the following requirements: it should support team cooperation, it should be easy to deploy and maintain in a shared environment, and it should be flexible and scalable for various problem complexities and data set sizes. In order to meet these requirements we decided to explore the capabilities of cloud computing that provides convenient, on-demand, network-based access to shared resources and tools. Cloud services can be deployed and reconfigured rapidly to meet the changing needs of their users, and they can be maintained with much less effort than traditional desktop applications.
            
            The DHmine toolkit is a set of cloud-based tools that provides many kinds of services for DH researchers. Its data storage solutions include a cloud-based file store based on the popular Nextcloud software, a noSQL database engine (MongoDB) that can hold unstructured data, a MySQL component to store relational data, and finally, and RDF tripestore based on RDF4J to store relational and factual knowledge. We extended these storage services with autonomous software tools (called agents) that perform various tasks on demand, for example OCR, TEI encoding, document conversions and analysis, entity recognition and others (Mészáros, 2016). There are two statistical tools included in the system: RStudio that is a programmable environment for document and data analysis, and a stylometry tool called Shtylo (
                ) that provides an easy-to-use Web interface to the popular stylo R package (Eder, 2016). All these components (and a few additional parts like LDAP user authentication, a text indexing tool etc.) are integrated into a unified, cloud-based execution environment.
            
            There are two main interfaces to access the services of the DHmine toolkit. On the one hand there is a Web-based user interface that provides access to the individual tools (Nextcloud, R Studio, Shtylo etc.) and it also includes a programmable environment to develop data import, retrieval and visualization tools that meet the needs of the individual research projects. On the other hand there is a programmers interface (API) for external applications to access system functions like corpus creation and maintenance (document upload, search and retrieval), accessing data in the relational database and in the knowledge-store. This makes easy to integrate the services of the cloud-based system into various desktop applications.
            In order to simplify the management of the DHmine toolkit a Docker-based virtual machine environment was developed. This deploys the components into their individual containers and it automatically reconfigures the external Web interface according to the actually running services. Adding or removing a service is as simple as running a command to enable or disable a container. The DHmine toolkit can be installed by cloning its git repository and running a simple text-based tool to select the required services.
            The DHmine system was extensively used to create the Digital Mikes-Dictionary (Kiss and Mészáros, 2016) and Corpus, and critical annotations and related knowledge entries retrieved from DBpedia (Mészáros and Kiss, 2018). Since the tools became available other research projects were also started developing their own solutions based on the toolkit. These include processing a large bilingual literary correspondence from the twentieth century, and analyzing of family networks from the 17th and 18th centuries.
            During our presentation we can illustrate how these tools work and it would be a great opportunity to help other researchers to take the first steps to install and tailor this open source software for their purposes.
            Acknowledgement
            The research has been supported by the European Union, co-financed by the European Social Fund (EFOP-3.6.2-16-2017-00013, Thematic Fundamental Research Collaborations Grounding Innovation in Informatics and Infocommunications).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Mészáros, T. (2016). 
                        Agent-supported knowledge acquisition for digital humanities research. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Budapest, Hungary, 9–12 October 2016.
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Rybicki, J. and Kestemont, M. (2016) 
                        Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis. The R Journal Vol. 8/1, 2016
                    
                    
                        Kiss, M. and Mészáros, T. (2016) 
                        Creating an extended author's dictionary to support digital literary research. In DH Benelux 2016, Luxembourg, 9-10 June, 2016.
                    
                    
                        Mészáros, T. and Kiss, M. (2018) 
                        Knowledge Acquisition from Critical Annotations. Information, 2018, 9(7), 179, pp. 1-10.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Digital and interactive forms of scholarship challenge established practices in the Arts &amp; Humanities. Audiovisual content, graphic interfaces, and different types of visualizations employed in new forms of presentation and publication (e.g. websites, blogs, online databases, 3D worlds) do not conform with existing concepts of scholarship, and established practices of evaluation. Bringing together 3D model making (scholarship more generally) and the work of digital scholarly editions (DSE) is in fact new, and not a series of scholarly theories and practices that have been previously deployed in the digital humanities. Although these digital vehicles powerfully disseminate and engage with scholarship, scholars who implement these ‘new’ modalities are confronted by “the same old,” established mechanisms with which to gauge ‘impact’ among one’s scholarly peers, i.e. within traditional and long-established publications (Denbo 2018). Today, there exist few scholars who have combined expertise in both content and the use of 3D technologies. 3D digital scholarship may have been "ignored," in part because scholars are unfamiliar with available technologies and often feel uncomfortable evaluating such. With little to no experience with 3D digital scholarship, peer-review among senior academics is especially difficult. Therefore, much highly original and innovative research and scholarship is ignored in the absence of evaluations and metrics for digital scholarship – for instance, when awarding tenured posts or when evaluating research outputs and impact. 
            This panel discusses a particular form of interactive scholarship, 3D visualisation, that despite its long tradition in humanities research, is still faced with scepticism and hesitation, not only because of the constant technological shifts and exigencies and the fragile ecosystem within which projects are being developed, but also due to their non-conventional nature that does not adhere to established academic practices and metrics (Sullivan, Nieves, Snyder, 2017). 
            The proposed panel, consisting of scholars working on 3D computer graphics and Digital Scholarly Editions, explores 3D Scholarly Editions (3DSE) as a means to approach 3D modelling and reconstruction as scholarship. 3D Scholarly Editions are (re)constructions that include robust contextual information, metadata, and paradata either in the form of in-world textual or multimodal annotations and supplementary side sources. We would argue that the annotation needs to take advantage of the affordances of the medium to be truly effective when providing access to alternative versions of a (re)construction and background information about the world being modelled, or when providing access to the creation process. This type draws from the theory and practice of Digital Scholarly Editing (DSE) that, in turn, draws from a long history of practice in editing texts for print (Shillingsburg, 1999; Apollon et al., 2014; Schreibman, 2013; Pierazzo, 2015; Driscoll and Pierazzo, 2016).
            Paper I
            “3D as a Research Practice: Opportunities, Affordances, Challenges”
            Literature and Art: 
            Since the mid-80s, 3D modelling and visualisations have become a substantial research practice in digital history, archaeology, and heritage. These range from schematic (re)constructions of buildings to photorealistic renderings and spatiotemporal simulations of ancient structures. Standalone, offline 3D reconstructions have been used as analytical tools to investigate properties of past environments, providing metric data that can inform the interpretive process. For example, visibility and lighting analysis in 3D spaces has provided a new way of analysing space, as well as discussing and understanding social patterns and socio-symbolic meanings (Dawson et al. 2007; Paliou 2013, Papadopoulos &amp; Earl 2014). Offline 3D modelling projects have a long and more consistent tradition as opposed to online virtual worlds (Sequiera and Morgado, 2013), that were mainly developed during the years that Second Life and Open Simulator were at their peak. Both platforms democratised the process of creating virtual worlds as they did not require highly advanced 3D modelling skills, while enabling a novel way of experiencing history/heritage and working in an online environment for pedagogical and research purposes, unlike anything previously available (Wankel and Kingsley 2009).
            Both offline and online 3D visualisation projects have generated debate over their photorealistic and deceptive nature, as well as lengthy discussions about transparency and ambiguity (Miller and Richards 1995; James 1997; Goodrick and Gillings 2000; Eiteljorg 2000; Clark 2010). Proof-of-concept theoretical frameworks and implementations, such as the London Charter (Denard 2012), Seville Principles, and the Epoch’s Interpretation Management, have been developed to demonstrate intellectual rigour in 3D models and explicate decision-making in the process of their creation. 
            Changes in software, hardware, operating systems, and the Internet itself have also generated debate over the value of virtual 3D worlds as scholarship. Most of the early projects developed in Second Life and/or Unity 3D are not accessible anymore, thus making it difficult for new projects to learn from previous work, especially given that their experiential, spatiotemporal nature is only accessible via conventional, static, and two-dimensional images. The instability of the research environment is often a deterrent to researchers working with such methods, since even when virtual worlds can be ported from one framework to another, this involves significant costs, downsampling and even rebuilding models, and repurposing content that cannot be fully migrated. 
            Online and interactive scholarship, even text-based, has always faced technological shifts and exigencies; however, even in such a fragile ecosystem, changes, successes, and failures enable alternative forms of research, inform the interpretive process, and assist knowledge production. This paper explores humanities research undertaken in 3D computer graphics discussing the affordances of the medium, as well as the opportunities and challenges that researchers face, paving the way for new and alternative forms of methodological and theoretical frameworks for 3D scholarship. 
            Paper II
            “A rationale for 3D Editions within the practice of textual scholarship”
            Literature and Art:
            The nature, functionality, and theories informing Digital Scholarly Editions (DSEs) have flourished over the past three decades, moving beyond how to represent print-based texts in digital forms into new types of knowledge production and dissemination informed by the affordances of the medium (Apollon et al 2014; Sutherland 1997; Driscoll and Pierazzo 2016, Pierazzo 2015). In Derridean terms, these editions function more like an archive or knowledge site, a space for gathering together texts on a specific theme, individual, or topic, expanding the world of its creation into an archontic space for inscription and investigation (Derrida and Prenowitz 1995, 10). Moreover, these sites need not privilege the alphanumeric. As early as 1999, when the first digital archives were being published, McKenzie described the range of objects that could be open to the kinds of intensive bibliographical study that textual scholars had traditionally reserved for print and manuscript traditions, ‘as verbal, visual, oral and numeric data’ (McKenzie 1999, 13). 
            Conceiving three-dimensional (3D) (re)constructions as Digital Scholarly Editions might seem anti-intuitive, at first glance. After all, the technologies, methodologies, and theories that have informed the creation of DSEs – everything from TEI/XML, documentary vs critical editions, and relational vs XML-aware databases to more recent discussions of how the texts created in DSEs can be repurposed, remodelled, and algorithmically analysed and visualized – share little with the technologies, methodologies, and theories that have informed scholarship expressed through 3D (re)constructions. 
            We argue in this panel, however, that 3D (re)constructions, can, in the McKenziean sense, serve as the primary text of a digital scholarly edition. As argued in the previous paper, these include, broadly speaking, cultural heritage visualisations and simulations. What distinguishes 3D(re)constructions as editions from the use of 3D technology for gaming, documentation of evidence (as for an archaeology site), or sites for analysis (eg testing hypothesis or simulating phenomena), is that the 3D (re)construction is embedded in a knowledge site, where evidence (textual, social, and historical) is gathered in the form of annotation and apparatus (Gabler, 2010, 44). 
            As knowledge sites, they encompass within the same computational paradigm both the primary text (in this case the 3D world) and the evidence that informed the decisions in creating the text, thus providing the community which it serves a tool for ‘prying problems apart and opening up a new space for the extension of learning’ (Apollon et al., 2014, 5-6). This framework provides the information structures and evidence that make up the edition so that the audience can understand the process behind the creation of the edition, and adjudicate its authenticity and reliability.
            Paper III
            “Delineating &amp; (Re)Constructing New Modes of Digital Scholarly Editing w/3D Modelling: A Look at Annotation, Ambiguity, and Transparency”
            History:
            Over the past year, funded by a grant from both the National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC) and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, a team of sixteen (16) digital humanists – including faculty, librarians, technologists and university publishers – has been working to bring together 3D modelling and digital editions in an effort to advance scholarly publishing practices. As part of this work, this team has reimagined how a scholarly digital edition might include 3D models in the form of annotation and apparatus (Gabler, 2010, 44). Four scholars, two working in the ancient world, and two others on sites/locations dating from the twentieth-century, have developed working prototypes for a more robust and sustainable digital platform that could include 3D models of cultural heritage objects, or entire virtual worlds of historical reconstructions within the framework of digital scholarly editions. However, bringing together these two areas of digital scholarship with their own unique histories and practices has required a re-examination of the methods deployed in digital scholarly editions including annotation, ambiguity, and transparency. Interestingly, scholars in textual editing and 3D re-construction share similar challenges in modelling the textual and material record. One of the more difficult areas of overlap in both fields is how to represent temporal and spatial concerns when the evidence is scant or imperfect and otherwise requires evaluating the evidentiary record. This paper will look at the ways in which the traditional apparatus in digital scholarly editing aligns with 3D modelling and (re)construction to enhance methods in annotation, ambiguity, and transparency (Schreibman, 2002, 288-89). Each of the four 3D scholarly editions (3DSE) comprising parts of the year-long planning grant provides examples as to how these overlaps in knowledge production have been addressed and helps illustrate a process for embarking on this “new” area in digital humanities scholarship. The four-3DSEs include: ‘3D Saqqara Project’ (Egypt); ‘Contested Memories: The Battle of Mount Street Bridge (BMSB) Project’ (Ireland); ‘Apartheid Heritage(s) Project’ (South Africa); and ‘Neolithic House Project’ (Greece).
            Annotation, as some have argued, might provide opportunities for enabling new forms of structured data permitting readers/users to arrive at their own interpretation of the text (Bauer and Zirker 2017, 212). Deep explanatory annotations could also provide ways of addressing how decisions are made by both the editor and the model maker in 3D scholarly editions. Annotations are a way of reconstructing the historical context of a work, and, in turn, a way to address the subjectivity of the editor in that reconstruction process. Scholars involved in 3D (re)constructions can learn a great deal from the series of widely accepted practices deployed by digital edition editors, while also providing new ways of addressing some of the more contested aspects of scholarly interpretation, how to reconcile with the many facsimiles of the various witnesses in an edition, or how the reader/user might engage their own interpretation of the materials. Interestingly, three of the four 3DSEs are now coalescing around an agreed-upon framework for addressing the text (in this case the virtual 3D model) through a dynamic interface design that bridges textual editing and 3D modelling practices. 
            Interpretation remains the core activity in literary studies (Gius and Jacke 2017, 233). Understanding the limitations of interpretation has also meant that most scholars will agree that literary texts are ambiguous or polyvalent, allowing for conflicting interpretations. Ambiguity, in 3D (re)constructions is very similar to textual editing – particularly with regards to the subjective nature of gathering, selecting, and interpreting evidence – although “there are less codified ways to express ambiguity” (Schreibman and Papadopoulos 2018, 6). Finding practice-based, generally agreed upon methods to represent ambiguity remain unresolved as attempts to codify this work are often tailor-made to specific projects or constrained by the limitations of existing platforms. In an effort to provide a sustainable long-term solution for documenting the decision-making process, the editors of all four of the 3DSE in this project have arrived at a proof-of-concept that draws upon the core set of technologies and methods found in textual editing. 
            Perhaps the most fruitful synergy in this year-long planning grant has been our attempt to make transparent how the work of the 3D modeler with respect to the textual editor (and vice-versa) informs the other while developing a new paradigm for this sort of “intertextual network” edition. As Schreibman and Papadopoulos will argue in their papers, the 3DSE editor role requires a clear framework that brings together models, theories, and paradigms for the documentation and display of text while also acknowledging some of the difficulties in making all these processes visible to the reader/user. Critically important is outlining how might we provide a means for documenting the decision-making process that does not detract from the source materials, and also finds a balance between overall interpretation and individual decision making without overwhelming the reader/user.
            Bringing together the scholarly practices of 3D (re)constructions and digital editions has meant an important re-thinking of how both areas can contribute to our understanding of scholarly editing practices, while also helping address the common concerns over sustainability, reader/user engagement, and, more broadly, scholarly publishing. As this paper suggests, annotation, ambiguity, and transparency provide the foundational elements for new knowledge practices that are richly layered and generative of new standards for our work in the fields of three-dimensional modeling, virtual reconstructions, and 3D computer graphic simulations. The theoretical and methodological practices we have outlined here also require a critical examination of the roles our institutions play in supporting this kind of work, both technically and programmatically, requiring as it does, a clear commitment to collaborative scholarship. In all four of our 3DSEs, these works are only made possible with the support of librarians, technologists, and modelers who understand the nature of collaborative work relying upon different areas of expertise. 
            Paper IV
            “Technological Requirements for 3D Publishing”
            Information Technology:
            With the emergence of stable digital technologies capable of supporting ongoing knowledge production – specifically the publication of scholarly 3D material – its user base or academic audience will require a scholarly computer model also that also provides an interactive user experience, i.e.one that will permit the audience to test arguments and further immerse itself in the 3D experience. While acknowledging the importance of reality-based models produced from scans or photos of extant sites and artifacts, this paper focuses on stand-alone 3D environments that are the result of significant well-documented scholarship, that explore the requirements for their publication from the perspective of both scholars and presses, and discuss available technological options for academics seeking to publish 3D work.
            Whether created manually, procedurally, or through some combination of reality- and sourced-based modeling, these environments were developed with a research question or pedagogical objective at its core, and are also intended to demonstrate and acknowledge the interpretative decisions made during their construction. As acts of scholarship, these models are intended to be assessed and peer reviewed, and can arguably be considered knowledge production in and of themselves. Yet, integration of this type of work into the scholarly record remains a challenge.
            In a 2016 working group meeting, Elaine A. Sullivan from the University of California – Santa Cruz succinctly summarized the academic’s perspective: “As a scholar, I want my work to be a part of the academic record. I want it to be published, I want it to be sustainable, I want it to be peer reviewed, I want it to be considered in the same conversations as other forms of academic output, I want it to be cited by colleagues in my discipline, and I want others to build off of my work for their own scholarship. Perhaps most importantly, I want it to count for promotion and tenure.” To facilitate that depth of academic engagement, technology is needed that can facilitate the transformation of raw computer models into information-rich virtual environments that support annotation, bibliography, linkages to primary and secondary documentary evidence, citations, and secondary scholarship – all the while preserving and respecting the author’s intellectual property.
            From the publisher’s perspective, technology is needed that will support the editing and peer-review process; will seamlessly integrate itself into existing publishing workflows; will deliver the 3D material to viewers/users in a manner that accommodates the intent of the author; will ensure access to the content for purposes of reproducibility, reuse, and purposeful deformation; and, perhaps most critically, will preserve this material as part of the academic record.
            Currently, there are limited options for publishing 3D content. The final section of the paper will consider the challenges of self-publishing or uploading material to an online asset warehouse or similar commercial option (e.g., Europeana, Sketchfab), review the few examples where presses are exploring mixed media and interactive user experiences (e.g., “Studies in Digital Heritage” at University of Indiana, “A Mid-Republican House from Gabii” from University of Michigan Press), and describe ongoing efforts to building technology platforms for the publication of 3D material (e.g., the IIIF Universal Viewer, the UCLA-based VSim software and repository/archive funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities in the U.S.).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Apollon, D., Bélisle, C., Régnier, P. (2014). Digital Critical Editions. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    Bauer, M. and Zirker, A. (2017). “Explanatory Annotation of Literary Texts and the Reader: Seven Types of Problems.” International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 11, no. 2, 212-232.
                    Clark, J. T. (2010). “The Fallacy of Reconstruction”. In Forte, M. (ed.) Cyber-Archaeology. BAR International Series S2177, pp. 63-73. Oxford: Archaeopress.
                    Denard, H. (2012). “A New Introduction to the London Charter.” In A. Bentkowska-Kafel, D. Baker and H. Denard (eds), Paradata and Transparency in Virtual Heritage, Brookfield, Vermont, Ashgate.
                    Denbo, S. (2018). “Imagining the Digital Monograph.” Perspectives on History, Blog. https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/november-2018/imagining-the-digital-monograph-publishers-and-authors-pursue-new-forms-for-scholarship
                    Derrida, J. and Prenowitz, E. (1995). “Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression.” Diacritics 25(2): 9-63. http://www.jstor.org/stable/465144
                    Dawson P., Levy, R., Gardner, D. and Walls, M. (2007). “Simulating the Behavior of Light Inside Arctic Dwellings: Implications for Assessing the Role of Vision in Task Performance.” World Archaeology 39: 17–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00438240601136397
                    Driscoll, M. and Pierazzo, E. (2016). Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories and Practices. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers. 
                    Eiteljorg, H. (2000). “The Compelling Computer Image - A Double-Edged Sword.” Internet Archaeology 8. http://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issue8/eiteljorg_index.html
                    Gabler, H.W. (2010). “Theorizing the Digital Scholarly Edition.” Literature Compass 7: 43-56.
                    https://10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00675.x.
                    Gius, E. and Jacke, J. (2017). “The Hermeneutic Profit of Annotation: On Preventing and Fostering Disagreement in Literary Analysis.” International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 11, no. 2, 233-254. 
                    Goodrick, G. and Gillings, M., (2000). “Constructs, Simulations and Hyperreal Worlds: The Role of Virtual Reality (VR) in Archaeological Research.” In Lock, G. and Brown, K. (eds) On the Theory and Practice of Archaeological Computing, pp. 41-58. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    James, S. (1997). “Drawing Inferences.” In Molyneaux, L. B. (ed.). The Cultural Life of Images: Visual Representation in Archaeology, pp. 22-48. Great Britain: Routledge.
                    McKenzie, D.F. (1999). Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
                    Miller, P. and Richards, J. (1995). “The Good, the Bad, and the Downright Misleading: Archaeological Adoption of Computer Visualization,” In Huggett, J. and Ryan, N. (eds.) Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, pp. 19-22, BAR International Series 600, Oxford.
                    Oetelaar, T. (2016). CFD, “Thermal Environments, and Cultural Heritage: Two Case Studies of Roman Baths,” In IEEE 16th International Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering (EEEIC), Florence, Italy: IEEE. http://doi.org/10.1109/EEEIC.2016.7555484
                    Paliou, E. (2014). “Visibility analysis in 3D spaces: a new dimension to the understanding of social space,” in Spatial Analysis and Social Spaces: Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Interpretation of Prehistoric and Historical Built Environments, edited by Eleftheria, Paliou, 
                    Papadopoulos, C. and Graeme, E. (2014). “Formal Three-dimensional Computational Analyses of Archaeological Spaces”, in Spatial Analysis and Social Spaces: Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Interpretation of Prehistoric and Historical Built Environments, edited by Eleftheria, Paliou, Undine, Lieberwirth, and Silvia, Polla, pp. 135–165. Berlin: Topoi, Studies of the Ancient World, De Gruyter.
                    Pierazzo, E. (2015). Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. New York, NY, USA: Ashgate.
                    Schreibman, S. (2013). “Digital Scholarly Editing.” In Literary Studies in a Digital Age: A Methodological Primer. MLA Commons, edited by Price, K. and Siemens, R. https://dlsanthology.mla.hcommons.org/digital-scholarly-editing/
                    Schreibman, S. &amp; Papadopoulos, C. “Textuality in 3D: Three-dimensional (Re)constructions as Digital Scholarly Editions.” Digital Scholar (2018), forthcoming. 
                    Sequiera M. Luis and Morgado, L. C. (2013). “Virtual Archaeology in Second Life and OpenSimulator.” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research 6(1): 1-16. https://journals.tdl.org/jvwr/index.php/jvwr/article/view/7047/6310 
                    Sullivan, E., Nieves, A., and Snyder, L. (2017).“Making the Model: Scholarship
                    and Rhetoric in 3D Historical Reconstructions,” In Making Things and Drawing Boundaries: Experiments in the Digital Humanities, Debates in the Digital Humanities Series, edited by
                    Sayers, Jentery, pp. 301-316. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
                    Sutherland, K. (1997). Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and Theory. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                
            
        
    

        
            Research context
            
                Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) is “the ability of a computer to transform handwritten input represented in its spatial form of graphical marks into an equivalent symbolic representation as ASCII text.” (Romero et al., 2012: 5)
                 What is the state of the art of the application of HTR to early modern manuscripts? With what level of accuracy 
                
                    can HTR models automate their transcription? What is known about how HTR currently accommodates manuscript text that shows changing writing styles, hands and text in multiple languages? We will explore these questions with reference to the wider literature and a case study of the first HTR model to be created for the hand of 
                
                Sir Hans Sloane (1660-1753).
            
            
                	Optical Character Recognition on documents with perfectly machine-printed characters can reach an accuracy level of more than 99% (Cao and Natarajan, 2014: 336–37). However OCR is often problematic for historical documents (Smith and Cordell, 2019: 5)
                . It also cannot be used for handwritten documents, since the space between characters and words is inconsistent. 
                Holistic segmentation-free off-line 
                HTR technology works at a line level and can deal with cursive characters, slanted words and irregular calligraphy, but it must be trained for a specific handwriting 
                (Alabau and Leiva, 2012: 2274; Sánchez et al., 2014: 111–12)
                . HTR is not accurate enough to replace human expertise, however it holds the potential to bolster the transcription process (Toselli et al., 2018: 174;176)
                . 
            
            
                 ‘
                
                    Enlightenment Architectures: Sir Hans Sloane’s Catalogues of his Collections is a Leverhulme-funded collaboration between the British Museum and UCL. 
                    It studies 5 of the manuscript catalogues of
                
                Sloane,
                
                     The catalogue of Miscellanies, two of his Natural History catalogues (Fossils vol. I and vol. V) and two of his library catalogues (Sloane MS 3972C vol. VI and Sloane MS 3972B).
                
                 and is encoding them in TEI to understand the information architectures they use. In 2017, selected catalogues were transcribed to a high level of accuracy by the company AEL Data Service in Chennai, India. We thus had high quality transcriptions of Sloane’s manuscript materials, in addition to images of his catalogues, available for use in the training of an HTR model for Sloane’s hand.
            
            
                	The HTR model discussed here was trained using the software Transkribus. The aim of the e-Infrastructure project READ (Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents) is to make archival sources more accessible through technological development. The centrepiece of READ is the service platform and application Transkribus, which enables the automatic recognition and transcription of handwritten documents and the ability to search within them (READ project, 2018a; READ project, 2018b)
                . 
            
            Methodology 
            
                To train an HTR model with Transkribus, one has to provide it with training data (digital surrogates of the original folios and their transcriptions). This is known as 
                ground truth 
                or
                 reference data. 
                The segmentation of the document into its elements, in particular the baselines, and the actual transcription is crucial for creating an adequate HTR model. The ground truth data must consist of a representative sample of a collection’s documents and also respect the original appearance of the script, e.g. special characters, as closely as possible. With Transkribus, this serves the purpose of training the HTR model, and also the evaluation of its accuracy. Between 75 and 100 pages (around 15,000 to 20,000 words) of training data are necessary for an effective HTR model.
                 
                A randomized selection of documents is recommended (
                READ project, 2018c: 3–4; READ project, 2017: 10)
                .
                 
                We determined that the 
                
                    first sub-section of the Miscellanies catalogue (folio 2-152v) would give enough training and test data to evaluate the model because it contains important characteristics of the whole collection of catalogues, such as annotations and a complex layout.
                
                
                    We wish to thank the members of the Enlightenment Architectures team for their assistance in making this selection and for their wider advice about this case study. 
                
                 
            
            For this research, five different HTR models were created to allow a comparison between their changing accuracy. This includes one pre-test model. Training started with 75 folios and was then increased to 100 and 125 folios. For the last model, in addition to the 125 folios of training data, a base model was added.
            Results
            
                
                    The quality of an HTR transcription can be evaluated according to a Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error Rate (CER
                    ) (Romero et al., 2012: 93). Transkribus allows both measures (READ project, 2018c: 5).
                     WER is […] “the minimum number of words that need to be substituted, deleted or inserted to convert a sentence recognized by the system into the corresponding reference transcription, divided by the total number of words in the reference transcription […]” 
                    (Romero et al., 2012: 55). C
                    ER is the minimum number of single characters which need to be corrected, divided by the total number of characters in the reference text
                     (Romero et al., 2012: 55)
                    . Transkribus also allows the evaluation of the general accuracy of a model with a learning curve visualisation and the accuracy of a model on the page level to be specified via the compute accuracy function (READ project, 2018d: 9–12). According to READ
                     (2018d: 10),
                     a model with an accuracy rate of 90% can be regarded as an effective automated transcription.
                
            
             The evaluation showed that our current model of 20,803 words reached a CER of 12.73% without the base model. The transcription has not reached a level of accuracy that is sufficient for academic research without further human input. The model has problems transcribing names (persons and places), abbreviations, double letters (e.g. ee), punctuation, Latin text and the numbers in the margins correctly. 
            Conclusion 
            
                In the paper we will reflect on how our methodology and model might be refined in order to improve the CER, in line with the experiences of other projects (for example Hodel, 2017 or
                 Prell, 2018). We will give particular attention to questions like ‘
                
                    Where in particular does recognition fail?’. ‘
                    How much training data is necessary to create a model with an accuracy of at least 90%?’ and ‘how might external resources like gazetteers and name authority lists be integrated into Transkribus and used in conjunction with the HTR model in order to increase the accuracy of the transcription of named entities? 
                     Our responses to questions like this are likely to be transferable to other projects who seek to build HTR models for the transcription of early-modern manuscript materials. 
                
            
            
                
                    Although our model reached a relative high level of accuracy, is it not good enough to be used for scholarly work. We will therefore also reflect on scenarios where the model could still be used, such as Authorship Attribution (Franzini et al.,
                
                 
                
                    or Named Entity Recognition (Carbonell et al., 2018; Toledo et al., 2019).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alabau, V. and Leiva, L.
                         (2012). Transcribing handwritten text images with a word soup game. 
                        CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
                        . Austin, Texas: ACM Press, pp. 2273–78 doi:10.1145/2212776.2223788.
                    
                    
                        Cao, H. and Natarajan, P.
                         (2014). Machine-Printed Character Recognition. In Doermann, D. and Tombre, K. (eds), 
                        Handbook of Document Image Processing and Recognition
                        . London: Springer London, pp. 331–58 doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-85729-859-1_44.
                    
                    
                        Carbonell, M., Villegas, M., Fornes, A. and Llados, J.
                         (2018). Joint Recognition of Handwritten Text and Named Entities with a Neural End-to-End Model. 
                        2018 13th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems (DAS)
                        . Vienna: IEEE, pp. 399–404 doi:10.1109/DAS.2018.52.
                    
                    
                        Franzini, G., Kestemont, M., Rotari, G., Jander, M., Ochab, J. K., Franzini, E., Byszuk, J. and Rybicki, J.
                         (2018). Attributing Authorship in the Noisy Digitized Correspondence of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. 
                        Frontiers in Digital Humanities
                        , 
                        5
                        (4) doi:10.3389/fdigh.2018.00004.
                    
                    
                        Hodel, T.
                         (2017). Sending 15th-Century Missives through Algorithms: Testing and Evaluating HTR with 2,200 Documents 
                        Schrift Im Kloster
                         https://solascriptum.wordpress.com/2017/07/11/imc-leeds-paper-sending-15th-century-missives-through-algorithms-testing-and-evaluating-htr-with-2200-documents/ (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        Prell, M.
                         (2018). Frühneuzeitliche Briefe als Herausforderung automatisierter Handschriftenerkennung: Ein Transkribus-Projektbericht. doi:10.22032/dbt.34849. https://www.db-thueringen.de/servlets/MCRFileNodeServlet/dbt_derivate_00041045/Transkribusbericht_2018_06_02.pdf (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        READ project
                         (2017). How To Transcribe Documents with Transkribus: Simple Mode https://transkribus.eu/wiki/images/a/ad/HowToTranscribe_SimpleMode.pdf (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        READ project
                         (2018a). Services https://read.transkribus.eu/services/ (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        READ project
                         (2018b). About https://read.transkribus.eu/about/ (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        READ project
                         (2018c). How To Prepare Test Projects with Transkribus - for Archives and Libraries https://transkribus.eu/wiki/images/8/81/HowToPrepareTestProjects.pdf (accessed 27 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        READ project
                         (2018d). How To Train A Handwritten Text Recognition Model In Transkribus https://transkribus.eu/wiki/images/3/34/HowToTranscribe_Train_A_Model.pdf (accessed 26 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        Romero, V., Toselli, A. H. and Vidal, E.
                         (2012). 
                        Multimodal Interactive Handwritten Text Transcription
                        . Vol. 80. (Series in Machine Perception and Artificial Intelligence). Singapore: World Scientific Pub.
                    
                    
                        Sánchez, J. A., Bosch, V., Romero, V., Depuydt, K. and Does, J. de
                         (2014). Handwritten text recognition for historical documents in the transcriptorium project. 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage
                        . Madrid, Spain: ACM Press, pp. 111–17 doi:10.1145/2595188.2595193.
                    
                    
                        Smith, D. A. and Cordell, R.
                         (2019). 
                        A Research Agenda for Historical and Multilingual Optical Character Recognition
                        . Northeastern University https://ocr.northeastern.edu/report/ (accessed 10 March 2019).
                    
                    
                        Toledo, J. I., Carbonell, M., Fornés, A. and Lladós, J.
                         (2019). Information extraction from historical handwritten document images with a context-aware neural model. 
                        Pattern Recognition
                        , 
                        86
                        : 27–36 doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2018.08.020.
                    
                    
                        Toselli, A. H., Leiva, L. A., Bordes-Cabrera, I., Hernández-Tornero, C., Bosch, V. and Vidal, E.
                         (2018). Transcribing a 17th-century botanical manuscript: Longitudinal evaluation of document layout detection and interactive transcription. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                        , 
                        33
                        (1): 173–202 doi:https://doi-org.libproxy.ucl.ac.uk/10.1093/llc/fqw064.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Why do we need a metamodel for metadata? 
                The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI; TEI-Consortium 2019) environment provides a generic document model. TEI customizations typically follow an explicit or implicit model for text representation. The TEI document model provides modules for encoding text via mark up as well as modules for the metadata referring to the TEI document and the encoded text. The specialized (“odd”) customization presented here follows an explicit Metamodel for Corpus Metadata (MCM) representation and expands the range of applications of the TEI metadata modules to non-TEI corpora. Metadata are defined as “structured information that describes, explains, locates, or otherwise makes it easier to retrieve, use, or manage an information resource.” (NISO 2004: 1). The application scenarios for metadata are diverse, which in turn generates requirements for metadata classifications (c.f. for example Zeng and Qin 2016). Corpus documentation is a typical example of the application of metadata. In order to (re-)use historical corpora, a researcher needs to be able to gain intellectual access to a heterogeneous set of properties of a corpus. Moreover, the reusability of (historical) corpora is an important indicator for their sustainability, following Simons and Bird (2008: 90) who stated that a “[...] resource will be used if it still exists, if it is usable, and if a user finds it relevant.” Historical corpora attest diverse methods and approaches towards corpus creation, exemplified by a variety of existing resources such as 
                    Referenzkorpus Althochdeutsch (Donhauser, Gippert and Lühr, 2018, Version 1.1), 
                    Deutsches Textarchiv (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2019), and 
                    Kasseler Junktionskorpus (Ágel and Hennig, 2008, Version 1.1). Thus, corpus documentation must cover a complex and heterogeneous field of corpus data. MCM provides a UML-based extensive and extensible metamodel for describing corpora, including their documents, annotations and preparation workflows, to address this complexity and enable intellectual access to corpus data. 
                
                In this paper, I will discuss how MCM can serve as a content model for the TEI document model, which in turn is used for a realization of MCM. This way, information is passed from model to model. Following this approach, I will also show how flexibly the TEI framework can be used and how two types of models can interact with each other.
            
            
                The TEI document model 
                The TEI Guidelines provide an extensive and easily adaptable framework for text encoding of various text types and genres, and for the encoding of metadata (cf. Stührenberg 2012). Especially the digitization and encoding of historical documents are often achieved with the help of the TEI (cf. for example Haaf, Geyken, and Wiegand 2014; Schroeder and Zeldes 2016; Durrell, Ensslin, and Bennett 2007). Figure 1 illustrates the TEI document model, and particularly the relation of data and metadata.
                
                    
                    TEI document model with a basic structure containing teiHeader and body. The metadata in the teiHeader refer to the body part as well as to the external source and the TEI document itself. The body part refers as well to source. The source itself can be more complex than indicated here.
                
                A TEI-compliant document
                    
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-TEI.html Accessed 2018-11-25.
                        
                     contains a body, which ‘contains the whole body of a single text’
                    
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-body.html Accessed 2018-11-25.
                        
                    , and a teiHeader
                    
                        
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/HD.html Accessed 2018-11-25.
                        
                     for the metadata records and for the documentation of a TEI document. The metadata in the teiHeader refer to the TEI document itself, the body and the external source (in our case historical texts). The data in the body of the TEI document refer to the source as being the digital surrogate of the source. In this way, metadata and data are integrated in a single document, are defined by the TEI content model, and refer to the same source. The annotation (tag set) of the document is typically not documented in the teiHeader. Instead, it is extracted from, and documented in, the TEI Guidelines, and modeled within the TEI environment.
                
            
            
                A model-to-model-based approach for developing corpus metadata 
                The TEI Guidelines can be seen as a content standard, the TEI XML as a file exchange standard which is defined by the TEI modeling tool ‘One Document Does it all’ (ODD, Burnard and Rahtz 2004).
                    
                         This is an advantage compared to other metadata schemes (e.g. ISO 2015) which do not have such a modeling environment. For a discussion of other approaches see Odebrecht (2018, chapter 5)
                     By modeling the TEI with the help of the TEI, the TEI is validated within TEI as well. This way, the data creation and documentation is exclusively dependent on the TEI environment. While using the TEI framework enables a high degree of interoperability across disciplines, other formats also mix TEI annotations with other annotations, or do not use the TEI at all. The complexity for corpus data documentation increases when dealing with digital surrogates of different encoding standards, which in turn are based on diverging text, data models, or formats. To handle this complexity, the MCM, by using the Unified Modeling Language (UML, cf. Rumpe 2011)
                    
                        
                            https://www.omg.org/spec/UML/ Accessed 2018-11-25.
                        
                    , identifies common features across diverse corpus data and defines which corpus metadata need to be included in a corpus documentation to enable intellectual access and corpus data reuse (Odebrecht 2018). This kind of documentation needs a stronger focus on information about corpus preparation, because the preparation steps for a historical corpus are not always included in a single environment such as the TEI. Adopting the TEI approach and focusing on the metadata framework, the MCM provides an additional conceptual layer (cf. Figure 2).
                
                
                    
                    The model-to-model approach: The MCM provides extended metadata for corpus documentation which are handed over to the TEI modeling environment ODD. Each TEI customization refers to a central corpus documentation part: source (text model), annotation (data model) and creation (workflow model).
                
                The MCM serves as a blue print for metadata modeling and realization in TEI (Odebrecht 2017). It is a format-independent and extensive content model for the application of the TEI to corpus documentation. The realization of the model-to-model approach can explicitly add additional statements and information relationships which go beyond the original TEI model. From a TEI perspective, the document model with a focus on metadata is extended by including non-TEI corpora but looses the close relationship between the source and the TEI document. The customizations adapt the TEI for an originally unintended and novel use case which allows for the documentation of historical corpora of any format and any architecture. This is done via three customizations: One customization describes corpus-internal information such as the text representation which is close to the typical functionality of the TEI. The second customization contains explicit information about all kinds of annotations in the corpus. A third customization describes corpus-external information of the workflow. A concrete application scenario for historical corpora is as follows: TEI or non-TEI corpora which shall be archived in a repository (LAUDATIO
                    
                        
                            http://www.laudatio-repository.org/ Accessed 2019-04-24.
                        
                    ) can be documented comprehensively and deeply structured. The resulting TEI-XML metadata are then used for metadata search and display in this repository.
                
                The TEI customizations represent an innovative perspective on the application of the TEI. The TEI already provides a full metadata structure which is integrated in a document-centric model. With the help of another model – the MCM – the application of the teiHeader can be extended. The MCM can be defined as a concrete and extensive content model for metadata information. The application of the MCM benefits from the TEI environment and its interoperability, and can make use of the modeling tool ODD and its validation mechanism. This approach enables use cases for metadata that were previously separated from the TEI universe and proves that the adaptability and flexibility of the TEI allows reuse scenarios, in this case TEI XML for corpus metadata, which have not been initially intended.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Burnard, L. and Sebastian R. (2004). RelaxNG with Son of ODD. 
                        Extreme Markup Languages. http://www.tei-c.org/cms/Talks/extreme2004/paper.html (accessed 2018-11-26).
                    
                    
                        Donhauser, K., Gippert, J. and Lühr, R. (2018, Version 1.1
                        ). Referenzkorpus Altdeutsch, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. 
                        http://www.deutschdiachrondigital.de/. 
                        http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0007-C9C7-6
                    
                    
                        Durrell, M., Ensslin, A. and Bennett. P. (2007). The GerManC project. 
                        Sprache und Datenverarbeitung (31): 71–80.
                    
                    
                        Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (2019). 
                        Deutsches Textarchiv. Grundlage für ein Referenzkorpus der neuhochdeutschen Sprache: 
                        http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/ (accessed 2019-04-26).
                    
                    
                        Haaf, S., Geyken A., and Wiegand, F. (2014). The DTA “Base Format”: A TEI Subset for the Compilation of a Large Reference Corpus of Printed Text from Multiple Sources. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (8). doi:10.4000/jtei.1114.
                    
                    
                        Ágel, V. and Hennig, M. (2008, Version 1.1). 
                        KAJUK. Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen. 
                        http://www.uni-giessen.de/kajuk/index.htm. 
                        http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-2102-8
                    
                    
                        ISO 24622-1 (2015). 
                        Language resource management. Component Metadata Infrastructure (CMDI). 01.140.20. https://www.iso.org/standard/37336.html (accessed 2018-11-26).
                    
                    
                        NISO (2004). 
                        Understanding Metadata. NISO Press. ISBN: 1-880124-62-9.
                    
                    
                        
                            Odebrecht, C. (2017). 
                            Metadata for Historical Corpora. Realization of the Metamodel for Corpus Metadata with the help of TEI Customization [Data set]. Zenodo. doi: 
                        10.5281/zenodo.2543455
                    
                    
                        Odebrecht, C. (2018). 
                        MKM – ein Metamodell für Korpusmetadaten. Dokumentation und Wiederverwendung historischer Korpora. Phd Thesis. Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Sprach- und literaturwissenschaftliche Fakultät, Berlin. doi: 10.18452/19407.
                    
                    
                        Rumpe, B. (2011). 
                        Modellierung mit UML. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
                    
                    
                        Schroeder, C. T., and Zeldes, A. (2016). Raiders of the Lost Corpus. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 10 (2). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/2/000247/000247.html (accessed 2018-11-26).
                    
                    
                        Simons, G. and Bird, S. (2008). Toward a global infrastructure for the sustainability of language resources. In 
                        Proceedings of the 22nd Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, pp. 87–100.
                    
                    
                        Stührenberg, M. (2012). The TEI and Current Standards for Structuring Linguistic Data. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (3). doi: 10.4000/jtei.523
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2019). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                    
                    
                        Version 3.5.0, 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5 (accessed 2019-03-02)
                    
                    
                        Zeng, M. L., and Qin, J. (2016). 
                        Metadata. Second Edition. London: facet publishing.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            In this paper we report our experiences developing and applying a set of digital infrastructure elements which, in combination, realise a layered digital library (Page et al 2017) for the investigation of manuscript provenance.
            We describe several related technical contributions: encoding of manuscript catalogue and local authority records as TEI; using Github for version control, issue tracking, and collaboration; automated production of catalogue user interfaces derived from the TEI; an XML processing workflow identifying, extracting, and processing TEI elements for reuse in research; mapping workflow output into a CIDOC-CRM RDF export; reconciliation of RDF entities with external authorities enabling the creation and use of Linked Data bridging multiple datasets.
            We contextualise the co-evolution of these components and exemplify their use in studies of the provenance of medieval manuscripts. We reflect on the flexibility and extensibility provided by our layered approach, and the independent benefits for catalogers and scholars.
            
                
                    Catalogue implementation and Linked Data workflow
                
                The foundation layer of the approach described herein is the TEI encoding of manuscript metadata undertaken by the University of Oxford Bodleian Libraries. TEI has previously been used to encode text-based catalogues of manuscripts
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    , and we briefly reference the particular problems and solutions posed for the Bodleian Libraries previously described elsewhere (Holford, Hankinson, and Morrison, 2018).
                
                The digital catalogue records are mostly derived from earlier printed catalogues, though in many cases they have been enhanced and updated for the digital catalogue. More than 9,200 Western medieval manuscripts are described.
                TEI XML was chosen for this detailed cataloguing of manuscripts because of its rich and flexible syntax: it can encode a complete retrospective conversion of existing catalogue description texts, adding structured markup of specific concepts and identifiers adapted to the various formats of historical catalogues, while allowing a variable degree of comprehensive or selective markup as required or desired.
                Catalogue records are implemented using a customisation of the TEI P5 manuscript description module
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    , with minor variations for Western, Islamic and Oriental manuscripts. Significant effort has been invested in the creation of local authority files for works, people and places, also using TEI. These have been, in turn, manually reconciled with URIs of records in external authorities such as VIAF, Library of Congress, Bibliothèque nationale de France, Système Universitaire de Documentation, Gemeinsame Normdatei, and WikiData.
                
                TEI records are created and edited in the Oxygen editor, and stored in repositories
                    
                        
                            
                        
                     using the Git version control system. GitHub provides for issue tracking and collaboration - requests for modifications or additional markup in support of researcher investigations, such as that described in this paper, can be added, trialled, reverted, or otherwise properly and consistently managed without negatively impacting on the traditional library functions of the catalogue.
                
                This TEI layer is, therefore, focussed purely on the creation and maintenance of the XML record files, with appropriate support tools and functionality, and which could easily be transferred to an alternative repository systems should the need arise.
                While the TEI records are freely and openly available via GitHub, the primary interface for library users is a Medieval Manuscripts collections website
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    , where the full gamut of traditional searching, browsing and viewing functionalities are provided. The website is built using open source technologies including XSLT, XQuery, Solr and Blacklight
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    . Since the website is generated atop a version-controlled check out of the TEI catalogue layer, it too can be developed independently of the other layers.
                
                A further benefit of this separation of concerns is the ability to create parallel specialised data layers targeted towards distinct areas of research, supplementing rather than supplanting the canonical TEI catalogue and core digital library functions. Here the flexibility and adaptability offered by TEI is excessive, perhaps counterproductive, for computational processing of the catalogue metadata.
                Answering specific research questions we instead desire reasoning over logically consistent relationships, such as those in the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model
                    
                        
                            The CIDOC-CRM 
                                
                            
                        
                    , and an ability to cross-reference multiple corpora and authorities using Linked Data: we create a selective RDF layer derived from the catalogue metadata. While theoretically conversion could be include all available TEI elements and attributes, in practice undertaking the mapping is detailed and complex, and limiting scope according to the investigation engenders progress. RDF complements this approach through data structures well suited to future extensions retaining consistency.
                
                The first stage of processing simplifies the TEI records, extracting pertinent information (manuscripts, parts, works, authors and other people, places) using XQuery
                    
                        
                            
                        
                     into a more rigid XML structure. This transforms records into a single file, conforming to desired metadata fields, normalising some data (e.g. languages), referencing authority files, and building URIs.
                
                The second stage ingests our simplified XML into the 3M mapping tool (Oldman, Theodoridou and Samaritakis, 2010) for transformation to a data model combining entities and relationships from CIDOC-CRM and FRBRoo
                    
                        An object-oriented version of FRBR harmonized with CIDOC-CRM
                    . Entities are also reconciled with local and external authorities, and RDF is exported ready for querying against research questions.
                
                In creating these two alternate layers atop the TEI encoded catalogue, we serve several distinct but complementary motivations: a robust, maintainable and consistent record system for cataloguing; a visible and discoverable interface for browsing and searching the catalogue; and a malleable data structure for detailed scholarly investigation. These parallel the affordances offered by the layers’ encodings, deploying TEI and RDF (and, similarly Solr/Blacklight) by their strengths. In the remainder of the paper we focus on the last of these motivations.
            
            
                
                    Application to manuscript provenance research
                
                Having described the infrastructural components and overall workflow, we demonstrate the use of this novel digital library for research into the provenance of medieval manuscripts: their origins and movements, and the collectors and owners involved in their history.
                As the result of changes in ownership over centuries, European manuscripts are spread across the world in diverse library, museum and gallery collections. Information relating their often-complicated histories is dispersed and fragmented across numerous sources, compelling historians and other researchers to make painstaking and time-consuming searches of printed and online catalogues. Digital tools which can assist in these searches, recording their outcomes, are of great benefit; cross-referencing and reconciliation across catalogues even more so.
                As such, our ultimate aim is to search across multiple distributed catalogues
                    
                        
                            
                        
                    
                    ,
                    
                        Furthermore, the RDF described here for our manuscript catalogues has already formed part of Linked Data network combining records from the gardens, libraries and museums of the University of Oxford as part of the OXLOD project, including the Ashmolean, Museum of Natural History, and Pitt Rivers Museum.
                    , using ontologies to resolve conceptual equivalencies and indirect relationships, overcoming differences in underlying catalogue structures, and so enabling unified searching and interrogation. Here, however, we constrain discussion to our completed implementation at the University of Oxford, noting it provides a template for equivalent layer creation over other catalogue systems, and that the queries below will be equally applicable to a cross-corpora search
                    
                        Indeed this reusability and extensibility is one of our primary motivations for using Linked Data.
                    .
                
                There has been little previous work transforming TEI manuscript catalogues into RDF suitable for the combined data explorations described here. The Medieval Electronic Scholarly Alliance (MESA) published samples of transformations from the Walters Art Museum into the Dublin Core based schema
                    
                        
                            
                        
                     of the Advanced Research Consortium (ARC); while Compton and Schwartz (2019) outline the general motivations and benefits of TEI to RDF conversion.
                
                For our modelling, we began by considering TEI markup for the manuscripts records themselves, which can be complex and hierarchical, often describing a manuscript divided into several parts each with its own history and containing works-within-works (e.g. a collection of poetry and individual poems). Information about the provenance of a manuscript is sometimes encoded with a single XML element describing the entire history of the manuscript, and sometimes as multiple elements each recounting one event in that history. Dates might be encoded with ‘date’ tags or attributes on the ‘provenance’ element, and so on.
                Given this inherent complexity within the data, we identified a reduced set of ‘frames of reference’ to practically scope our RDF conversion. Consulting with other manuscript scholars identified archetypal questions required of any data investigation. We include an illustrative selection of these queries here, which we reference to their realisation in TEI, simplified XML, 3M mapping, RDF. and SPARQL:
                
                    How many manuscripts were produced in Northern Italy and/or Lombardy?
                    How many manuscripts were produced in London in the 15th century?
                    How many manuscripts did French collectors acquire from dissolved English monasteries?
                
                Our focus on manuscript provenance and associated research questions scoped our choice of elements and attributes to include in the simplified XML: selecting necessary entities, cross-referencing information from local authority files, and creating URIs required for the next stage of processing. The authority files themselves, being essentially flat lists, could be mapped in the 3M tool directly.
                Within 3M, we show examples of mapping from the TEI customisation to CIDOC-CRM and FRBRoo
                    
                        For example, from the catalogue work item (TEI bibl) to F1 Work; msItem to F22 Self-contained Expression; and so on.
                    , taking care to separate evidence derived directly from the text from that which embeds institutional knowledge (i.e. inscriptions require interpretation).
                
                Finally, we provide examples of SPARQL resolving the research questions, above, paying attention to how data semantics can overcome complexities not immediately apparent in their natural language form. For example, breaking down a query to retrieve “manuscripts from 1550-1600 produced in European countries” entails reasoning over variable temporal constructs, mapping and resolution of external spatial definitions (Getty, Wikidata).
                
                    Acknowledgements: We are grateful for the support and insights provided by our colleagues participating in the wider projects surrounding this work: Prof. Donna Kurtz and Gabriel Hanganu of the Oxford Linked Open Data project (OXLOD); and Mapping Manuscript Migrations project team members at the the University of Pennsylvania Libraries, the Institut de recherche et d’histoire des textes, and the Semantic Computing Group at Aalto University.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Holford, M. Hankinson, H. and Morrison, M. ‘Implementing TEI-based manuscript cataloguing at the Bodleian Library: challenges and solutions’. European Association of Digital Humanities conference 2018 (EADH 2019).
                    Compton, C. and Schwartz, M. 2018. ‘More Than “Nice to Have”: TEI-to-Linked Data Conversion’. Digital Humanities 2018. 
                        
                    
                    Oldman, D., Theodoridou, M., and Samaritakis, G. 2010. Using Mapping Memory Manager (3M) with CIDOC CRM. Version 4g. http://83.212.168.219/DariahCrete/sites/default/files/mapping_manual_version_4g.pdf
                    Page, K.R., Bechhofer, S., Fazekas, G, Weigl D.M, and Wilmering, T. 2017. ‘Realising a layered digital library: exploration and analysis of the live music archive through linked data’. Proc. 17th ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, pp.89-98.
                
            
        
    

        
            Various events, which were related to marking the 100th anniversary of WWI, have in recent years further increased the interest in historical resources and research on WWI (1914–1918). Some successful projects took place on the international level, for example, the Europeana Collections 1914–1918, 1914–1918-online and CENDARI, while even more were carried out at the national level. Most of these projects aim at securing access to the digitized cultural WWI heritage, which is kept by GLAM institutions (galleries, libraries, archives, and museums). Some institutions also published databases of the (fallen) soldiers from the WW1. (Clavert, 2018a, 2018b) The poster will present a digital database of WWI victims from Slovenia, which was created in cooperation between various research and cultural institutions. As many as 10 museums, two archive facilities and two research institutions participated in the consortium. The project was coordinated by the Institute of Contemporary History, which has a well-developed Digital Humanities Research Group, and acts as a national coordinating institution for DARIAH in Slovenia.
            The project of collecting data on the WWI victims from Slovenia (
                ZV1) is a good example of successful institutional integration of the local GLAM institutions, research organizations and the digital research infrastructure. Since the project was created upon the initiative of the GLAM Institutions, it provides a good example of successfully overcoming the challenges that the initiators of the Cultural Heritage Data Reuse Charter are facing. (Seillier, 2018)
            
            The work of the consortium partners was based on the following principles:
            
                
                    Separate funding: The project was financed from the existing activities of individual partners.
                
                
                    Use of the existing databases: Partners contributed data from their existing databases.
                
                
                    Separate data collection: Partners collected data primarily for the purpose of activities carried out in the parent institutions. 
                
                
                    Open access: The collected information is made available by the partners under the terms of the Creative Commons licenses.
                
                
                    Uniform data protection: Partners stored the collected data in the verified repository. 
                
                
                    Single database: Collected data from all partners were unified and imported into the MySQL relational database.
                
            
            We opted for this type of operation for the following reasons:
            
                For the purpose of collecting data on all WWI victims, it was impossible to obtain adequate project financing.
                Although a lot of volunteer work was carried out as part of the project, the intensity of the project work was determined by the partners alone, according to their wishes and expectations.
                The consortium has brought together researchers from diverse research institutions, who had varying levels of technical knowledge and experience. This way, the project partners selected the appropriate tools and software by themselves. Most of them used spreadsheet programs, primarily the Microsoft Excel.
            
            The designed project had the following shortcomings:
            
                
                    Missing data: Since the project partners mostly collected data for a specific region and the consortium was not joined by all relevant institutions from Slovenia, in some regions the data was not collected at all.
                
                
                    Non-uniform data: Since the project partners collected data for various reasons, the collected data was not always interoperable.
                
                
                    Duplicates: Due to the fact that data was collected by different partners, whereby each did it for their own purpose, it is possible that multiple records were collected for the same person within the common database.
                
            
            The Digital Humanities Research Group eliminated these deficiencies in the following ways:
            
                
                    Missing data: Following the model of the German and Austrian genealogical projects, the group used the digitized Casualty Lists (Verlustliste) for the entire Austria-Hungary. On the 
                    ANNO website, we have scraped OCRs of all available casualty lists in the TXT format. When converting from the TXT format to TEI XML, we used the semi-automatic annotation: regular expression, XPath, XSL Stylesheets (
                    GitHub). We used the TEI Module for Names, Dates, People, and Places (Figure 1) (TEI Consortium, 2018).
                
                
                    Non-uniform data: The ability to import and export data in the CSV format and subsequent cleaning of messy data: OpenRefine, R.
                
                
                    Duplicates: The core record linkage and deduplication tool is already available in the ZV1 database. For more advanced deduplication of people records, we use the RecordLinkage R-package and the Fine-grained Record Integration and Linkage Tool (FRIL).
                
            
            
                
                An example of an XML TEI markup for WWI victims
            
            The editorial project team established a unified data model on the basis of which a MySQL relational database was built. There are currently 26.205 people in the database. The digital base of the WWI victims was designed by using traditional online technologies: HTML5, CSS, PHP7 and JavaScript. We use the ElasticSearch engine to perform the base search. For a tabular display of search results, we use the DataTables, which enables further filtering of data by selected columns (Figure 2).
            
                
                ZV1 database
            
            Future Plans:
            
                
                    Short-term: To convert as many source databases from project partners into TEI as possible and publish them as digital editions. 
                
                
                    Long-term: Within the project, GeoNames was used to mark historic places. At the same time, we are planning to classify events and military units. Following the example of successful Linked Open Data (LOD) projects that used WWI data (Mäkelä et al., 2017), our long-term goal is to publish information about the WWI victims from Slovenia on the semantic web.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clavert, F. (2018a). 
                        Traces de mémoires collectives et bases de données de la Première Guerre mondiale. [Blog] L'histoire contemporaine à l'ère numérique. https://histnum.hypotheses.org/2743 [Accessed 4 April 2019].
                    
                    
                        Clavert, F. (2018b). WW1 (fallen) soldiers on-line: databases as traces of collective memories. 
                        Digital Humanities Benelux Conference, Amsterdam, June 2018.
                    
                    
                        Mäkelä, E., Törnroos, J., Lindquist, T. and Hyvönen, E. (2017). WW1LOD – An application of CIDOC-CRM to World War 1 Linked Data. 
                        International Journal on Digital Libraries, 18(4): 333–343.
                    
                    
                        Seillier, D. (2018). 
                        Assessing the survey on the Charter’s principles. [Blog] Heritage Data Reuse Charter: Information and development around the Heritage Reuse Charter. https://datacharter.hypotheses.org/179 [Accessed 4 April 2019].
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2018). 
                        Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. http://www.tei-c.org/P5/ [Accessed 4 April 2019].
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            This poster aims at showing the first results of the ongoing collaborative research project 
                The reception of the English novel in the Italian literary press between 1700 and 1830: a transcultural enquiry into the early shaping of the modern Italian literary and cultural identity. The project aims at investigating the reception of English novels in the Italian literary press during the Long Eighteenth Century (1700-1830). The analysis focuses on an existing corpus of data relative to the publication, dissemination, translations, critical reviews, and editorial advertisements of English novels in Italian literary newspapers and journals of the time. The main purpose of the project is to uncover how the English novels were introduced to the Italian readership through literary journalism with the application of digital methodologies of investigation. One of the project goals is in fact to create a methodological paradigm that may be extended to the study of the reception of English novels in the literary journalism of other nations. 
            
            The present paper therefore has three primary objects:
            a) To show to the public the first research output: an open access, bilingual, and annotated digital repository, which consists of a Drupal-based software for corpora, and represents an immediate way to develop the research. The first step of the project has been the cataloguing, analysis, and digitization of the corpus of reviews. This preliminarily created digital database allows the subsequent computational, textual and critical surveys. 
            b) To show how the TEI has been applied to the analysis of the corpus. The text encoding of the reviews, conducted following the TEI standards, makes possible to point out the elements that are original and innovative with respect to the foreign reviews of the time which the Italian press copied from, often adapting the contents. In fact, the encoding of the reviews allows also to understand and visualise their “genealogical dimension” (i.e. the comparative analysis of reviews that were taken from French or English periodicals and made their way into the Italian press). These sources have already been identified, and the comparison between the encoded versions will allow to understand the extent of the influence French and English journalism had on the Italian press, and to outline the specific Italian input. The TEI will therefore make possible to focus on the re-interpretations of Italian reviewers who drew on the Italian literary tradition but challenged its subjects, genres and linguistic structures. Ultimately, the TEI will also be applied to integrate the stylometric analysis and the gathering of Geospatial information: the short presentation will allow me to show a case study and to explain how the mark-up process proves to be a fundamental part of the methodology for the analysis of the corpus. 
            c) To illustrate the two main lines of approach that will be applied in order to digitally explore the corpus. The first consists of a stylistic and linguistic analysis of the reviews, which will be pursued equalizing and comparing stylistic and lexical constellations belonging to different discursive practices from a number of periodicals and journalist. Digital stylometry, word frequency and statistical analyses tools such as 
                R, 
                MiniTab and 
                Intelligent Archive will be used during this phase. The study of the readers’ response to the contents, spread by the novels via the reviews, is deeply connected to the stylistic analysis of the reviews. In fact, the outlining of the reviews’ stylistic features is crucial to understanding in which ways the contents were revealed to the public, and how the audience was influenced in the perception of the moral values and the social messages of the novels. The second line of approach will concern the spatial analysis of the data, which will be mapped thanks to 
                GIS digital tools integrated with Geo-criticism. The spatial analysis allows the visualization of popular reading trends in 18th and early 19th century Italy.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Altick, Richard D. 
                        The English Common Reader: A Social History of the Mass Reading Public, 1800-1900. 
                        Columbus: Ohio State UP, 1998. 
                    
                    
                        
                            Baines, Paul. The Long 18
                            th century. 
                            London
                            : 
                            Arnold, 
                            2004.
                        
                    
                    
                        Balay, Robert. 
                        Early Periodical Indexes: Bibliographies and Indexes of Literature Published in Periodicals before 1900
                        . Lanham, MD: Scarecrow, 2000. 
                    
                    Beller, Manfred and Leersen, Joep, 
                        Imagology. The cultural construction and literary representations of national characters. A critical survey, Amsterdam-Atlanta: Rodopi, 2007.
                    
                    
                        Benedict, Barbara M. “Readers, Writers, Reviewers, and the Professionalization of Literature.” 
                        Cambridge Companion to Literature, 1740-1830
                        . Ed. by T. Keymer and J. Mee. Oxford: Oxford U. Press, 2004.
                    
                    
                        Basker, James. “Criticism and the Rise of Periodical Literature.” 
                        The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism
                        . Vol. 4: 
                        The Eighteenth Century
                        . Ed. by H. B. Nisbetand C. Rawson. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997. 316-32
                    
                    
                        Berengo, Marino. 
                        I giornali veneziani del Settecento
                        . Milan: Feltrinelli, 1962.
                    
                    
                        Colombo, Rosa Maria. 
                        Settecento senza amore: studi sulla narrative inglese
                        . Rome: Bulzoni, 1983. 
                    
                    
                        _____. 
                        Lo Spectator e i giornali veneziani del Settecento
                        . Bari: Adriatica editrice, 1966. 
                    
                    
                        De Stefanis Ciccone, Stefania, ed. 
                        La stampa periodica Milanese nella prima metà dell’Ottocento. Testi e concordanze
                        . Pisa: Giardini, 1983. 
                    
                    
                        D’Alia, Fiorella. 
                        La donna nel romanzo italiano del Settecento
                        . Rome: Fratelli Palombi, 1990.
                    
                    
                        Di Fino, Sharon Marie. 
                        The Intellectual Development of German Women in Selected Periodicals from 1725 to 1784
                        . New York: Peter Lang, 1990.
                    
                    
                        Donoghue, Frank. “Colonizing Readers: Review Criticism and the Formation of a Reading Public.” 
                        The Consumption of Culture, 1600-1800: Image, Object, Text
                        . Ed. by A. Bermingham and J. Brewer. New York: Routledge, 1995. 54-74.
                    
                    
                        Farinelli, Giuseppe. 
                        Storia del giornalismo italiano: dalle origini ai giorni nostri
                        . Turin: UTET, 1997. 
                    
                    
                        Forster, Antonia. 
                        Index to Book Reviews in England, 1749-1774
                        . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University, 1990. 
                    
                    
                        _____. 
                        Index to book reviews in England, 1775-1800
                        . London: British Library, 1997. 
                    
                    
                        Franchini, Silvia, Simonetta Soldani, eds. 
                        Donne e giornalismo: Percorsi e presenze di una storia di genere
                        . Milan: Franco Angeli, 2004. 
                    
                    
                        Infelise, Mario. 
                        L’editoria veneziana nel Settecento
                        . Milan: Franco Angeli, 1989. 
                    
                    
                        Klancher, Jon P. 
                        The Making of English Reading Audiences, 1790-1832
                        . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987.
                    
                    
                        MacMurran, Mary H. 
                        The Spread of Novels: Translation and Prose Fiction in the Eighteenth Century
                        . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010. 
                    
                    
                        Magnani, Giovanni. 
                        Giornalismo e attività letteraria dell’Ottocento
                        . Florence: Bulgarini, 1974. 
                    
                    
                        Mangione, Daniela. 
                        Prima di Manzoni: autore e lettore nel romanzo del Settecento
                        . Rome: Salerno editrice, 2012.
                    
                    
                        Marchesi, Giambattista. 
                        Studi e ricerche intorno ai nostri romanzi e romanzieri del Settecento coll’aggiunta di una bibliografia dei romanzieri editi in Italia in quel secolo
                        . Bergamo: Istituto italiano d'arti grafiche, 1903.
                    
                    
                        Mayo, Robert. 
                        The English Novel in the Magazines, 1740-1815. With a Catalogue of 1375 Magazine Novels and Novellettes
                        . Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1962.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, Franco. 
                        Atlante del romanzo europeo. 1800-1900
                        . Torino: Einaudi, 1997. 
                    
                    
                        Murialdi, Paolo. 
                        Storia del giornalismo italiano
                        . Bologna: Il Mulino, 2000. 
                    
                    
                        
                            O’Gorman, Frank. The Long Eighteenth Century: British Political and Social History 1688–1832 (The Arnold History of Britain Series). 
                            Hodder Arnold, 1997.
                        
                    
                    
                        Pearson, Jacqueline. 
                        Women's Reading in Britain, 1750-1835: A Dangerous Recreation
                        . New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
                    
                    
                        Piccioni, Luigi. 
                        Il giornalismo letterario in Italia
                        . Turin-Rome: Loescher, 1984. 
                    
                    
                        Reiman, Donald H. 
                        The Romantics Reviewed; Contemporary Reviews of British Romantic Writers
                        . New York: Garland, 1972.
                    
                    
                        Rivers, Isabel. 
                        Books and their readers in eighteenth-century England: new essays
                        . London and New York: Leicester University Press, 2001.
                    
                    
                        Rose, Jonathan. “Rereading the English Common Reader: A Preface to a History of Audiences.” 
                        Journal of the History of Ideas 
                        53 (1992). 47-70. 
                    
                    
                        Sgard, Jean, ed. 
                        Dictionnaire des journaux (1600-1789)
                        . 2 Vols. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation; Paris: Universitas, 1991. 
                    
                    
                        _____. ed. 
                        Dictionnaire des journalistes 1600-1789
                        . Rev. ed. 2 Vols. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation, 1999.
                    
                    
                        Siskin, Clifford. “Eighteenth-century Periodicals and the Romantic Rise of the Novel.” 
                        Studies in the Novel 
                        26.2 (Summer 1994): 26-42.
                    
                    Spiering, Menno (ed.), 
                        Nation building and writing literary history, Amsterdam-Atlanta: Rodopi, 1999.
                    
                    
                        Streeter, Harold Wade. 
                        The Eighteenth-century English Novel in French Translation: A Bibliographical Study
                        . New York: Blom, 1970.
                    
                    
                        Ward, William S. 
                        Literary Reviews in British Periodicals 1788-1826: A Bibliography
                        . New York: Garland Publishing, 1977. 
                    
                    
                        Westphal, Bertrand. 
                        La Géocritique. Réel, Fiction, Espace
                        , («Paradoxe»), Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 2007.
                    
                    
                        Zambon, Maria Rosa. Bibliographie du roman français en Italie au 18e siècle. Florence: Sansoni, 1962.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                
                    Context
                
                
                    
                        During the elaboration of his political theory, 
                    
                    
                        the materialist 
                    
                    
                        philosopher
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        Thomas
                    
                    
                        Hobbes 
                    
                    
                        (1588-1679) 
                    
                    
                        developed a complex relation with the Bible. Although he credited himself with the scientific foundation of politics, 
                    
                    
                        in 
                    
                    
                        The
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        Elements
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        of Law
                    
                    
                        (1640)
                    
                    
                        , 
                    
                    
                        De Cive
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        (1642, 1647)
                    
                    
                        , 
                    
                    
                        and 
                    
                    
                        the English and Latin
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        Leviathan
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        (
                    
                    
                        1651, 1668
                    
                    
                        ), 
                    
                    
                        Hobbes 
                    
                    
                        made an increasing use of Scriptural evidence in support of his arguments. 
                    
                    
                        While
                    
                    
                        fight
                    
                    
                        ing
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        Scholastic philosop
                    
                    
                        h
                    
                    
                        y on its 
                    
                    
                        own 
                    
                    
                        ground,
                    
                    
                        not only 
                    
                    
                        did he
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        la
                    
                    
                        y
                    
                    
                        the
                    
                    foundations of 
                    modern 
                    B
                    iblical criticism, 
                    but 
                    he 
                    also
                     
                    provide
                    d
                     
                    a
                     
                    marked
                    ly heterodox interpretation 
                    of
                    a growing number 
                    of Scriptural
                    passages.
                
                
                    And y
                    et
                    , 
                    t
                    he hundreds of Biblical quotations s
                    prinkled
                    in the political writings, 
                    Hobbes’s
                     
                    simultaneous use of 
                    multiple Scriptural sources and his 
                    inconsistent 
                    handling of the source-texts make it 
                    hard
                    to account for the nature and development of Hobbes’s treatment of the Bible.
                     
                    That is why, w
                    ith the notable exception of the pioneering study by Harold W. Jones (
                    Jones, 
                    1984), even modern scholarship has rarely dared to venture in a methodical examination of Hobbes’s 
                    B
                    iblical knowledge and exegesis (Pacchi 
                    et al.
                    , 198
                    8
                    ; Somos, 2015).
                
            
            
                
                    
                        O
                    
                    
                        bjectives 
                    
                
                
                    With this poster, we aim to showcase the benefits of a textometric approach to 
                    what 
                    Jones 
                    defined
                    “
                    the problem of Hobbes and the Bible”
                    . 
                    W
                    e draw on pilot evidence from
                     
                    the 
                    ongoing 
                    
                        Digital Theological Hobbes
                    
                    project, 
                    where
                    textometric functionalities 
                    are 
                    put in the service of the study of Hobbes’s 
                    Biblical 
                    discussions
                    thanks to 
                    a
                    TXM-based 
                    corpus of diplomatic transcriptions of 
                    the
                    English political works.
                     
                    Based on the 
                    preliminary results obtained from the exploitation of
                     
                    the
                    prototype 
                    corpus, we 
                    argue
                     
                    that 
                    the
                    unique combination of automatic and semi-automatic tools 
                    of
                     
                    the TXM so
                    f
                    tware 
                    platform
                     
                    &lt;
                    
                    
                        &gt;
                    
                     
                    (
                    
                        Heiden, 
                    
                    
                        2010
                    
                    ) 
                    will enable to achieve
                    the following milestones:
                
                
                    
                        1) a
                    
                    
                        n
                    
                    
                        index of Hobbes’s explicit Scriptural quotations in the political works;
                    
                
                
                    
                        2
                    
                    
                        ) a quantitative and qualitative representation of both the evolution of Hobbes’s exegetical discussions and their growing impact on his political theor
                    
                    
                        y;
                    
                
                
                    
                        3
                    
                    
                        ) the systematic contextualization of Hobbes’s Biblical references in his politic
                    
                    
                        al science
                    
                    
                        ;
                    
                
                
                    
                        4
                    
                    
                        ) the intertextual reconstruction of 
                    
                    
                        the 
                    
                    
                        Scriptural sources 
                    
                    
                        of a relevant sample of quotations
                    
                    
                        .
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                        First 
                    
                    
                        r
                    
                    
                        esults
                    
                
                
                    Our first results are the following:
                
                
                    
                        1) 
                    
                    
                        the 
                    
                    
                        TXM-based 
                    
                    
                        prototype 
                    
                    
                        corpus of
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        diplomatic transcriptions of 
                    
                    
                        Hobbes’s
                    
                    
                        English political works
                    
                    ,
                     
                    built by 
                    linguistically annotat
                    ing,
                    refining
                     
                    and importing
                     
                    the 
                    XML-TEI 
                    P5
                    -
                    encoded 
                    (TEI Consortium, 2019) 
                    EEBO-TCP
                     
                    transcriptions 
                    (Kichuk, 2007) 
                    of 
                    
                        Human Nature
                    
                    , 
                    
                        De Corpore Politico
                    
                    , 
                    
                        Philosophicall Rudiments concerning Government and Society
                    
                    and 
                    
                        Leviathan
                    
                     
                    (
                    freely accessible at 
                    &lt;
                    
                        https://github.com/textcreationpartnership
                    
                    &gt;
                    ) 
                    into the open-source and TEI-oriented TXM software platform
                    .
                
                
                    -
                    
                         
                    
                    TCP files are 
                    annotated with standard spellings, parts of speech and lemmata
                    by MorhAdorner &lt;
                    &gt; (Burns, 2013)
                    ;
                
                
                    
                        - 
                    
                    
                        th
                    
                    
                        e
                    
                    
                        corpus is 
                    
                    
                        i
                    
                    
                        nstrumented by 
                    
                    
                        qualitative 
                    
                    
                        (
                    
                    
                        like KWIC concordances 
                    
                    
                        and
                    
                    
                        lexical
                    
                    
                        pattern progression graphs
                    
                    
                        ) 
                    
                    
                        and quantitative 
                    
                    
                        (
                    
                    
                        like 
                    
                    
                        lexical
                    
                    
                        pattern frequency lists, 
                    
                    
                        co-occurrence
                    
                    
                        analyses, factorial 
                    
                    
                        correspondence
                    
                    
                        analyses, 
                    
                    
                        contrastive word specificit
                    
                    
                        ies
                    
                    
                        ) 
                    
                    
                        analysis tools;
                    
                
                
                    - 
                    the URS annotation 
                    service
                     
                    allows to manually annotate word sequenc
                    es
                    according to 
                    a
                    Unit-Relation-Schema model
                     
                    (Heiden, 2018).
                
                
                    
                        2) 
                    
                    
                        a demo of
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        the 
                    
                    
                        automatic and semi-automatic tools 
                    
                    
                        of 
                    
                    
                        the 
                    
                    
                        TXM-based 
                    
                    
                        prototype 
                    
                    
                        corpus
                    
                    , 
                    in order to:
                
                
                    - 
                    systematic
                    ally
                     
                    map and index
                    Hobbes’s 
                    Scriptural
                    references ‘in vacuo’, i.e. “out of their contexts and with no consideration of the textual bases on which rest the quotations” (Jones, 1984: 
                    274
                    ), 
                    see 
                    
                        Figs.
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        1 and 
                    
                    
                        2
                    
                    
                        ;
                    
                
                
                    
                        - 
                    
                    
                        ground
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        the contextual study of Hobbes’s Biblical citations 
                    
                    
                        and 
                    
                    
                        the
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        intertextual analysis 
                    
                    
                        of their 
                    
                    
                        sources 
                    
                    
                        by means of the URS
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        manual annotation service
                    
                    
                        , 
                    
                    
                        see 
                    
                    
                        Fig.
                    
                    
                         
                    
                    
                        3
                    
                    
                        .
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Conclusion 
                
                
                    B
                    y shedding new light on Hobbes’s knowledge, use and handling of the Scriptures over time, we will
                     
                    take a fundamental step forward in accomplishing Jones’s research agenda. 
                    However, 
                    we 
                    will 
                    also 
                    make a methodological contribution to
                    many historical humanities. T
                    he 
                    textometric 
                    analysis of Hobbes’s 
                    exegetical practices
                     
                    will actually allow the development of a 
                    computational approach to 
                    the study of Biblical reception that could be applied to many modern textual corpora.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        Fig. 1
                    
                     
                    
                        KWIC concordance of Hobbes
                    
                    ’s Biblical references (book-chapter-verse pattern and verse pattern) in the prototype corpus and full-text view of the highlighted concordance line in the synoptic edition of 
                    De Cive
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    Fig. 2 
                    Hierarchical index of Hobbes’s Biblical references (book-chapter-verse pattern and verse pattern) and their progression graph in the 
                    Leviathan
                     sub-corpus. By clicking on the 58th occurrence of the graph, its KWIC concordance opens below it
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        F
                    
                    
                        i
                    
                    
                        g. 
                    
                    
                        3
                    
                     
                    
                        URS manual annotation of 
                    
                    
                        the
                    
                    
                        quotation ‘
                    
                    
                        Numb
                    
                    
                        . 1.4.’ 
                    
                    
                        taken from 
                    
                    
                        The Elements of Law
                    
                    
                        as: a reference devoid of citation (R), a simple quotation (S), and a reference to the Old Testament (OT). 
                    
                    
                        The ‘context’ property allows the extraction of the title of the chapter section 
                    
                    
                        analysed
                    
                    
                        : 
                    
                    
                        Parallel of the Twelve Princes of Israel, and the Twelve Apostles
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Created in 2012, the Mémoires des Archéologues et des Sites Archéologiques (MASA) Consortium has been certified by the Very Large Research Infrastructure Huma-Num. MASA was born from the experience acquired by and within several Maisons des Sciences de l'Homme in the field of processing the documentation produced by archaeologists. MASA's partners have pooled their skills to meet the needs of the archaeological community. The issues identified are multiple and involve several levels of complexity intertwined.
            The first level of complexity is related to the nature of the discipline itself: by digging, the archaeologist irreparably destroys his own object of study, even with a rigorous protocol for recording data during their production, the experiment is not reproducible. This places a particular responsibility on the archaeologist and gives his records the status of primary data. The return to this data is often necessary for comparative purposes and reinterpretation.
            The second issue is related to the nature of the documentation and its supports, which are very diversified and sometimes very fragile (field notebooks, surveys, plans, plans, photographs, pencil surveys on layers, etc.) and whose digitization should facilitate consultation and storage. The excavation archives are made up of these various recordings and the artifacts collected, which represent a considerable mass of material elements. As the two are inseparable, information systems must ensure that the link between them is maintained.
            The third challenge stems from the habit of archaeologists to work with heterogeneous databases, often designed without a methodological and technical choice protocol. Ex-post work is therefore necessary to make these databases standardised and interoperable (RDF, SKOS, DC), to use common repositories that make it possible to consider linking these data on the web of data, to document them with new metadata where appropriate, to enrich them and to facilitate access while ensuring their sustainability.
            To meet these objectives, the MASA consortium proposes to the archaeological community a process of data manipulation from acquisition to publication according to a systemic approach that respects FAIR principles. The MASA ecosystem is composed of bricks for archiving and sharing archaeological data sets. Once processed, documented and standardized, the archaeological data sets are put online according to the standards in force (XML, TEI, EAD...). Standardised repositories are used for spatial (GeoNames), temporal (PeriodO) and descriptive (PACTOLS via the OpenTheso thesaurus manager) information. The OpenArchaeo platform ensures their interoperability in a MASA triplestore and allows their interrogation via a simplified HMI that translates requests into SPARQL according to a generic model for mapping archaeological data with the CIDOC CRM ontology. The data are accessible from the publications that mobilize them. The LogicistWriter logicist writing tool offers the matching of inferences with the CIDOC CRMinf extension on reasoning. Each step of the process is documented by a good practice guide in the OpenGuide platform developed for this purpose.
            The whole process will be illustrated by the example of the excavation in Rigny (France), which follows all these recommendations from the field recording put online to the logicist publication of the results (Marlet et al., 2019).
            With this digital ecosystem, the MASA consortium relies on the data culture of archaeologists and their long experience in computerization to bring the community to respect the FAIR principles and to open these corpus in the Linked Open Data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Marlet, O., Zadora-Rio, E., Buard, P.-Y., Markhoff, B. and Rodier, X. (2019). The Archaeological Excavation Report of Rigny: An Example of an Interoperable Logicist Publication. 
                        Heritage 2019, 2(1), 761-773; https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage2010049
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The recent appearance of Steven Pinker’s 
                Enlightenment Now is a topical reminder of the enduring importance of 18th-century legacies in contemporary thought, culture, and politics. Considered pernicious or positive, French intellectuals began assessing the legacy of 
                les Lumières almost from the outset of the events of 1789 and continued this polemic throughout the 19th century. While the study of pro- and anti-Enlightenment or Revolution writers active during the 19th century is certainly of great value, our work in this project aims to examine the complexities of Enlightenment legacies using new “distant reading” approaches (Underwood, 2017). To this end, and in conjunction with the Observatoire de la Vie Littéraire (OBVIL) at Sorbonne Université, we have developed a new generation of sequence alignment software that detects reused passages in very large corpora; we use this software to compare several important collections of 18th-century texts to the Très Grande Bibliothèque (TGB) corpus of 19th-century printed materials made available by the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (BNF). Following an overview of the datasets and software developed for this effort, we will sketch some preliminary results arising from this project and conclude with an outline of further work we will carry out based on this database. 
            
            We used three different text collections for this project. The 18th-century sample is drawn from the holdings of the ARTFL Project and includes the 
                Encyclopédie of Diderot and d’Alembert as well as 1,367 17th-18th century texts from the ARTFL Frantext database.
                
                     See http://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/ and http://artfl-project.uchicago.edu/content/artfl-frantext/.
                 Both are well-curated collections and provide solid samples of Enlightenment discourse. For the 19th century, we were able to employ selections of the TGB collection released by the BNF in conjunction with OBVIL. The collection consists of 128,441 documents by more than 58,000 authors almost all of which have metadata drawn from the BNF catalogue. The vast majority of the collection was published during the 19th century, though this includes a significant number of reprints of older texts. The collection contains a broad selection of themes and subjects with 35,710 documents listed as 
                Littérature, 28,885 as 
                Histoire de la France and 23,776 
                Droit. As expected, the quality of the raw data – based on uncorrected Optical Character Recognition – varies widely depending on a range of factors, including age, preservation status and print quality. In order to identify those texts that were originally published before 1800, we used a series of heuristics based on the metadata provided by the BNF to eliminate duplicates and near-duplicate texts. This left 112,907 documents in our working TGB sample.
            
            While the ARTFL Project has developed text alignment packages in the past (Horton et al., 2010; Roe, 2012), this system is less-suited for very large-scale comparisons, e.g., those in 100,000+ document range. Detecting identical or similar passages requires a one-to-one document comparison of every text in the dataset (Gladstone and Cooney, 2020). Given the scale of the TGB dataset, we developed the TextPAIR system to address limitations of the previous model using new technologies. Installed as a Python package, it includes a text preprocessing component written in Python, a sequence aligner written in Go to maximize speed and scalability, and a single-page web application written with the VueJS framework to guarantee maximum interactivity when text alignments are deployed in the browser. The package is available as open-source code on Github, with accompanying documentation meant to assist other research groups in installing and running their own text-reuse experiments.
                
                     See https://github.com/ARTFL-Project/text-pair.
                
            
            The sequence alignment of the pre 19th-century sample of Frantext and the 
                Encyclopédie against the 112,000 documents of the TGB produced a large number of resulting 
                passage pairs, our basic unit of analysis. Figure One shows a typical alignment pair, in this case a passage from the famous 
                Discours Préliminare reused with some indication of the source in Peignot’s 1801 
                Dictionnaire raisonné de bibliologie. It is important to note that TextPAIR can detect similar passages with considerable variations which can arise from textual insertions, deletions or modifications along with data capture errors, differences in spellings and word order changes. Figure 1 uses the “show differences” feature to highlight the variations between the passage pair.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1
            
            Each record of the result database stores metadata for each document of the pair from the TEI headers, byte locations and offsets in the corresponding text data files, the passages in question, the size of the alignments, and whether or not the alignment is considered “banal” or uninteresting. The databases are loaded into a PostgreSQL relational database with a dedicated interface to allow users to query the document pairs, get summary results and navigate to the original documents at will. Figure 2 shows the query form of the 
                Encyclopédie to TGB alignment database, which supports metadata queries to allow the user to focus on specific questions, in this case a search for all aligned passages from articles written by Rousseau.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2. Searching for similar passages from articles by Rousseau in the Encyclopédie
            
            The query returns 611 passages, as shown in Figure 3, where the first reused passage in this query is his article “Accolade”, which is found almost verbatim in a dictionary of music from 1825. The query interface makes extensive use of facets, allowing the user to consult frequencies broken down by different criteria. Looking at the reuses of Rousseau’s contributions to the 
                Encyclopédie, it is interesting to note that while most of Rousseau’s entries in the 
                Encyclopédie were about music, it is his political philosophy article “ECONOMIE” that is most reused in the 19th century.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 3
            The interface also supports the generation of time series graphs of the results. Figure 4 shows that reuses of the article “ECONOMIE” was fairly consistent through the 19th century. 
            
                
            
            Figure 4
            The Baron d’Holbach presents another interesting case. As one of the 
                philosophes with the most notorious reputation as a free-thinking materialist he contributed some of the most controversial articles to the 
                Encyclopédie, such as “Représentants” and “Prêtres”. As shown in Figure 5, it was however his work on chemistry, mineralogy, and German history that is most reused in the 19th century. Instead of his scandalous article on “Prêtres” being cited, as one would expect, you find resonances of the rather orthodox article “EVÊQUE” which outlines the historical background of elector Bishops under the Holy Roman Empire. In fact, not one reuse of d’Holbach’s controversial material was found in the TGB, which sheds new light on our vision of d’Holbach as not simply an atheist propagandist, but as a man of science whose articles in various domains continued to be cited and used well into the 19th century. This is an image of d’Holbach that rarely, if ever, occurs in modern intellectual and literary histories.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 5
            The 19th-century reuses of passages from the 17 texts by Rousseau found in ARTFL Frantext, show a similar combination of expected and unexpected avenues of influence. It is not particularly surprising to find the nearly 1,500 instances of passages from his 
                Contrat social in works dealing with political theory even if they are used in a negative fashion. As shown in Figure 6, the most frequent reuse is in Pierre Landes’ attack on the 
                philosophe in his 
                Principes du droit politique, mis en opposition avec ceux de J.-J. Rousseau sur le contrat social followed by numerous expositions of Rousseau’s political thought.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 6
            By contrast, as shown in Figure 7, the over 10,000 reuses of Rousseau’s work more generally seem to focus on his reputation as a prose stylist, with the most frequent reuses found in various dictionaries and grammatical works. It is important to note the various vectors through which particular texts or authors can exert influence, even if it is indirect.
            
                
            
            Figure 7
            
                We believe that we can begin to use these techniques and these sorts of large-scale databases to refashion literary history, to give a more expansive vision of literary culture by identifying various forms of intertextual activity, from reuse to referencing, in a broadened set of 18th-century corpora and to eventually make use of various visualisation tools to navigate the output. While our interpretive work on this set of reuses is still in its initial phases, we have already been able to identify significant findings that challenge our understanding of the impact of the 
                Lumières in the 19th century. 
                
                Our full paper will expand on our observations above and begin the systematic exposition of the various complexities of identifying text reuse at such an unprecedented scale. We are aware, however, that these larger questions are well beyond the ability of any small group of researchers to explore, and thus invite interested parties to consult the alignment databases themselves.
                
                     See http://artfl-project.uchicago.edu/legacy_eighteenth.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Gladstone, G. and Cooney, C. (2020) Opening New Paths for Scholarship: Algorithms to Track Text Reuse in ECCO. In Digitizing Enlightenment: Digital Humanities and the Transformation of Eighteenth-Century Studies. Liverpool: Oxford University Studies in the Enlightenment (forthcoming).
                    
                    
                        Horton, R., Olsen, M., and Roe, G. (2010). Something Borrowed: Sequence Alignment and the Identification of Similar Passages in Large Text Collections. Digital Studies / Le Champ numérique, 2.1. http://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.258 (accessed 2 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Roe, G. (2012). Intertextuality and Influence in the Age of Enlightenment: Sequence Alignment Applications for Humanities Research. In Digital Humanities 2012. Hamburg: University of Hamburg, pp. 345-47. 
                    
                    
                        Underwood, T. (2017). A Genealogy of Distant Reading. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 11.2. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000317/000317.html (accessed 2 April 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The written heritage of the “Islamicate”
                
                     Introduced by the University of Chicago historian Marshall Hodgson, the term “Islamicate” refers to anything Islamic and non-Islamic, religious and non-religious that was produced in the vast geographical region we refer to as the “Islamic world” (see, Hodgson, 1974).
                 cultures that stretch from modern Bengal to Spain is as vast as it is understudied and underrepresented in the digital humanities. The sheer volume and diversity of the surviving works produced in Arabic and Persian in the premodern period makes this body of texts ideal for computational analysis. While a great number of texts has been digitized over past two decades, OpenITI is the first corpus of Islamicate texts that is open, machine readable, and aims at being comprehensive. OpenITI strives to provide the essential textual infrastructure in Persian and Arabic for new forms of macro textual analysis and digital scholarship. The corpus is already actively used in several ERC projects.
            
            Currently, OpenITI includes about 4,300 unique book titles (predominantly in Arabic) by over 1,800 authors, which amounts to approximately 750 million words (1,46 billion words with all versions). Most texts have been collected from open-access online collections of high-quality digital reproductions of premodern texts.
                
                     Such as 
                        http://shamela.ws/, 
                        http://shiaonlinelibrary.com/, 
                        https://ganjoor.net/, etc..
                    
                
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 1. Chronological distribution of authors and books in OpenITI.
            
            OpenITI is organized in compliance with Canonical Text Services (CTS) guidelines as implemented in the 
                CapiTainS Suite (Clérice et al., 2017), with two exceptions made for practical purposes. First, we implemented human-readable URNs (
                uniform resource name) as this allows for easier subsetting of the corpus and makes it easier to engage non-DH specialists in Islamicate studies in collaboration. Second, we are postponing conversion to TEI XML, since it poses a number of challenges for right-to-left languages, connected scripts, and extensive texts (many texts are over 1 million words).
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2. CTS URN Structure: al-Ḏahabī’s 
                Taʾrīḫ al-islām.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 3. 
                CapiTainS
                -Compliant Folder Structure: Versions of al-Ġazālī’s 
                Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn incorporated into the repository 
                0525AH within OpenITI.
            
            CTS offers a powerful mechanism for building expandable and interoperable corpora. The power of CTS lies in the URN, which provides the permanent canonical references to texts and are used by CTS to identify or retrieve passages of text (
                Figure 2). The tree-like structure of CTS URNs together with modular folder organization (
                Figure 3) allow one to easily expand the corpus in a decentralized manner as well as to accommodate as many texts and their versions in any number of languages as might be necessary.
            
            Texts have been automatically converted into our custom format—
                OpenITI mARkdown (
                AR stands for Arabic). Facilitating conversion of raw texts into machine-actionable formats, this flavor of markdown: 1) simplifies work with multivolume texts that make up the core of the corpus; and 2) helps to avoid problems that one faces when paired symbols (e.g., angle brackets), LTR and RTL languages, and connected scripts occur in the same document, when even a simple editing task becomes overly complicated. Additionally, 
                mARkdown will facilitate conversion into TEI XML, the de facto standard for publishing digital editions. The detailed description of 
                OpenITI mARkdown can be found at 
                https://maximromanov.github.io/mARkdown/.
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 3. OpenITI mARkdown: A sample text (
                biography) tagged morphologically and semantically (using EditPad Pro, 
                https://www.editpadpro.com/).
            
            Available on GitHub (
                https://github.com/OpenITI), OpenITI includes four different types of repositories:
            
            
                
                    Raw texts repositories (naming pattern: 
                    `RAWrabica\d+`), where texts collected from online libraries are stored in their original formats. The total count exceeds 50,000 files. Texts here must be manually reviewed and moved into 
                    main working repositories (over 14,000 have been processed).
                
                
                    Main working repositories (pattern: 
                    `\d{4}AH`), where texts in 
                    mARkdown are grouped into 25 year periods, based on authors’ death dates. This makes repositories more manageable, allowing scholars to focus on relevant texts. Manual editing, reviewing, and tagging of texts happens here.
                
                
                    Instantiations (pattern: 
                    `i\.\w+`) include all texts of the corpus adapted for use with specific software. For example, in `
                    i.stylo`, texts are renamed and reformatted as required by the `
                    stylo` package for R (see, Eder et al., 2016).
                
                
                    Releases (
                    planned) will have citable time-stamped versions of the corpus.
                
            
            In order to achieve comprehensiveness, we currently are working on the improvement of Arabic-script OCR (see, Kiessling et al., 2017) and the development of a digital text production pipeline (collaboratively with SHARIAsource, Harvard Law School). Called CorpusBuilder, this user-friendly, web-based, open-source application will significantly lower the technological barriers to entry and help us involve colleagues, librarians and citizen scientists from around the world in our collaborative project of corpus creation.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Clérice, T., Munson, M. and Almas, B. (2017). 
                        Capitains/Capitains.Github.Io: 2.0.0. Zenodo doi:10.5281/zenodo.570516. https://zenodo.org/record/570516 (accessed 29 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Eder, M., Rybicki, J. and Kestemont, M. (2016). Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis. 
                        The R Journal, 
                        8(1): 107–121.
                    
                    
                        Hodgson, M. G. S. (1974). 
                        The Venture of Islam: The Classical Age of Islam, 3 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B., Miller, M. T., Savant, S. B. and Romanov, M. G. (2017). Important New Developments in Arabographic Optical Character Recognition (OCR). 
                        Al-ʿUṣūr Al-Wusṭá (The Journal of Middle East Medievalists), 
                        25: 1–13.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                
                    Edition Visualization Technology (EVT) is an open source tool to produce digital scholarly editions on the basis of TEI XML-encoded documents. Born to serve the goals of a single project, the 
                    Digital Vercelli Book (Rosselli Del Turco, 2017), it has been developed in such a way as to become a general purpose tool. Several DSE projects are using it to publish digital editions (Humarec Project; Salvatori, 2014), in fact many researchers have found in EVT the perfect tool for their needs: it is easy to configure and deploy, it is fully customizable, it includes several useful research tools out of the box.
                
                The current development version (
                    EVT 2) is based on the 
                    AngularJS programming framework, which it is especially suitable for the development of complex client-side Web applications since it supports the Model View Controller design pattern, a very popular architectural pattern that separates the data of the application domain, its visualisation, and the user interaction with the data and the view (Krasner and Pope, 1988).
                
                
                    
                        
                        EVT 1
                    
                
                At the present moment EVT is available as a 
                    usable beta version, and a fully functional release is due in 2019. The forthcoming release will include all the features present in the original version (EVT 1), i.e. support for diplomatic editions, text-image linking, a sophisticated image viewer, a powerful text engine, and more. At the same time, the support for critical editions - which was the starting point for EVT 2 (Di Pietro and Rosselli Del Turco, 2018) - will be further improved thanks to the feedback received from many interested scholars.
                
                
                    
                        
                        EVT 2 first beta version
                    
                
            
            
                Current and future developments
                In 2005, describing the DSE as a dynamic device, P. Robinson implicitly alluded at the complexity of building such a software tool (Robinson, 2005). In fact, at the end of the first development cycle we discovered that, in spite of our search for flexibility, the base framework (XSLT 2 transformations and a Javascript-based front-end to navigate the edition) wouldn’t allow further extension. The current development version, on the other hand, while much more flexible from a technical point of view, presents challenges on multiple levels:
                
                    
                        Design. EVT must be able to combine standardized representation and publication with the peculiarities of each edition: this is a very complex task considering the great variability of TEI XML, in fact the same encoding may have different interpretations and the same interpretation may have different encodings. Significant variation of the data to be processed requires great flexibility by the processing software.
                    
                    
                        Implementation. The original AngularJS framework has been replaced by a vastly improved new version, simply known as 
                        Angular, which is incompatible with the former. Upgrading to Angular
                         would solve some efficiency issues present in the current AngularJS-based version, and make available all the recent improvements.
                    
                
                Furthermore, EVT has always been based on a client-only architecture, which is great to keep technical complexity at a minimum, making it very easy to publish and maintain a web-based digital edition. This is also a limiting factor, however, when it comes to advanced features such as user annotation of text and images, search engine, and heavy-load textual processing. Adding client-server functionality would solve this dilemma, but this is a complex task which requires appropriate planning, support and funding in order to be carried out.
                
                    
                        User Interface. This is probably the area that needs most attention.
                        
                            
                                Handling of heterogeneous materials. Text and images are directly visible in the UI, while other materials, such as introductory text, lists of witnesses, critical apparatus entries, named entities, links between text and image are displayed on request. Their presence, however, must be reported in the UI and must be easily accessible. The text can be consulted in the traditional way, i.e. sequentially, or different parts of the text and different materials can be consulted in parallel. Each possible combination has its own display mode, designed specifically to enrich that type of interaction with the text.
                            
                            
                                Designing graphic solutions suitable for the digital context but in line with the conventions of printed editions. The simultaneous presence of text in both diplomatic and critical editions requires both careful planning of navigation and special care in identifying those graphic solutions that allow us to represent these conventions without overburdening the UI.
                            
                            
                                Complexity in finding the right compromise between web design principles and traditional layout. The UI should be innovative, but not so far from the conventions of traditional editions as to require a learning effort that is too high.
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                In this poster we will present and discuss the complexity of developing a sophisticated tool such as EVT, explaining the design principles and the methodological aspects at its base.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Angular: 
                        .
                    
                    AngularJS: 
                        .
                    
                    Boschetti, F. and Del Grosso, A.M. (2014). TeiCoPhiLib: A Library of Components for the Domain of Collaborative Philology. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 
                        8 | December 2014 - December 2015. 
                        .
                    
                    Di Pietro C. and Rosselli Del Turco R. (2018). Between innovation and conservation: The narrow path of UI design for the DSE. In R. Bleier, M. Bürgermeister, H. Klug, F. Neuber, e G. Schneider (eds.), 
                        Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces. Schriften des Instituts für 
                        Dokumentologie und Editorik 12. Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
                    
                    EVT Team (2014-). Home page for the project: 
                        . Source code repository: 
                        .
                    
                    Humarec Project. Humarec Manuscript Viewer - Marciana Gr. Z 11 (379): 
                        .
                    
                    Krasner, G. and Pope, S. (1988). A Description of the Model–View–Controller User Interface Paradigm in the Smalltalk-80 System. 
                        Journal of Object Oriented Programming, 
                        1 (3): 26-49.
                    
                    Robinson, P. (2005). Current issues in making digital editions of medieval texts—or, do electronic scholarly editions have a future? 
                        Digital Medievalist, 
                        1. 
                        . “The layers of footnotes, the multiplicity of textual views, the opportunities for dramatic visualization interweaving the many with each other and offering different modes of viewing the one within the many—all this proclaims ‘I am a hypertext: invent a dynamic device to show me’.” § 12.
                    
                    Rosselli Del Turco R., Buomprisco G., Di Pietro C., Kenny J., Masotti R., and Pugliese J. (2015). Edition Visualization Technology: A Simple Tool to Visualize TEI-Based Digital Editions. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Issue 
                        8: 1–21. 
                        .
                    
                    Rosselli Del Turco, R. (2017). 
                        The Digital Vercelli Book. A facsimile edition of Vercelli, Biblioteca Capitolare, CXVII. In Collane@unito.it, 
                        . 
                    
                    Salvatori, E. (2014). 
                        Codice Pelavicino. Edizione digitale. Università di Pisa. 
                        
                            http://pelavicino.labcd.unipi.it
                        . 
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                With his idea of 'Distant Reading', Moretti (2000) introduced an important 
                    leitmotif in the Digital Humanities that has led to an ongoing discussion about quantitative methods in literary and cultural studies (Clement et al., 2008; Crane, 2006). We believe that the literary genre of drama is particularly well suited for quantitative analyses and hence adapt the concept of "Drametrics" (as proposed by Romanska, 2015) as a term for the distant reading of dramatic texts. In addition to the actual dialogs, dramatic texts contain other structural elements that can be easily quantified, such as the characters of the play as well as an explicit act and scene structure. Keeping these features in mind, it is hardly surprising that we find a number of recent studies dedicated to the quantitative analysis of drama (e.g. Ilsemann, 2013; Wilhelm et al., 2013; Nalisnick and Baird, 2013; Trilcke et al., 2015; Dennerlein, 2015; Xanthos et al., 2016; Willand and Reiter, 2017; Krautter, 2018). At the same time, there have been quantitative approaches to the analysis of drama that date far back into the pre-digital age. As an example for early approaches to quantitative analyses of drama, we would like to refer to the ideas of Marcus’ (1973) mathematical poetics, which also contains interesting approaches for quantitative drama analysis.
                
            
            
                Solomon Marcus’ Mathematical Poetics
                Marcus suggests the scenic presence of characters as a basic computable measure of a play, which, for each dramatic text, can be visualized by means of a 
                    configuration matrix (Marcus, 1973). The matrix (cf. figure 1) contains one row for each character of the play, and one column for each scene. Whenever a character appears on stage, the value 1 is entered into the corresponding cell; if a character is not present in a scene 0 is entered as a value.
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 1: An example configuration matrix visualizes the appearances of characters (A-G) throughout the 15 scenes of the play.
                
                Configuration matrices can be used to compute various quantitative aspects of a drama, for instance: the 
                    scenic distance and 
                    proximity of characters and even specific relationships between characters (e.g. 
                    dominance, alternation, independence or
                     concomitance) as well as the overall 
                    configuration density of plays (Marcus, 1973). The 
                    configuration density is calculated by dividing the number of cells holding a 1 by the total number of cells. In other words, the configuration density indicates how many of the potential character appearances have actually been realized. It can be understood as a measure of a play’s 'population density'. When every character appears on the stage in every scene, the play has a theoretical maximum configuration density value of 1.
                
                During the 1970s and early 1980s, several studies applied Marcus’ mathematical approach for the analysis of texts, always dealing with very few samples of text (cf. Marcus, 1974; Marcus, 1977; Marcus, 1984). In these studies, configuration matrices proved to be useful in text analysis, as they fasten and simplify the overview of a character’s first or last appearance, co-presence or avoidance with other characters. Some years later, Ilsemann (1998) took on the ideas of Solomon Marcus to explore Shakespeare’s plays in a quantitative way. Ilsemann (1998) used the frequency and lengths of characters’ speeches as further parameters and found that the configuration density is an important aspect of genre-distinct quantitative patterns for comedies, romances, tragedies and history plays. In 2005 and 2008, Ilsemann used the frequencies and distributions of speech lengths to discuss authorship attribution in Shakespeare’s plays. 
            
            
                The 
                    Katharsis Tool
                
                In order to be able to automatically analyze quantitative aspects of dramatic texts according to Marcus’ character configurations and Ilsemann’s analysis of speech lengths and frequencies, we have created 
                    Katharsis, a tool for computational 
                    drametrics. The 
                    Katharsis tool comprises a 
                    parsing component that extracts and calculates various quantitative parameters as suggested by Marcus (1973) and an analysis component that searches for dramatic texts of a certain author, genre, timeframe, etc. Currently, a test corpus of approx. 100 German drama texts from the 
                    TextGrid Repository
                    
                        Available online via https://textgridrep.org/ (Note: all URLs mentioned in this article were last checked April 29, 2019)
                     is available for analysis. The texts are available as TEI-XML, allowing for the extraction of metadata (title, author, year etc.) and speeches with the corresponding speaker and structural information. Note that the tool can be extended with further plays from other authors and genres if the texts are encoded in TEI-XML. Furthermore, the quantitative metrics are independent of the language. Figure 2 shows the 
                    Katharsis results for a search for dramatic texts by Friedrich Schiller. Users can download any quantitative information displayed in the screenshot in JSON format for individual analysis.
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 2: Summary of quantitative information calculated by Katharsis for dramatic texts by Friedrich Schiller.
                
                With the help of 
                    Katharsis researchers are able to examine a specific drama in more detail. The tool provides an interactive configuration matrix to explore character appearances and speech statistics for each configuration (figure 3).
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 3:
                    Katharsis snippet of the interactive configuration matrix for the play Maria Stuart, by Friedrich Schiller.
                
                Furthermore, 
                    Katharsis produces a table and several interactive bar charts to analyze the distribution of speakers and speech statistics on the structural levels (act and scene) and the progression of these metrics throughout the course of a play (for an example see figure 4).
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 4: Average length of speeches (measured in number of words) throughout all acts of the play 
                    Maria Stuart by Friedrich Schiller.
                
                Another segment of the tool shows statistics concerning the comparison of speakers like speech statistics and the distributions of scenic presence. Furthermore, following Marcus’ (1973) approach, specific character relations derived from the configuration matrix can be explored. For each character of the play, the tool displays relations to other characters which may be of the type 
                    dominate/dominated, alternative, independent or concomitant.
                
                 The last component concerning the analysis of individual dramatic texts follows Ilsemann’s (2005; 2008) idea to examine the distribution of speech lengths in the play. We calculated the speech length by counting the number of words. Users can analyze an interactive histogram and a curve chart. Different speech lengths can be included in the visualization dynamically to narrow down the range of speech lengths for more in-depth analysis (see figure 5 for an example with a comparison). 
                 Finally, 
                    Katharsis can be used to analyze and compare self-created collections of plays by means of various quantitative aspects. The comparison of different genres and authors is a pre-configured comparison. Figure 5 illustrates a comparison of speech lengths for Goethe and Schiller showing that Goethe’s most frequent speech length is seven while Schiller’s is rather low with only four words. This might be one reason why the plays of Goethe never were that successful on stage like those of Schiller.
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 5: Comparison of the relative distribution of speech lengths for the plays of Goethe and Schiller.
                
                The 
                    Katharsis tool is available online and can be tested as a live demo in any current web browser: 
                    http://lauchblatt.github.io/Katharsis/index.html
                
            
            
                Case Studies on Quantitative Drama Analysis
                In this section, we illustrate the usefulness of 
                    Katharsis by means of short case studies: An important computable aspect of dramatic texts are the encounters of characters on stage in different configurations. A case study that used 
                    Katharsis on 13 tragedies, 17 comedies, one tragicomedy and one 
                    Schauspiel of the German authors Andreas Gryphius, Christian Weise, and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing verified the hypothesis that there is a trend for comedies to have higher configuration densities than tragedies (Dennerlein, 2015). For dramatic German texts from 1600 to 1800 the mean length of speeches in comedies (as compared to tragedies) is lower (see figure 6), whereas the total number of speeches is higher (see figure 7), which means characters in comedies seem to interact in a more dialogic manner.
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 6: Average length of speeches in comedies and tragedies of the corpus.
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 7: Average number of speeches in comedies and tragedies of the corpus.
                
                This seems plausible with regard to some characteristics of tragedies and comedies already known: Tragedies more often feature monologues because they provide the ideal occasion to reflect on jealousy, hatred, guilt, plans of murder, or suicide. A general lack of communication, or communication difficulties, may be associated with the fact that generally fewer characters share the stage. In comedy, however, protagonists more often encounter each other. Typical comic effects such as confusions between characters or characters exchanging roles as well as speeches delivered at spectators, are staged in the presence of several characters and may result in a rather high configuration density.
            
            
                Future Work: Sentiment Analysis for Drama
                To enhance the applicability of 
                    Katharsis as a tool for computational drametrics, we are currently preparing to include basic sentiment analysis techniques (Liu, 2016) as an addition to mere structural parameters. While sentiment analysis has been particularly popular in the field of computational linguistics, the approach is also gaining popularity in literary studies (Alm and Sproat, 2005; Nalisnick and Baird, 2013; Mohammad, 2011). So far, we have evaluated different sentiment analysis techniques for the context of historic, German language plays (Schmidt and Burghard, 2018a; Schmidt and Burghardt, 2018b; Schmidt, Burghardt and Dennerlein, 2018a; Schmidt, Burghardt and Dennerlein, 2018b). A first 
                    Katharsis prototype (Schmidt and Burghardt, 2018b; Schmidt, Burghardt and Dennerlein, 2018b) that implements sentiment analysis for 12 German plays by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing is available online: 
                    http://lauchblatt.github.io/Katharsis/sa_selection.html
                
                In the long term, we plan to combine character-to-character sentiment analysis (cf. Nalisnick and Baird, 2013) with the existing configuration matrices, thus not only transferring Marcus’ approach of mathematical drama analysis to a digital tool, but rather enhancing it by using additional parameters such as character sentiment.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alm, C. O. and Sproat, R. (2005). Emotional sequencing and development in fairy tales. 
                        International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Berlin: Springer, pp. 668-674.
                    
                    
                        Clement, T., Steger, S., Unsworth, J. and Uszkalo, K. (2008). 
                        How not to read a million books. Available online at http://people.brandeis.edu/~unsworth/hownot2read.html
                    
                    
                        Crane, G. (2006). What do you do with a million books? 
                        D-Lib Magazine. Available online at http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march06/crane/03crane.html
                    
                    
                        Dennerlein, K. (2015). Measuring the average population densities of plays. A case study of Andreas Gryphius, Christian Weise and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. 
                        Semicerchio. Rivista di poesia comparata LIII: 80–88.
                    
                    
                        Ilsemann, H. (1998). 
                        Shakespeare disassembled. Eine quantitative Analyse der Dramen Shakespeares. Frankfurt: Peter Lang Pub Inc.
                    
                    
                        Ilsemann, H. (2005). Some statistical observations on speech lengths in Shakespeare’s plays. 
                        Shakespeare Jahrbuch, 141: 158–68.
                    
                    
                        Ilsemann, H. (2008). More statistical observations on speech lengths in Shakespeare’s plays. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(4): 397-407.
                    
                    
                        Ilsemann, H. (2013). Quantitativ-statistische Dramenanalyse: Welche Aussagekraft haben Häufigkeitsverteilungen der Replikenlängen? 
                        Forum Computerphilologie. Available online at http://computerphilologie.digital-humanities.de/jg09/Ilsemann.html
                    
                    
                        Krautter, B. (2018). Quantitative microanalysis? Different methods of digital drama analysis in comparison. 
                        Book of Abstracts, DH 2018. Mexico-City, Mexico, pp. 225-228.
                    
                    
                        Liu, B. (2016). 
                        Sentiment Analysis. Mining Opinions, Sentiments and Emotions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Marcus, S. (1973). 
                        Mathematische Poetik. Frankfurt: Athenäum.
                    
                    
                        Marcus, S. (ed.) (1974). Poetics and Mathematics. 
                        Special issue of the journal POETICS, 10. 
                    
                    
                        Marcus, S. (ed.) (1977). The formal study of drama
                        . Special issue of the journal POETICS, 6, 3/4.
                    
                    
                        Marcus, S. (ed.) (1984). The formal Study of Drama. II. 
                        Special issue of the journal POETICS, 13, 1/2.
                    
                    
                        Mohammad, S. (2011). From once upon a time to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in novels and fairy tales. 
                        Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, Association for Computational Linguistics. Portland, Oregon: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 105–114.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on World Literature. 
                        New Left Review 1: 54–68.
                    
                    
                        Nalisnick, E. T. and Baird H. S. (2013). Character-to-Character Sentiment Analysis in Shakespeare’s Plays. 
                        Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 479–483.
                    
                    
                        Romanska, M. (2015). Drametrics: what dramaturgs should learn from mathematicians. In Romanska, M. (ed.), 
                        The Routledge Companion to Dramaturgy. Routledge, pp. 472-481.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, T. and Burghardt, M. (2018a). An Evaluation of Lexicon-based Sentiment Analysis Techniques for the Plays of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. 
                        Proceedings of the Second Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature. Santa Fe, New Mexico: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 139-149.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, T. and Burghardt, M. (2018b). Toward a Tool for Sentiment Analysis for German Historic Plays. In Piotrowski, M. (ed.), 
                        COMHUM 2018: Book of Abstracts for the Workshop on Computational Methods in the Humanities 2018. Lausanne, Switzerland: Laboratoire laussannois d'informatique et statistique textuelle, pp. 46-48.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, T., Burghardt, M. and Dennerlein, K. (2018a). Sentiment Annotation of Historic German Plays: An Empirical Study on Annotation Behavior. Sandra Kübler, Heike Zinsmeister (eds.), 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Annotation in Digital Humanities (annDH 2018) Sofia, Bulgaria, pp. 47-52.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, T., Burghardt, M. and Dennerlein, K. (2018b). „Kann man denn auch nicht lachend sehr ernsthaft sein?“ – Zum Einsatz von Sentiment Analyse-Verfahren für die quantitative Untersuchung von Lessings Dramen. In 
                        Book of Abstracts, DHd 2018, Cologne, Germany.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, P., Fischer, F. and Kampkaspar, D. (2015). Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts. 
                        Book of Abstracts, DH 2015. Sidney, Australia
                    
                    
                        Wilhelm, T., Burghardt, M., and Wolff, C. (2013). “To See or Not to See” - An Interactive Tool for the Visualization and Analysis of Shakespeare Plays. In R. Franken-Wendelstorf, E. Lindinger, and J. Sieck (Eds.), 
                        Kultur und Informatik: Visual Worlds &amp; Interactive Spaces. Glückstadt: Verlag Werner Hülsbusch, pp. 175–185.
                    
                    
                        Willand, M. and Reiter, N. (2017). Geschlecht und Gattung. Digitale Analysen von Kleists ›Familie Schroffenstein‹. In 
                        Kleist-Jahrbuch 2018. Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler, pp.177-195.
                    
                    
                        Xanthos, A., Pante, I., Rochat, Y and Grandjean, M. (2016). Visualising the dynamics of character networks. 
                        Book of Abstracts, DH 2016. Kraków, Poland, pp. 417-419. 
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                This paper explores the development of a prosopographical database for the field of Syriac studies called SPEAR: Syriac Persons, Event, and Relations. Syriac is a dialect of Aramaic used in the Near East and South and Central Asia between the 3rd and 8th centuries and continues to be used liturgically by Christians in the Middle East and India as well as expatriate communities in Europe and North America. This project employs a factoid-based approach to prosopography. Where most factoid-based prosopographies organize data in a relational database, SPEAR encodes prosopographical data from primary source texts in Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) XML using a customized schema designed to facilitate linking this propopographical data to other linked data resources and for serialization into RDF (Resource Description Framework). The 
                    Srophé Application employing eXist DB ingests the TEI documents and allows for visualization and querying of data.
                
            
            
                From text to factoids
                SPEAR has looked for inspiration to the Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (
                    PASE) and other factoid prosopographies coming out of the Department of Digital Humanities at King’s College London. Where traditional print prosopographies distill short narrative summaries of known information about historical individuals, factoid-based prosopographies collect and tag discrete pieces of information asserted in primary source texts (Bradley and Short, 2005; Tinti, 2007). The result is a text-based persons database. Encoders work text-by-text to encode relevant prosopographical material that can be sourced to that text such as name variants, genders, occupations, physical characteristics, personal relationships, and historical events. Each factoid is encoded in a unique &lt;div&gt; element with a TEI customization to add a @uri attribute, thus assigning a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to each factoid &lt;div&gt;. Every factoid also includes one or more &lt;bibl&gt; elements pointing to a Syriaca.org bibliography URI for a specific edition of the work. TEI encoding provides an XML structure and the shared semantic content of elements and attributes.
                
                
                    
                
                Sample SPEAR factoid
            
            
                Linked open data framework
                The SPEAR data model integrate the TEI encoding of prosopographical data with the Linked Open Data (LOD) framework of Syriaca.org. Syriaca.org provides URIs and disambiguating information for entities in the field of Syriac studies: 
                    persons, 
                    places, 
                    works, and 
                    bibliography. This system of URIs facilitates the production of a data graph out of the discrete pieces of prosopographical data contained in each factoid; the data about a particular person, the references to a particular location, or the persons with a particular occupation. SPEAR uses the relationship 
                    ontology produced by Standard for Networking Ancient Prosopographies (
                    SNAP) when possible. Modern ontologies generally do not accommodate important ancient social relationships, such as those constituted by slaveholding. Employing SNAP relationships enables SPEAR to encode the relationships present in the source base according to a standard used by related projects likely to be interested in the data produced by SPEAR.
                
                Transforming personal information gleaned from ancient textual historical sources into machine-readable and queryable data has required the development of a robust controlled vocabulary for systematically describing personal information and events. Out of a desire to use a vocabulary familiar to scholars in the field, SPEAR modified and expanded the keyword list used by the Comprehensive Bibliography on Syriac Christianity (
                    CBSC), a list that has evolved over almost fifty years to describe scholarly work in the field of Syriac studies (Simpson and Brown, 2013). Though in an early stage of development, Syriaca.org has encoded the 
                    Syriac Taxonomy in TEI, assigned URIs to each term, and provided minimal hierarchical structuring. This rich encoding and RDF serialization will facilitate faceted browse and search by multiple fields. It will also allow the display of links between individual factoids and scholarly bibliography described with the same controlled vocabulary.
                
            
            
                From factoids to text
                SPEAR’s use of LOD facilitates another important aspect of the project, the ability for users to return to the primary sources from which factoids have been derived. SPEAR bibliographic references use the system of 
                    DTS:URNs developed by the Homer Multitext Project to cite specific portions of a text. A shared URN standard is also employed by the 
                    Digital Syriac Corpus, a partner project offering TEI encoded Syriac texts. Each factoid page containing a URN in the bibliography displays the portion of text corresponding to the reference. The page also includes a link to take users to the full Corpus text as well.
                
                
                    
                
                A factoid viewed in HTML
            
            
                Conclusion
                SPEAR shows how a prosopography project can employ TEI, field-specific scholarly standards, and Linked Open Data to produce a highly structured and semantically rich database that maintains close ties to the texts from which it is derived. The work speaks to recent discussions on the need for TEI to engage more fully with semantic web technology (Ciotti and Tomasi, 2016). Future developments for this project include: encoding data from additional texts, developing the current taxonomy into a structured domain ontology for use by the field of Syriac studies more broadly, exploring different approaches to data visualization, and developing protocols for serializing this data into the RDF standards of SNAP, the Advanced Research Consortium (
                    ARC), and 
                    CIDOC-CRM (Pasin and Bradley, 2015).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bradley, J. and Short, H. (2005). Texts into databases: the Evolving Field of New-style Prosopography. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 20(1): 3–24. 
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, F. and Tomasi, F. (2016). Formal Ontologies, Linked Data, and TEI Semantics. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 9.
                    
                    
                        Pasin, M. and Bradley, J. (2015). Factoid-Based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies: Towards an Integrated Approach. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(1): 86–97. 
                    
                    
                        Simpson, J. and Brown, S. (2013). From XML to RDF in the Orlando Project. 
                        2013 International Conference on Culture and Computing. Kyoto: IEEE, pp. 194–95. 
                    
                    
                        Tinti, F. (2007). The Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England: Facts and Factoids. In Keats-Rohan, K. S. B. (ed), 
                        Prosopography Approaches and Applications: A Handbook. Oxford: Unit for Prosopographical Research, Linacre College, pp. 197–210.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            As cultural historians, should our responsibility be to the people in our historical data set or to our methodology? Is it possible to, as they say, have it both ways, and if so, what do Digital Humanities methods offer us as we seek to responsibly represent political history? In digitizing and digitally remixing a primary source data, should we value data collection consistency or value recovering information that the original methodology could not capture? We plan to report on the data collecting practices of Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada, a Canadian history project.
            As Stan Ruecker and Stéfan Sinclair have argued, the work of the humanities consists of adding value to cultural artifacts through interpretation and analysis (Sinclair et al.), but what is the most sound way to gather together the materials that will permit the creation of this added value? The best practices may lie in our collective past. It has been 10 years since Tom Scheinfeldt posted his pivotal blog post “Sunset for Ideology, Sunrise for Methodology?,” reminding us that that “late 19th and early 20th century scholarship was dominated...by methodological refinement and disciplinary consolidation...Serious scholarship was concerned as much with organizing knowledge as it was with framing knowledge in an ideological construct” (Scheinfeldt). Digital humanities scholars have answered Scheinfeldt’s call: the field has revived the great 19th century work in bibliography, prosopography, chronology, philology and lexicography. We want to move further and respond to Elijah Meeks’ call to expand our explicit discussion of the methods and methodologies we use to collect and organize the data we augment through interpretation and analysis (Meeks).
            The Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada (LGLC) project is comprised of 34,000 records about the people, places, events, and organizations of the gay liberation movement from the formation of the first homophile group at the country’s largest university in 1964 to the start of the AIDS crisis in 1981. The project builds on Donald McLeod’s monographs
                , Lesbian and Gay Liberation In Canada: A Selected Annotated Chronology (1964-1975 and 1976-1981). The base text consists of event records organized by date and then by location, with each summarizing a moment in liberation history. We have augmented the text both through digitization and the addition of data from archival sources and oral history The chronology text was encoded in TEI, to identify (and occasionally disambiguate) events, people, places, and dates. The TEI was then converted via XSLT into Cypher, the language that underpins Neo4j, a popular graph database. In addition to facilitating our own analysis of the data, the database underpins our node-based public history web app at lglc.ca. We are starting the second of the project: direct data augmentation.
            
            The base text that underpins our project is a chronology that was amassed primarily through archival research conducted in the periodical studies tradition. This method left gaps in the data, since periodicals tend to favour those groups newsworthy enough to be covered in the periodical press; wealthy enough to advertise in the periodical press; and situated close enough to the press to benefit from print advertisements. Sensing that there were voices on the margins, racially, socio-economically, and geographically, missing from the periodicals-only collection method, we have devised an experiment to decide on which method will best help us fill these gaps. We know that oral history has fruitfully been used in the field (Nyhan et al.; Chenier), so we have assigned one of three potential methods to three research assistants:
            The first assistant is using library authorities paired with secondary sources to create a prosopography, or collective biography, of the over 3,500 people mentioned in our chronology in order to find statistical norms within the political movement and to map activist relationships. This will help us ascertain where the likely gaps are in our periodicals-only based representation of the political movement.
            The second assistant is continuing with the periodicals and archives-only method, but turning to periodicals that were dedicated to documenting the concerns and activities of groups currently marginalized in our base text; 
            The third assistant is conducting oral testimony interviews to capture events not covered in our chronology (and for the moment is verifying them via secondary print sources).
            In this short-presentation, we report back on the findings of this research into methodological best practice and will demonstrate the affordances of the alpha version of our public history site.  As we are entering the augmentation phase of the project, we are keen to get feedback and best practice recommendations from the ADHO membership. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Chenier, Elise. (2010). Hidden from Historians: Preserving Lesbian Oral History in Canada. 
                        Archivaria, 68.
                    
                    
                        Meeks, Elijah. (2011). Digital Humanities as Thunderdome. 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities, 1(1).
                    
                    
                        Nyhan, Julianne, et al. (2015). Oral History and the Hidden Histories Project: Towards Histories of Computing in the Humanities. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(1): 71–85, 
                        dsh.oxfordjournals.org, doi:10.1093/llc/fqt044.
                    
                    
                        Scheinfeldt, Tom. (2008). Sunset for Ideology, Sunrise for Methodology? 
                        Found History, 13, https://foundhistory.org/2008/03/sunset-for-ideology-sunrise-for-methodology/
                    
                    
                        
                        Sinclair, Stéfan, et al. (2013). Information Visualization for Humanities Scholars. 
                        Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving Anthology, Modern Language Association, https://dlsanthology.mla.hcommons.org/information-visualization-for-humanities-scholars/
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The 
                    
                        Meditationes
                     is the scientific notebook of the mathematician Jacob I Bernoulli (1654–1705), a member of the Bernoulli dynasty from Basel. The notebook consists of 367 pages; more than 90% of the 287 entries deal with issues in mathematics and physics. Parts of the 
                    Meditationes have been published in six volumes over the past decades according to rather varying standards.
                
                Our project will provide a complete edition of the manuscript for the first time, providing facsimiles, transcriptions (from diplomatic to normalized texts), translations, and comments. The edition is part of 
                    
                        Bernoulli-Euler Online
                     (BEOL), a platform for early modern mathematical texts. BEOL makes texts available to historians of science and will provide tools for working with the resources available on the platform.
                
            
            
                Transcription of the Meditationes
                
                    Regions and normalized text
                    The transcription of the 
                        Meditationes is based on the digital facsimiles of the manuscript. For each entry – a Meditatio –, regions are defined on the manuscript page and transcribed individually. Regions are categorized as title regions containing the entry’s number, text regions (mainly philological text), mathematical notation regions (mainly equations), and mathematical figure regions. Regions can be connected by cross references.
                    
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Part of Meditatio 165
                    
                    Figure 1 shows a part of Meditatio 165. Two regions are shown (marked in green). The region at the bottom of the page (M165-07-T) contains a cross reference sign “#” (marked in red) that reoccurs in the region in the page’s margin (M165-08-TN). This means that the text in the margin belongs to a specific place in “M165-07-T”. When presenting the transcriptions, we offer a multi-layer graphical user interface (GUI). The diplomatic layer shows the single regions aligned with their transcriptions. When specifying a region in the GUI, the associated transcription is shown to the user. The next layer shows a text that is easier to read with the margin region directly integrated into the text of region “M165-07-T”. The normalized text reflects the Meditatio’s logical structure: it is a sequence of paragraphs that can span regions and pages. The example below shows the normalized text that combines the transcription of “M165-07-T” and “M165-08-TN” (indicated by curly braces):
                    [...] hoc est, { quia 
                        
                            
                                d
                                d
                                x
                                 
                                 
                                .
                                 
                                d
                                x
                                 
                                :
                                :
                                 
                                d
                                
                                    
                                        y
                                    
                                    
                                        3
                                    
                                
                                 
                                 
                                .
                                 
                                I
                                n
                                t
                                .
                                 
                                d
                                
                                    
                                        y
                                    
                                    
                                        3
                                    
                                
                            
                        , erit [...] proportional‹es› ‹?› } 
                        
                            
                                d
                                d
                                x
                                 
                                 
                                .
                                 
                                d
                                x
                                 
                                :
                                :
                                 
                                d
                                
                                    
                                        y
                                    
                                    
                                        3
                                    
                                
                                 
                                 
                                .
                                 
                                I
                                n
                                t
                                .
                                 
                                d
                                
                                    
                                        y
                                    
                                    
                                        3
                                    
                                
                            
                         &amp; quia etiam [...]
                    
                    Regions are geometrically defined and shown as overlays. The regions can be converted to IIIF image URLs. The International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) defines a URL-based syntax for accessing images, allowing for interoperability among image repositories. (Appleby et al.) With IIIF, regions can be easily viewed as image files, defining their format, resolution, and even rotation. Rotation is useful when text has been added vertically in a margin, as in “M165-08-TN”, which is easier to read when it is rotated 270 degrees clockwise.
                
                
                    Philological and mathematical text
                    The transcription of the Meditationes is based on two markup systems: XML for the philological aspects of the text, and LaTeX for mathematical notation. LaTeX is the input format preferred by the specialists working on the project, and can be automatically converted into MathML if necessary. To represent both the mathematical and philological aspects of the text, LaTeX mathematical notation is embedded in the XML-based transcription.
                        
                             The XML transcriptions can be transformed to TEI/XML by means of XSL transformations.
                         In some cases, the surrounding context has to be taken into account when rendering the LaTeX, e.g., if text is underlined or struck through. This can be achieved by dynamic macro insertion to avoid redundancy in the transcription source files.
                    
                    
                        
                        Figure 2: Title Text of Meditatio 54
                    
                    Figure 2 shows the title text of Meditatio 54. In the manuscript, philological text and mathematical notation are not differentiated: both kinds of text are underlined. The excerpt below shows a part of the transcription source. When transforming the XML to HTML using an XSL transformation, macros are inserted dynamically if needed. In case of “abc”, the macro “\underline{abc}” is inserted dynamically.
                    &lt;hi rend="underline"&gt;In &lt;choice&gt;&lt;abbr&gt;ang&lt;am&gt;.&lt;/am&gt;&lt;/abbr&gt;&lt;expan&gt;ang&lt;ex&gt;ulo&lt;/ex&gt;&lt;/expan&gt;&lt;/choice&gt; &lt;formula notation="tex"&gt;abc&lt;/formula&gt;. ductâ obliquè &lt;lb/&gt;
                    ...
                    &lt;/hi&gt;
                    Philological text can be converted to HTML for rendering in a web browser. The 
                        
                            MathJax
                         library is used to render mathematical notation. MathJax generates HTML and CSS from LaTeX or MathML, and can be instructed to render mathematical notation as underlined or struck through.
                    
                    When using LaTeX macros directly in the source, custom macros are used that are replaced when transforming the XML source code to HTML. This way, the usage of MathJax-specific macros can be avoided, making it possible to use other rendering environments, such as a LaTeX-based typesetting system for print output. We have found 
                        
                            Pandoc
                         to be a useful tool for changing the implementation of a macro. The XML transcription files are preprocessed: for each formula, the LaTeX is passed to Pandoc, which replaces custom macros with the implementation to be used in the production environment.
                        
                            
                                https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#latex-macros
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Translations
                    For each Meditatio, translations in English, German, and French are available. Translations mainly refer to the normalized text, and can be aligned with the regions by their IDs. To avoid redundancy, complex formulae are referenced rather than re-encoded. In some cases, additional macros are needed for language support.
                    &lt;formula notation="tex" id="M151-09-M_1"&gt;
                     \left.
                     \begin{array}{lcr}
                     &amp;amp; &amp;amp; BE \\
                     \language{Trigono}{Dreieck}{triangle}{triangle} &amp;amp; &amp;amp; \frac{4}{3}a \\
                     \language{Quadrato}{Quadrat}{square}{carré} &amp;amp; &amp;amp; a \\
                     \language{Pentagono}{Fünfeck}{pentagon}{pentagone} &amp;amp; &amp;amp; \frac{4}{5}a \\
                     \language{Hexagono}{Sechseck}{hexagon}{hexagone} &amp;amp; &amp;amp; \frac{2}{3}a \\
                     \language{Heptagono}{Siebeneck}{heptagon}{heptagone} &amp;amp; &amp;amp; \frac{4}{7}a \\
                     \end{array} \
                     \right\}
                     \language{ erit }{abschneidet, so wird }{, one has }{, on aura } CE \language{ vel }{ oder }{ or }{ ou } Ce (b)\ =
                     \left\{
                     \begin{array}{r}
                     \frac{1}{3}a \\
                     0 \\
                     \frac{1}{5}a \\
                     \frac{1}{3}a \\
                     \frac{4}{7}a \\
                     \end{array}
                     \right\}
                     &lt;/formula&gt; 
                    The excerpt above shows LaTeX code for a formula referenced from the translation file. Depending on the target language, the macro “\language{...}{...}{...}{...}” has to be replaced with the correct argument. In case of the English translations, the first argument is taken into account, in case of German the second and so forth. This can be accomplished by using Pandoc to preprocess the XML.
                
            
            
                Integration into Bernoulli-Euler Online
                The transcriptions, facsimiles, translations, and comments of the 
                    Meditationes will be imported into 
                    Bernoulli-Euler Online (BEOL), a web-based platform for studying early modern mathematics. The platform already contains correspondence (currently about 2000 letters) relating to members of the Bernoulli dynasty and Leonhard Euler. The material in BEOL has been imported from existing editions, both print and digital. For BEOL, a comprehensive index of persons and bibliographical items had to be created. This index makes it possible to search for persons and bibliographical items in a global manner, overcoming the previous divisions into different parts of the edition. (Schweizer et al., 2017; Alassi et al., 2018) BEOL will serve as a single entry point for historians of science interested in the works of members of the Bernoulli dynasty and Leonhard Euler.
                
                The BEOL platform is based on 
                    Knora, a generic framework for storing, sharing, and working on primary sources and data in the humanities. All operations (reading, creating, changing of data) are performed through calls to the Knora API over HTTP. This API will enable clients to integrate the material available on BEOL into other platforms and vice versa. BEOL contributes to the development of Knora. Project-specific requirements are generalized so they can be implemented as generic components. These components can then be used by projects other than BEOL.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        
                        Alassi, Sepideh, Tobias Schweizer, Martin Mattmüller, Lukas Rosenthaler, and Helmut Harbrecht (2018). ‘A Digital Edition of Leonhard Euler’s Correspondence with Christian Goldbach’. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2018 Conference Abstracts. https://dh2018.adho.org/a-digital-edition-of-leonhard-eulers-correspondence-with-christian-goldbach/.
                    
                    
                        
                        Appleby, Michael, Tom Crane, Robert Sanderson, Jon Stroop, and Simeon Warner ‘IIIF Image Api 2.1.1’. https://iiif.io/api/image/2.1/.
                    
                    
                        
                        Schweizer, Tobias, Sepideh Alassi, Martin Mattmüller, Lukas Rosenthaler, and Helmut Harbrecht (2017). ‘Integrating Historical Scientific Texts into the Bernoulli-Euler Online Platform’. In 
                        Digital Humanities 2017 Conference Abstracts, 585–87. 
                        https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/147/147.pdf.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                
                    Introduction
                
                The COST Action 
                    Distant Reading for European Literary History is a collaborative, interdisciplinary network which aims “to facilitate the creation of a broader, more inclusive and better-grounded account of European literary history and cultural identity” (
                    ). The network consists of European researchers from different disciplines and research fields such as computational linguistics, corpus linguistics, and (digital) literary studies. Currently, over 100 researchers from 30 different countries are working together in the Action. With the present poster, we would like to present our strategy for developing a key output of the project, the corpus which serves as an empirical basis for our project.
                
            
            
                Basic idea of ELTeC
                The 
                    Distant Reading Action aims to “develop the resources and methods necessary to change the way European literary history is written” (“Memorandum of Understanding”). To that end, the Action will create a diachronic, multilingual, medium-sized open access benchmark corpus of novels from 1840-1919, called ELTeC (European Literary Text Collection). A working group dedicated to ‘Scholarly Resources’ is collecting sets of 100 novels in at least 10 European languages. These novels are encoded according to the recommendations of the TEI (Text Encoding Initiative; see TEI Consortium 2018 and Burnard 2014) and made freely available via GitHub and Zenodo (see 
                    . The ELTeC repositories will be archived via Zenodo). ELTeC is the basis for work taking place in the 
                    Distant Reading network on evaluating and improving methods and tools supporting text annotation and analysis for Digital Literary Studies. It also provides the materials to work on theoretical concerns and use cases from European literary history also taking place in the 
                    Distant Reading network. Hence, ELTeC is a key activity in the 
                    Distant Reading network.
                
            
            
                Corpus design
                The key challenge regarding the corpus design and annotation schemas for ELTeC is the need to handle the tension between valid and meaningful criteria and an operationalisation of these criteria for texts from many different cultures, a challenge typical of large-scale DH projects. The corpus design is therefore metadata-based by defining a set of parameters instead of relying on literary canons. Therefore, we integrate famous, canonical as well as forgotten, non-canonical novels. We represent the variation of production and aim to maximize the variety within each time period. The corpus design of ELTeC is similar to reference corpora designed to serve as an empirical base for different research approaches. We have put a focus on the composition of the corpus. The corpus will be balanced with regard to parameters which include language, publication date, author gender, length and reprint counts. The corpus also includes ‘smaller’ varieties of a language in order to be able to consider the high variance of the vernacular languages across Europe.
                     Cf. for further details our white papers on “Canonicity and corpus design parameters in the ELTeC context” and “Sampling criteria for the ELTeC”.
                
            
            
                Corpus annotation
                The ELTeC is encoded using TEI XML, customised for Distant Reading methods and tools. “Our main goal has been to identify a small core set of textual features which can be readily (preferably automatically) identified in existing digital transcriptions, or easily and consistently provided by new transcriptions” (Section ‘Principles’ of the white paper “Encoding Guidelines for the ELTeC”). Unlike many Digital Scholarly Editing projects, the intention is not to support a rich representation of the full complexities of an original source, but rather to represent in a consistent and economical way an agreed minimum of the textual features most relevant to Distant Reading practices. We distinguish a basic encoding (level 0), a richer TEI encoding (level 1) and a linguistic encoding (level 2). A single TEI ODD is defined, from which we derive schemas and documentation for each level of annotation.
                     The encoding scheme is formally documented using the TEI ODD system. See further 
                         and 
                        . In 2019, we have started to develop a customization for level 2, which includes linguistic annotation.
                     At level 0, only chapters, headings, and paragraphs are distinguished. At level 1, more semantic encoding is introduced, for example distinguishing the functions of highlighting, such as to mark foreign words or emphasis. Additional markup for corrections, footnotes and some structural features is also included. Contributors to the ELTeC may choose to submit materials using either level of encoding, depending on what is most appropriate for them.
                
            
            
                Data sources, collaboration and publication
                We integrate already existing textual resources, whether already TEI-encoded or not, e.g. from Project Gutenberg (
                    ), TextGrid (
                    ) or the Cervantes Virtual Library (
                    ). Project members also digitize and encode new texts, especially non-canonical novels, and make them available for research for the first time. As far as possible, ELTeC corpora include a digital edition of the first edition of each novel.
                
                Collaborative corpus creation, documentation and publication of ELTeC is happening on our GitHub organisation (COST-ELTeC; see: 
                    ), where each language collection is stored in a single repository with all available encoding levels. For each language, a specific group of researchers is responsible for selecting and annotating the novels. However, as we are working on an open platform, the remaining members of the project as well as other colleagues are welcome to review and improve the text selection and annotation.
                
            
            
                Acknowledgements
                
                    Distant Reading 
                    for European Literary History (CA16204) is a COST Action funded by the COST Association through the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the EU.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Burnard, L. 
                        What is the Text Encoding Initiative? How to add intelligent markup to digital resources. Marseille: Open Edition Press, 2018.
                    
                    
                        “Canonicity and corpus design parameters in the ELTeC context”. Working paper, last updated Sept. 2018. 
                        
                    
                    
                        “Encoding Guidelines for the ELTeC”. Draft. 
                        
                    
                    
                        “Memorandum of Understanding for the implementation of the COST Action 
                        Distant Reading for European Literary History (DISTANT-READING) CA16204”. Brussels, COST Association. June 2017. 
                        
                    
                    
                        “Sampling criteria for the ELTeC”. Discussion paper. January 2018. 
                        
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (eds.) 2018. 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.4.0. TEI Consortium. 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            The discipline of genetic criticism regards text as a dynamic rather than static object and tries to “put the text back into motion, opening it to the moving constellations that presided its genesis” (Contat et al. 1996, 2). Consequently, such a dynamic perspective implies an equally dynamic model of representation. 
            A traditional danger of manuscript research is that the researcher gets lost in the details of the archival material. Over the last decades, numerous editing projects explored the potential to capture text-genetic processes digitally. Most of these digital editions and archives, such as WoolfOnline, the Jane Austen Fiction Manuscripts, the Shelley-Godwin Archive, present the textual genesis in two ways. First by arranging the extant source documents in a stemmatologically established order, giving the reader an insight into the chronological document succession from a first note or draft to a first edition. Secondly, the individual documents are transcribed and critically annotated in rich detail, giving the user an insight into what each extant version looked like on paper. In addition to these features, some editions also integrate extra tools, such as a writer’s correspondence or an author’s own reading in the form of a digital or virtually reconstructed library. 
            What all these projects have in common is a hierarchical data model. Documents are stored in collections (folders and subfolders) which could well be visualized as directed rooted tree-graphs. In such a tree the edition as the overarching structure represents the root element, (sub-)collections represent its child elements and the individual documents are descendants. Below the document level, the tree continues in strictly hierarchical TEI encodings that lead us down to the smallest annotated unit of a document – a phrase, a word, sometimes a letter – nested in XML brackets. Up to this point, in terms of data structures, the edition can be visualized as a single coherent tree structure. There are three common practices to describe the textual genesis against the background of this hierarchical representation of the material.
            
                
                    Stemmatological metadata describe relationships that break this strict tree structure. The documents are arranged in a chronological sequence that might well vary from the documents’ physical order in the collections as represented by the tree. Yet, these genetic relationships always link elements on the same level of the tree’s hierarchy – the document level. They neither allow to 
                    zoom in on deeper levels of the tree nor to derive information on how text units on these finer levels of granularity are genetically interconnected. 
                
                
                    Annotating the textual genesis within individual documents, e.g. with text-genetic TEI encodings (TEI Consortium 2011 §11), allows us to link nodes of the tree (here XML elements) across the hierarchical tree structure. Additions, deletions and substitutions are assigned to groups (tei:change elements) which are put into sequences (ordered and unordered tei:listChange elements) in the metadata. Just like the stemmatological metadata, these structures represent genetic paths that break the hierarchy, yet in this case they do not allow us to 
                    zoom out along the tree or the stemmatological document relations. We cannot draw conclusions about how the sequential making of an individual version is connected to the textual genesis across multiple versions. 
                
                
                    Collation software such as CollateX (Dekker and Middell 2011) and the upcoming HyperCollate (Bleeker et al. 2018) detects the textual variance between different text versions and models these differences in so-called variantGraphs. Collation software allows us to capture paths that represent the textual variance between the documents on the granularity level of the token – 
                    across the tree hierarchy of an XML encoding. Without stipulating any genetic interpretation, these graphs raise questions such as “how was a sentence/phrase altered syntactically (semantically) between draft A and draft B?”. The graph does not give explicit answers. Instead, it neutrally visualizes the variant and invariant text tokens between a selection of versions. Collation is limited to capturing connections between the documents, yet not on the hierarchical level of the document, but on the level of the token, which may well be smaller than any TEI annotation (on the level of XML text nodes). Again, this approach does not allow us to 
                    zoom out. We cannot derive information from the stemmatological order (1), nor from the witness-specific genesis (2).
                
            
            In all three cases, additional graph-structures are annotated across to the underlying hierarchical tree, which is itself a graph. Each one of these structures provides an alternative navigation for a particular level or subtree of the work and thus each of these structures represents a different aspect of the work’s textual genesis. Only very few projects, such as the Faust Edition and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project, incorporate all three structures and even those projects have not managed to merge them in a way that allows the user to seamlessly navigate over all genetic information. 
            What is missing is a comprehensive model that allows to navigate seamlessly between the different types of genetic paths, to zoom in and out on writing processes (between the 
                macrogenetic and 
                microgenetic levels) and to connect external source texts to their use in the drafts (linking ‘
                exogenesis’ and ‘
                endogenesis’). Ideally, we should be able to implement this model in an easily accessible and extensible research environment, allowing the scholar to capture, organize, visualize and analyze genetic paths of all described types.
            
            Building on the system of genetic paths as developed in HyperLearn (D’Iorio 2003, Barbera 2005) the proposed paper presents a digital way of modelling text-genetic relationships in an eXist-db based research environment for genetic criticism, henceforth referred to as a Manuscript Web (MW). Such an MW in the form of a customizable web application allows textual scholars to organize their document-collections consisting of facsimiles, TEI transcripts and bibliographical metadata, in four different module types: (1) virtual libraries, (2) collections of notes, (3) drafts and (4) published editions. A Manuscript Web also starts from a project tree, but unlike the projects described above it enables users not only to capture genetic paths across the given tree hierarchy, but to search the respective modules to which they belong and to store relationships (source-to-target vectors) between all identifiable elements/hierarchical levels of the project tree (that is modules, collection-folders, document-entities, XML elements and text nodes). The model thus enables users 
                to zoom in and out between 
                macro- and micro-genetic levels, as well as between 
                exo- and endogenesis.
            
            For example, to link endo- with exogenesis, a scholar may connect an entire section of a TEI-encoded notebook to an identified source in the author’s virtual library to indicate that this notebook section contains reading notes from the related source. On a microgenetic level, individual notes from this section may be linked to paragraphs, phrases or interlinear additions in a manuscript draft. On a ‘higher’ level in the hierarchy level (macrogenesis), this draft may be linked to the following draft in the stemmatological sequence. Such one-to-one relations can be captured individually and regardless of the granularity level. Where the source- and target-references of independent relations overlap, they form paths and genetic graphs across the corpus. Since all these graphs refer to elements of the underlying project tree, this tree provides a navigational backbone that allows the user to zoom in and out on the genetic information. From any document within the environment the user can access all genetically related entities to answer questions such as “what does this particular paragraph look like in the next draft?” or “which literary sources inspired this paragraph?”.
            The aim of the proposed model is to enable users to connect what is usually merely juxtaposed. Most digital archives and scholarly editions offer the traces of a work’s genesis as digitized items, side by side. What this paper proposes is a way to enable not only scholarly editors, but also users to discover and record the connections between these textual traces. The ability to record these connections facilitates a more comprehensive understanding of a work’s genesis.
            “Put[ting] the text back into motion,” as Contat et al. described it (1996, 2), implies a dynamic model that allows users to turn the different genetic traces or “stills” – so to speak – into the “motion picture” of the genesis. With the proposed model, zooming in on the smallest level of textual change no longer entails the danger of getting lost in the labyrinth of the digital archive thanks to the possibility to zoom out again at every stage in the enquiry and see the bigger picture. 
            Finally, the paper shows how this dynamic model facilitates not only research into one single work’s genesis, but also comparative genetic criticism of several authors’ works. Up till now, comparative studies have been relatively rare in the field of genetic criticism, because every author’s writing method is characterized by idiosyncrasies. By modelling the text-genetic data in such a way that they become more comparable, the proposed model will contribute to the development of comparative genetic criticism.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Barbera, M. (2005). The HyperLearning project: Towards a distributed and semantically structured e-research and e-learning platform, Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21.1: 77-82.
                    
                    
                        Bleeker, E., Buitendijk, B., Dekker, R. H. and Kulsdom, A. (2018). TMI? Visualisation as Research Instrument for Computational Philology, DH Benelux Conference Abstract, 
                        http://2018.dhbenelux.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2018/05/revised-abstract-bleeker-etal.pdf (accessed 23 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Contat, M., Hollier, D. and Neefs, J. (1996). Editors' Preface, Yale French Studies 89, 1-5.
                    
                    
                        Dekker, R. H., and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-supported collation with CollateX: managing textual variance in an environment with varying requirements, Supporting Digital Humanities, 2011: 17-18.
                    
                    
                        D’Iorio, P. (2003). Cognitive Models of HyperNietzsche: Dynamic Ontology and Hyper-Learning, Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, 5: 179-184.
                    
                    
                        Hoenen, A., and Brüning, G. (2018). Zur Stemmatologie neuerer Überlieferungen. In 
                        
                            DARIAH-DE Working Papers
                         (forthcoming).
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium, eds. (2011). 
                        
                            TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                         P5v2.0, 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/2.0.0/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/Guidelines.pdf (accessed 23 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Van Hulle, Dirk (2016). Modelling a Digital Scholarly Edition for Genetic Criticism: A Rapprochement, Variants, 12-13: 34-56.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The digital humanities (DH) community has reached an inflection point. Conceptual issues related to DH are now routinely discussed, and a significant body of literature about DH tools and methods exists, but very little is said about the challenges of maintaining the projects and tools that result from DH activity. The truth is that many teams are struggling with decades of accumulated technical debt, and the natural process of technological entropy. Lack of openness about the problems of sustaining and, when appropriate, archiving DH projects is natural: our problems expose weaknesses at the heart of our community, make us feel insecure when comparing ourselves to other teams, prompt us to question our relationship with funding agencies, and raise questions about the sustainability of our core activities. But we need to discuss the issues so we can increase our understanding, share best practices, and advocate for change. Long-term technical maintenance can be daunting, but good planning, carefully considered processes, transparent and healthy relationships with administrators and IT departments, and some common sense can resolve most issues.
                Our panel brings together four DH software engineering teams and initiatives, based in the United Kingdom, United States, and Canada, with responsibility for over 350 projects built over two decades. The panel aims to ‘clear the air’, by openly discussing the problems we face and detailing the security, maintenance, archiving, and sustainability solutions we have put in place to resolve them. The wide range of issues across the international DH community mean that we can only initiate a conversation, but we hope our commitment to full disclosure, coupled with a degree of geographical breadth, will help set the tone for a new era of collaboration and information sharing. Our long-term goal is to foster a culture of sustainability across the DH community, and respect for those engaged in the essential work of maintenance and repair.
                Our four panelists will describe the work of two DH centres and two archiving and sustainability projects, detailing the wide range of approaches they have adopted to manage technical but also operational (human resources, administrative) and financial complexities. Common themes are apparent across the four teams, related to forward planning and consideration of application and data life-cycle management, but differences exist too. Sometimes differences relate to technical philosophy (a decision to support heterogenous technologies, or a decision to focus on a more defined toolset); sometimes differences relate to the exigencies of local funding and operational realities (permanent versus fixed-term HR contracts, availability of internal or external maintenance funding). In all cases, however, our technical development is informed by a firm belief – resulting from hard experience – that maintenance and repair are integral to the art of making. Our panel members believe the next phase in the evolution of DH will require greater attention to the practical, epistemological, and methodological imperatives of maintenance and repair.
            
            
                Paper One: We Need to Maintain 100 Projects, Without Funding? Really? A Pragmatic Approach to Archiving and Maintenance
                King’s Digital Lab (KDL) was launched in November 2015. It was established to improve Digital Humanities (DH) software engineering process and quality, and ensure digital research is scalable and sustainable. It works in partnership with a DH department, and other departments across the Faculty of Arts &amp; Humanities at King’s College London, and comprises a Director, Project Manager, Systems Manager, and a team of 10 analysts, UI/UX designers, and engineers. The team inherited ~100 projects when it was established, built using heterogeneous technologies over two decades. The vast majority of those projects had no funding for maintenance and were running outdated operating systems and software as a result. Several had experienced minor hacks, and the infrastructure they used was approaching end of life. The Lab ‘estate’, although representing a significant corpus of high-quality DH research attracting ~250,000 unique users per year, constituted significant risk to DH at our university, and security risk to the wider university network.
                Over the last three years the team have undertaken a full audit of its projects and integrated archiving, sustainability, and research data management to its Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC). An internal process triaged the projects according to security risk, scholarly value, cultural and cultural heritage value, ‘brand’ value, and maintenance cost. Principal Investigators (PIs) were contacted and given a range of options to consider, from archiving their site to upgrading it and placing it under a Service Level Agreement (SLA), usually of between 2 and 5 years. Approximately 50 sites (most of which were of relatively low scholarly value, or merely proof of concept quality) were quickly archived, with the remainder being upgraded and moved to SLAs progressively over 18 months. A major infrastructure upgrade was implemented over the same period, providing 50TB of disk space, ~1TB RAM, and enterprise backup systems capable of supporting significant growth. The process of discussing projects with PIs and finding funding to upgrade and maintain projects was often difficult. The Faculty supported every project led by one of their staff members, and offered cost-recovery rates to all other projects, but many PIs had difficulty reconciling themselves to the need for ongoing maintenance and support or found it difficult to gain support from their administrators (even at cost-recovery level).
                At the time of writing all but a handful of projects have been resolved, but the process highlighted significant gaps in understanding across the DH community along with policy issues related to funding of DH projects. Archiving and sustainability issues have been reduced to an acceptable level in the Lab, but risks remain (as they do for any similar digital team), and ongoing management will be required. Archiving and sustainability are now integral to the Lab’s software engineering process, from requirements elicitation during concept development to archiving or ongoing maintenance in the post-funding period. The Lab’s processes are aligned, in turn, to the University’s Research Data Management (RDM) process and an effort is being made to align technical design with the national web archive.
            
            
                Paper Two: "Running God Knows How Many Versions of PHP": The Challenges of Successfully Sustaining Digital Projects
                In 2019, the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media is celebrating its 25th year, including a long legacy of both creating and sustaining digital history projects. Founded on the principle of democratizing history, RRCHNM is committed to creating open-source software and sustainable digital projects; millions of people use center-designed software such as Zotero, Omeka, and Tropy, while tens of millions visit the center's various project websites every year. Nor is this engagement limited to the center's most recent accomplishments; one of the center's older projects, the twenty-year-old History Matters, is still receiving over three million website hits annually.
                While this widespread and continuous engagement with center software and websites is a testament to the intellectual value of the center's digital scholarship, it also intensifies the sustainability pressure inherent in all digital projects. The center's earliest projects involved bespoke code which requires considerable labor either to maintain or to later transition to a content management system, e.g. Omeka, which was built in part to streamline the creation and management of the center's digital projects. Even projects running on a CMS still require upkeep, as new versions of the system or its components are released; external links break when websites restructure or eliminate content; and older technologies such as Adobe Flash are deprecated. Furthermore, the servers of which these projects live eventually reach the end of their hardware's lifespans and the projects must be migrated to new servers to survive.
                These technological challenges can be further exacerbated by logistical conditions that arise in a environment where collaborations happen across departments and institutions, projects have temporally limited funding support, and project team members are either soft-funded staff positions or graduate students who are—usually, though not always—transient members of an institution. While transdisciplinary and cross-institutional collaboration, grant funding, and graduate student involvement are generally seen as positive aspects of the digital humanities as a field, they lead to logistical challenges with respect to sustainability. The decentralization of knowledge across institutions and teams, as well as personnel discontinuity over time, leads to challenges in documenting and maintaining contextual knowledge around projects as they age, often requiring personnel to "reinvent the wheel" during the already challenging and un(der)funded process of technologically updating old projects.
                Despite these challenges, RRCHNM has sustained its digital projects over the course of its existence and—thanks to the institutional support it receives from its associated department and college, as well as the leadership of its previous and current directors—is well positioned to continue sustaining its digital projects for the foreseeable future. This paper will discuss both the institutional conditions that enable RRCHNM to sustain its digital projects as well as the technical and logistical challenges that it must overcome when continuously sustaining a wide variety of digital projects created by hundreds of people over the course of two and a half decades.
            
            
                Paper Three: Ruthless Principles for Digital Longevity
                
                    Project Endings is a SSHRC funded collaboration which aims to provide practical solutions to issues attendant on ending a project and archiving the digital products of research, including not only data but also interactive applications and web-based publications. Endings is a collaboration between the Humanities Faculty and the Library at the University of Victoria, and endeavours to align the aims of faculty researchers producing projects and the archivists who will eventually be responsible for curating their work.
                
                Using both practice-based methods and scholarly research, Endings is already producing recommended approaches (Holmes 2017; Arneil &amp; Holmes 2017; Holmes &amp; Takeda 2018) and diagnostic tools (Holmes &amp; Takeda 2017) that will assist scholars in ensuring that their project will be completed, archivable, functional, and available well in to the future.
                The project has conducted a survey with 128 project leaders, and conducted 28 follow-up interviews to gain insight in to the practical issues faced by DH scholars. Simultaneously it has been actively working on 'ending' several existing in-house projects (The Diary of Robert Graves, Le mariage sous L'Ancien Régime, The Map of Early Modern London, and a number of others) using the a set of principles developed from our work. These principles focus on reducing technological overhead and applying software development best practices to the planning and construction of a project’s digital outputs. Our methodology is based on paring back the range of technologies used to the absolute minimum (HTML, CSS and JavaScript), and building completely static web materials with no dependence on any server-side technologies.
                The Endings project divides digital projects into five primary components: data, products, processing, documentation, and release management. We aim at longevity primarily for data and products, but believe that this goal requires careful attention to processing, documentation and release management. We are developing preservation principles for of these factors, and this presentation will discuss key components of the principles along with their justification and practicality.
                Many of these principles are uncontroversial. For instance, principle 1.1, “Data is stored only in formats which conform to open standards and which are amenable to processing (TEI XML, GML, ODF, TXT)” would not be surprising to anyone. Others are more demanding and are likely to meet strong resistance from some members of a project team; programmers may be unsettled by the demand that there be “no dependence on external libraries: no JQuery, no AngularJS, no Bootstrap,” or puzzled by the requirement that “every page contains all the components it needs, so that it will function without the rest of the site if necessary, even though this means duplicating information across the site.” This “ruthless” set of maxims can make rapid development and deployment more difficult, but the principle of “hard now, easy later” is the only real guarantee of digital longevity for projects which, while they may be curated, are never likely to be actively maintained over the long term.
            
            
                Paper Four: Balancing Innovation &amp; Persistence in Digital Scholarly Publications
                In the past few years, several university presses have been awarded funding by the Andrew W. Mellow Foundation to meet the needs of digital humanists and social scientists who are pushing the bounds of traditional print publishing practices and seeking to output their arguments in a form that matches their methodologies. These multimodal, multilinear, open-access, web-based publications follow a parallel editorial and production workflow as traditional scholarly monographs, and as peer-reviewed scholarly works, carry the same weight in consideration of tenure and promotion for the scholars who create them. Stanford University Press is pushing farther than others by allowing authors to choose their own web-based platforms or builds rather than offering ones designed in-house. This openness introduces challenges for preservation and persistence of the publication. But rather than limit the potential for innovative expression, SUP is investing in exploring possibilities in digital preservation for complex interactive works.
                This program has seen the publication of four unique projects to date that could not possibly be rendered as print books but whose place in the scholarly record is just as important to their fields of study. It is important then that they can endure the specific threats that web-based digital content faces. The publisher needs to mitigate the potential fragility of these formats by keeping a handle on the complexity, but they must also support the innovative and courageous strides scholars are making as they rightly challenge the politics and limitations of traditional print publishing model. Essentially, they must balance innovation with durability.
                To intercept the dangers to persistence introduced in digital formats, SUP implemented a careful multi-phase set of guidelines for preservation and archiving. These start with pre-production technical recommendations that encourage but do not force authors to choose platforms and design elements that are durable and archivable. They also initiate a three-pronged preservation strategy during production and immediately after initial publication that can ensure viable access to and experience of the work once inevitable obsolescence creeps in to the live hosted product. These include documentation and digital repository deposit, web archiving, and emulation.
                While devoting resources not usually deployed in a university press context, SUP is also talking to authors before, during, and after the development and publication of their work and learning that expectations for their works’ longevity vary significantly. While most acknowledge and even embrace the risks and ephemerality of the digital, they also put trust in the Press to ensure the kind of persistence associated with traditional publications. Some expect to share the responsibility of persistence and others would be satisfied with a time stamp that covers academic milestones related to tenure and publishing expectations. A candid dialogue about existing and developing preservation practices in such programs will hopefully both assure scholars that publishers are aggressively pursuing preservation as part of the responsibility of publication, and also invite DH authors to share their expectations and concerns with the challenges digital presentation formats present.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arneil, S. and Holmes, M. (2017). Archiving form and function: preserving a 2003 digital project. Paper presented at the DPASSH Conference 2017: Digital Preservation for Social Sciences and Humanities, Brighton.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, A., Nyhan, J. and Moulin, C. (2013). ESF Science Policy briefing on research infrastructures in the digital humanities: landscapes, ecosystems and cultures
                        . Lexicon Philosophicum, 1: 277–87.
                    
                    
                        Hodder, I. (2014). The Entanglements of Humans and Things: A Long-Term View. New 
                        Literary History, 45(1): 19–36.
                    
                    
                        Holmes, M. and Takeda, J. (2017). Beyond Validation: Using Programmed Diagnostics to Learn About, Monitor, and Successfully Complete Your DH Project. Paper presented at the Digital Humanities 2017, Montreal https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/140/140.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Holmes, M. and Takeda, J. (2018). Why do I need four search engines? Paper presented at the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities Conference, Tokyo https://conf2018.jadh.org/files/Proceedings_JADH2018.pdf#page=58.
                    
                    
                        Holmes, M. (2017). Selecting Technologies for Long-Term Survival. Paper presented at the SHARP Conference 2017: Technologies of the Book, Victoria, BC https://github.com/projectEndings/Endings/raw/master/presentations/SHARP_2017/mdh_sharp_2017.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Maxwell, J. W., Bordini, A. and Shamash, K. (2017). Reassembling Scholarly Communications: An Evaluation of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation’s Monograph Initiative (Final Report, May 2016). 
                        The Journal of Electronic Publishing, 20(1) doi:10.3998/3336451.0020.101. http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.3336451.0020.101 (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Jackson, S. J. (2014). Rethinking Repair. In Gillespie, T., Boczkowski, P. J. and Foot, K. A. (eds), 
                        Media Technologies. The MIT Press, pp. 221–40.
                    
                    
                        King’s Digital Lab (2019). KDL’s pragmatic approach to managing 100 Digital Humanities projects, and more... King’s Digital Lab https://www.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/our-work/archiving-sustainability/ (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Mulliken, J. (2018). 3 Approaches to the Preservation of Interactive Scholarly Works. SupDigital http://blog.supdigital.org/3-approaches-to-the-preservation-of-interactive-scholarly-works/ (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Nicholson, C. (2018). Keeping the lights on. 
                        Research Europe: 13.
                    
                    
                        Nowviskie, B. (2015). Digital Humanities in the Anthropocene. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(suppl_1): i4–15 doi:10.1093/llc/fqv015.
                    
                    
                        Rusbridge, C. (2007). Arts and Humanities Data Service decision. 
                        Digital Curation Centre http://www.dcc.ac.uk/news/arts-and-humanities-data-service-decision (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Russell, A. and Vinsel, L. (2016). Hail the Maintainers. 
                        Aeon https://aeon.co/essays/innovation-is-overvalued-maintenance-often-matters-more (accessed 9 June 2017).
                    
                    
                        Smithies, J., Westling, C., Sichani, A.-M., Mellen, P. and Ciula, A. (2019). Managing 100 Digital Humanities Projects: Digital Scholarship &amp; Archiving in King’s Digital Lab. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 12(4).
                    
                    
                        Smithies, J. (2017). 
                        The Digital Humanities and the Digital Modern. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan https://www.palgrave.com/gb/book/9781137499431.
                    
                    
                        Smithies, J., Sichani, A.-M. and Westling, C. (2017). Preserving 30 years of Digital Humanities Work: The Experience of King’s College London Digital Lab. Paper presented at the DPASSH Conference 2017: Digital Preservation for Social Sciences and Humanities, Brighton. 
                    
                    
                        Smithies, J. (2019). The Continuum Approach to Career Development: Research Software Careers in King’s Digital Lab. 
                        King’s Digital Lab https://www.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/blog/rse-career-development/ (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Straumsheim, C. (2015). Researchers, university press directors emboldened by Mellon foundation interest in academic publishing. 
                        Inside Higher Ed https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/02/25/researchers-university-press-directors-emboldened-mellon-foundation-interest (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Waters, D. J. (2016). Monograph Publishing in the Digital Age. 
                        The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation https://mellon.org/resources/shared-experiences-blog/monograph-publishing-digital-age/ (accessed 26 April 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                &lt;DH-Heading1&gt;1. Introduction&lt;/ 
                DH-Heading1&gt;
            
            This paper presents a project to encode and analyze ancient Greek music.
            Notated music of Ancient Greece survives only in about 40, often quite fragmentary, sources spanning a chronological range of 500-600 years. Only one song exists that can be considered complete. The information preserved in these documents, however, can be quite rich. It informs us about lyric, pitch, rhythm, meter, section breaks, dynamics, and instrumentation. Documents containing notated ancient Greek music survive primarily in the form of papyrus fragments. A smaller but significant number appears in inscriptions, while a limited amount of the music of Hadrian's court musician, Mesomedes of Crete, survives in a manuscript tradition. Due to the accidents of survival, the majority of these compositions date from the Roman period, although a significant number of Classical and Hellenistic fragments, such as a fragment from the Orestes of Euripides, survives as well. They range geographically from Greece to Anatolia to Egypt, and include tragedies, paeans, hymns, comedies, instrumental works, theoretical exercises, and one early Christian hymn. Huge challenges for the study of this corpus are its fragmentary nature and its geographical, chronological, and topical extent.
            The goal of this project is to implement a design permitting digital study of this corpus, and to provide a framework for research and pedagogy. The digital corpus must be able to encode the same information across a variety of source types but also take the different aspects of the documents' histories into account so that understanding can be made in context.
            2. The Digital Corpus
            Our digital editions should capture the semantics of ancient Greek musical documents. They should support computational analysis and presentation directly from the information recorded in the ancient documents. To do this, they must address two fundamental challenges: recording ancient Greek musical notation, and coordinating musical notation, lyrics, and other analytical data sets.
            It is not possible to record ancient Greek musical notation using existing systems for the digital encoding of music such as MusicXML and the Music Encoding Initiative (MEI). The Music Encoding Initiative (https://music-encoding.org/), for example, is excellently suited to encoding modern western music notation. Its XML scheme can be extended with modules for particular kinds of notation. However, MEI assumes that music can be encoded in terms of pitches as notated in familiar staffed systems. The limits of this assumption are most evident in MEI's guidelines for encoding neumes, which are forced to avoid encoding unstaffed neumes entirely. For this reason, Waller et al. ("Encoding the Oldest Western Music," https://dh2018.adho.org/en/encoding-the-oldest-western-music/) developed the Virgapes notation for encoding medieval plainchant, which they presented at DH2018.
            We need instead an encoding scheme that expresses the semantics of ancient Greek documents. The Unicode block for Ancient Greek Musical Notation, for example, does not satisfy this requirement, since its codepoints focus on graphemes rather than sememes, with the result that visually identical but semantically distinct symbols are encoded to a single codepoint. We therefore define an original encoding establishing a one-to-one correspondence between the symbols used in Greek musical texts and their digital encoding.
            Most surviving Greek musical documents are vocal. Our editions of the musical notation must therefore be coordinated with editions of the lyrics. We adopt the model mentioned above, by Waller et al. Musical notation and lyrics are transcribed in separate TEI XML documents aligned by canonical citation using Canonical Text Services (CTS) URNs.
            We extend the model of Waller et al. by adding further editions. Any aspect of analysis which is not able to be easily captured in an existing edition is simply captured in an aligned edition. For example, Greek texts had a pitch accent that is explicitly written in modern printed editions, and for a source document can be reconstructed by the editor. Similarly, meter can be inferred from the length of syllables in the text. Both accent and meter are recorded in separate documents and aligned by CTS URN with the diplomatic editions of the lyrics.
            3. Systematic Data Extraction, Computational Analysis, and Presentation
            Along with its digital editions, the project includes a suite of programs to extract and analyze data from the editions. This endeavor operates by the principle that the corpus and the manipulation of the data therein are to be entirely separate.
            Data within the corpus can be systematically extracted for computational analysis or presentation. Since all editions of a single document are aligned, correlated patterns in different types of editions can be identified and analyzed. For example, accent information and pitch information can be compared, to study the known phenomenon in ancient Greek music by which melodic pattern tends to correlate with accent. Instances of agreement and of conflict can be separately analyzed in relation to the other editions to achieve an understanding of how and why agreement or conflict might occur.
            For presentation, for example, composite information from the aligned editions can be exported as a text file which can then be read by a custom-coded application created with the music program Max MSP. This aural analysis provides the choice to realize the music according to a variety of tuning systems championed by a variety of competing ancient theories, such as those of Aristoxenus and Ptolemy, for which the program is specially equipped.
            4. Open Source
            All material from the project will be available in a public repository on Github. New editions and code from contributors can expand the project, creating an ongoing initiative to advance the study of this topic.
            This framework's explicit modeling and coordination of a large and complex corpus of information underscores the theme of "Complexities." The automated generation of aural analysis with Max MSP takes a novel approach of audio synthesis by systematic data extraction, and introduces a range of options for presentation and teaching.
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                Aligning different versions of the same work is both a computational and a philological challenge. In particular, the collation of witnesses of an ancient or medieval text poses specific difficulties due to the coexistence of macro-structural and localised variants, including a large number of formal variants.
                We present an experimental computer-assisted workflow for aligning several witnesses and classifyingvariants. Formal and substantive variants are examples of categories especially relevant for languages which are unstable in their graphic system, as are medieval languages. The case studies are in Old French, and, marginally, Old Spanish. 
                The distinction between formal and substantive variants enables to treat them separately. Stemmatology, for instance, will be mostly interested in the former (even if this has been challenged in Andrews, 2016), while, for linguistic analysis the latter are needed. In automatic collation, based on full transcription of the texts to be compared, the formal variation is generally preserved, but temporarily nullified by means of normalisation or fuzzy match: this enables an accurate alignment of the texts and at the same time the preservation of the original forms.
            
            
                How to handle variation
                Medieval texts, especially in vernacular, often exhibit important variation. At the phrases or words levels, syntactic or graphic variations account for diachronic and diatopic differences, varying scribal practices and the plurality of graphematic standards. This makes it difficult to align sequences between texts, when they have very few letters in common, e.g., 
                    Cait del fuere | 
                    Chiet dou fuerre | 
                    Kiet du feurre (‘[The sword] falls of the scabbard’).
                
                Difficulties due to spelling or flexional variation only add up to already existing variations in word order or substance. Consider the following example taken from Chrétien de Troye's 
                    Chevalier au lion (Meyer, 2006, v. 3701):
                
                
                    H Li frans li dolz ou ert il donques
                
                
                    P Li frans li dous ou estoit donques
                
                
                    V Li franz li doz ou ert il donques
                
                
                    F Li frans li dols ou ert il donques
                
                
                    G Li biaux li preuz ou estoit donques
                
                
                    A Li preus li frans u est il donques
                
                
                    S Li preus li frans u ert il donques
                
                
                    R Li frans li dols u ert il donques
                
                
                    M Li frans li preus ou est il donques
                
                Spelling (e.g., 
                    dolz, 
                    dous, 
                    doz, 
                    dols) and flexional variants (
                    est, 
                    ert, 
                    estoit) go along with substitutions (
                    dous | 
                    preus or 
                    biaux | 
                    frans), additions/deletions (
                    il), or permutations (
                    preuz). In such a case, clearing out spelling and flexional variation might help in resolving the other difficulties. 
                
                This paper offers a new approach to the normalisation task made possible by the developments in the field of NLP and the resources now available for medieval languages, following the steps described in fig. 1.
                
                    
                        
                        Processing workflow
                    
                
                The initial step is the acquisition of the text, from the digital image, done by a combination of manual transcription (for producing ground truth), automated handwritten text recognition, and post-correction. The raw text thus obtained is then structured and stored in an XML/TEI based format. All these tasks are performed before the normalisation step, here represented by lemmatization and linguistic annotation, done with the help of neural network-based taggers/lemmatizers.
                Traditionally, normalisation consists of the preparation of the texts for alignment and might imply lowercasing, removing punctuation or editorial markup, as well as the temporary removal of formal features (Silva and Love, 1969 ; Robinson, 1989). Our proposal is to move to an automatic normalisation performed using NLP tools. Each token (i.e. word) is annotated with linguistic information such as part of speech, lemma and detailed morphological information. This kind of normalisation is only possible when suitable resources are available. For Old Spanish, Freeling (Padró Stanilovsky, 2012) provides a specific module (Boleda, 2011; Porta et al., 2013). For Old French, we used the data provided by the 
                    Geste corpus (Camps et al., 2016), annotated with lemmas, as well as POS and morph tags according to the Cattex scheme (Prevost et al., 2013). With this data, we trained a neural tagger/lemmatizer suitable for variation-rich languages (Kestemont et al., 2017 ; Manjavacas et al., 2019). On the test set, accuracy reached 94.5 and 95% for lemmatization and POS-tagging, and was in the range 94-98.5% for different morphological features.
                
                After normalisation, the texts enriched with linguistic information can be used to perform the alignment. Variation in structure, order or content in medieval texts is favoured by the existence of ‘active textual transmission’ (Vàrvaro, 1970) and by processes of rewriting, prosification/versification, etc. Changes in the order of the structural entities (verses, paragraphs, etc.) are also common. In order to collate these displaced entities, a phase of macro-structural alignment might be needed. This process can be done by a combination of direct expertise and tools conceived for detecting paraphrase, text reuse or computing similarities (Büchler et al., 2014; Jänicke and Wrisley, 2018).
                The very collation is then made by using the collation program CollateX (Dekker et al., 2011 and 2015) in its Python version. CollateX uses multiple alignment algorithms, suitable for the comparison of more than two witnesses (Spadini, 2017); its modular structure, based on the Gothenburg model, enables the user to intervene on each module separately and to add new ones.
            
            
                Automatic categorization of variants
                All these software bricks can be integrated in a more complex pipeline up to the the final output. The modular structure of CollateX enables us to adjust the alignment and the visualization phases, in order to take into account the linguistic annotations added to each token. The alignment is performed directly on the annotation, used as a normalised form. In the creation of the output, some rules are added to compare the original forms with the annotation and to assign a category to the variant. For example, the category 'formal variant' is assigned to aligned tokens which have the same annotations but different original forms, such as:
                
                    mielz (pos: adverb; lemma: 
                    mieus),
                
                
                    miels (pos: adverb; lemma: 
                    mieus),
                
                
                    miaus (pos: adverb; lemma: 
                    mieus).
                
                Additional rules can be used for classifying variants into finer-grained categories, using linguistic annotation (fig. 2).
                
                    
                        
                        Possible classification of variants using linguistic annotation, with examples of possible subcategories and cases. The broad paradigmatic subcategory encompasses synonyms, cohyponyms, hypero-/hyponymes or holo-/meronyms; the semantic subcategory is reserved for lexemes who do not hold this type of relation between them.
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusions and Further research
                This paper presents some early results of an ongoing research on automatic collation and categorization of variants. Performing normalization using NLP tools not only speeds up the task, but also makes the identification of fine-grained categories possible. The case studies show the strong and weak points of this proposal and of the technical solutions for its implementation. Eventually, this research forces us to reflect upon the importance of having software components which are open and modular, in order to improve them and to include them in computational pipelines.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L. (2016). Analysis of Variation Significance in Artificial Traditions Using Stemmaweb. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        31(3): 523–39 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqu072.
                    
                    
                        Boleda, G. (2011). Extending the tool, or how to annotate historical language varieties. 
                        Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities. pp. 1–9.
                    
                    
                        Büchler, M., Burns, P. R., Müller, M., Franzini, E. and Franzini, G. (2014). Towards a Historical Text Re-use Detection. In Biemann, C. and Mehler, A. (eds), 
                        Text Mining: From Ontology Learning to Automated Text Processing Applications. (Theory and Applications of Natural Language Processing). Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 221–38 doi:
                        10.1007/978-3-319-12655-5_11. 
                         (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Camps, J.-B., Albarran, E., Cochet, A. and Ing, L. (2016). 
                        Jean-Baptiste-Camps/Geste: Geste: Un Corpus de Chansons de Geste, 2016-…. Zenodo doi:
                        10.5281/zenodo.2630574. 
                         (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker, R., Hulle, D. van, Middell, G., Neyt, V. and Zundert, J. van (2015). Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        30(3): 452–70 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqu007.
                    
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker, R. and Middell, G. (2010). 
                        CollateX. 
                         (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Jänicke, S. and Wrisley, D. J. (2017). Visualizing Mouvance: Toward a visual analysis of variant medieval text traditions. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        32(suppl_2): ii106–23 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqx033.
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M., Pauw, G. de, Nie, R. van and Daelemans, W. (2017). Lemmatization for variation-rich languages using deep learning. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        32(4): 797–815 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqw034.
                    
                    
                        Manjavacas, E., Kádár, Á. and Kestemont, Mike, M. (2019). Improving Lemmatization of Non-Standard Languages with Joint Learning. 
                        arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06939 (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Meyer, K. (2006). 
                        Transcription Synoptique Des Manuscrits et Fragments Du Chevalier Au Lion Par Chrétien de Troyes. Université d’Ottawa: Faculté des Arts, Laboratoire de français ancien 
                         (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Padró, L. and Stanilovsky, E. (2012). FreeLing 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012) ELRA. Istanbul, Turkey. May, 2012.
                    
                    
                        Piotrowski, M. (2012). 
                        Natural Language Processing for Historical Texts. San Rafael: Morgan and Claypool.
                    
                    
                        Porta, J., Sancho, J.-L. and Gómez, J. (2013). Edit transducers for spelling variation in Old Spanish. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Historical Linguistics at NODALIDA 2013; May 22-24; 2013; Oslo; Norway. NEALT Proceedings Series 18. Linköping University Electronic Press, pp. 70–79.
                    
                    
                        Prévost, S., Guillot, C., Lavrentiev, A. and Heiden, S. (2013). 
                        Jeu d’étiquettes Morphosyntaxiques CATTEX2009. version 2.0 
                         (accessed 25 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Robinson, P. M. W. (1989). The Collation and Textual Criticism of Icelandic Manuscripts (1): Collation. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        4(2): 99–105 doi:
                        10.1093/llc/4.2.99.
                    
                    
                        Silva, G. and Love, H. (1969). The identification of text variants by computer. 
                        Information Storage and Retrieval, 
                        5(3): 89–108 doi:
                        10.1016/0020-0271(69)90014-X.
                    
                    
                        Spadini, E. (2017). The role of the base manuscript in the collation of medieval texts. In Boot, P. and alii (eds), 
                        Advances in Digital Scholarly Editing. Papers Presented at the DiXiT Conferences in The Hague, Cologne, and Antwerp. Leiden: Sidestone Press, pp. 345–50.
                    
                    
                        Varvaro, A. (1970). Critica dei testi classica e romanza. Problemi comuni ed esperienze diverse. 
                        Rendiconti Dell’Accademia Di Archeologia, Lettere e Belle Arti Di Napoli, 
                        XLV: 73–117.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Cooking traditions, whether they are regional or in a larger context, are one of the most distinguishable items of European culture and an important part of European identities. But how did they become to what we know them now? How did they develop and what were their influences? During the last decades, research arrived at two important conclusions on these questions. Firstly, there are no quantitative studies on the origin and formation of regional cuisines in Europe. Secondly, manuscripts containing thousands of cookery recipes first appeared in the Middle Ages, which can be consequently regarded as the birth of modern European cuisines. On the European continent Latin, Middle French and Early New High German recipes provide the majority of culinary transmission. The project is preparing the cooking recipe transmission of France and the German speaking countries, which sums up to more than 80 manuscripts and about 8000 recipes, for the analysis of their origin, their relation, and their migration through Europe. The comparison of French and German food history is especially suited for this task as France always had a culturally formative influence on German speaking peoples. 
            Cooking recipes are culturally charged transient texts, which are best diachronically and spatially analyzed by strongly relying on digital humanities methods. However, understanding these recipes, their context and their transmission is not an easy process. The technical terms that describe ingredients, utensils, procedures, and customs of the time are a challenge even for history scholars who specialize on the topic. Thus, the texts need not only be transcribed and edited but also semantically enriched so that further analysis like machine aided comparison of ingredients or cooking processes can add to standardized philological research like the collation. The base of our data will be customized TEI/XML documents with a schema aiming at facilitating the semantic annotation of cooking recipes in general. 
            The core of our digital research strategy is the Semantic Web and the idea of Linked Open Data. We are in the comfortable position within the Humanities that we are mainly dealing with food ingredients i.e. animals, plants and fungi, all fields of research that are provided with a sophisticated amount of already established ontologies and Linked Data
                
                     For an overview of ontologies covering these topics see 
                        http://www.ontobee.org/, 
                        http://aims.fao.org/, 
                        https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/, 
                        https://agclass.nal.usda.gov/about.shtml, 
                        http://zbw.eu/stw/version/latest/thsys/70498/about.de.html all of which are connected to the Linked Open Date Cloud by proving its data in one or more serializations of OWL and/or RDF(S). 
                    
                 including the general knowledge bases of Wikidata and DBPedia. Ontologies are also already being successfully used to represent (Dooley et al., 2018, Sam et al., 2014, Ribeiro et al., 2006) and analyze (Hammad and Hassouna, 2011, Vadivu and Waheeta Hopper, 2010) cooking recipes, albeit with different focuses and granularity of data. In the digital research-approach, we partly rely on text similarities but largely on the occurrence of ingredients, preparation instructions and time, tools, serving suggestions and medicinal, cultural as well as religious implications in the texts. The sheer quantity of semantics within one historic recipe shows how complex a semantic annotation of these texts is, leaving apart all philological observations that can be found in the material. Besides the ability to find links between resources that were not known before, a main argument for the decision to put Semantic Web technologies at the core of the project, was to ability to work outside of language barriers. Through the use of concepts in the sense of a notion, an idea rather than a term we are trying to overcome historical and language constraints i.e. the German word for potato ‘Erdapfel’ (‘erdaphel’ in Early New high German, literally ‘apple from the ground’) appears in a manuscript from about 1488) long before the potato was imported from South America to Europe, giving us proof that the concept of ‘Erdapfel’ must have been a very different one (probably ‘any kind of beet’) from today’s notion. For this reason, we needed to introduce a workflow that reflects the recipes’ philological and semantic complexity. A precompiled list of medieval plant names and their translations to modern English and German as well as their medieval variant dictions
                
                     http://medieval-plants.org
                 collected by Helmut W. Klug, the principal researcher of the Austrian part of CoReMa, gave us the opportunity to start with a (semi)automated alignment of Wikidata concepts with the Reconciliation Service API
                
                     https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Reconciliation-Service-API
                 provided by OpenRefine
                
                     http://openrefine.org/
                . Once each term has a concept connected with it, these concepts are used to enrich the ingredients within the actual recipe texts in the TEI documents. However, as stated above, a crucial point of this process is the human interpretation of the enriched entities and the decision for a concept. Therefore, the auto alignment procedure can only be viewed as a means to an end. 
            
            Once the entities of each recipe are equipped with concepts, the project’s analysis can reveal concurring or deviating eating habits, text migration as well as the influence of neighboring countries on their respective cuisine. The vast implementation of ontologies in the natural sciences allows us to establish connections from historical eating habits to modern concepts of food and generate new knowledge for the domain of food history. The research data will also be the basis for spatial and temporal visualization and statistical evaluation. The storage, analysis and dissemination of the project’s data is handled by the data repository GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management) developed by the Austrian Centre for Information Modelling in Graz.
                
                     http://gams.uni-graz.at/
                 Within this infrastructure aimed at long-term preservation, the triplestore Blazegraph is accessed through a web service for the storage and retrieval of RDF triples which allows us to query our project’s databases of medieval recipes in France and Austria as well as all connected concepts in the Linked Open Data Cloud.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dooley, D. M., Griffiths, E. J., Gosal, G. S., Buttigieg, P. L., Hoehndorf, R., Lange, M. C., Schriml, L. M., Brinkman, F. S. L. and Hsiao, W. W. L. (2018). FoodOn: a harmonized food ontology to increase global food traceability, quality control and data integration. 
                        Npj Science of Food, 
                        2(1): 23 doi:
                        10.1038/s41538-018-0032-6.
                    
                    
                        Hammad, R. and Hassouna, M. (2011). Multi-Language Semantic Search Engine. : 6.
                    
                    
                        Ribeiro, R., Batista, F., Pardal, J. P., Mamede, N. J. and Pinto, H. S. (2006). Cooking an Ontology. In Euzenat, J. and Domingue, J. (eds), 
                        Artificial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applications. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 213–21.
                    
                    
                        Sam, M., Krisnadhi, A. A., Wang, C., Gallagher, J. and Hitzler, P. (2014). 
                        An Ontology Design Pattern for Cooking Recipes – Classroom Created.
                    
                    
                        Vadivu, G. and Hopper, S. W. (2010). Semantic Linking and Querying of Natural Food, Chemicals and Diseases. 
                        International Journal of Computer Applications, 
                        11(4): 35–38 doi:
                        10.5120/1567-2093.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction
                The poster will introduce the approach taken to migrate a large-scale digital letter edition with accompanying material to a new technical infrastructure. 
                The underlying project (Hurch, 2007-) is concerned with the work on the scientific estate of 19
                    th century linguist Hugo Schuchardt. The primary objective is the edition of the scientific correspondence, an endeavor being underway since decades. 
                
                The database comprises nearly 6500 full-text transcribed letters with facsimiles and editorial comments. In addition to a large bibliographical database of primary and secondary literature, a former funding period also produced thesauri for persons, places and subjects. The reason for the migration primarily lies in the increasing difficulty to maintain the proprietary infrastructure, which has been developed and extended for more than two decades.
            
            
                Levels of Migration
                
                    Organizational
                    The migration process entails moving a large part of the technical infrastructure from the Institute of Linguistics to a second institution of the university specialized in DH and long-term preservation. In future, one institute will be responsible for scholarly data generation and producing the SIP (in the sense of the OAIS model (Space Data Systems, 2012)), whereas the second institution is concerned with the archival and publication (AIP and DIP). Nevertheless, there has to be close cooperation between the two partners to create the necessary organizational and technical interfaces to accomplish this. 
                
                
                    Technical
                    The existing proprietary infrastructure is only partly documented. The project is a pioneer in electronic publishing efforts, thus unfortunately having to deal with a lot of legacy infrastructure and code. The standardized digital objects created during the migration will be integrated into an existing trusted digital repository for long-term preservation operated by the second partner (Centre for Information Modelling, 2003-).
                    Since the funding for the migration phase is limited to one year, the main focus will be to create an automated workflow for the integration of further data, which requires as low future maintenance as possible.
                
                
                    Content related
                    The first step of the migration is to create appropriate data models for all resources and to pull the data from the current infrastructure. 
                    The full-text transcriptions are mostly already in TEI format (TEI Consortium, 2018), but not a consistent one. The new schema will also be interoperable with the DTA (Zentrum Sprache, 2011–2018) base format and ediarum (Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences, 2018). Furthermore, especially thesaurus data is not stored in an acknowledged standard format and has to be transferred to more suitable formats, mostly SKOS (Miles and Bechhofer, 2009). 
                    Due to the high recognition of the project in the community, special attention must be payed to keep existing URLs working and to avoid broken links and confusion on side of the community.
                    With regard to data reuse, correspondence data will be delivered in CMIF (TEI Correspondence SIG, 2015–2018) to the CorrespSearch (Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences, 2014–2018) aggregation service; furthermore, the data will be published on a freely accessible OAI endpoint (Lagoze, 2018) via PMH (Lagoze and Sompel, 2015).
                        
                    
                
                
                    Visualization and Analysis
                    The migration process will also include an update and consolidation of the user interface and dissemination options. A new presentation layer based on Bootstrap 4 (Otto and Thornton, 2011–2018) will be implemented, presenting all data sources from the project accompanied by static content in a fully responsive way. Digital facsimiles will be presented in an IIIF-compliant viewer (IIIF Consortium, 2012–2018). 
                    After finishing the migration of the research data, new visualization and analysis tools like a timeline visualization, a map tool and statistical analyses of the correspondence metadata can be easily integrated using the existing APIs and services of the digital repository. The intent is also to exploit the thesauri to a larger extent in resource discovery and search mechanisms.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                The poster will highlight the complexity of migrating a well-known and already large-scale digital edition project to a new infrastructure, touching on every of the aforementioned aspects and showing our solutions. Nevertheless, this challenging process also entails the chance to add extended functionality and dissemination options to the currently rather outdated web representation and further enhance data quality, reuse and interoperability in a way not possible one or two decades ago. 
                Furthermore, the poster will once more highlight the need for domain specific trusted repositories or data centers (Arbeitsgruppe Datenzentren im Verband DHd, 2017). The case of the project in question illustrates how proprietary standalone infrastructures must fall into disuse because of impossible maintenance work.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arbeitsgruppe Datenzentren im Verband DHd (2017). 
                        Geisteswissenschaftliche Datenzentren im deutschsprachigen Raum. Grundsatzpapier zur Sicherung der langfristigen Verfügbarkeit von Forschungsdaten. DOI: 
                        http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1134760 (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences (2014–2018). 
                        correspSearch. Search scholarly editions of letters.
                        https://correspsearch.net/index.xql?id=&amp;l=en (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences (2018). 
                        ediarum - an Oxygen XML Author framework for digital scholarly editions.
                        http://www.bbaw.de/telota/software/ediarum (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Hurch, B. (ed.) (2007-). 
                        Hugo Schuchardt Archiv. http://schuchardt.uni-graz.at (accessed 8 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        IIIF Consortium (2012–2018). 
                        International Image Interoperability Framework.
                        https://iiif.io/ (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Lagoze, C. (2018). 
                        Open Archives Initiative.
                        https://www.openarchives.org/ (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Lagoze, C. and Sompel, van de H. (2015). 
                        Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata
                    
                    
                        Harvesting. 
                        https://www.openarchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.html (accessed: 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Miles, A. and Bechhofer, S.
                         (2009). SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System Reference. In
                        W3C
                         (eds.), URL:
                         https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-20090818
                         (accessed 22 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Otto, M. and Thornton J. (2011–2018). 
                        Bootstrap.
                        https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2018). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.4.0. http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/3.4.0/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html (accessed 22 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        TEI Correspondence SIG (2015–2018). 
                        CMIF – Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format.
                        https://github.com/TEI-Correspondence-SIG/CMIF (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (2012). 
                        Reference Model for an Open Archival Information System (OAIS).
                        https://public.ccsds.org/pubs/650x0m2.pdf (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Centre for Information Modelling (2003-). 
                        GAMS – Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System. 
                        https://gams.uni-graz.at (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Zentrum Sprache der BBAW (2011–2018). 
                        Deutsches Textarchiv-Basisformat.
                        http://deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat (accessed 19 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Throughout the history of DH, a great deal of effort and many research projects have been dedicated to the study of historical documents, particularly around linguistic annotation and critical and facsimile editions in TEI, but also in automated image analysis, handwritten text recognition (HTR), layout analysis, named entity recognition, and more. Furthermore, software implementing innovations in these fields is increasingly allowing for interconnections through Web APIs, a process that is further enabled by standards such as the International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF) and Distributed Text Services (Almas et al. [n.d.]). All this strongly suggests that these different components can now usefully be brought together into a single interconnected infrastructure to allow for the online preparation, analysis and publication of texts, editions, images, and annotations. This is the goal of the eScripta platform which is currently under development at Université Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL). A prototype platform is already available and will be demonstrated at DH2019. Although focussed on researchers at PSL, the code is already Open Source and freely available (Tissot et al. 2019), and, unlike most comparable systems, the trained models for HTR are also freely open and available through the Kraken model repository (Kiessling [n.d.]). 
            The platform is part of a larger funded project dedicated to the history and practice of writing. The host institution has an exceptional concentration of specialists in very diverse forms of writing, including manuscripts, documents and inscriptions not only in Latin, Greek, Hebrew and Arabic but also Egyptian (hieroglyphic, hieratic and demotic), Cuneiform (Sumerian and Akkadian), proto-Semitic, Aramaic, early Chinese, Old Vietnamese, Indic scripts in all forms, Batak, Javanese, Pyu, Tocharian, and many others. This wide expertise and range of use-cases means that the project presents an important opportunity to develop a deeply cross-cultural and cross-disciplinary infrastructure that allows for multigraphic and multilingual work of exceptional breadth.
            A key existing component of this platform is Kraken (Kiessling [n.d.], Kiessling 2019), a module for handwritten text recognition (HTR) that allows automatic analysis and transcription of manuscripts and printed books. It has been developed specifically for multi-lingual documents and non-Latin scripts including non-alphabetic writing-systems and right-to-left, top-to-bottom, bottom-to-top and bidirectional writing. Kraken has already been integrated into the platform and provided with a new and significantly improved interface for text entry and correction, as well as enhanced line-detection for complex layouts (Kiessling et al. 2019).
            
                
                eScripta Web interface to Kraken, ready to enter Ground Truth transcription.
            
            
                
                Uncorrected results of newly-developed line detection on complex layout for right-to-left text (Kiessling 2019b).
            
            A further key pre-existing component of the platform is Archetype (Brookes et al. 2015; Stokes et al. 2016), for deeply structured annotations to enable the exploration, study and communication of palaeographical and art-historical content; it is already being used in completed projects including DigiPal, Models of Authority and Exon Domesday. 
            
                
                The 'default' Archetype home page before customisation.
            
            
                
                Archetype applied to the Exon Domesday book showing occurrences of the 'gallows mark' (Exon 2018: Search &gt; Graphs &gt; Gallows Mark)
            
            
                
                Archetype used in the Models of Authority project to show images of a given title (‘marescallus’) in the charters (Models of Authority &gt; Search &gt; People &gt; ‘Marescallus’)
            
            
                
                Archetype used in the Exon Domesday project to display the text, transcription and translation of the book (Exon Domesday &gt; Browse Text and Translation).
            
            Other important components to be added include linking to external services such as those provided by D
                ivaServices (Würsch, Liwicki and Ingold [n.d.]). These are to be complemented with an ergonomic interface for manual transcription and data-entry for different types of digital and printed editions, as well as translations, commentaries, and linguistic analyses. This component will again comprise a dialogue between manual linguistic annotation such as POS tagging for the preparation of training data with Pandora (Kestemont [n.d.]), and a module for post-correction using Pyrrha (Clérice et al. [n.d.]). The resulting texts will be disseminated through TEI Publisher or similar.
            
            
                
                The Pyrrha interface for post-correction of automatic annotation
            
            
                
                The Digital Mishnah (under development), built on TEI Publisher
            
            A further element is deep or allographic transcription, combining Archetype and Kraken with the interface already described. This will facilitate the production of facsimile editions and also training the computer for automatic transcription, alignment of existing texts with images, wordspotting, and text-image searches of the sort encouraged by Archetype (for examples see Figure 3 and Stokes et al. 2016). This combination of quantitative and qualitative approaches will also allow, for instance, the clustering of letters in a manuscript based on deep annotation, or analysing the distribution of allographs throughout an inscription or corpus. This becomes particularly powerful when combined with databases of manuscripts that are dated, geolocalised and/or written by the same scribe, such as Medium and Pinakes which are also planned for integration.
            As well as problems around internationalisation and the many conventions and needs of such a broad project, another challenge here is how and to what degree these different components can be combined given their different data-models, purposes and assumptions. A Conceptual Reference Model is therefore being developed which will constitute a further important output of this project, based on the Biblissima ontology (an extension of FRBRoo) and CRMtex (Gehrke et al. 2015; Felicetti and Murano 2017; Murano and Felicetti 2017).
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Almas, B.M., Cayless, H., Clérice, T., Jolivet, V., Morlock, E., Robie, D., Tauber, J., Witt, J.C., and Liuzzo, P. [n.d.]. 
                        Distributed Text Services (DTS), 
                        
                            https://distributed-text-services.github.io
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Archetype (2017). London: King’s College, 
                        
                            https://archetype.ink
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Biblissima [n.d.]. Ontologie. 
                        Biblissima Documentation, 
                        
                            http://doc.biblissima-condorcet.fr/ontologie
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Brookes, S., Stokes, P. A., Watson, M. and Matos, D. M. D.(2015). The DigiPal project for European scripts and decorations. In Conti, A., Da Rold, O. &amp; Shaw, P. A. (eds), 
                        Writing Europe 500–1450: Texts and Contexts. D.S. Brewer, pp. 25–58.
                    
                    
                        Clérice T., Pilla J. et al. [n.d.]. 
                        Pyrrha: A language-independent post-correction app for POS and lemmatization, 
                        
                            https://github.com/hipster-philology/pyrrha
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Felicetti, A., Murano, F. (2017). Scripta manent: a CIDOC CRM semiotic reading of ancient texts. 
                        International Journal of Digital Libraries 18, 263–270. 
                        
                            doi:10.1007/s00799-016-0189-z
                        
                    
                    
                        Gehrke, S., Frunzeanu, E., Charbonnier, P. and Muffat, M. (2015). Biblissima’s prototype on medieval manuscript illuminations and their context. In A. Zucker, I. Draelants, C.F. Zucker and A. Monnin (eds), 
                        SW4SH 2015: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Semantic Web for Scientific Heritage, 43–48. 
                        
                            http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1364/paper5.pdf
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        HIMANIS (2018). 
                        The HIMANIS Project: Indexing the Trésor des Chartes Registers. Paris: IRHT, 
                        
                            http://www.himanis.org
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        IIIF [n.d.]. 
                        IIIF: International Image Interoperability Framework, 
                        
                            http://iiif.io/
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kestemont, M. [n.d.]. 
                        Pandora: A Tagger-Lemmatizer for Natural Languages, 
                        
                            https://github.com/hipster-philology/pandora
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B. [n.d.]. 
                        Kraken, 
                        
                            http://kraken.re
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B. (2019). Kraken: an universal text recognizer for the humanities. 
                        Digital Humanities Book of Abstracts. Utrecht. (in preparation).
                    
                    
                        Kiessling B., Stoekl Ben-Ezra D., and Miller M. T. (2019). BADAM: A public dataset for baseline detection in Arabic-script manuscripts. Submitted to ICDAR 2019
                    
                    
                        Medium (2016). 
                        Medium: Répertoire des manuscrits reproduits ou recensés. Paris: IRHT, 
                        
                            http://medium.irht.cnrs.fr
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Models of Authority (2017). 
                        Models of Authority: Scottish Charters and the Emergence of Government 1100–1250. London: King’s College, 
                        
                            https://www.modelsofauthority.ac.uk
                         (accessed 24 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Murano, Francesca and Achille Felicetti (2017). 
                        Definition of the CRMtex: An Extension of CIDOC-CRM to Model Ancient Textual Entities, version 0.8 (CIDOC-CRM), 
                        
                            http://www.cidoc-crm.org/crmtex/sites/default/files/CRMtex_v0.8.pdf
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Pinakes (2016). 
                        Pinakes: Textes et manuscrits grecs. Paris: IRHT, 
                        
                            http://pinakes.irht.cnrs.fr
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A. et al. (2016). The Models of Authority project: Extending the DigiPal Framework for script and decoration. 
                        Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Krakow: pp. 896-99, 
                        
                            http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/387
                         (accessed 24 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A. (2018). Modelling Multigraphism: The digital representation of multiple scripts and alphabets. 
                        Digital Humanities 2018 Book of Abstracts. Mexico City, pp. 292–96.
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A., ed. (2018). 
                        Exon: The Domesday Survey of South-West England, Studies in Domesday, gen ed. J. Crick. London: King’s College, 
                        
                            http://www.exondomesday.ac.uk
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, Dominique (2013). Ontologie des formes et encodage des textes manuscrits médiévaux. Le projet ORIFLAMMS, 
                        Document numérique 16: 81–95.
                    
                    
                        Tissot, Robin et al. (2019). eScriptorium [Source Code]. Paris: INRIA, 
                        
                            https://gitlab.inria.fr/scripta/escriptorium
                         (accessed 29 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Würsch, M., M. Liwicki and R. Ingold [n.d.], 
                        Diva
                        Services. Fribourg: University of Fribourg, 
                        
                            https://diuf.unifr.ch/main/hisdoc/divaservices
                         (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                
                The French-Israeli project 
                
                    Tikkoun Sofrim
                 is part of a network of projects (
                , 
                
                    Sofer Mahir
                , 
                
                    eRabbinica
                , 
                
                    Scribes of the Cairo Genizah
                , 
                
                    Scripta-PSL
                ) aimed at developing a future framework for comprehensive and systematic textual availability, editions and deep annotation of (Hebrew) manuscripts via a pipeline that combines HTR with crowdsourcing the corrections and validation by scholars. End uses are scholarly editions (with 
                
                    TEI-Publisher
                ), library service (integration via 
                
                    mirador
                ), automatic annotation, distant-reading and big-data studies.
            
            
                The sample
                The project focuses on Tanhuma-Yelamdenu Midrashim, late rabbinic exegetical works without full scholarly critical edition, even thought vulgate editions in two recensions [1,2] and translations exist [3]. Unlike other classical works, they were not subject to formal canonization, but went through a long period of fluid transmission [4]. Manuscripts differ significantly from each other on the micro- and macro-levels. The texts reflect different possible hierarchies following the biblical text, liturgical rites or divisions in early print editions. Hence, the envisaged data structure will need to go beyond a simple canonical structure to support flexible accessibility to the texts both from library and critical edition perspectives.
            
            
                HTR
                The current Layout analysis is based on the z-profile-method for column detection [5] and the heartbeat-seam-carve algorithm for line detection [6], well adapted for literary manuscripts with regular layout. Textual ground truth was created by manual transcription from scratch or through the adaptation of transcriptions sent by scholars who had worked on manuscript-parts. Using the open-source kraken engine [7], we trained models for four large manuscripts (
                    
                        Geneva Com. Lat. 146
                    , 
                    
                        BNF Cod. Héb 150
                    , 
                    
                        Bibl. Vaticana ebr. 44 vol. 1
                     and 
                    
                        2
                    , 
                    
                        Parma, Palatina, Cod. Parm. 312
                    
                    2) [8]. The CERs vary between 2.8% (BNF), 2.9% (Parma), 6.9% (Vatican) and 8.9% (Geneva). The likely reasons for the weaker results for Vatican and Geneva were the use of low resolution images (Vatican) as well as binarization issues, curved lines and superposed words (Geneva). These issues will be dealt with in an upcoming, much improved layout analysis based on state-of-the-art CNNs part of 
                    
                        kraken@eScriptorium
                     at PSL [9,10,11].
                
            
            
                Crowdsourcing
                Our 
                    
                        crowdsourcing platform
                     opened on Feb. 13th, 2019 [12]. To maximise our reach, we offer a designated UI for mobile and desktop. The technological stack used for development was selected to simplify future code contribution and collaboration with other platforms: Vue.js / Google-Firebase for the operational site and MySQL for analytical purposes.
                
                
                    
                
                Since classical rabbinic literature is still thriving in contemporary ritual and religious study cycles, we based community recruitment and engagement on links to websites for daily studies following annual and other cycles of studies. The launching was set to the beginning of Deuteronomy in 
                    
                        929
                    , a community daily Hebrew Bible chapter project, and we assigned fitting pages to each biblical chapter.
                
                While the link with 929 proved very fruitful for a first broad exposure to the public, by and large ongoing traffic mainly came from intensive facebook activity in relevant groups and pages.
                
                    
                
                Attracted first by hilarious mistakes in the automatic transcription, users continued into long term engagement. Other crowd-engagement methods involved presentations in schools, synagogues, universities and homes for senior citizens Israel, France and the US. Two articles in the press, one of which included the URL of our website, greatly augmented the number of users in week 6 [13,14].
            
            
                Results
                Until April 26, we received on the average 5005 lines per week: 
                
                    
                
                Mega-users (&gt;1000 lines) and super-users (&gt;100 lines), presenting 4.6% and 19.3% of the number of user, provided almost 80% of the total amount of transcriptions.
                
                    
                
                Based on the submitted transcriptions, we produced an alignment on the word level with 
                    
                        collatex
                     [15,16]. With a majority vote, we established a preliminary complete text for the 590 pages of Geneva 146. According to manual check, the automatic reconstruction results in about two mistakes per page (ca. 1700 glyphs/page), i.e. an accuracy of ca. 99.8%, most of which concern markup for additions or deletions.
                
                
                    
                
                A transcription based on collating contributions of 5 users/line.
            
            
                Conclusions and outlook
                We now have the tools and know-how for high-quality automatic transcription of Hebrew manuscripts. Crowdsourcing is a promising mechanism for correcting remaining errors. Future versions of the platform should include embedded community engagement, feedback elements to ensure continuity and optimize social media engagement activity.
                The project [17] provides PoC for future large scale production of manuscript texts, based on combined deep learning and crowdsourcing mechanisms. These will be based on optimizing the performance of HTR engines and crowd task-assignment, using crowd based transfer learning and weak supervision
                    .
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    N.N. (1960). Midrash Tanhuma, Jerusalem. [standard ‘print-edition’]
                    Buber, S. (1885). 
                        Midrash Tanhuma, Jerusalem 1964=Vilna 1885 [‘Buber-edition’]
                    
                    Townsend, J. (1989-2003). Midrash Tanhuma. Translated into English with Introduction, Indices and Brief Notes, Hoboken, NJ, New York.
                    Bregman, M. (2003). The Tanhuma-Yelammedenu Literature: Studies in the Evolution of the Versions. Piscataway, NJ (Hebrew).
                    Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Lapin, H. (2019). Z-profile: Holistic Preprocessing Applied to Hebrew Manuscripts for HTR with Ocropy and Kraken. Submitted. Code available at: 
                        https://github.com/ephenum/z-profile_column_segmentation. 
                    
                    Seuret, M., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Liwicki. M. (2017). Robust Heartbeat-based Line Segmentation Methods for Regular Texts and Paratextual Elements. HIP@ICDAR: 71-76.
                        Code available at: 
                        https://github.com/ephenum/heartbeat_seamcarve_line_segmentation
                    
                    Kiessling, B. (2019). Kraken - an Universal Text Recognizer for the Humanities, DH2019, in preparation. Kraken github : 
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Geneva Com. Lat. 146
                        , 
                        
                            BNF Cod. Héb 150
                        , 
                        
                            Bibl. Vaticana ebr. 44 vol. 1
                         and 
                        
                            2
                        , 
                        
                            Parma, Palatina, Cod. Parm. 3123
                        
                        .
                    
                    Kiessling B., Stoekl Ben-Ezra D., Miller M. T., BADAM: A Public Dataset for Baseline Detection in Arabic-script Manuscripts, submitted to ICDAR 2019.
                    Stokes, P., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Kiessling, B., Tissot R. (2019). A New Digital Platform for the Study of Historical Texts and Writing. Digital Humanities 2019 Book of Abstracts. Utrecht.
                    eScriptorium gitlab : 
                        
                            https://gitlab.inria.fr/scripta/escriptorium
                        
                    
                    Wecker, A., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Raziel-Kretzmer, V., Schor, U., Kuflik, T., Ohali, A., Elovits, D., Lavee, M., Stevenson, P. (2019). Tikkoun Sofrim: A WebApp for Personalization and Adaptation of Crowdsourcing Transcriptions. Poster at UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9-12, 2019, Larnaca. New York: ACM Press. 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3324972. 
                        
                        Tikkoun Sofrim website: 
                        
                            https://tikkoun-sofrim.firebaseapp.com/
                        . 
                        Tikkoun Sofrim github: 
                        
                            https://github.com/drore/tikkoun
                        
                    
                    Dvir, N. (2019). חוכמת ההמונים תעזור לפענח טקסטים עבריים עתיקים, Israel Hayom. 21.3.2019
                    Harari, O. (2019). בואו לעזור: שומרים על האוצר היהודי. Arutz 7, 21.3.2019.
                    Dekker, R. H., van Hulle, D., Middell, G., Neyt, V. and van Zundert, J. (2015). Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript project. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 30: 452-470.
                    Dekker, R. H. and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-Supported Collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. Supporting Digital Humanities 2011. University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 17-18 November 2011.
                    PHC Maimonide 41146YC (2019-2020)
                
            
        
    

        
            Though the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) has long supported the use of the XML fragment linking mechanism known as XPointers (Grosso et al. 2003; TEI 16), they are seldom implemented or recommended as a method of linking TEI documents. Hugh Cayless has argued that TEI pointers are an underappreciated mechanism, the “victim of a Catch-22”: the specifications are “difficult to grasp, and as a result, most people never bother to try using [them]” (Cayless 2013). Though Cayless’ proposals for new definitions of TEI pointers are compelling, five years later, his diagnosis holds true: the definitions of the pointing schemes have not been updated and there is still a paucity of examples of XPointers in TEI projects. This short paper responds to Cayless by outlining the use of TEI pointers in the Waterloo-based Stratford Festival Online (SFO) project, which aims to encode the Festival’s world-class collection of theatrical promptbooks (Malone 2013; 2018) in TEI. Through this real-world example of the necessity of XPointers in the SFO project, we make the case that they may also be a viable option for other TEI projects. 
            Promptbooks are difficult objects to encode because they are simultaneously both textual artifacts and also instructions for actualizing the aesthetic decisions that define a particular production of a play (Bauman 2001; Kaethler, Roberts-Smith, and Malone 2017). Over the course of a rehearsal process, the stage manager creates a book to remind themselves what they will need to do during each performance (calling technical cues, monitoring actors’ performances, etc.) to ensure the performance is consistent (Shattuck 1965). The stage manager records the “what” of the book (what the stage manager needs to do) along a timeline showing “when” each action needs to happen; the “when” recorded in the book takes the form of words spoken by actors. The text of a promptbook is a performance timeline along which the events of a performance are sequenced for the stage manager’s reference. Promptbooks therefore contain three ontological categories of content: 1) a timeline (words spoken by actors in a play); 2) descriptions of performance events; and 3) annotations made by the stage manager, which link events to the moments on the timeline when each should occur (Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. 2017; Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. forthcoming). Current TEI Guidelines for “Drama” cannot accommodate this ontological complexity (TEI 7; Lavaigno and Mylonas 1995; Bauman 2001; Kaethler, Roberts-Smith and Malone 2017; Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. forthcoming). To complicate matters further, stage managers use a range of idiosyncratic marks to link performance events to moments in the textual timeline, and these “moments” may in turn be literally moments, as brief as the space between two syllables pronounced by an actor, or may conversely be periods as long as several lines of spoken text (Kaethler, Roberts-Smith and Malone 2017; Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. 2017; Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. forthcoming; see figure 1).
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Some systems for linking events to moments in the timeline of spoken text in the promptbook from the Stratford Festival’s King Lear (1988). 
            In response to these challenges, our research team is developing an approach to promptbook encoding that uses two data files (one for the performance text and the other for non-verbal performance events [Roberts-Smith, Kaethler, Malone et al. forthcoming]) that are linked by stand-off markup (the advantages and disadvantages of which we do not summarize here; see TEI 16.9; Bański 2010) and XPointers. Our choice to use XPointers derives from earlier experiments with standard techniques of standoff markup. We initially attempted to use &lt;anchor&gt; elements, repurposing the TEI’s double end-point-attachment method (TEI 12.2.2). However, this approach makes the event document unusable without the text document. Since one of the project’s goals is to map events to other electronic versions of the same base text, we rejected &lt;anchor&gt; elements. We also considered tokenizing each character of the text document so that an encoder could specify a range of characters (encoded using the &lt;c&gt; element). This method does not require an encoder to add elements manually to the performance text document and could enable the creation of user-friendly markup interfaces. However, linking to individual &lt;c&gt; elements in the text document requires that the performance text be edited completely before running a tokenizing algorithm, whereas the project’s workflow requires encoding the text and event documents simultaneously; and adding &lt;c&gt; elements significantly increases the size of the document, makes it difficult for human encoders to read and seriously inhibits any further editing of the document. 
            By contrast, the TEI pointer framework provides a non-intrusive and event-centric method of addressing segments of the text document, because it does not rely on the encoding of the text document. There are multiple TEI pointer schemes that can handle stable element ID references, character position references, and string matching. To be sure, using TEI pointers in a standoff document is not a mutually exclusive practice with encoding &lt;anchor&gt;s or tokenizing the source text; instead, TEI pointers offer the project further options for addressing segments of text beyond ID references, including XPath, string matching, range selection, and left and right point selection. For instance, TEI Pointers can take advantage of the match() feature, which allows encoders to specify a string to address based off a canonical reference (for example, canonical line numbers) that two projects share as an interoperable data-point, like a canonical line number. This is not to say that TEI Pointers are inherently more interoperable than other methods,but, instead, provide another mechanism for addressing contiguous and adjacent nodes, which is difficult to do purely with IDREFS. 
            Consequently, we are developing a method, using Apache Ant and an XSLT function library, of parsing TEI pointers and associating the text document with the standoff markup. Since our approach to resolving XPointers requires a two stage process, this paper does not describe how to resolve XPointers in standard “just-in-time” setups; instead, we demonstrate a method of handling XPointers that can be integrated as an intermediate process in a static build pipeline, the infrastructural benefits for creating sustainable and archivable digital projects will be dealt with in further detail elsewhere. Since XPointers address segments that are not necessarily stable or canonical and links between the standoff document and the source document can easily break, we have also developed a suite of diagnostic tests to ensure that the XPointers used in the project are, at minimum, resolvable (Holmes and Takeda 2019). Both the sample implementation and the diagnostic code, along with documentation discussing the development of and differences between XPointers and TEI Pointers, will be available via Github as a proof-of-concept for the feasibility of using XPointers within TEI projects. We hope that other projects—particularly those dealing with standoff annotation structure or other situations where the source text is not available for editing—can make use and, ultimately, improve the TEI Pointer system for use across various domains.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bański, P. (2010). “Why TEI stand-off annotation doesn't quite work: and why you might want to use it nevertheless” 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 5. https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol5.Banski01.
                    
                    Bauman, S. (2001 April 12). “Re: TEI and drama”. TEI Electronic ListServ. https://listserv.brown.edu/archives/cgi-bin/wa?A2=TEI-L;2973394d.0104
                    Bauman, S. (2011). “Interchange vs. Interoperability.” 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 7. 
                        https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol7.Bauman01.
                    
                    Cayless, H. (2013). “Rebooting TEI Pointers” 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 6. DOI : 10.4000/jtei.907.
                    
                    Grosso, P., E. Maler, J. Marsh, and N. Walsh, eds. (25 March 2003). “XPointer Framework.” 
                        W3C. https://www.w3.org/TR/xptr-framework/
                    
                    Holmes, M., and Takeda, J. (2019). Beyond Validation: Using Programmed Diagnostics to Learn About, Monitor, and Successfully Complete Your DH Project.” 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. DOI: 10.1093/llc/fqz011. 
                    
                    Kaethler, M., Roberts-Smith, J. and Malone, T. (2017). Brave new XML: TEI and the Stratford Promptbooks. Panel: From Theatre Archive to Theatrical Archive: Four Futures for the Festival’s Collections. Shakespearean Theatre Conference. University of Waterloo-Stratford Festival. June 21–24.
                    Lavaigno, J. and Mylonas, E. (1995). The Show Must Go on: Problems of Tagging Performance Texts. 
                        Computers and the Humanities 29: 113-121.
                    
                    Malone, T. (2013). ‘Distract parcels in Combined Sums’: The Stratford Festival Archives’ Stage-Managerial Collections. 
                        Canadian Theatre Review 156 (fall): 66-71. 
                    
                    Malone, T. (2018). A Digital Parallel-text Approach to Performance Historiography.” In Jenstad, J., Kaethler, M. and J. Roberts-Smith (eds), 
                        Shakespeare’s Language in Digital Media: Old Words, New Tools. Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 105-124.
                    
                    Phillips, R, dir. and The. John Gray, stage manager. (1988). 
                        King Lear. By William Shakespeare. Promptbook. Stratford Festival Archive. 
                    
                    Roberts-Smith, K, Kaethler, M. and Malone, T. (2017). The Problem With Promptbooks, Or the Problem With TEI? Tagging Time and Space. CSDH/SCHN, Congress. Toronto, 29 May. 
                    Roberts-Smith, J., Kaethler, M., and Malone, T., with Giffen, L., Holmes, M., Jenstad, J. and Takeda, J. (Forthcoming). Tagging Time and Space: TEI and the Canadian Stratford Festival Promptbooks. Special issue, Boyd, J. and Martin, K. (eds), 
                        Digital Studies/
                        Le champ numérique. 
                    
                    Shattuck, C. H. (1965). 
                        The Shakespeare Promptbooks: A Descriptive Catalogue. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    TEI Consortium, eds. (2018 July 23). 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 3.4.0. TEI Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                Introduction / Importance 
                The sonnet is a prodigious poetic form. Since its invention in the 13th century by Giacomo da Lentino, hundreds of poets have written many thousands of sonnets in European literary languages. It was popularized by Petrarch in the 14th century, translated by Wyatt and Camões in the 16th, and reformulated by poets from Shakespeare to Rilke to Frost. The experimental poet Raymond Queneau has even written a machine-generated sequence whose lines can be recombined in a hundred trillion different ways. 
                This project has begun to compile every extant sonnet into a database &lt; acriticismlab.org &gt;, in order to quantify their features through time. Those features include dates, languages, authors, diction (word choices), sentiments, named entities, and form. 
                My research question is straightforward: just what is a sonnet? Definitions have tended to focus on its form: 14 lines of rhymed ten-syllable (pentameter) verse. Subtypes, including the Petrarchan and the Shakespearean sonnet, are often based on rhyme scheme. But another definition is based on generic rather than formal features: a first-person reflection or “dialectical self-confrontation,” often with a volta (or turn) from problem to resolution (Oppenheimer: 1989). To what degree, then, is the sonnet a form or a genre? What subtypes will a comprehensive, quantified taxonomy reveal? 
                I am pursuing these inquiries by gathering as many known specimens of sonnets as possible, and then quantifying my analysis of their metadata. This includes metadata at the level of tokens and lines; of clauses and sentences; of rhyme-units (couplets/quatrains/sestets/octets) and complete sonnets; and of their published sequences. There are many features of these units that can be encoded, largely through automated natural-language processing. Tokens can be lemmatized and tagged with their parts of speech; their order and frequencies can be modelled as topics; their syllables per line can be counted; their rhyme with other tokens can be represented. The only human-dependent encoding the database includes at present leverages the expertise of anthology editors: orthography, punctuation, authors, dates, and copyright. 
                The sonnet genre must be localized in its diction. Some words appear more frequently than others, particularly in the sonnet’s early centuries of first-person lovelorn reflections: words like ‘love’ and ‘she’ and ‘suffer’ and so on. So, too, do words describing the sonnet’s own composition: words like ‘ink’ and ’lines’ and (simply) ‘this’. But genre can be quantified at the level of the sentence, as other scholars have discovered by analyzing topics and principal components in Shakespeare’s sentences (Estill and Meneses: 2018; Hope and Witmore: 2010). This project will determine what generic features the sonnet’s words and sentences reveal. 
            
            
                Methods 
                The ACL Sonnet Database has standardized its texts according to the TEI guidelines, making them available to basic query functions and JSON object serialization. Thus far it contains 1880 Englishlanguage sonnets, including 445 transcribed from a single print anthology (Hirsch and Boland: 2008). My students and I have populated this repository first with English-language sonnets because they are numerous enough to offer a test case for machine-enabled research in any natural language. 
                The database also maintains a Python class for connecting to its data via the RESTful API, automating much of the data parsing for analysis with software like the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK). Initial student-driven inquiries began with close readings of ten sonnets from the anthology to identify quantifiable features. Students have charted the frequency distributions of the sonnets’ rhyme schemes; enjambment; rhetorical figures (anaphora and epistrophe); and topics, including rhetorical questions and references to celestial objects and classical muses. 
            
            
                Results 
                At this proof-of-concept stage, the database offers results only in these limited domains, and on this limited dataset. At the time of the DH2019 conference, it will have many more thousands of sonnets. I will report on their quantifiable formal characteristics, including rhyme schemes, meter, line lengths, sentence lengths, word frequencies, part-of-speech distributions, and ngrams. I will also report on topic models and the sonnets’ principal components distributed through time, author nationality and gender, and other salient subdivisions. 
            
            
                Discussion 
                Anthologies of sonnets are sufficient for preliminary student-driven inquiries, but to generate insights into the sonnet writ large, a wider net is necessary. I have begun conversations with machine-learning specialists to train a neural network to recognize sonnets in undifferentiated text files, based on the formal and generic characteristics of sonnets isolated by anthology editors. To prepare for this phase my approach will be two-pronged: to give students another dozen anthologies for further transcription; and to use that expanding repository of sonnets as a training set for a machine-learning process that will identify similar poems in a corpus of 70,000 English texts printed before 1700, the Early English Books Online - Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) corpus. Early sonnets establish conventions to which later English sonnets respond, so they are a valid place to begin this inquiry. That process has already begun with a subset of 18,000 XML files from the EEBO-TCP corpus containing the &lt;l&gt; element, denoting lines of poetry. My lead programmer, who built the database, will write an algorithm that parses these undifferentiated elements into clusters of 14-line sequences, on the provisional assumption that all 14-line stanzas or poems bear a family resemblance to the sonnet. (This, too, is a provisional assumption; there are sonnets, including one by Shakespeare, of irregular lengths.) I will begin with 14-line sequences in order to identify the extra-formal characteristics that are twinned with this form; only then can I unshackle the detection algorithm from the constraints of form, to see which other poetic units bear the nearest affinity.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Estill, L., and Meneses, L. (2018). Is Falstaff Falstaff? Is Prince Hal Henry V?: Topic Modeling Shakespeare’s Plays. Digital Studies/le Champ Numérique 8(1). 
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, Edward and Boland, Eavan (eds.) (2008. 
                        The Making of a Sonnet: A Norton Anthology. New York; London: W. W. Norton. 
                    
                    
                        Hope, J., and Witmore, M (2010). The Hundredth Psalm to the Tune of “green Sleeves”: Digital Approaches to Shakespeare’s Language of Genre. Shakespeare Quarterly 61(3). 
                    
                    
                        Oppenheimer, Paul (1989). 
                        The Birth of the Modern Mind: Self, Consciousness, and the Invention of the Sonnet. New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            L’enseignement des méthodes qualitatives et ethnographiques occupe une place prédominante dans les filières universitaires en SHS, favorisant un apprentissage par et pour la recherche. Dans ce domaine, les façons de faire sont diverses, que ce soit en termes de méthodes enseignées (observations, entretiens, etc.), de formes d’enseignement (présentations théoriques, réalisations pratiques, etc.) ou bien encore de données utilisées (produites par l’enseignant et/ou les étudiants, issues de la littérature, etc.) Sur ce point précis, disposer de données qualitatives fiables, pertinentes, éthiquement et juridiquement sûres représente une gageure pour les enseignants. 
            Cette communication vise justement à apporter un éclairage particulier sur cette question des données en présentant la banque d’enquêtes qualitatives beQuali et ses apports pour la formation aux méthodes en SHS. En effet, beQuali répond aux besoins spécifiques des enseignants en mettant à disposition des données anonymisées, issues d’enquêtes reconnues et couvrant un large éventail de thématiques et de méthodes. De plus, beQuali permet d’utiliser ces données non seulement comme des exemples illustratifs mais aussi comme des corpus manipulables en tant que tels. Plus généralement, beQuali est une banque d’enquêtes qualitatives développée au sein du Centre de données socio-politiques (UMS SciencesPo Paris/CNRS) et fait partie de l’équipement d’excellence DIME-SHS, qui offre des outils numériques pour la production et la réutilisation d'enquêtes en sciences sociales. Elle met à disposition de la communauté académique des données issues d’enquêtes qualitatives en sociologie et en science politique. beQuali s’inscrit pleinement dans la perspective des humanités numériques dans la mesure où elle participe de la diffusion des savoirs par le biais des outils numériques. Le catalogue de beQuali compte à l’heure actuelle une douzaine d’enquêtes dans les domaines de la sociologie et des sciences politiques. Les objets d’études sont donc particulièrement divers, tout comme les méthodologies mises en œuvre. De fait, la banque d’enquête a pour but de mettre en lumière le pluralisme des méthodes qualitatives et propose ainsi des enquêtes par entretiens (non directifs ou semi-directifs), observations ethnographiques ou entretiens collectifs (
                focus group). Dans le but d’apporter le plus d’éléments possibles sur le contexte de l’enquête comme sur son déroulement, les corpus mis à disposition pour chaque enquête comprennent, outre les données proprement dites (transcriptions d’entretien, carnet d’observations, etc.), l’ensemble des documents relatifs à la préparation de l’enquête comme à son analyse. Pour donner un exemple concret, le dernier ajout au catalogue est une enquête réalisée par Anne Gotman intitulée « Dilapidation et prodigalité » (Gotman, 1995). Le corpus mis à disposition est composé de 327 fichiers, dont 68 transcriptions d’entretien et 36 questionnaires.
            
            Pour cette communication, une présentation générale de l’outil beQuali sera proposée en premier lieu. Il s’agira ainsi de donner quelques éléments de contexte concernant la banque d’enquêtes et de décrire ses différentes activités. Surtout, une présentation du site internet de beQuali (www.bequali.fr) sera réalisée, notamment des différents outils d’exploration des enquêtes. Ensuite, nous souhaitons mettre en lumière les usages possibles de beQuali pour la formation méthodologique et les diverses problématiques qu’ils soulèvent en termes de pédagogie, d’accès aux données et de contextualisation de ces dernières. En offrant un point de vue privilégié sur la recherche « en train de se faire », beQuali constitue de fait un moyen original de transmettre des savoirs et des savoir-faire. beQuali offre en effet aux étudiants l’opportunité de faire connaître toute la complexité d’une recherche qualitative en sciences sociales, complexité souvent invisibilisée dans les travaux finaux des chercheurs (articles, ouvrages, etc.) La mise à disposition des enquêtes sur internet, comme l’utilisation de nombreux outils numériques, permettent de plus une adaptation pertinente aux différentes demandes des enseignants. C’est notamment le cas des opérations de numérisation des transcriptions d’entretien et de l’utilisation de la TEI (
                Text encoding initiative). L'édition en TEI permet de décrire la structuration du texte (tours de paroles entre les interviewés et les enquêteurs, éléments de paraverbal, etc.) et un affichage dynamique sur le site beQuali. Cet outil permet ainsi de faire travailler en ligne les étudiants sur la relation entre enquêteur et enquêté, par exemple, sur la nature des échanges ou le niveau de distance entre ces derniers. De plus, nous proposons de faire la démonstration d’un nouvel outil de recherche dans les corpus d’enquête dédié aux enseignants et étudiants. Ce « kit d’enseignement » facilite la découverte des matériaux utiles et de leur contenu en réponse à des thématiques d’enseignement prédéfinies. Pour finir, la présentation s’efforcera d’intégrer des retours d’utilisateurs de beQuali, notamment des enseignants. En définitive, cette présentation courte vise à présenter, via l'exemple de beQuali, les possibilités ouvertes par le numérique pour explorer et exploiter les corpus complexes que sont les enquêtes qualitatives dans un contexte de formation universitaire.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Corti, L. and Bishop L. (2005). Strategies in teaching secondary analysis of qualitative data. 
                        Forum : Qualitative Social Research, 6(1).
                    
                    
                        Duchesne, S. and Garcia, G. (2014). beQuali : une archive qualitative au service des sciences sociales. In Cornu, M. and Formageau, J. (eds.), 
                        Archives de la recherche. Problèmes et enjeux de la construction du savoir scientifique. Paris: L’Harmattan, pp. 35-56.
                    
                    
                        Gotman, A. (1995). 
                        Dilapidation et prodigalité. Paris: Nathan.
                    
                    
                        Hakker, M. and Morgan-Brett, B. (2016). Developing research-led teaching: two cases of practical data reuse in the classroom. 
                        Sage Open, 7(2).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                This paper reflects on the problem of the ontological status of text in the digital environment. Referring to Briet (1951), Van Zundert and Andrews (2017) drew on Briet’s fluid concept of documentation and pointed to a similar fluidity in the concept of text. Here we draw a parallel to debates in the field of philosophy of consciousness to examine how this may help us to understand the specific textuality of digital text.
            
            In his 2003 article, P.M.S. Hacker confronted Thomas Nagel’s reasoning in “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” (Nagel, 1974). Nagel had argued that consciousness has a unique individual subjective quality that defies reduction to the materiality of body and mind. Hacker’s refutation of Nagel’s reasoning is almost exclusively based on the observation that Nagel’s argumentation in key places is syntactically faulty (Hacker, 2003:170). For Hacker—a Wittgensteinian philosopher of language—erroneous syntax implies faulty logic and thus incorrect argument. His counter-argument implicitly reduces consciousness to that which can be understood and explained linguistically. But this move ignores thereby the evidence and arguments put forward in fields beyond linguistics and philosophy that speak against the idea of consciousness as a solely linguistic construct: empirical evidence from the neurosciences (cf. Koch, Massimini, Boly, and Tononi, 2016), theories on consciousness that relate consciousness to mind and body such as came forward from integrated information theory (cf. Tononi, 2012), and ideas surrounding embodied cognition (cf. Shapiro, 2012). Sources from many disciplines thus seem to suggest we cannot understand consciousness solely as a linguistic construct, or one that must be explained exclusively by linguistic means. A concrete understanding of consciousness is likely to integrate types of knowledge and experiences that are distinctly non-linguistic and hard to properly linguistically express.
            Arguably then, mind and consciousness are better understood as emergent properties of a body orchestrating multiple types of sensations and information. Explaining consciousness through linguistic properties alone would be akin to trying to explain plastic arts by words solely. As early 20th century artist Vernon Blake (1926) put it in his phenomenological treatise on art: “By means of words one cannot hope to attain to precise transmission of ‘plastic’ thoughts. The plastic arts exist because they are the natural and only way to transmit that species of thought from one human being to another. They necessarily deal in thought factors which are inexpressible in words.” 
            We observe a parallel in digital textual scholarship, which is the field’s preoccupation with the digital mimetic reproduction of printed text. This is the prevalent paradigm (comprehensively described in e.g. Pierazzo, 2013), and most digital scholarly editions that have been produced follow it meticulously. This mimetic philosophy has historically been expounded through the socio-technical system known as TEI-XML and its supporting community.  The vocabulary and syntax of the TEI is geared exclusively towards the structural, documentary, and content description of non-digital texts. Its philosophy and technology confine text to an existence as a book or as a digital reproduction thereof; itsvocabulary and syntax treat textuality only by means of the non-digital idiom of print, manuscript, score, script et cetera. The application of this idiom consequently leads to the reification of text as that which was contained in a document.
            Just as it is an illusion to think that consciousness can be explained entirely by means of linguistics, so it is an illusion to think that text and a full understanding of it can be achieved by digital means that reduce the text to a print paradigm. Barring some eccentric exceptions there are, to our knowledge, no scholarly editors that hold that only what is on the page is the text, that the text exists solely as a semiotic representation. It is in reading that the text becomes to exist. Umberto Eco (1981) regarded a written text as a series of instructions for the reader to create meaning. The meaning of a text is a co-creation that emerges from the interaction between the text and the situated knowledge and embodied cognition of the reader. The uniqueness of this interaction—that stems from two uniquely situated sites of knowledge, namely the text and the reader, mingling—gives rise to the indeterminacy Jerome McGann (1991) calls the textual condition.
            Like consciousness cannot be reduced to linguistics, textuality cannot be reduced to documentary description. We may never be able to experience the uniqueness of another reader’s mind. Consequently we may never be able to fully explain what text is. But the salient point is that we can apply digital technology to understand text beyond its being as a sign on the page. We contend that digital technologies can (and should) be used to explore the properties of these different beings of text. Analogous to what Alan Kay (1997, 2007) said about the computer revolution, we may perhaps say that the digital text has not happened yet.  The medium which differentiates the digital from linear, non-interactive text is still in the process of being imagined.
            So we textual scholars must become more imaginative, and ask ourselves: is there anything it is like to be a text? For us this question serves to displace an understanding of digital text as an inanimate series of electronic signs with an understanding of text as a more dynamic and interactive agent. Being a text in a digital environment involves formal complexities and computational procedural elements that are alien to print or manuscript text. Furthermore, being digital allows a text to transgress the boundaries of the document and to connect to other texts and information in ways that reify connections usually only present in human cognition. Lastly there is an element of code to the existence of text in the digital environment. Software code is text’s animated computational twin. Text will often interact with code, to the point of symbiosis. Our use cases demonstrate these properties of digital text.
            Our first use case focuses on Codex (Neill and Kuczera, 2019), a system for combining text annotation with graph database networks. A standoff property text editor is a central tool allowing users to create multiple overlapping annotations (avoiding ‘OHCO impedance’). The graph network can be constructed out of entities derived from within texts as well as managed independently of the texts themselves. The aspiration of Codex is not so much the reproduction of a manuscript within a document (like a single cell), but the emergence of a multi-cellular network of texts linked by the connective tissue of the graph database. The goal of Codex is to enable scholars to create a kind of ‘meta-text’ formed from out of the relations existing within texts across the corpus.
            Our second use case focuses on the creation of a digital critical edition as a computational model of the text and its witnesses, where a documentary model of edition was considered insufficient to represent not only the individual texts, but the relationship between the text witnesses themselves as well as to the information the text carries. The process of transcription, transformation to valid TEI-XML, collation of the chosen layers of witness text, and analysis of the variation is done with available tools, such as tpen2tei (Andrews, Veigl, and Kaufmann, 2018) and CollateX (Dekker and Middell, 2011), that are as general-purpose as possible. Even so, the editors had to write custom code ‘plugins’ in order to facilitate this process, for example to specify a normalization string for collation, to handle the expansion of abbreviations, or to convert certain elements of TEI markup to HTML display. We consider that this custom software code, insofar as it carries an editor’s interpretation of the text and the significance of its parts, is itself part of the edition that is produced, and thus part of the edited text.
            Our third use case considers the object-oriented modeling of a text using a general-purpose computer language. The objective in this case is to demonstrate that adequate transcription as the scholarly community has performed it up to now does not necessarily encompass adequate re-mediation of that text. Computer languages facilitate the meticulous modeling not only of the linguistic layer of a text, but also of many dimensions of the text beyond that. We may actually program a digital scholarly edition so that, when the code is run, the result is the scholarly edition. But we may also model the objects, events, and relations that exist in the narrative world of the text, in which case running the code becomes a re-enactment of the text’s narrative. In this way digital technology calls into question the limits of transcription and how digital transcription may add to understanding in novel ways.
            These use cases show that to imagine what it is like to be a digital text invites us to reconceive of text in a specifically digital fashion that points to affordances we fail to see and use were we to regard digital text as a mere mimesis of print and manuscript texts. This, we contend, adds to our understanding of what being a text is, and ultimately to understanding what text is.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Andrews, T. L., Veigl, C., and Kaufmann, S. (2018). 
                        tpen2tei. Python, Vienna: DHUniWien. https://github.com/DHUniWien/tpen2tei (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Blake, V. (1971). 
                        The Art And Craft Of Drawing: A Study (First published 1926). New York: Hacker Art Books.
                    
                    
                        Briet, S. (1951). 
                        Qu’est-ce que la Documentation? Paris: Édit.
                    
                    
                        Eco, U. (1981). The Theory of Signs and the Role of the Reader. 
                        The Bulletin of the Midwest Modern Language Association, 
                        14(1): 35–45. 10.2307/1314865.
                    
                    
                        Hacker, P. M. S. (2002). Is There Anything It Is like to Be a Bat? 
                        Philosophy, 
                        77(300): 157–74. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3752108 (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Haentjens Dekker, R., and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-supported collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. In 
                        Supporting Digital Humanities 2011. Presented at the Supporting Digital Humanities 2011, Kopenhagen (DE).
                    
                    
                        Kay, A. C. (2007). The Real Computer Revolution Hasn’t Happened Yet. Viewpoints Research Institute. http://www.vpri.org/pdf/m2007007a_revolution.pdf (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Kay, 
                        A.
                         C. (1997). The Computer Revolution Hasn’t Happened Yet. Presented at the 12th annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA 1997), Atlanta: ACM SIGPLAN. https://moryton.blogspot.com/2007/12/computer-revolution-hasnt-happened-yet.html (accessed 27 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates of consciousness: progress and problems. 
                        Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
                        17: 307–321. 10.1038/nrn.2016.22.
                    
                    
                        McGann, J. (1991). 
                        The Textual Condition. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                    
                    
                        Nagel, T. (1974). What Is It Like to Be a Bat? 
                        The Philosophical Review, 
                        83(4): 435–50. 10.2307/2183914.
                    
                    
                        Neil, I., and Kuczera, A. (2019). The Codex.net — An Atlas of History. 
                        Die Modellierung des Zweifels – Schlüsselideen und -konzepte zur graphbasierten Modellierung von Unsicherheiten, 
                        Sonderbände der ZfdG 4: (forthcoming).
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E. (2015). 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Farnham: ashgate Publishing limited.
                    
                    
                        Shapiro, L. A. (2012). Embodied Cognition. In Margolis, E., Samuels, R., and Stich, S. P. (eds.), 
                        The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Cognitive Science. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 118–46. http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195309799.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780195309799-e-6 (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Tononi, G. (2012). 
                        Phi, A Voyage from the Brain to the Soul. New York: Patheon Books.
                    
                    
                        Van Zundert, J. J., and Andrews, T. L. (2017). Qu’est-ce qu’un texte numérique? 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 
                        32(Suppl_2): ii89–105. 10.1093/llc/fqx039.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Since October 2018, version 1.0rc of a 
                digital genetic edition of Goethe’s 
                
                    Faust
                
                 is publicly accessible online (Goethe 2018). The poster visualizes and explains the edition’s most specific features and discusses recent research about modelling macrogenesis as a graph.
            
            The 
                archive is the edition’s heart piece with detailed multi-view representations of about 550 manuscripts spanning a period from the early 1770s until 1832. Additionally, it contains printed editions and testimonies about the genesis of Faust (references found in diaries, letters etc.). For each of the manuscripts there are the following views, some of which are combined on screen:
            
            
                visualization of the quire structure (collation) and manuscript description (fig. 1)
                    plus, see fig. 2:
                
                high-resolution digital facsimiles 
                diplomatic transcription overlay
                separate diplomatic rendering of inscriptional phenomena
                textual rendering for a more interpretive account of alterations
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        2 H, collation visualisation (center) with preview images (left) and textual manuscript description (right); extract.
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        2 H, verse line 11579f. Views: 
                        digital facsimile – text image overlay – 
                        separate diplomatic transcript – diplomatic rendering with tooltip information about inscriptional phenomena – 
                        textual rendering with tooltip information about alterations
                    
                
            
            Additionally, each manuscript’s final textual stage is rendered in way that closely corresponds to the rendering of the critically established text of the work (see below). All but the diplomatic views are also available for the printed editions.
            The edition’s 
                genesis section comes with navigable graphic visualizations of how witnesses relate to each other. Bar diagrams (see fig. 3) indicate the textual content of each witness by length of and gaps within bars. Their order is based on a global chronological ordering expressed in a directed acyclic graph (see below for details about macrogenesis).
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        Bar diagram for a scene of “Faust II”. Witnesses are chronologically ordered (top-down). Ochre colored bars do not contain elaborate versions, but are semantically connectable to passages of the final text, the canonic numbering of serves as x-axis.
                    
                
            
            The edition’s 
                text was critically established on the basis of the complete textual transmission. By clicking on a line of text all other versions appear synoptically (fig. 4), showing its development within and across all other witnesses in graph based chronological order (see below). All sigils are links that lead to the corresponding passage of the respective witness in the archive (see above). In addition to the synopsis, there are critical apparatus entries that report about editorial decisions.
            
            
                
                    
                    
                        Synoptical view of the development of V. 11580. Line 11578 has additional apparatus entry
                    
                
            
            The views are generated from TEI-encoded source data, the poster will illustrate the process.
            The chronological (i.e. macrogenetic) order of witnesses is far from trivial: Only a few witnesses can be precisely dated. There are many relative chronologies that only span a few witnesses each. In an experimental part of the edition, all relevant chronological information has been extracted from scholarly literature (most notably Goethe, 1888; Fischer-Lamberg, 1955; Bohnenkamp, 1994) and recorded in a simple data model that basically recognizes relative and absolute datings, together with the bibliographic source and optional comments. This information has been modeled as a directed graph, as illustrated in fig. 5: E.g., the path 1825-05-25 → 2 III H.5 → 1825-04-06 means that 2 III H.5 has been written not before February 26th and not after April 4th, 1825. From this graph, additional information can be inferred, e.g., limits for the absolute dating of 2 III H.8.
            
                
                    
                    Subgraph around 2 III H.8
                
            
            Contradictions in model or sources lead to cycles in the graph (fig. 6). In the recorded information, there is one strongly connected component (in which every node is reachable from every other node) composed of 477 witnesses and 2136 assertions, too many to check manually. Identifying and removing all contradictions with the smallest number of interventions means solving the NP-complete (Karp, 1972) 
                minimum feedback arc set problem, for which we can calculate an exact solution using a method by Baharev et al. (2015). The procedure can be manually influenced by placing weights on sources or individual edges or by marking obviously wrong edges as to ignore first.
            
            
                
                    
                    All three dashed-red edges must be removed to make this component acyclic
                
            
            From the cycle-free results, a topological ordering of the witnesses can be created (Manber, 1998:199) that is then used everywhere the edition requires a chronological ordering. Subgraph visualisations created using NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008) and GraphViz (Gansner/North, 2000) help to explain the ordering.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Baharev, A., Schichl, H. and Neumaier, A. (2015). An exact method for the minimum feedback arc set problem. 
                         
                        .
                    
                    
                        Bohnenkamp, A. (1994)
                        . “... das Hauptgeschäft nicht außer Augen lassend”. Die Paralipomena zu Goethes “Faust”. Frankfurt am Main / Leipzig: Insel.
                    
                    
                        Fischer-Lamberg, R. (1955): Untersuchungen zur Chronologie von Faust II 2 und 3. Diss. phil. (masch.), Humboldt-Universität Berlin.
                    
                    
                        Gansner, E. R. and North, S. C. (2000). An open graph visualization system and its applications to software engineering. 
                        Software - Practice and Experience, 
                        30(11): 1203–1233.
                    
                    
                        Goethe, J. W. (1888). Goethes Werke, edited under the auspices of the Grand Duchess Sophie of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach. Vol. 15, 
                        Faust. Zweiter Theil, edited by Erich Schmidt. Weimar: Hermann Böhlau.
                    
                    
                        Goethe, J. W. (2018). 
                        Faust. Historisch-Kritische Edition. (Ed.) Bohnenkamp, A., Henke, S. &amp; Jannidis, F. Version 1.1 RC. Frankfurt am Main ; Weimar ; Würzburg
                         
                         (accessed 24 January 2019).
                    
                    
                        Hagberg, A. A., Schult, D. A. and Swart, P. J. (2008). Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and Function using NetworkX. In Varoquaux, G., Vaught, T. and Millman, J. (eds), 
                        Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science Conference. Pasadena, CA USA, pp. 11–15.
                    
                    
                        Manber, U. (1989). 
                        Introduction to Algorithms: A Creative Approach. Vol. 4. Addison-Wesley Reading, MA
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            
                The “assertive edition”
                Historians have since long considered historical documents as an information carrier. Editing documents for historical research thus often meant to create modernized or abridged texts and offered a wide range of tools to access the content of the texts (abstracts, rich indices or commentaries). In the digital world this approach has ended in a type of digital scholarly edition which is still lacking an accepted term: drawing from the Semantic Web it could be named “semantic edition”, in the context of “fact-checking” it might be termed “factual edition”, or putting it into logical reasing the term could be “assertive edition” (Vogeler, 2018). Scholarly editions in this field range from early adopters of OWL like the Henry III Fine Rolls (Ciula et al., 2008; Ciula, Veira, 2007), extensive RDF representations of indices like in sandrart.net (Schreurs et al., 2007-2012) or burkhard-source
                    
                        
                            http://burckhardtsource.org/
                        
                    , or infrastructures based on the integration of text and database as in Symogih (Beretta, Vernus, 2012; Beretta, 2015).
                    
                        
                            http://symogih.org/
                        
                     Projects like Old-Bailey-Online (Howard, 2015)
                    
                        
                            https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/
                        
                     conceptualised the information part as relational databases, recent activities in the context of the Historical Atlas of Poland project created a resource labelled “edition” as database of annotations to images of the original documents (Borek et al., 2018, Słoń, Zachara-Związek, 2018)
                    
                        
                            https://atlas.ihpan.edu.pl/gis/agad_wschowa_i2_pub/index.php
                        
                    .
                
                The main change in the recent years in these digital editions is the extension of the concept of database representation from annotations similar to printed indices (Poupeau 2006) to representations of full information conveyed. In particular, the simple representation of information in RDF statements is attractive and supports this effort. RDF additionally has the advantage to be an accepted data exchange standard, which is flexible and expressive enough to cover a wide range of projects. On the other hand, the TEI has been extended to include formal descriptions of persons, places, names and basic knowledge information organisation. Classic relational database systems are powerful tools to create datasets representing complex knowledge, and the recent discussion on graph technologies is moving the discussion about the best suited technical solutions forward. The paper will give an insight in a group of projects trying to integrate the wide range of technologies around.
                The DH repository and publication platform GAMS (Stigler / Steiner, 2018) in Graz holds several projects which can be considered “semantic”/”factual”/”assertive” editions: the scholarly editions of the annual accounts of the City of Basel (Burghartz, 2015), the Urfehdebuch Basel (Burghartz et al., 2017; Pollin, Vogeler, 2017), or the Cantus-Network (Klugseder, Praßl, 2018). Others are in preparation (Klug: Tegernseer Wirtschaftsbuch; Klug et al.: Cooking Receipts of the Middle Ages; Wareham: British Hearth Tax Online; Haug-Moritz: Imperial Diet 1576
                    
                        
                            https://reichstagsakten-1576.uni-graz.at/
                        
                    ). The tasks to be solved with these resources are multiple: Which assertion made by the texts should be represented? How good the XML structure helps to extract assertions? How to link between data representation, text, and image? How to organise an efficient workflow?
                
            
            
                Which content should be represented?
                All projects come from specific domains: accounting, criminal history, history of liturgy, taxation, political institutions, and dietary history. This leads to the development of individual ontologies. In the case of accounts the projects could benefit from an international activity in the development of an ontology for historical accounting (MEDEA
                    
                        
                            http://medea.hypotheses.org/
                        
                    , DEPCHA
                    
                        
                            http://gams.uni-graz.at/context:depcha
                        
                    ). The criminal records used a “local” ontology which should be harmonised in the wider range of criminal history research. The Cantus Network reused identifiers from liturgical study (cantus database)
                    
                        
                            http://cantus.uwaterloo.ca/
                        
                     and started to work on an ontology for liturgical feasts based on the reference work by Hermann Grotefend (1898). Cooking receipts can reuse food ontologies for modern purposes or generic data from wikidata. For the imperial diet the historians in the project suggested to work on an ontology representing forms of communication as they are considered core in the interpretation of the political event. The experiences with these ontologies demonstrate that a core functionality in the implementation of assertive editions it he possibility to model information which goes beyond the flat text, i.e. information that can hardly be extracted with standard information extraction methods.
                
            
            
                How to link between data representation, text, and image?
                The GAMS system integrates TEI transcriptions with a IIIF image server. This makes it easy to link between text and images. The relationship between assertions and text is handled by a local ontology considering the data entries as a kind of factoid (Bradley, Short, 2005), which carries a link to the source. In practice the textual fragments supporting the formal assertions carry identifiers by which they can be stored together with the data with a local &lt;g2o:textualContent&gt; property.
                    
                        
                            http://gams.uni-graz.at/o:gams-ontology/#textualContent
                        
                     This is an approach similar to Web Annotation so it seems suitable to reuse the W3C Web Annotation Vocabulary.
                    
                        
                            https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-model/
                        
                     This would even allow the full range of relationships between the main representations of the text (digital image, transcription, database).
                
            
            
                How to organise an efficient workflow?
                Centring the technical solution on well-established standards helps to create a framework of different tools. While Oxygen-XML is a main tool for XML encoding and plug-ins like Ediarum
                    
                        
                            www.bbaw.de/en/telota/software/ediarum
                        
                     help in transcription and basic markup, tools like Transkribus
                    
                        
                            https://transkribus.eu/
                        
                     are used in the Cooking Receipt project to create topographically precise transcriptions. In the Cantus project a workflow based on the conversion of word files to TEI was chosen. The TEI offers with the @ana attribute a powerful method to extract assertions with XSLT. For the criminal records, the accounts and the hearth tax documents, customized TEI are used, which combine the text structure (e.g. in simple &lt;p&gt; tags) with the interpretative level (with @ana as a URI references). XSLT-Transformations during ingest in the GAMS convert extracts the RDF representation of the text. The DEPCHA project demonstrates that this workflow can be used as a hub between various input forms.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                The experiences in the projects show that DH provides methods for historians to create rich editions including formal representations of the information conveyed. The GAMS infrastructure does this by combining a set of tools around standards like IIIF, TEI and RDF. Still, the standards for data exchange in many humanities domains do not exist. Future work will have to focus on creating reused domain ontologies, which the data-for-history initiative is promoting.
                    
                        
                            http://dataforhistory.org/
                        
                     It has to be evaluated, if W3C Web annotation can become the major link between the various representations of texts in digital scholarly editions. All of this can form the assertive edition many historians dream of.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Beretta, F. (2015). The symogih.org project and TEI. Encoding structured historical data in XML texts. In 
                        Text Encoding Initiative Conference and Members’ Meeting 2015. Connect, Animate, Innovate., Oct 2015, Lyon, France, 
                        https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01251915.
                    
                    
                        Beretta, F., and Vernus, P. (2012). Le projet SyMoGIH et la modélisation de l'information. Une opération scientifique au service de l'histoire. In 
                        Les Carnets du LARHRA 1: 81-107.
                    
                    
                        Borek, A., Gochna, M., Myrda, G., Słomski, M., Słoń, M., and Związek, T. (2018): Technical and Methodological Foundations of Digital Indexing of Medieval and Early Modern Books of Entries. In 
                        DSH 66: in print.
                    
                    
                        Bradley, J., and Short, H. (2005). Texts into databases. The Evolving field of New-style Prosopography. In 
                        LLC 20, suppl. 1: 3-24.
                    
                    
                        Burghartz, S. (ed.) (2015). 
                        Jahrrechnungen der Stadt Basel 1535 bis 1610 – digital. Basel, Graz: ZIM. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/context:srbas.
                    
                    
                        Burghartz, S., Calvi, S., and Vogeler, G. (eds.) (2017). 
                        Urfehdebücher der Stadt Basel – digitale Edition. Graz: ZIM. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/context:ufbas.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, 
                        A., and Veira, J. M. (2007). Implementing an RDF/OWL Ontology on Henry the III Fine Rolls, abstract. In 
                        OWLED 2007, Innsbruck, 6-7 June 2007. 
                        http://webont.org/owled/2007/PapersPDF/submission_6.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Ciula, A., Spence, P., and Veira, J. M. (2008). Expressing complex associations in medieval historical documents. The Henry III Fine Rolls Project. In 
                        LLC 23: 311-325.
                    
                    
                        Grotefend, H. (1891-1898). 
                        Zeitrechnung des deutschen Mittelalters und der Neuzeit, 2 vols., Hannover: Hahn.
                    
                    
                        Howard, S. (2015). Bloody Code. Reflecting on a Decade of the Old Bailey Online and the Digital Futures of our Criminal Past. In 
                        Law, Crime and History 5,1: 
                        http://www.pbs.plymouth.ac.uk/solon/journal/vol.5%20issue1%202015/Howard%20Bloody%20Code.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Pollin, Ch., and Vogeler, G. (2017). Semantically Enriched Historical Data. Drawing on the Example of the Digital Edition of the "Urfehdebucher der Stadt Basel". In Adamou, A., Daga, E., and Isaksen, L. (eds.). 
                        WHiSe 2017. Workshop on Humanities in the Semantic Web. Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Humanities in the Semantic Web (WHiSe II), co-located with 16th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2017), 
                        http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2014/paper-03.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Poupeau, G. (2006). De l'index nominum à l'ontologie. Comment mettre en lumière les réseaux sociaux dans les corpus historiques numériques? In 
                        Digital Humanities 2006. The First ADHO International Conference: Conference Abstracts. Université Paris-Sorbonne: 161-164.
                    
                    
                        Klugseder, R., and Praßl, F. K. (eds.) (2018). 
                        Cantus Network. libri ordinarii
                         of the Salzburg metropolitan province. Graz/Wien: ZIM. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/context:cantus.
                    
                    
                        Schreurs, A., Blüm, C., and Wübbena, Th. (eds.) (2007-2012). 
                        Sandrart.net. Eine netzbasierte Forschungsplattform zur Kunst- und Kulturgeschichte des 17. Jahrhunderts. 
                        http://sandrart.net.
                    
                    
                        Słoń, M., and Zachara-Związek, U. (2018). The Court Records of Wschowa (1495–1526). Digital Edition. In 
                        Studia Geohistorica 6: 204-222.
                    
                    
                        Stigler, J., and Steiner. E. (2018). GAMS - an Infrastructure for the Long-Term Preservation and Publication of Research Data from the Humanities. In 
                        Mitteilungen der VÖB 71,1: 66-75. 
                        10.31263/voebm.v71i1.1992.
                    
                    
                        Vogeler, G (2019). The ‘assertive edition’. In 
                        International Journal of Digital Humanities 2, forthcoming, preprint: 
                        https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:21373/.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            There has been greater inclusion of teaching in DH debates in recent years, yet in practice, UK digital humanities teaching tends to be found in explicitly DH postgraduate courses or as specific skills training for self-selecting staff or (often postgrad) students; it also appears less in English literature teaching than in history, classics, media studies or linguistics. This paper offers a case study where TEI XML encoding was introduced to first-year undergraduates in an established course on Shakespeare, to facilitate discussion on how digital humanists can enable integration of digital skills into ‘traditional’ English literature teaching by capitalizing on affinities between DH, book history, and textual scholarship. Integrating digital approaches into undergraduate teaching of English literature enables us to introduce students early on to reflecting critically on the digital, and lets us embrace the complexities of encoding as editing, rather than allowing undergraduates to only interact with the digital through a GUI.
            Early modern studies provides an ideal context in which to teach text encoding and digital literacy skills. In part this is due to the availability of encoded early modern texts for analysis and reuse, for example in the massive release into the public domain of lightly encoded EEBO-TCP texts in January 2015, and in part to fewer issues around copyright than with more modern texts (see Brown and Zimmer, 2017). More specifically, there is a synergy between the existing concerns of the Shakespeare course under discussion and those of digital publication, where the latter finds a natural fit in conversations on book history, text technologies, and editorial agency. Olin Bjork, in an article comparing American composition and computing classes to the “new media studies” side of digital humanities, suggests that “A weakness of digital humanities is that it undertheorizes the transformation of material objects into digital objects” (Bjork, 2012: 103). The materiality and the instability of the text are complexities that go to the heart of early modern literature studies: these are issues that our students grapple with when they consider the nature of the early modern play-text, yet rarely do we recognise that the digital text must be part of this conversation. Accordingly, in a course that unsettles the Shakespearean play as single authoritative text, there is a real need to push conversations on early print and textual scholarship into the realm of the digital, to unsettle and critique the digital texts the students encounter more often than they open their assigned course book.
            The course under discussion is a first year module with c.200 students enrolled, and the digital element ran as a successful pilot in 2018 and was expanded in 2019. The digital element is introduced in a guest lecture by a digital humanist; issues raised are debated in seminar groups, and existing digital texts and projects are introduced to the students, including A Digital Anthology of Early Modern English Drama (EMED), Internet Shakespeare Editions, the Queen’s Men Editions, Digital Renaissance Editions, and Folger Digital Texts, where students use the Folger API to explore the possibilities opened up by text encoding. The students then have the opportunity to create their own digital edition of the ending of King Lear, opting in to an additional workshop on TEI XML. They can elect to do their final assessment as a TEI-encoded play excerpt coupled with traditional essay, which allows them to reflect on the differences between early print, modern printed editions, and digital media. Writing about the medium and the choices it encourages or enforces allows them to critically reflect on digital texts at a crucially early point in their university careers. In the encoding part of the assignment, by taking ownership of a digital play text, they come to see both the scholarly edition and the digital medium as less an unquestionably authoritative black box and more something that they themselves can have agency over and interrogate. By pulling back the curtain on the scholarly text and the digital medium, they are more able to critique both text and textual manifestation. 
            DH in the undergraduate classroom often tends towards GUI publication, with wikis, Wordpress sites, or platforms like the Alliance for Networking Visual Culture’s Scalar (Bjork, 2012: 99–100). While that is a valuable part of the picture, this paper explores what happens when students are introduced to the complexities of XML encoding as an editing practice, and how exposure to the component parts of a digital publication opens up that black box. This reveals to the students the variety of people involved in publication, in modern as well as early modern times, and demonstrates that encoders are editors and developers are intellectual partners who have concrete influence over the resulting output. Significantly, this message is also imparted to fellow academic staff teaching on the course. This approach thus invites fellow academic staff into the digital humanities, developing by proxy their understanding of digital resource creation and consequently their ability to critique this growing area of scholarly production.
            The aim of this paper is to share experiences and create discussion around the natural affinity between early modern studies and digital publication and digital critical literacy, especially in an undergraduate context. A parallel can be seen between the instinct to view the digital object as something that appears from thin air and the unquestioning acceptance of a particular critical edition as the immutable authoritative text. It is too easy to ignore the digital provenance of a text online or the multiple agents involved in producing any (especially canonical) text. To do this is to remove those who construct the text, and obscure the encoding as well as editorial choices made at every stage of its creation. To direct attention towards these is to put them back. This is a conversation that we need to begin early on in students’ academic career, to situate digital critical literacy within an existing tradition of literary criticism: we need to teach students to close-read the material digital object at the same time as the literary text and its early print origins.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bjork, O. (2012). Digital Humanities and the First-Year Writing Course. In Hirsch, B. ed., (2012) 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers, pp. 97–119. 
                    
                    
                        Brown, M., Poston, M. and Williamson, E. A Digital Anthology of Early Modern English Drama https://emed.folger.edu/ (accessed 20 November 2018).
                    
                    
                        Greatley-Hirsch, B. (2015) Digital Renaissance Editions 
                        http://digitalrenaissance.uvic.ca (accessed 20 November 2017).
                    
                    Hackfest and Ideas Hack, Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) at the Bodleian Libraries http://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/eebotcp/early-english-books-hackfest/ (accessed 20 November 2018).
                    
                        Hirsch, B. ed. (2012) 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers. 
                    
                    
                        Hirsch, B., and Jenstad, J. (2016). Beyond the Text: Digital Editions and Performance. 
                        Shakespeare Bulletin 34, 107–27. 
                    
                    Internet Shakespeare Editions, (2016). 
                        http://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/ (accessed 20 November 2017).
                    
                    
                        Mowat, B., Werstine, P., Poston, M. and Niles, R., eds., (n.d.) Shakespeare's Plays from Folger Digital Texts. 
                        www.folgerdigitaltexts.org (accessed 20 November 2018). 
                    
                    The Alliance for Networking Visual Culture (n.d.) Scalar 
                        https://scalar.usc.edu/scalar/ (accessed 20 November 2017).
                    
                    Queen's Men Editions, (2011). 
                        http://qme.internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/ (accessed 20 November 2017). 
                    
                    
                        Zimmer, E. and Brown, M. (2017) History of Early English Books Online. Folgerpedia. 
                        https://folgerpedia.folger.edu/History_of_Early_English_Books_Online (accessed 20 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Research projects often create domain-specific annotation vocabularies. This poster will present approaches to the modelling and migration of encoded charter data that arose during the migration of the Charters Encoding Initiative (CEI: www.cei.lmu.de) to be compliant with the current version of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI P5: www.tei-c.org/ ). It is part of a project to migrate and enhance encoded charter descriptions from the virtual charter platform monasterium.net in order to provide a well documented, reusable environment that prolongs the data life cycle (cf. Buddenbohm et al. 2016; Wissik, Ďurčo 2015; Büttner et al. 2011; Flanders, Muñoz 2015). The migration follows established principles of data sustainability and interoperability (cf. Cremer 2015 et al.). It relies on the ingest of data from Monasterium.net into the GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System), a Fedora-Commons-based certified trusted digital repository at the University of Graz that handles preservation and publication, and also provides benefits like data visibility, unique handle references (handle.net), and the provision of interoperable data via OAI-PMH (Stigler / Steiner 2018).
            To achieve this, a new data model extension had to be developed in order to support both scholarly needs and the careful curation of data. The project evaluated which concepts from the charter domain are of wider importance. The new TEI P5 extension for charter-specific data, based upon the existing CEI, has to structure the data in a context-neutral manner that supports encoding diverse historical periods and regions using diplomatic TEI markup (Vogeler 2018), including Ethiopian royal acts (Wion 2018), Nepalese charters from Mustang (Ramble 2018), and early modern grants of arms from (e.g.) Marburg ( 1581-12-14_Marburg ). This justifies a data model extension in order to support both scholarly needs and the careful curation of data. It includes elements new to the TEI to model:
            
                Authenticating features like signatures, fingerprints, and notarial signa.
                Span-level features describing the conventional elements of documentary instruments.
                Person/Organization level legal actors.
                Status of documents as originals or copies and their relationship with other textual witnesses.
            
            Domain-specific annotation can be achieved additionally through the creation of structured ontologies, e.g. describing methods of authentication, types of manuscript additions, and heraldic blazonry to support the typing and subtyping of data. This enhances the possibility of semantic use in the principle of Linked Open Data (LoD).
            Faced with heterogeneous data from a variety of sources (direct-entry from archives, web scraping, digitization of catalogues, and carefully hand-crafted born-digital description), the project involves a series of transformations where charter encoding is re-imagined and the CEI is re-modelled and transformed to the TEI P5 in a context-sensitive manner (see Ambrosio et al. 2014). This entails:
            
                Cleaning and rationalizing existing data in a more interoperable and cross-project comparable manner.
                Mapping of existing data to new standards and transformation into current, standards-compliant TEI P5 structure.
            
            The new data model will be tested through the development of facet-based search and predefined queries and visualization based upon scholarly needs of target audience of diplomatics, legal history, and art history scholars. All of this is part of a long-term project to develop tools that enable end users such as archives and individual scholars, as well as the repository monasterium.net, to describe historic legal data in a structured manner that is semantically interoperable with other historical data.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Ambrosio, Antonella; Sébastien Barret; Georg Vogeler (eds.) (2014). Digital diplomatics The computer as a tool for the diplomatist? Beihefte zum Archiv für Diplomatik, Schriftgeschichte, Siegel- und Wappenkunde 14. Böhlau.
                    
                    
                        Buddenbohm, Stefan; Claudia Engelhardt; Ulrike Wuttke (2016). Angebotsgenese für ein geisteswissenschaftliches Forschungsdatenzentrum. In: 
                        Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften. 2016. http://zfdg.de/2016_003 DOI: 10.17175/2016_003
                    
                    
                        Büttner, Stephan; Hans-Christoph Hobohm; Lars Müller (ed.) (2011). 
                        Handbuch Forschungsdatenmanagement, Bad Honnef: Bock + Herchen, 2011. www.forschungsdatenmanagement.de
                    
                    
                        Cremer, Fabian; Claudia Engelhardt und Heike Neuroth (2015). Embedded Data Manager – Integriertes Forschungsdatenmanagement: Praxis, Perspektiven und Potentiale. In: BIBLIOTHEK - Forschung und Praxis 2015; 39(1), 13-31. DOI: 10.1515/bfp-2015-0006
                    
                    
                        Digital Curation Centre, University of Edinburgh: “ The DCC Curation Model .” 
                        http://www.dcc.ac.uk/sites/default/files/documents/publications/DCCLifecycle.pdf
                    
                    
                        Flanders, Julia; Trevor Muñoz (2015). An Introduction An Introduction to Humanities Data Curation. https://guide.dhcuration.org/contents/intro/
                    
                    
                        Renear, Allen H. (2004). Text encoding. In: 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/
                    
                    
                        Smith, Abby (2004). Preservation. In: 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/.
                    
                    
                        Stigler, Johannes, Elisabeth Steiner (2018). GAMS – Eine Infrastruktur zur Langzeitarchivierung und Publikation geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungsdaten. In: Mitteilungen der VÖB 71,1 (2018), 207-206. DOI: 10.31263/voebm.v71i1.1992
                    
                    
                        Vogeler, Georg (2018). Digital Diplomatics: The Evolution of a European Tradition or a Generic Concept?. In: Cubelic, Simon , Michaels, Axel und Zotter, Astrid (eds.): 
                        Studies in Historical Documents from Nepal and India, Heidelberg: Heidelberg University Publishing, 2018. 85-109. DOI: 10.17885/heiup.331.454
                    
                    
                        Wion, Anaïs (2018). “The TEI-XML Architecture of Ethiopian Manuscript Archives: Respecting the Integrity of Primary Sources and Asserting Editorial Choices”, in: Comparative Oriental Manuscript Studies Bulletin 4/1, 2018, 33-38. https://www.aai.uni-hamburg.de/en/comst/pdf/bulletin4-1/33-38.pdf
                    
                    
                        Wissik Tanja, Matej Ďurčo (2015). Research Data Workflows: From Research Data Lifecycle Models to Institutional Solutions. CLARIN 2015 Selected Papers. Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings, No. 123. 94-107. http://www.ep.liu.se/ecp/123/008/ecp15123008.pdf
                    
                
            
        
    

        
            Lexicography is currently embracing rapid change as the traditional methods of publishing dictionaries are replaced by the ubiquity of lexical information on the Web. Furthermore, the application of computational techniques to the processes of lexicography is revolutionizing how dictionaries can be constructed. In this context, the recently established ELEXIS (European Lexicographic Infrastructure) project aims to develop an infrastructure for eLexicography across Europe, that builds a virtuous cycle of lexicography where lexicographic resources are linked across languages, in order to build improved natural language processing tools, which can then aid in the construction of novel resources and retro-digitization of dictionaries, thus driving the cycle. The project is multilingual, covering 15 European countries, and has a strong interest in driving lexicography for under-resourced and minoritized languages.
            The event will be the second iteration of a highly successful 
                workshop first run before the EADH Conference in Galway on 6 December 2018. On that occasion, the Workshop was the highest-subscribed of the ten pre-conference workshops, with 33 regular registrations and approximately fifty attendees from a range of backgrounds in lexicography, computer science, and the humanities.
            
            Specific emphasis in this edition of the workshop will be on complexity in regard of data, technologies and community aspects of lexicography. Complexity in data concerns issues in access to lexicographic data across stakeholders (national institutes, research groups, individuals), representation formats, linguistic assumptions, underlying theories and scope of analysis and representation, legal restrictions and licenses, multilingual, cross-lingual, comparative and typological issues, as well as advanced aspects in multimodality, concerning audio-visual representation. Complexity in technologies concerns challenges in creating and expanding novel lexicographic resources, which require a combination of many technologies, including natural language processing tools as well as machine learning approaches and AI methods in general, for data linking and data management, in order to identify and represent words, their senses and definitions. 
            Complexity in communities, in part, lies in differences related to stakeholders’ type and status (national language institutes, standardization bodies, research groups, individuals), status of the language in question (official, minority, regional, etc.), and involvement in networking activities. In addition, the complexity is related to several academic disciplines involved in eLexicographic research such as linguistics, natural language processing (NLP), digital humanities, artificial intelligence (AI), computational linguistics, computer science, etc. This constitutes a challenge to provide professionals with training opportunities and ensure knowledge exchange among all stakeholders.
            The workshop has three main aims: firstly, we will invite speakers from existing major lexicographic projects to give insights into the complexity in regard of data, technologies and community aspects of lexicography. Secondly, we will provide a hands-on tutorial with the ELEXIS infrastructure to enable participants to become familiar with the technologies being developed in the project. Finally, we will make an open call for posters, which will provide an overview of new projects in the area of electronic lexicography, with a special focus on papers that tackle the topic of complexity. The poster presenters will give a 5 minute lightning talk on their topic in addition to their contribution to the poster session.
            Topics of Interest
            
                Lexicography and Digital Humanities
                Complexity in Data for Lexicography 
                Complexity in Technologies for Lexicography
                Complexity across Lexicography and Related Communities
                Access and usage of dictionaries on the Web
                Retro-digitization of lexicographic resources
                Lexicography for language learning
                Use and applications of NLP for lexicography
                Lexicography for under-resourced languages
                Lexicography for terminology and translation
                Linked Data for lexical resources
                AI for Lexicography
            
            Summary of the Call
            We welcome submissions of abstracts of up to 500 words that will be presented as posters at the workshop. Submissions should present methodologies, experiments, use cases, descriptions of ongoing or planned research projects and position papers on topics related to the topics of interest (given above). Furthermore, we especially welcome papers describing interdisciplinary research combining research in lexicography, linguistics, computer science and digital humanities approaches and giving insights into complexity in regard of data, technologies and community aspects of lexicography. 
            Please submit abstracts by May 6th 2019 in any language (including an English translation for the title for reviewing purposes). Submissions will be reviewed by at least 3 reviewers and will be made available online prior to the workshop. Papers should be submitted via EasyChair. Notifications will be sent by end of May and final versions of abstracts will be required by end of June. More information on the workshop can be found on the 
                workshop website.
            
            Tentative Schedule
            
                
                    9:00-9:30
                    Invited talk: “Unity in Variety: Observation and Lexicographic Treatment of the German Standard Variety used in South Tyrol” Andrea Abel (Eurac Research, Italy)
                
                
                    9:30-10:00
                    Invited talk: 
                        "Framing in the Dutch Language: from structured data to text and back from text to structured data on situations” Piek Vossen (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands)
                    
                
                
                    10:00-10:30
                    Introduction to ELEXIS infrastructure and technology
                
                
                    10:30-11:00
                    Coffee break
                
                
                    11:00-12:00
                    Lightning Talks
                
                
                    12:00-13:00
                    Poster session
                
            
            Organizing Committee
            
                John P. McCrae is a lecturer above-the-bar at the National University of Ireland Galway in the school of information technology. His work has focussed on the application of linked data to language resources. In particular, he is the original developer of the lemon-OntoLex model, which has become a de-facto standard for representing lexicons on the Web. In addition, he is a board member of the Global WordNet Association. He has also organized many events (e.g. Language Data and Knowledge Conferences, Linked Data in Linguistics Workshops Summer Datathons/Summer Schools on Linguistic Linked Open Data etc.)
                Address: Insight Centre for Data Analytics, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland
                Email: john.mccrae@insight-centre.org
            
            
                Paul Buitelaar is a Senior Lecturer at the National University of Ireland Galway (NUIG), vice-director of the Insight Centre for Data Analytics at NUIG and head of the Insight Unit for Natural Language Processing. His main research interests are in the development and use of Natural Language Processing methods and solutions for semantic-based information access. He has been involved in a large number of national and international funded projects in this area. In recent years he was involved in the development of the Saffron framework for knowledge extraction and the definition and implementation of lemon, a vocabulary for Linguistic Linked Data.
                Address: Insight Centre for Data Analytics, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland
                Email: paul.buitelaar@insight-centre.org
            
            
                Toma Tasovac is Director of the Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities (BCDH) and Director of the Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities (DARIAH). His areas of interest include lexicography, data modeling, TEI, digital editions and research infrastructures. Toma was previously a Steering Group member of the European Network for eLexicography (ENeL), and is currently also affiliated with the European Lexicographic Infrastructure (ELEXIS).
                Address: Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities, Belgrade, Serbia
                Email: ttasovac@humanistika.org
            
            
                Justin Tonra is Lecturer in English (Digital Humanities) at the National University of Ireland Galway. His areas of research interest include digital approaches to literary studies, book history, textual studies and bibliography, scholarly editing, and literature of the Romantic period. He is currently joint National Coordinator for DARIAH Ireland, and a working-group leader for COST Action CA16204 Distant Reading for European Literary History.
                Address: English Department, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland
                Email: justin.tonra@nuigalway.ie
            
            
                Tanja Wissik is a senior researcher at the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ACDH) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences and teaches at the University of Graz. She holds a PhD from the University of Vienna in translation studies with a specialization in the field of terminology and corpus linguistics. She has been working in numerous research projects related to language resources and language technologies and is involved in outreach and network activities.
                Address: Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria
                Email: Tanja.Wissik@oeaw.ac.at
            
            
                Ksenia Zaytseva is data analyst at the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ACDH) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. She is primarily involved in development of tools and services for DH projects in archaeological and linguistic domains. Her main research interests are Semantic Web technologies, Linked (Open) Data, controlled vocabularies and reference data services. She is also interested in scientific Python programming, machine learning and web application development. 
                Address: Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria
                Email: ksenia.zaytseva@oeaw.ac.at
            
            The workshop is supported by the two EU projects 
                ELEXIS (European Lexicographic Infrastructure) and 
                Prêt-à-LLOD (Multilingual Linguistic Linked Data), and 
                DARIAH-IE.
            
            Programme Committee
            
                Fahad Khan (ILC-CNR, Pisa)
                Monica Monachini (ILC-CNR, Pisa)*
                Rute Costa (New University of Lisbon)
                Francesca Frontini (University Paul Valéry, Montpellier)
                Andrea Bellandi (ILC-CNR, Pisa)
                Christophe Roche (University of Savoie)
                Bolette Sandford Pedersen (University of Copenhagen)
                Christiane Fellbaum (Princeton University)*
                Philipp Cimiano (Bielefeld University)
                Simon Krek (Josef Stefan Institute)
                Vera Hildenbrandt (Trier Center for Digital Humanities)
                Karlheinz Mörth (Austrian Academy of Sciences)*
                Thierry Declerck (DFKI)
                Katrien Depuydt (Institute of Dutch Language)*
                Christian Chiarcos (Goethe-University Frankfurt)
                Monika Rind-Pawlowski (Goethe-University Frankfurt)*
                Alexander Geyken (Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences)*
            
            * Awaiting confirmation
        
    

        
            
                Panel introduction
                The theme of this conference is complexities, and there are few printed media as complex as newspapers and magazines. They are, generally, serial publications (and thus have a complex temporal dimension not often found in other publications), frequently with miscellaneous content and complex page layout, and often entailing complex publication relationships among authors, editors, and publishers. They have generally been poorly served by conventional research libraries, which have often discarded covers and advertising in the desire to conserve space and whose catalogues seldom represent the actual nature of their holdings.
                The digital remediation of periodicals has also been complex. Digitization is a complex term with a variety of meanings and consequently a variety of products, each with different stakeholders. Librarians want simple formats that can be produced, catalogued, stored, and delivered in standard ways. Scholars of visual arts want pages images of very high resolution and chromatic fidelity; many linguists and textual scholars don't care about pages at all but are keenly invested in machine-readable transcriptions of complete texts that are often spread across different pages and different issues. Scholars of print need information about paper types and typography. Repositories need information about copyright.
                Although most text-based scholars (literature, history, sociology, cultural studies) seldom venture beyond the downloaded PDF and token search, some have begun to engage digital textuality in more complex and sophisticated ways, and these engagements have exposed some of the limitations of standard approaches to digitization, which often focus on graphical user interfaces to page images and the production of efficient inverted indexes at the expense of the periodical corpus.
                This panel follows a session at the 2014 Digital Humanities Conference in Lausanne, Switzerland, entitled "Remediating 20th-Century Magazines of the Arts: Approaches, Methods, Possibilities," which stimulated an ongoing series of discussions and calls for the formation of an ADHO SIG devoted to Periodicals. Since then, projects large and small–Europeana Newspapers (
                    http://www.europeana-newspapers.eu), the Chronicling America Data Challenge (
                    https://www.neh.gov/news/press-release/2016-07-25), Traslantis (
                    https://translantis.wp.hum.uu.nl), the Viral Texts Project (
                    https://viraltexts.org) and, more recently, Impresso (
                    https://impresso-project.ch/) and Newseye (
                    https://www.newseye.eu/)–have begun to go beyond the retrieval paradigm to explore other methods and approaches to newspapers. This panel showcases the complexity of periodical studies and the many ways digital technologies enable them today.
                
            
            
                „Horizontal“ reading in a corpus of 19th century German music magazines and daily newspapers: analysing the debates on Verdi’s 
                    Messa da Requiem
                
                Perhaps even more than today, musical concerts in the 19th century were most relevant social and cultural events. Whenever a new musical piece was performed, detailed reviews were published in local newspapers, discussing musical ideas as well as the quality of composition and performance. The discussions were usually published in the 
                    feuilleton and in many cases even on the title page. Music critique was part of a general cultural discourse, connected to political opinions, religious beliefs and social imprints, and newspapers were a relevant forum for these debates.
                
                In the late 1860s, the number of German newspapers increased immensely, due to less restrictive press laws and to advanced printing techniques as well. It was in the mid-1870s when the newspapers announced a new piece by the Italian opera composer Giuseppe Verdi: The grand 
                    Messa da Requiem, a commemorative work for orchestra, choir and soloists, for the deceased Italian writer Alessandro Manzoni. The first performances in Austria and Germany induced a discussion about the (in)appropriateness of operatic style in the genre of sacred music, and if church music should ideally be free of realism and overwhelming or untrue emotion.
                
                The research described here focuses on analyzing the ideals of requiem music from the perspective of German music critique and compares them on regional and local levels. The analysis was supported by TEI-encoded transcriptions of all relevant German articles between 1874 and 1878, resulting in a corpus of 330 texts and approximately one million characters. The markup focuses on semantics: About 8,000 entities and relations, amongst them more than 500 individual persons, 140 performances, 100 geographic items and 135 musical works, and 100 cases of text reuse were identified.
                The corpus was then analyzed from different perspectives. Based on the semantic markup, each partial analysis started from one single entry point (e.g. 
                    Kyrie, the first part of Verdi’s composition), extracts all occurrences of one semantic unit, including some context, and compares all these in respect to publication journal, place and date and possibly author’s background. A delicate matter is the extent of context, which operates sufficiently on phrase segments in most cases. This method of extracting and parallel reading the contexts of one single semantic unit, or metaphorically: »horizontal« reading, helps identifying patterns in the reception. For example, the part 
                    Agnus Dei, a very popular piece which was mentioned in more than 60 texts, was strikingly often compared with other known opera numbers for its tune, which suggested that Verdi could have copied the melody. While musicological research has so far been limited to individual critics, the new method can be used to compare different receptions to each other without requiring background information on the single authors, which is often not available. However, this method requires accessible digital copies of newspapers, reliable metadata, high quality OCR or transcriptions, phrase segmentation, and tagged semantic entities.
                
            
            
                Re-discovering the „hidden women“ of 19th century Egyptology through thematic analysis of historical newspapers
                The end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries saw great archaeological activity in Egypt, a period that came to be known as the “Golden Age” of Egyptology. My research seeks to re-examine the ambiguous and liminal position of women attached to these archaeological digs and expeditions. The starting point was the unpublished travel journals of Mrs. Emma B. Andrews, who for over two decades between 1889 and 1914 traveled the Nile with the millionaire lawyer turned archaeologist, Theodore M. Davis. Andrews was present when Davis discovered eighteen of the forty-two tombs now known in the Valley of the Kings. and her writings provide a detailed record of excavation often lacking in contemporary publications.
                My initial work included transcribing and encoding the diaries in TEI XML, tagging named entities that have formed the basis of a research database and a digital edition. The research corpus has expanded to include material written by the wives, relatives, and friends of expedition directors, archaeologists, artists, and photographers working in Egypt at that time, and comprises diaries, correspondence, historical ephemera and a large number of historical newspapers. These documents give the historian an overview of the social, geographical and political history of Egypt at the time within the broader context of the histories of archaeology and Egyptology, of gender studies, and of the social, cultural and political history of the Victorian era.
                Working with a large corpus of digitized newspapers has shifted the work away from granular markup towards broader thematic analysis, including topic modeling and ngram analysis. This paper focuses on the process and challenges of extracting significant information from collections of digitized newspapers of varying quality and content using computational methods, using material drawn from archives including Chronicling America, Gale Primary Sources, Europeana Newspapers, and the British Library.
                Relevant newspaper articles, advertisements, and editorials have been compiled from keyword searches, based on lists generated from the named entities captured during the markup of diaries and correspondence. This has been a simple yet effective way to create relevant datasets - a task that would otherwise have been slow and unwieldy given the scope of the source material.
                The main challenge has been poor-quality OCR, which has affected returned search results. This has led to the development of strategies for cleaning bad OCR programmatically using NLTK and RegEx, as well as with digital tools developed for the purpose, including Lexos and Gale’s Digital Scholar Lab.
                Work beyond text cleaning has focused on analyzing curated newspaper datasets in an effort to identify prevalent cultural and historical themes using topic modeling tools and ngram analysis. The aim is to explore Egyptological women’s writing within this cultural context, to develop a picture of everyday life from multiple historical primary source material, a topic that is often obscured from an historian’s view.
            
            
                The periodical as a geographical space: the 19th century Hebrew 
                    HaZefirah as a case study
                
                A historical periodical, just like any historical event or phenomenon, is defined in space and time. Its institutions operate from actual buildings; it is circulated via transportation routes; and through its reader network it connects between places and people. However, the relation between the two concepts, “geographical space” and “periodical,” is not one-way. Just as much as the periodical is within a geographical space, one can and should explore the ways in which geographical spaces are within periodicals, and most importantly, are created by them. Many periodicals produce an internal geographical space, whose attributes and connections result from the text and inner conventions of the periodical, which might include the distinction between different pages, articles, and sections, or the distinction between places that appear in the headlines and places that appear in the body of the text. Geographical places, such as cities, mountains, rivers, states and continents, are located on paper rather than on the globe; their sizes (or altitudes) are defined by the frequency of their references, and the distances between the places are defined by proximity on the line, page or article. These geographical spaces that emerge from the text are mediated geographical spaces with completely different shapes and topographies than the “normal” world map. They are influenced by cultural, political, ideological and economic perceptions of writers and readers of the periodical, but they also reinforce such perceptions and legitimize them. Recent advances in digitization, automatic annotation, morphological and lexical analysis, as well as geographic and network mapping, have made the exploration of such uncharted and chaotic spaces more feasible than before. This paper will use the nineteenth century Hebrew newspaper 
                    HaZefira as a case study for different geographical spaces that originate from and within the newspaper. By alternating between various ways of representing the geographical data in the journalistic text, I will show that spaces are constantly being deterritorialized and reterritorialized. 
                    Hazefira, which operated between 1862 and 1931 was established in order to educate its readers with worldly knowledge. Its articles discussed global news, travel stories, and scientific discoveries, all of which involved spatial references. This paper will discuss the different ways of exploring the relations between textual spaces (within the journal) and their spatial references, the digital methodologies that assist the unveiling of these spaces, and the problems that are still left to be dealt with.
                
            
            
                Reconceptualizing resources: transforming Blue Mountain into TEI-encoded editions and a bibliographic knowledge base
                This paper presents work being done by the Blue Mountain Project to create TEI-based editions of its magazines and a bibliographic knowledge base of avant-garde publication that leverages its detailed bibliographic metadata and the resources of the semantic web.
                The Blue Mountain corpus of European and North American Avant-Garde periodicals currently contains full runs of thirty-four titles in eleven languages, with full text encoded in METS/ALTO and descriptive metadata in MODS. Blue Mountain's rich and extensive metadata are not well represented in the content models predominant in digital library repositories, models based on page images of books and manuscripts. Furthermore, traditional bibliographic metadata often fails to capture important information about periodicals, including periodicity, issuance, and republication.
                The paper describes the reconception of Blue Mountain's digital objects from library resources to digital editions, and of its metadata from descriptive catalog records to a bibliographic knowledge base. It describes our transformation of METS/ALTO documents into TEI-encoded XML and IIIF manifests, as well as our conversion of Blue Mountain's MODS data to PRESSoo, part of a family of models that enable analysts to capture the temporal nature of publication as well as the inter-relationships among a variety of agents and entities, allowing researchers to ask questions not easily answered before.
            
            
                A generous design of interfaces as an answer to the complexity of digitized newspaper collections
                The digitization of historical sources does not automatically translate into accessibility for historical research. The publication of digitized newspapers and periodicals still leaves researchers willing to use them, hamstrung by interfaces that offer little interaction other than search functionalities. The insufficient interactions offered by current interfaces derive from their technical and material background but also from the limited information collected so far on the actual needs of the users, especially for research. Research in the humanities is characterized by iteration, discovery and exploration, especially given the huge volume and inherent complexity of historical newspapers. Digitized newspapers offer opportunities for enrichment which in turn should allow the development of novel research workflows which go beyond mere content retrieval by means of keyword searches and get us closer to humanist research practices.
                The ambition to offer room for more flexible and open interaction with digitized cultural heritage collections has been captured by Whitelaw (DHQ, 2015) under his call for more “generous interfaces”. The interdisciplinary project “impresso - Media Monitoring of the Past” aims at materializing this call with the development of a methodologically reflected technological framework to enable new ways of engaging with multilingual digitized historical newspapers, mainly from Switzerland and Luxembourg. In other words, impresso works on the conception of a generous interface by fostering synergies between computational linguists, designers, humanist researchers and institutions holding the collections. Our proposition for the implementation of generosity is to enable users to interact with primary sources in a digital environment using all possible entry points resulting from this transformation. In our case, such interactions are made possible by OCR improvement, annotations of named entities, topics and text reuse detection as well as close and persistent cooperation with historians and designers.
                We make use of newspaper metadata provided by the partnering libraries (who printed it, when, where), the metadata produced during the compilation of digital collections e.g. the quantity of words, pages, issues, as well as annotations such as the segmentation of the document, named entities, topic modeling and text reuse. We integrate indicators of the quality of the digitization, e.g. OCR quality, missing issues, pages. Each of these items opens a distinct entry for search, exploration and analysis.
                These added layers of information require a suitable interface to be usable for researchers. This interface can facilitate the navigation of large-scale collections, both to get an overview of the general collection made available but also to get an overview of the content of a particular query or a particular collection of articles, curated by a user. The impresso interface provides space for a visual exploration of the collections, using filters to customize the visualization based on the mentioned metadata, as well as automatically extracted named entities, topics and text similarities. This push towards the design of a “generous” interface should encourage novel research workflows and a more reflective use of historical newspapers.
            
            
                Opportunities and limitations of research on historical periodicals in the era of digitization: usability of digital collections in the light of different modes of reception
                This paper reflects the initial discussions of the newspaper and magazine working group in the Digital Humanities in the German-Speaking World Association (
                    https://dig-hum.de/ag-zeitungen-zeitschriften ).
                
                Before the new opportunities of digitization emerged in libraries all over the world, historical periodicals were a rare and difficult field for both researchers and librarians. In cultural and media history, only few titles were in focus of research. In literary studies, periodicals were only consulted for first editions by canonical authors. In economics, media studies and social sciences, historical periodicals were observed for reader and consumer behavior. For linguistics, historical periodicals showed changes in non-fictional language though building up a corpus was very difficult before digitization (Burr 1997).
                Today, we can observe two ways of dealing with mass digitization. For libraries, there is always the question of emphasizing the quantity or the quality of digital editions. Both strategies have advantages: emphasizing quantity yields access to a wider range of titles; emphasizing quality leads to better access, better searchability, and greater re-usability.
                Likewise, researchers take advantage of the opportunities offered by digitization in two ways. Those simply looking to read content in hard-to-find titles are happy with the quantitative approach: a badly scanned page image is sufficient for their needs. Researchers in a DH context, however, whose research entails establishing author networks, layout analysis, or topic modeling, are frustrated by the quantitative approach and dependent upon it at the same time. Still other researchers are hampered by the loss of materiality inherent in digital editions.
                It is time to open up a discussion about how the different players in the process of digitization could work together to overcome these obstructions. We need to establish and compare the requirements of the different stakeholders as well as the status of the current landscape of digitized historical periodicals. At the moment there is a very active movement in research on historical periodicals and some are already considering digital collections as a knowledge systems and not only as containers of text, images, and other pieces of information.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Allen, Robert B.
                         (2015).Improving Access to Digitized Historical Newspapers with Text Mining, Coordinated Models, and Formative User Interface Design. ArXiv:1502.03943 [Cs], February 13, 2015. 
                        
                            http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03943
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Blevins, Cameron.
                         (2014). Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region: A View of the World from Houston, The Journal of American History 101(1): 122-147.
                    
                    
                        Burr, Elisabeth.
                         (1997). Neutral oder stereotyp. Referenz auf Frauen und Männer in der italienischen Tagespresse. In Dahmen, W.,  Holtus, G.,  Kramer, J.,  Metzeltin, M., Schweickard, W. and Winkelmann, O. (eds): Sprache und Geschlecht in der Romania. Romanistisches Kolloquium X (= TBL 417). Tübingen: Narr 133-179, 1997.
                    
                    
                        Erlin, Matt and Tatlock, Lynne.
                         (2014) Distant Readings. Topologies of German Culture in the Long Nineteenth Century. Rochester: Camden House, 2014.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, Elena.
                         (2016) Textual Scholarship and Text Encoding.  In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R. and Unsworth, J. (eds),  A New Companion to Digital Humanities Wiley Blackwell, 2016.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christof.
                         (2013).  Big? Smart? Clean? Messy? Data in the Humanities,  Journal of Digital Humanities 2(3).
                        
                            http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-3/big-smart-clean-messy-data-in-the-humanities/
                        
                         (accessed 3 May 2019).
                    
                    
                        Soffer, Oren.
                         (2007).  Ein lefalpel! Iton HaZefira ve-ha-Modernizatsia shel haSiakh ha-hevrati ve-ha-politi. Jerusalem: Mosad Bialik. 
                    
                    
                        Van Galen, Quintus and Nicholson, Bob.
                         (2018). In search of America: topic modelling nineteenth-century newspaper archives. Digital Journalism, 2018. 1-21. 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2018.1512879
                        
                    
                    
                        Whitelaw, Mitchell.
                         (2015).  Generous interfaces for digital cultural collections. Digital Humanities Quarterly 9(1). 
                        
                            http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/1/000205/000205.html
                        
                         (accessed 3 May 2019).
                    
                
            
        
    

      
         
            CLARIN-D: Eine Forschungsinfrastruktur für die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften 
            Auffinden, Auswerten, Aufbewahren: Die Forschung mit digitalen Sprach- und Textdaten stellt die Sozial- und Geisteswissenschaften vor neue, fächerübergreifende Herausforderungen:
            
               Rohdaten und Ergebnisse sollen für Nachvollziehbarkeit und weitere Analysen zentral und einfach auffindbar sein,
               für die Auswertung können computergestützte Werkzeuge vielfältig eingesetzt werden – möglichst entlang methodischer Standards, und
               Forschungsergebnisse müssen nachvollziehbar und langfristig verfügbar gemacht werden.
            
            Die
          Forschungsinfrastruktur CLARIN-D (Common Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure in Deutschland) unterstützt die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften dabei, ihre digitalen Ressourcen in nachhaltiger, offener und interoperabler Weise zur Verfügung zu stellen (www.clarin-d.de). Über neun CLARIN-D-Zentren mit unterschiedlichen Arbeitsschwerpunkten und einem breiten Angebot an Webservices stehen der deutschen Forschungslandschaft umfangreiche Angebote zur Forschung mit Sprachdaten zur Verfügung. Insofern bei den Angeboten die Perspektive von nicht computerlinguistisch vorgebildeten Fachwissenschaftler_innen als Zielgruppe im Vordergrund steht, sind die CLARIN-D Angebote für die Digital Humanities von besonderem Interesse, zielen sie doch darauf ab, die Arbeit mit digitalen Sprachdaten durch Vereinheitlichung von Standards und Bereitstellung von Werkzeugen und Webservices zu erleichtern.
        
            Beim Auffinden von Ressourcen geht es darum, Zugang zu Daten zu erhalten, die der wissenschaftlichen Gemeinschaft zur Verfügung gestellt wurden. Diese Daten werden zitiert und können so gefunden und in anderen Forschungskontexten und zur Reproduktion von Ergebnissen verwendet werden.
            Werkzeuge zur Analyse von Forschungsdaten sind über das Web zugänglich und können dadurch ohne zusätzlichen Aufwand verwendet werden. CLARIN-D macht Werkzeuge für die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften verfügbar, so dass unterschiedliche Werkzeuge für neue Forschungsfragestellungen zusammen verwendet werden können.
            Daten, die in Forschungsprojekten entstehen oder die anderen Forschern zur Verfügung gestellt werden, können mit Hilfe der CLARIN-D-Zentren langfristig aufbewahrt und somit archiviert werden. Sie erhalten dabei eine eindeutige Referenz und können ähnlich wie Bücher und Artikel zitiert werden. Außerdem werden dadurch Anforderungen von Förderungsorganisationen zur Vorhaltung von Daten und Ergebnissen über Projektlaufzeiten hinaus gewährleistet.
            Mit diesen Services ist CLARIN-D für eine Vielzahl von Fachdisziplinen, welche sich im Bereich der Digital Humanities bewegen, von großen Interesse. Um den Anforderungen und Bedürfnissen dieser Fachcommunities gerecht zu werden, haben sich (potenzielle) Nutzer_innen der Infrastruktur innerhalb von CLARIN-D in sogenannten Fach-Arbeitsgruppen (F-AGs) organisiert. In zehn F-AGs, welche von Germanistik und anderen Philologien über diverse Teilbereiche der Linguistik bis hin zu Sozial- und Geschichtswissenschaften reichen, sind mittlerweile ca. 200 Wissenschaftler_innen organisiert, welche sich über Möglichkeiten, Bedarfe und methodische Standards bei der Arbeit mit digitalen Sprachdaten austauschen. Zudem werden im Rahmen von sogenannten “Kurationsprojekten” wichtige fachwissenschaftliche Ressourcen aufbereitet und für die Forschungscommunity zugänglich gemacht.
            Im geplanten Panel sollen exemplarisch zwei Use Cases dargestellt und dokumentiert werden (Abschnitt 2). Ein weiterer Beitrag befasst sich mit den Prinzipien und Möglichkeiten der Dokumentation von fachwissenschaftlichen Nutzungsszenarien von Clarin-D-Ressourcen (Abschnitt 3).
         
         
            
               Fachwissenschaftliche Use Cases der Infrastruktur
        
            Das Panel “Fachwissenschaftliche Nutzungsszenarien der CLARIN-D Infrastruktur” stellt zwei Use Cases aus unterschiedlichen fachwissenschaftlichen Perspektiven vor, bei denen Services bezüglich der drei zentralen Leistungen Auffinden, Auswerten und Aufbewahren zur Anwendung kommen. Über den Erkenntnisgewinn der Darstellung der einzelnen Use Cases hinaus wird so im Rahmen des Panels der Nutzen der Infrastruktur für unterschiedliche Disziplinen insgesamt sichtbar gemacht. Dazu stellen die Einzelvorträge die Generalisierbarkeit ihrer Ansätze an zentralen Punkten heraus um zu verdeutlichen, wie andere Forschungsfragen mit ähnlichen Methoden und Werkzeugen bearbeitet werden können. Zudem wird im Rahmen der Diskussionen zu den einzelnen Vorträgen vor allem auf Erfahrungen und Generalisierbarkeit der Ansätze fokussiert, um so den projekt- und fächerübergreifenden Mehrwert der Nutzung von Komponenten der Infrastruktur aufzuzeigen und die Anwendung für eigene Projekte zu ermutigen. Vorgestellt werden drei Nutzungsszenarien aus dem Bereich der Politikwissenschaften, der Neueren Geschichte und der Germanistik, wobei neben den Projekten vor allem die Reflexion des Einflusses der CLARIN-D Infrastruktur auf Forschungsmöglichkeiten und Dokumentation von Forschungsabläufen im Vordergrund steht.
            
               
                  Beitrag 1: Aufbereitung und Analyse von Parlamentsprotokollen als öffentliche Sprachressource der Demokratie
          
               Im deutschsprachigen Raum besteht ein Mangel an frei verfügbaren, annotierten Korpora politischer Texte. Dadurch wird der Einstieg in die DH-Forschung massiv gehemmt. Eine mögliche Lösung bieten Plenarprotokolle als öffentliches Archiv des politischen Zeitgeschehens einer Demokratie, welche im Rahmen der CLARIN-D Infrastruktur aufbereitet und verfügbar gemacht werden. Plenarprotokolle des Bundestags, der Landtage oder auch des Europaparlaments dokumentieren über große Zeiträume das gesamte Spektrum politischer Aktivität. Dies ist zugleich, ohne eine thematische Klassifikation von Debatten, ein Nachteil: Plenarprotokolle decken, wenn nicht Subkorpora nach inhaltlichen Kriterien gebildet werden können, das politische Geschehen für viele Auswertungszwecke zu undifferenziert ab. Für eine Vielzahl sozialwissenschaftlicher Fragestellungen ist es relevant, dass themen- bzw. politikfeldspezifische Subkorpora gebildet werden können. Dafür ist eine Annotation von Debatten und deren Klassifikation erforderlich. Eine entsprechende Aufwertung der
            Ressource “Plenarprotokollkorpus” wird im Kurationsprojekt der F-AG 8 vorgenommen.
          
               Im Rahmen des Panel-Beitrags wird zuerst der Workflow dargestellt, wie auf Basis der bei Parlamenten verfügbaren Plenarprotokolle (im txt- und pdf-Format) XML-Dokumente aufbereitet werden, die TEI-Standards entsprechen. Anschließend zeigen wir, wie mit CLARIN-Tools Annotationen für die Korpusaufbereitung vorgenommen werden. Redebeiträge sollen auf Basis der manuellen Annotation automatisch in bestimmte Themenkategorien klassifiziert werden. Im Beitrag wird auch dargestellt, wie die Qualitätssicherung der (halb-)automatischen Aufbereitung durch Intercoderreliabilitäten und Qualitätskriterien maschineller Sprachverarbeitung von Seiten der klassischen Politikwissenschaft als auch von Seiten der Informatik realisiert werden kann. Versionierung der Daten und Issue Tracking werden dabei gleichermaßen realisiert. Im Ergebnis steht der sozialwissenschaftlichen Community (und selbstverständlich auch anderen Wissenschaftler_innen) ein nach Themengebieten differenziert auswertbares Korpus zur Verfügung.
            
            
               
                  Beitrag 2: CLARIN-kompatible Aufwertung OCR-erfasster Texte aus der Lehrbuchsammlung des GEIs und deren Integration in die CLARIN-D-Infrastruktur: Ein Fazit aus fachwissenschaftlicher Sicht
          
               Welchen Aufwand bringt eine Integration historischer Quellen in die CLARIN-D Infrastruktur mit sich? Welche Mehrwerte ergeben sich daraus für die historische Forschung? Diese Fragen sollte das Projekt
            „Quellen des Neuen: Realkundliches und naturwissenschaftliches Wissen für Dilettanten und Experten zwischen Aufklärung und Moderne“ der 2014 gegründeten CLARIN-D-Facharbeitsgruppe „Neuere Geschichte“ klären. Zu diesem Zweck sollten im Projekt Korpora aus verschiedenen Projektkontexten über die CLARIN-Infrastruktur miteinander verknüpft und interoperabel gemacht werden. Im Blick waren dabei (1) das digitale Schulbuchkorpus des GEI (Georg-Eckert-Institut Braunschweig; GEI), (2) das Korpus des Deutschen Textarchivs (Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften; BBAW) sowie (3) die gedruckten Publikationen des Universitätsgelehrten Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752–1840) (Akademie der Wissenschaften Mainz). Durch Verknüpfung dieser Korpora sollten Untersuchungen zum Zusammenhang und Verhältnis von schulischer Lehre mit der Wissensproduktion und -vermittlung im universitären Umfeld ermöglicht werden. Die CLARIN-Infrastruktur ermöglicht zudem den Rückgriff auf gegebene Tools für die vergleichende Analyse der gegebenen Korpora.
          
               Die Herausforderung des Projekts bestand darin, die in Qualität und Form heterogenen Daten der verschiedenen Korpora CLARIN-konform aufzubereiten und miteinander interoperabel zu machen. Von mehreren möglichen Integrationsszenarien wurde in Zusammenarbeit mit dem CLARIN-D-Servicezentrum an der BBAW eine sehr genaue und vergleichsweise aufwändige Methode realisiert, mit dem Ziel, adäquate Forschungsdaten für die Wissensgeschichte und andere historisch arbeitende Disziplinen zu erhalten. Unter Nachnutzung bzw. Anpassung bestehender Workflows der BBAW wurden exemplarisch Schulbücher verschiedener Fächer und Zeiträume dem Auszeichnungslevel der DTA-Korpora und der bereits integrierten „Blumenbach-Online“-Ressourcen angepasst. In verschiedenen ‘Stadien’ der Textaufbereitung wurde zudem die Anwendbarkeit von CLARIN-D-Tools auf Teilmengen der verfügbaren Daten getestet.
               Der Panel-Beitrag erläutert den Workflow zur CLARIN-konformen Aufbereitung der GEI-digital-Ressourcen und führt den Mehrwert dieser Arbeiten für die Forschung beispielhaft vor. 
            
            
               
                  Beitrag 3: Möglichkeiten und Prinzipien der Dokumentation von fachlichen Nutzungsszenarien von Clarin-D-Ressourcen
          
               Für die fachliche Nutzung der Ressourcen (Daten, Werkzeuge), die in einer Infrastruktur angeboten werden, ist die Frage von zentraler Bedeutung, wie man typische wissenschaftliche Anwendungsszenarien, bei denen Daten und Werkzeuge für eine spezifische fachliche Aufgabenstellung genutzt werden, so darstellen kann, dass die Dokumentationen für unterschiedliche Zielgruppen hilfreich und im besten Fall auch stimulierend sind. Dabei sind einerseits unterschiedliche Nutzertypen (z. B. Doktorand_innen, Studierende, erfahrene und weniger erfahrene Forscher_innen), andererseits die ganz unterschiedlichen fachlichen Fragestellungen in verschiedenen Disziplinen (z. B. Germanistik) und Unterdisziplinen (z. B. Syntax, Wortschatzforschung) zu berücksichtigen. Gegenstand des Panel-Beitrags sind zunächst drei Typen der Dokumentation, die jeweils von einer fachlichen Fragestellung ausgeht, sodann die Ermittlung von Daten und Werkzeugen umfasst, die zielorientierte Anwendung von Daten und Werkzeugen beschreibt und mit dem Hinweis auf ein fachliches Resultat endet, das auf die ursprüngliche fachliche Fragestellung rückzubeziehen ist. Die drei Typen sind:
               
                  gedruckte und bebilderte Anleitungen;
                  Screencasts, bei denen eine fachliche Anwendung digitaler Ressourcen von einer Stimme aus dem Off kommentiert wird;
                  Experten-Interviews, die vor Ort oder als virtuelles Video-Meeting aufgezeichnet werden und dann als Filme / Podcasts dauerhaft zugänglich sind. Hier vertritt ein/e Interviewer/in die Nutzerinteressen, eine Expertin oder ein Experte stellt die Ressourcen und ihre Anwendung dar.
               
               Der Beitrag wird zunächst die Prototypen vorstellen und dann allgemeine Überlegungen zu Zielen, Verfahrensweisen, Prinzipien (z. B. Usability, Zielgruppenorientierung), Darstellungsformen und zum Repertoire von Darstellungsmitteln anschließen.
            
         
         
            
               Fächerübergreifende Perspektiven
        
            Wir versprechen uns durch die multiperspektivische Reflexion der hier vorgestellten Nutzungsszenarien nicht nur eine Verbesserung des Verständnisses für den Nutzen einer Forschungsinfrastruktur, sondern hegen insbesondere die Hoffnung, einen wichtigen Beitrag zur Methodendiskussion in den Digital Humanities zu liefern. In der gemeinsamen Nutzung und Weiterentwicklung von Technologien zum Auffinden, Auswerten und Aufbewahren digitaler Sprachdaten liegt der Schlüssel zur Etablierung von Standards, zum Herabsetzen von Zugangsschwellen und damit letztlich zur Ermöglichung eines breiten Austausches in diesem noch vergleichsweise jungen Forschungsfeld.
         
         
            
               Ablauf
        
            Das Panel wird moderiert von Gregor Wiedemann, Koordinator der Fach-AGs im CLARIN-D Projekt. Der inhaltliche Ablauf wird wie folgt gestaltet:
            
               Einführung zur
            CLARIN-D Infrastruktur: Gregor Wiedemann (Universität Leipzig, Koordinator für die CLARIN-D Fach-AGs), Vortragszeit: 5 Minuten
          
               Beitrag 1, Vortragender:
            Prof. Dr. Andreas Blätte (Universität Duisburg/Essen, Lehrstuhl für Public Policy und Landeskunde), Vortragszeit: 10 Minuten
          
               Beitrag 2, Vortragende:
            Dr. Maret Keller (Georg-Eckert-Institut – Leibniz-Institut für internationale Schulbuchforschung), Susanne Haaf (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften), Kay-Michael Würzner (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften), Vortragszeit: 10 Minuten
          
               Beitrag 3, Vortragender:
            Prof. Dr. Thomas Gloning (Universität Gießen, Professur für Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft), Vortragszeit: 10 Minuten
          
               Panel-Diskussion zu fächerübergreifenden Problemen bei der Arbeit mit digitalen Sprachdaten und Lösungsansätzen im Rahmen der CLARIN-D Infrastruktur, Diskussionszeit: 25 Minuten
               Publikumsdiskussion Möglichkeiten, Perspektiven aber auch (Einstiegs-)Hürden bei der Anwendung virtueller Forschungsinfrastrukturen. Neben Verständnisfragen sollen vor allem Bedarfe seitens der (potenziellen) Anwender_innen und Möglichkeiten zur Generalisierung der präsentierte Forschungsabläufe diskutiert werden. Diskussionszeit: 30 Minuten
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Stand der Dinge
            Digitale Editionen machen in den Digital Humanities das „Brot- und
          Buttergeschäft“ aus. Doch während sich der methodisch-theoretische Hintergrund
          digitaler Editionen zusehends konsolidiert und sich diese neue Form der
          Publikation von Forschungsergebnissen im (fach)wissenschaftlichen Diskurs
          bereits etabliert hat, fehlt es nach wie vor an umfassend dokumentierten und
          selbstkritisch reflektierten Best-Practice-Beispielen von Frameworks und
          Workflows zur Erstellung und / oder Publikation von digitalen Editionen, welche
          als Blaupausen für künftige digitale Editionsprojekte herangezogen werden
          können. Das Resultat ist so bekannt wie unerfreulich und kann – nur geringfügig
          überspitzt – auf folgende Formel gebracht werden: So gut wie jedes Projekt
          erfindet das Rad – das technische Grundgerüst der Edition – wieder neu.
            Die wichtigsten Gründe für diese Entwicklung lassen sich rasch benennen:
            
               Digitale Editionen sind nach wie vor eine sehr junge Publikationsform und darüber hinaus abhängig von der raschen Weiterentwicklung gegenwärtiger Webtechnologien und -standards.
               Digitale Editionen erfordern technische Kompetenzen, welche jene traditioneller Geisteswissenschaftler_innen meist übersteigen, weshalb Kooperationen mit Entwickler_innen notwendig sind.
               Digitale Edition werden häufig in Form von Einzelprojekten realisiert, weshalb nicht auf bestehende Lösungsansätze anderer Institutionen zurückgegriffen wird. 
               In so gut wie allen Fällen fehlen die Ressourcen, manchmal wohl leider auch der Wille, die Eigenentwicklung, das geschaffene technische Grundgerüst hinreichend gut zu dokumentieren und in einer Form zu veröffentlichen, so dass andere den Quellcode, Workflows, Stylesheets etc. nachnutzen zu können.
               Digitale Editionen sind – wenigstens in der Selbstwahrnehmung – häufig hochgradig speziell und unterscheiden sich in Inhalt, Form und Funktion von allen bereits bestehenden Editionsprojekten, womit eine völlige Neuentwicklung des technischen Grundgerüstes gerechtfertigt wird. 
            
         
         
            Ablauf:
            Im Rahmen des Panels sollen einige der aktivsten Institutionen aus dem Bereich der digitalen Editionen an einen Tisch gebracht werden. Diese erhalten im Vorfeld der Tagung einen Fragebogen zur Vorbereitung einer kurzen (pro Teilnehmer ca. fünf Minuten) Vorstellung ihrer Systeme, wobei darin der Fokus auf dem Thema Reusability der in den Projekten verwendeten Technologien und Workflows liegen sollte. Konkret sollen die Teilnehmer_innen des Panels auf folgende Punkte eingehen:
            
               Kurze Vorstellung der eigenen Frameworks und Workflows, vor allem hinsichtlich einer Einschätzung über die Stärken und Schwächen der eigenen Lösungsansätze, aus welcher Tradition/Disziplin (z. B. Philologie, Geschichtswissenschaften) sie kommen und welche konkreten Projekte damit realisiert wurden. 
               Gibt es ein weitgehend standardisiertes Prozedere im Falle von Kooperations- bzw. Nachnutzungsanfragen (inklusive der dafür notwendigen Ressourcen)?
               Wer soll die Angebote nutzen; gibt es fachlich, institutionell, qualitativ, budgetär, regional, national, zeitlich oder anderweitig konstituierte Zielgruppen?
            
            Ein Ziel dieser Vorstellungsrunde soll es sein, potenziell interessierten Nutzer_innen im Auditorium einen kompakten Überblick über bestehende Angebote zur Erstellung und / oder Veröffentlichung von digitalen Editionen zu vermitteln.
         
         
            Podiumsdiskussion (ca. 30 Minuten)
            Im Anschluss an diese Kurzvorstellung erfolgt eine moderierte Podiumsdiskussion, worin folgende Punkte weiter thematisiert werden:
            
               Dokumentation von Technologie und Workflows: Wie gut sind die technischen Aspekte dokumentiert? Ist es für Dritte möglich, anhand dieser Dokumente ähnliche Projekte zu realisieren? Welche technische Infrastruktur ist dafür notwendig?
               Veröffentlichung von Code: Ist der für das System geschriebene oder adaptierte Code für andere nachnutzbar veröffentlicht (z. B. auf GitHub)?
               Wird das entwickelte Framework auch als Service angeboten?
               Ressourcen und Organisation der Entwicklung: Wie groß war / ist der Aufwand der Entwicklung des technischen Grundgerüstes, eventuell in Personenmonaten. Woher stammt das verwendete Know-How (Eigenentwicklung oder Adaption bestehender Konzepte)?
               Wie generisch ist das verwendete technische Framework bzw. wie aufwändig sind die Änderungen, die bei der Adaption an ein neues Projekt notwendig werden? Sprich: Wie leicht und wie weit kann das System an projektspezifische Bedürfnisse angepasst werden (unterstützte Datenformate, Funktionalitäten)? Welche Kompetenzen sind notwendig, um Anpassungen auf unterschiedlichen Ebenen (Anzeige, Projektstruktur usw.) vorzunehmen?
               Wie groß ist der laufende Aufwand für Wartung einzelner Projekte bzw. des Frameworks an sich?
            
            Es sollen gemeinsame Problemfelder identifiziert und reflektiert werden. Auf dieser Basis kann dann über mögliche (gemeinsame) Lösungen diskutiert werden. 
         
         
            Publikumsdiskussion (ca. 30 Minuten)
            Im letzten Drittel des Panels wird die Diskussion zum Publikum hin geöffnet werden. Dabei sollen vor allem potentielle Nutzer_innen die Möglichkeit bekommen, gezielt konkrete und ggf. eigene Projekte betreffend Fragen zu stellen und direkt mit möglicherweise zukünftigen Projektpartnern ins Gespräch zu kommen.
         
         
            Teilnehmer
            Bei der Auswahl der Teilnehmer wurde einerseits darauf geachtet, vornehmlich etablierte Institutionen anzusprechen, die sich als Dienstleister im Bereich digitaler Editionen profiliert haben, deshalb an möglichst generischen Lösungen zur Erstellung und Publikationen von digitalen Editionen interessiert sind und dafür selbst Frameworks und Workflows entwickelt haben. Außerdem wurde versucht, bei der Auswahl der Teilnehmer möglichst den gesamten deutschsprachigen Raum abzudecken.
            
               ACDH-ÖAW
               Matej Durco und Peter Andorfer
               Das ACDH verwendet ein eXistdb-basiertes Framework zur Veröffentlichung digitaler Editionen names cr-xq-mets. cr-xq-mets basiert lose auf SADE. Die Idee von cr-xq-mets ist die konsequente Trennung von Code und einzelnem Projekt, mit dem Ziel einen hohen Grad an generischer Projektentwicklung bei gleichzeitig geringem Aufwand an Projektmaintainance zu erreichen. 
               Das ACDH übernimmt auch die Organisation und Moderation des Panels. 
            
            
               Herzog August Bibliothek
               Thomas Stäcker
               Die Herzog August Bibliothek (HAB) hat für ihre digitalen Editionsprojekte
              die Reihe Editiones Electronicae Guelferbytanae gegründet  ), in der bisher 20 Werke erschienen sind. Hinzu kommen zahlreiche
              kleinere und umfangreichere Editionen, die außerhalb dieser Reihe erschienen
              sind. Hervorzuheben sind die beiden im Langzeitförderprogramm der DFG (je 12
              Jahre) erscheinenden Editionen der Kritische Gesamtausgabe der
              Schriften und Briefe Andreas Bodensteins von Karlstadt und die
              Digitale Edition und Kommentierung der Tagebücher des Fürsten Christian II.
                von Anhalt-Bernburg (1599-1656). Die Kodierung
                erfolgt in TEI (nach den übergreifenden Festlegungen der HAB). Die Anzeige
                der Webdarstellung und Suchfunktionaltäten basieren auf PHP sowie eXistdb. 
            
            
               TextGrid
               Sibylle Söring
               
                  TextGrid ist eine Virtuelle
                Forschungsumgebung für die text- und quellenbasierten Geisteswissenschaften,
                die u. a. die Erstellung digitaler Editionen mithilfe Open Source-basierter
                Tools und Dienste unterstützt. Neben der Software, dem TextGrid Laboratory,
                bietet TextGrid mit dem TextGrid Repository die Möglichkeit, vielfältige
                Forschungsdaten - u. a. XML / TEI-kodierte Texte, Bilder und Datenbanken -
                langfristig zu speichern sowie nach internationalen Standardformaten
                zitierbar zu publizieren und zur Nachnutzung zur Verfügung zu stellen, wie
                etwa zur Recherche und Visualisierung. Mit TextGrid wurden und werden
                verschiedene Editionsvorhaben umgesetzt, so u. a. die Digitale
                genetisch-kritische Edition von Theodor Fontanes Notizbüchern
                und die
                Bibliothek der Neologie. 
            
            
               BBAW – DTA, CLARIN-D
               Christian Thomas
               Das DFG-geförderte Projekt Deutsches Textarchiv der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie
                der Wissenschaften (BBAW) erstellt bzw. publiziert digitale Editionen von
                derzeit (September 2015) 1665 Werken im DTA-Kernkorpus unter Verwendung
                eines selbst entwickelten, auf Open-Source-Software basierenden Frameworks.
                Zu diesem Framework gehört mit dem Modul DTAE (DTA-Erweiterungen)
                ein elaborierter Workflow zur Integration
                hochwertiger Textressourcen aus externen Editions- und Forschungsprojekten.
                Über DTAE konnten als Ergänzungen des DTA-Kernkorpus bislang weitere 1097
                Einzelwerke sowie der gesamte Bestand zweier herausragender Zeitschriften
                des 19./20. Jahrhunderts, das von J. G. Dingler begründete Polytechnische
                Journal (346 Bände, 1820–1931) und die Zeitschrift Die
                Grenzboten (270 Bände, 1841–1922) in das DTA integriert werden. Der
                Textbestand aus DTA und DTAE umfasst ca. 200 Mio. Tokens und ca. 1,2 Mrd.
                Zeichen. Die DTA-Korpora sind einheitlich gemäß dem TEI-basierten und
                ausführlich dokumentierten DTA-Basisformat (DTABf) kodiert und werden
                mit Hilfe computerlinguistischer Werkzeuge automatisch annotiert, was unter
                anderem spezifizierte Suchanfragen nach bestimmten Metadatenfeldern,
                Wortarten, grammatischen Kategorien, X-Pfaden etc. ermöglicht. Zudem wird
                der historische Textbestand automatisch in Richtung moderner Orthographie
                ‘normalisiert’, was schreibweisentolerante Suchen über das gesamte Korpus
                ermöglicht (siehe allgemein zur Suche im DTA www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/DDC-suche_hilfe). Die
                Qualitätssicherung sämtlicher Korpusressourcen geschieht kollaborativ in der
                webbasierten Umgebung DTAQ, in der derzeit 866
                registrierte Nutzer mögliche Fehler auf der Text-, Annotations- und
                Metadatenebene melden und, je nach Rechtestatus, auch direkt online
                korrigieren können. 
            
            
               Trier Center for Digital Humanities
               Thomas Burch, Vera Hildenbrandt
               Das TCDH kann inzwischen auf eine mehr als langjährige Erfahrung in der
                Planung, Durchführung und Betreuung von Projekten im Bereich der Digital
                Humanities verweisen. Neben dem Schwerpunkt im Bereich der Erstellung und
                Publikation digitaler Editionen verfügt das Zentrum über eine ausgewiesene
                Expertise in der Entwicklung von Software-Umgebungen für
                geisteswissenschaftliche Großvorhaben. In mehreren von der DFG, dem BMBF
                sowie im Rahmen des Akademienprogramms geförderten Projekten entstanden und
                entstehen am TCDH digitale Editionen wie z. B. das
                Heinrich-Heine-Portal, das
                Christian-Dietrich-Grabbe-Portal, das Cusanus-Portal, die
                  elektronische Publikation der Korrespondenz August-Wilhelm Schlegels sowie die digitale Rekonstruktion
                    der Textgenese und Entstehungsgeschichte von Wolfgang Koeppens ‚Jugend'. Im
                    Bereich der Softwareentwicklung konzipiert, betreut und entwickelt das Team
                    des TCDH virtuelle Arbeitsumgebungen für Projekte mit hohen Anforderungen an
                    Workflow und grafische Benutzerschnittstellen. Hervorgehoben seien hier
                    Systeme wie das internetbasierte Artikelredaktionssystem für die Produktion
                    und Publikation von Wörterbüchern in dezentralen Arbeitsstellen, das
                    gemeinsam mit dem Forschungszentrum Europa und dem Sonderforschungsbereich
                    600 entwickelte "Forschungsnetzwerk und Datenbanksystem" (FuD 2015), die
                    Redaktions- und Publikationsplattform zur Europäischen Geschichte Online
                    oder das
                    interaktive Werkzeug “Transcribo” zur Erstellung von Transkriptionen. 
            
            
               ZIM – ACDH Graz
               Hubert Stigler
               Das ZIM hat im Rahmen einer Vielzahl von Editionsprojekten
                      forschungsgetrieben ein objektorientiertes Framework auf Basis
                      von FEDORA Commons und weiteren Open-Source-Projekten (Apache Cocoon,
                      Blazegraph u. a.) entwickelt, das Aspekte der Publikation von Digitalen
                      Editionen mit jenen der Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten zu
                      verbinden sucht. Als österreichischer Beitrag zu DARIAH steht es einer
                      breiten Öffentlichkeit zur Nachnutzung zur Verfügung.
            
            
               DH Lab Basel 
               Lukas Rosenthaler
               Während die anderen Teilnehmer vor allem an Lösungen für XML / TEI-basierte
                        digitale Editionen arbeiten, legt SALSAH (System for Annotation
                        and Linkage of Sources in Arts and Humanities) den Schwerpunkt (zurzeit
                        noch) auf die Verknüpfung und Verlinkung von vornehmlich digitalen
                        Faksimiles. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung und Projekthintergrund
            Die Kommunikation im Internet bzw. mit sozialen Medien hat in den vergangenen zwei Jahrzehnten in den geisteswissenschaftlichen Disziplinen eine zunehmende Aufmerksamkeit erfahren. Zahlreiche sprach-, sozial- und medienwissenschaftliche Analysen haben die sprachlichen und interaktionalen Besonderheiten bei der Kommunikation in Chats, Foren, Weblogs und sozialen Netzwerken, per SMS und WhatsApp als einen neuen Gegenstand geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschung erschlossen. Durch ihre digitale Verfügbarkeit sind Sprachdaten aus solchen Genres – im Gegensatz etwa zu Aufzeichnungen von Gesprächen – einfach zu gewinnen und für Forschungszwecke speicherbar. Trotzdem gibt es bislang wenige Korpora zur Sprachverwendung in sozialen Medien, die für Analysezwecke im Bereich der Digital Humanities aufbereitet sind und die der Scientific Community zur Nutzung zur Verfügung stehen. Das hat zum einen mit unklaren rechtlichen Rahmenbedingungen in Bezug auf die Nutzung und Bereitstellung digitaler Kommunikationsdaten für Forschungszwecke zu tun, zum anderen mit dem Fehlen geeigneter Standards für die Strukturbeschreibung und linguistische Annotation von Social-Media-Genres sowie der Notwendigkeit, automatische Annotationswerkszeuge für Daten dieses Typs anzupassen.
            In unserem Beitrag präsentieren wir Ergebnisse aus dem Projekt „ChatCorpus2CLARIN“, das als Kurationsprojekt der fachspezifischen Arbeitsgruppe F-AG 1 „Deutsche Philologie“1. von Mai 2015 bis Februar 2016 vom BMBF gefördert wird. Ziel des Projekts ist es, das
          Dortmunder Chat-Korpus, ein existierendes Korpus zur Sprachverwendung und Sprachvariation in der deutschsprachigen Chat-Kommunikation, in die Korpus-Infrastrukturen der CLARIN-D-Zentren an der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (BBAW) und am Institut für Deutsche Sprache (IDS) Mannheim zu integrieren. Dabei geht es insbesondere um die Herstellung einer Interoperabilität der Zielressource mit Korpora zur gesprochenen und geschriebenen Sprache (DWDS-Korpora, DeReKo, FOLK), die an der BBAW und am IDS bereits vorhanden sind. Die Bereitstellung des Chat-Korpus in CLARIN-D soll einen systematischen, korpusgestützten Vergleich der Sprachverwendung in Chats mit der Sprachverwendung in mündlichen Gesprächen und in redigierten Texten erlauben und der empirischen, sprachdatengestützten Forschung zur Sprache und Interaktion in sozialen Medien somit neue Möglichkeiten eröffnen.
        
            Um Interoperabilität mit existierenden CLARIN-D-Ressourcen herzustellen und es
          Forscher_innen zu ermöglichen, die unterschiedlichen Ressourcen im
          Forschungsprozess vernetzt zu nutzen, wird das Chat-Korpus bei der Integration
          unter Rückgriff auf Standards im Bereich der Digital Humanities remodelliert und
          um zusätzliche linguistische Annotationen erweitert. Der Beitrag beschreibt die
          Modellierung der Ressource und ihre Integration in CLARIN-D und zeigt, welche
          Mehrwerte sich für Nutzer des Korpus durch die Integration und die zusätzlichen
          Annotationen ergeben.
         
         
            Die Ausgangsressource
            Das
            Dortmunder Chat-Korpus (Beißwenger 2013) ist eine Sammlung von Chat-Mitschnitten aus vier verschiedenen Handlungsbereichen (Freizeit, Bildung, Beratung, Medien), die ca. 140.000 Chatter-Beiträge und 1,06 Mio. Token umfasst und die 2002–2008 am Lehrstuhl für Linguistik der deutschen Sprache und Sprachdidaktik der TU Dortmund aufgebaut wurde. Die Daten sind in einem XML-Format repräsentiert, das zentrale Strukturelemente von protokollieren Chatverläufen (sog. ‚Logfiles‘) abbildet, unterschiedliche Typen von Chat-Beiträgen unterscheidet und ausgewählte Stilelemente internetbasierter Kommunikation erfasst. Teile des Korpus werden seit 2005 über die Website
            http://www.chatkorpus.tu-dortmund.de zusammen mit einem einfachen, Java-basierten Abfragewerkzeug zur Verfügung gestellt. Das Korpus wird in diversen linguistischen und computerlinguistischen Projekten sowie im Bildungskontext (Schule und Hochschule) als Ressource in Forschung und Lehre genutzt.
          
         
         
            Interoperabilität durch Anschluss an Standards im Bereich der Digital Humanities
            
               Strukturmodellierung und Repräsentation in TEI
               Für die Repräsentation der im Korpus dokumentierten Chat-Verläufe greifen wir auf die Formate der
              Text Encoding Initiative (
              TEI) zurück. In den TEI-Guidelines (TEI-P5) gibt es bislang keine Modelle für die Darstellung von Social-Media-Genres, dafür umfangreiche Module für die Strukturrepräsentation von Textgenres und von transkribierten Gesprächen. Die in den Guidelines vorgesehene Möglichkeit der
              customization macht das Encoding-Framework aber flexibel genug, um es an die Erfordernisse auch von (neuen) Genres anzupassen.
            
               Seit 2013 beschäftigt sich in der TEI eine Special Interest Group (SIG)
              „Computer-mediated communication“ 2 mit der Entwicklung eines Standards für die Modellierung von
              Social-Media-Genres (Beißwenger et al. 2012; Chanier et al. 2014; Margareta
              / Lüngen 2014). Das Projekt greift den aktuellen Stand der in der SIG
              diskutierten Schemaentwürfe auf, testet diese an den Daten des Chat-Korpus
              sowie an Ausschnitten ausgewählter weiterer Social-Media-Genres
              (Wikipedia-Diskussionsseiten, WhatsApp-Dialoge, News-Diskussionen, Tweets)
              und entwickelt sie weiter. Das dabei entstehende TEI-Schema wird in Form
              eines ODD3dokumentiert und bildet die Grundlage für die TEI-Modellierung des
              kompletten Korpus. Zugleich wird das ODD, dessen Fertigstellung für Herbst
              2015 vorgesehen ist, in die weitere Arbeit der SIG eingespielt. 
            
            
               Linguistische Basisannotation mit „STTS 2.0“
               Um die Recherchemöglichkeiten im Korpus zu verbessern, wird der
                Ausgangsressource eine zusätzliche Annotationsebene hinzugefügt, deren Kern
                Part-of-speech-Informationen (PoS) bilden. Das im Projekt verwendete
                PoS-Tagset („STTS 2.0“, Beißwenger et al. 2015) verwendet die Kategorien des
                Stuttgart-Tübingen Tagset (STTS, Schiller et al.
                1999) und erweitert diese einerseits um Tags für typische Einheiten bei der
                schriftlichen Sprachverwendung in Social-Media-Genres (u. a. Emoticons,
                Hashtags, Adressierungen) sowie um Einheiten für die Darstellung von
                Phänomenen, die typisch sind für Kontexte informeller, dialogischer
                Kommunikation (u. a. Abtönungs- und Intensitätspartikeln, Diskursmarker).
                Die Erweiterungen sind abgestimmt auf Erweiterungen, die am IDS für die
                PoS-Annotation des FOLK-Korpus zur gesprochenen Sprache zum Einsatz kommen. 
               Um die Annotationen nach STTS 2.0 zu erzeugen, wurde das komplette
                  Chat-Korpus 2015 mit einem POS-Tagger annotiert, für den im BMBF-Projekt
                  “Analyse und Instrumentarien zur Beobachtung des Schreibgebrauchs im
                  Deutschen” (IDS 2014-2016) neue Taggermodelle speziell für den Umgang mit
                  Social-Media-Genres entwickelt wurden (Horbach et al. 2014). Um das Ergebnis
                  der automatischen Annotation manuell nachzukorrigieren und zusätzlich
                  einzelnen Tokens normalisierte Formen zuzuordnen, wurde das Werkzeug OrthoNormal (Schmidt 2012) auf die Bearbeitung von
                  Chat-Daten angepasst. 
            
         
         
            Zielressource und Mehrwerte
            Die Integration in die Infrastrukturen der beteiligten CLARIN-D-Zentren umfasst die Archivierung in den Repositorien an der BBAW und am IDS, die Aufnahme der Metadaten in das Virtual Language Observatory (VLO), die Einbindung der Daten in die korpusübergreifende Suchmaschine
                CLARIN Federated Content Search sowie die Bereitstellung über Webservices.
              
            Die rechtlichen Bedingungen der Bereitstellung werden über ein Rechtsgutachten
                geklärt. Je nach Ergebnis kommen für die Ressource unterschiedliche
                Lizenzmodelle in Frage: Als Idealfall wird eine CLARIN-Endnutzer-Lizenz vom Typ
                PUB („publicly available“, Oksanen et al. 2010) angestrebt, gegebenenfalls aber
                auch der Lizenztyp ACA-NC (akademische, nicht-kommerzielle Nutzung zum
                vollständigen Kopieren / Download freigegebener Ressourcen) oder, falls
                erforderlich, eine Beschränkung auf eine Nutzung über eine
                Korpusrecherchesoftware durch bei CLARIN registrierte Nutzer (Lizenztyp QAO-NC,
                gemäß Vorschlag in Kupietz / Lüngen 2014).
            Nach der Integration wird die Zielressource für Nutzer im Bereich der Digital Humanities gegenüber der Ausgangsressource die folgenden Mehrwerte aufweisen:
            
               
                  Erweiterung der Möglichkeiten des Zugriffs und der Durchsuchbarkeit der Ressource.
                  
               
                  Interoperabilität auf der Ebene der Dokumentstruktur (TEI): Durch die Remodellierung in einem TEI-Format wird die Ressource interoperabel mit anderen in TEI repräsentierten Sprachressourcen und Annotations- bzw. Analysewerkzeugen.
                  
               
                  Linguistische Annotation: Die Anreicherung um zusätzliche linguistische Basisannotationen wird die Möglichkeiten zur Nutzung der Ressource für die korpusgestützte Sprachanalyse erweitern und anspruchsvollere linguistische Suchanfragen ermöglichen.
                  
               
                  Interoperabilität auf der Ebene der linguistischen Annotation (STTS): Durch die Kompatibilität der Part-of-speech-Annotationen mit STTS wird die Ressource interoperabel mit anderen nach STTS annotieren Sprachressourcen.
                  
               
                  Vernetzung mit Korpusressourcen anderen Typs: Durch die Integration in CLARIN-D und die genannten Interoperabilitätsmerkmale werden die Möglichkeiten zu einem korpusgestützten Vergleich sprachlicher Besonderheiten im Chat-Korpus mit Korpora gesprochener Sprache und Korpora redigierter Schriftlichkeit verbessert.
                  
               
                  Verbesserte Auffindbarkeit der Ressource durch die Bereitstellung standardisierter Metadaten und die Aufnahme in das VLO.
                  
            
            Die Ergebnisse aus dem Projekt können zum gegenwärtigen Zeitpunkt z. T. nur
                  perspektivisch formuliert werden. Zum Termin der Konferenz werden die
                  Projektarbeiten abgeschlossen sein und die Ergebnisse vorliegen.
         
      
      
         
            Für weitere Informationen siehe http://www.clarin-d.de/de/wissenschaftsbereiche/germanistik
            
            Sie hierzu die Webseite der TEI unter http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/SIG/CMC/.
                
            Siehe http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/Customization/odds.xml.
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Beißwenger, Michael (2013): "Das Dortmunder
                      Chat-Korpus", in: Zeitschrift für germanistische
                      Linguistik 41, 1: 161-164. Erweiterte Fassung online: http://tinyurl.com/chatkorpus [letzter Zugriff 18. September
                      2015]. Beißwenger, Michael / Ermakova, Maria / Geyken,
                      Alexander / Lemnitzer, Lothar / Storrer, Angelika (2012): "A TEI
                      Schema for the Representation of Computer-mediated Communication", in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (jTEI) 3.
                      http://jtei.revues.org/476 [letzter Zugriff 18. September
                        2015].
               
                  Beißwenger, Michael / Bartz, Thomas / Storrer, Angelika /
                          Westpfahl, Swantje (2015): Tagset und Richtlinie
                          für das PoS-Tagging von Sprachdaten aus Genres internetbasierter
                          Kommunikation. https://sites.google.com/site/empirist2015/home/annotation-guidelines
                          [letzter Zugriff 18. September 2015].
               
                  Chanier, Thierry / Poudat, Celine / Sagot, Benoit /
                              Antoniadis, Georges / Wigham, Ciara / Hriba, Linda / Longhi, Julien /
                              Seddah, Djamé (2014): "The CoMeRe corpus for French: structuring
                              and annotating heterogeneous CMC genres", in: Journal of
                              Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 2: 1-30. http://www.jlcl.org/2014_Heft2/1Chanier-et-al.pdf [letzter
                              Zugriff 18. September 2015].
               
                  Horbach, Andrea / Steffen, Diana / Thater, Stefan / Pinkal,
                                  Manfred (2014): "Improving the Performance of Standard
                                  Part-of-Speech Taggers for Computer-Mediated Communication", in: Proceedings of KONVENS 2014 171-177. 
               
                  IDS = Institut für Deutsche Sprache (2014-2016): Projekt Schreibgebrauch. Analyse und Instrumentarien
                                  zur Beobachtung des Schreibgebrauchs im Deutschen http://www.schreibgebrauch.de/index.html.
               
                  Kupietz, Marc / Lüngen, Harald (2014): "Recent
                                    developments in DeReKo", in: Calzolari, Nicoletta / Choukri, Khalid /
                                    Declerck, Thierry / Loftsson, Hrafn / Maegaard, Bente / Mariani, Joseph /
                                    Odijk, Jan / Piperidis, Stelios (eds): Proceedings of the
                                    Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
                                    (LREC 2014), Reykjavik, Iceland. 
               
                  Margaretha, Eliza / Lüngen, Harald (2014): "Building
                                      Linguistic Corpora from Wikipedia Articles and Discussions", in: Journal of Language Technology and Computational
                                      Linguistics 2: 59-82. http://www. jlcl.org/2014_Heft2/3MargarethaLuengen.pdf [letzter
                                      Zugriff 18. September 2015]. 
               
                  Oksanen, Ville / Lindén, Krister / Westerlund, Hanna
                                        (2010): "Laundry Symbols and License Management: Practical Considerations
                                        for the Distribution of LRs based on experiences from CLARIN", in: Proceedings of LREC 2010: Workshop on Language Resources:
                                        From Storyboard to Sustainability and LR Lifecycle Management,
                                        Malta. 
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas (2012): "EXMARaLDA and the FOLK tools –
                                          two toolsets for transcribing and annotating spoken language", in: Proceedings of LREC2012
                  http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/529_Paper.pdf
                                            [letzter Zugriff 18. September 2015]. 
               
                  Schiller, Anne / Teufel, Simone / Stöckert, Christine
                                            (1999): Guidelines für das Tagging deutscher Textcorpora
                                            mit STTS (Kleines und großes Tagset). Universität Stuttgart:
                                            Institut für maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung. 
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.) (2007): TEI P5:
                                              Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                  http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 18.
                                                September 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         In dieser Posterpräsentation soll das am Exzellenzcluster Asien und Europa der Universität Heidelberg angesiedelten Projekt "Standardisierte Arbeitsabläufe zur Retrodigitalisierung am Fallbeispiel der Grabungsdokumentation Kastell Heidelberg-Neuenheim" (RetroDig) vorgestellt werden. Im Rahmen dieses einjährigen (04/2015 - 03/2016) Disziplin übergreifenden Forschungsprojekts entwickelt die JRG Digital Humanites and Digital Cultural Heritage zusammen mit der Heidelberg Research Architecture (HRA) eine Reihe von strikt generischen Komponenten für den Einsatz in einem interdisziplinären Forschungsverbund.
         Außeruniversitärer Partner bei diesem Vorhaben ist das Kurpfälzische Museum der Stadt Heidelberg, das eine bisher unpublizierte archäologische Grabungsdokumentation aus den 1970er für einen exemplarischen Retrodigitalisierungs-Workflow bereitstellt.
         Im Fallbeispiel werden sämtliche analogen Artefakte der vom Verfall bedrohten Dokumentation (handgezeichnete Pläne, handschriftliches Grabungstagebuch und Papierabzüge von Fotos) von Mitarbeitern der JRG Digital Humanities digitalisiert, erschlossen und annotiert. Dazu wird am Exzellenzcluster vorhandene digitale Infrastruktur verwendet und wo nötig erweitert.
         Das Kernstück der digitalen Forschungsumgebung des Clusters ist das
        Metadaten-Ökosystem Tamboti1. Es handelt sich dabei um ein auf eXist DB basierendes Open Source System,
      dass von der HRA zusammen mit ihren Partnern bereits seit mehreren Jahren entwickelt
      und schrittweise ausgebaut wird. Größere Komponenten für Tamboti werden
      grundsätzlich an Forschungsfragen orientiert im Rahmen von kleinen thematischen
      Fallbeispielen entworfen und implementiert. Nach Projektabschluss werden die
      entwickelten Softwarekomponenten von der HRA in den Regelbetrieb in Forschung und
      Lehre überführt. 
         Im hier vorgestellten Projekt RetroDig sollen darüber hinaus auch Einsatzmöglichkeiten im Museumsbereich evaluiert werden. Die generierten Datensätze und Softwarekomponenten werden die Grundlage für eine inhaltliche Aufbereitung der RetroDig Ergebnisse in einem zukünftigen digitalen Editionsprojekt der JRG Digital Humanities and Digital Cultural Heritage sein.
         Im derzeit laufenden Prokjekt wurden bereits die analogen Dokumente im Medialab der
        HRA digitalisiert. Im ersten Erschließungsschritt werden die materiellen
        Gesichtspunkte der Artefakte betrachtet und dabei die Objektmetadaten im VRA Core 4
        Standard aufgenommen. Dazu wird der formbasierter Zizphus VRA Editor2  verwendet, der die VRA-XML Datensätze direkt in einer Kollektion Tamboti
      speichert, wo die Daten bereits durchsucht, mit anderen Nutzern geteilt oder für
      Präsentationszwecke im integrierten Atomic-Wiki aufbereitet werden können. 
         Mitunter aus arbeitsökonomischen Gesichtspunkten werden beim Erstellen der Metadaten auch Beschriftungen transkribiert und vorerst im VRA  aufgenommen. Erst einmal ohne dabei qualitative Aussagen über deren Inhalt zu treffen.
         Dieses Vorgehen erlaubt es der HRA parallel zur Erfassung der Daten an der
        Entwicklung einer mehrteiligen Annotationskomponente zu arbeiten. Diese besteht 1.)
        aus einem DOM-nahen SVG Editor, der auf OpenSeadragon aufsetzt, 2.) einem
        semantischen Verlinkungsmechanismus (zum Zeitpunkt der Einreichung des Posters
        werden mehrere Möglichkeiten der Informationsmodellierung und Umsetzung diskutiert
        und ausprobiert. Bei der finalen Posterpräsentation wird sowohl auf die Diskussion,
        als auch auf die Implementierung Bezug genommen werden) und 3.) der Integration von
        TEIAN3,
        einem Editor, der es erlaubt beliebige Subsets von XML Vokabularen über eine
        graphische Nutzeroberfläche auf einen Text anzuwenden. Mit diesen Komponenten wird
        es u. a. möglich sein: Annotationen im Sinne des Open Annotation Data Model (OADM)
        zu erstellen, das im ersten Erfassungsschritt bereits transkribierte Material z. B.
        in TEI auszuzeichnen und mit dem SVG-Editor Grabungspläne so nachzuzeichnen, dass
        sie im Detail annotiert und in ein Geoinformationssystem eingehängt werden können. 
         Im vorgestellten Projekt haben wir uns aufgrund der kurzen Projektlaufzeit bewusst
          gegen die Entwicklung einer projektspezifischen Präsentationsoberfläche entschieden.
          Stattdessen konzentrieren wir uns auf Arbeitsabläufe zum Erstellen standardisierter
          Daten und der Frage wie diese möglichst zukunftssicher modelliert werden können. Die
          Datenanzeige soll derweil über Tamboti oder per IIIF-P über Mirrador oder andere
          standardkonforme Viewer erfolgen können. Die Daten können über Tamboti für weitere
          Nutzergruppen freigegeben werden und so z. B. im Unterricht mit Atomic Wiki oder
          HyperImage4 aufbereitet werden. Ein Tutorenprogramm5 und eine
          ausführliche Dokumentation dafür wurden in den letzten Semestern bereits etabliert
          und regelmäßig in unterschiedlichen Fachbereichen eingesetzt. 
      
      
         
            Die
      Produktivinstanz des Exzellenzclusters Asien und Europa ist unter http://tamboti.uni-hd.de zu
      erreichen. Der Quellcode ist unter https://github.com/exc-asia-and-europe/tamboti veröffentlicht.
    
             Ziziphus ist ein integrierter Bestandteil von
        Tamboti und wird von der HRA in Zusammenarbeit mit betterFORM und eXist
        solutions entwickelt. Der Quellcode ist unter https://github.com/exc-asia-and-europe/ziziphus/ veröffentlicht.
      
             Der Quellcode ist unter https://sourceforge.net/projects/teian/ veröffentlicht. 
             Derzeit wird die Community
        Edition des HyperImage Authoring Environment in der Version 3.0.beta2
        eingesetzt.
             Das Tutorenprogramm wurde im Wintersemester 2013 / 14,
        unterstützt durch Mittel aus dem „Willkommen in der Wissenschaft“
        Förderprogramm, vom Lehrstuhl für Visuelle und Medienanthropologie (Christiane
        Brosius) initiert und gemeinsam mit der HRA implementiert. Der kontinuierliche
        Ausbau des Programms wird von der Abteilung Schlüsselkompetenzen und
        Hochschuldidaktik der Universität Heidelberg begleitet.
         
      
   



      
         
            Ziel: Erfassung und Analyse literarischer Topographien
            Der Fokus der Untersuchung liegt auf der literarischen Repräsentation von Raum.
          Bisherige Untersuchungen ihres Werks haben erwiesen, dass Aichingers Bezugnahmen
          auf Orte und Ereignisse in Wien zentrale Bedeutung zukommt (Fässler 2013). Dabei
          fällt auf, dass Aichinger Raumbezüge in verschiedenen Phasen ihres Werks auf
          ganz unterschiedliche Weise elaboriert: Der Wienbezug ihres ersten Romans, Die größere Hoffnung (1948), ist für den Leser / die
          Leserin unzweifelhaft erkennbar, obwohl Aichinger konsequent auf die Nennung
          identifizierbarer Ortsnamen verzichtet. Im mittleren Werk werden Ortsbezüge
          zunehmend abstrakt; in ihren spätesten Texten hingegen häufen sich exakte
          Ortsangaben im Stadtraum Wien. Ziel des Projekts ist es, grundlegende Strukturen
          in Aichingers Referenzierung auf Orte zu ermitteln und deren Zusammenhang zur
          historischen Erfahrung herauszuarbeiten, deren Darstellung im Zentrum ihres
          Werks steht. Zu diesem Zweck sollen alle Angaben zu Ort, Zeit und Person in
          ihren Texten so codiert werden, dass sie einer maschinellen Abfrage zugänglich
          und damit sowohl systematisch als auch vollständig evaluiert werden können.
         
         
            Arbeitsschritte
            
               Digitale Texterfassung
               Textgrundlage ist die achtbändige Ausgabe der Werke Ilse Aichingers (S.
              Fischer Verlag 1991) sowie die danach erschienenen Einzelbände. Diese Bände
              wurden gescannt und mittels OCR (Optical Character Recognition) erfasst und
              dadurch maschinenlesbar gemacht. Als Vergleichskorpora sollen zusätzlich die
              davon abweichenden Textfassungen der Erstausgabe des Romans sowie der
              zwischen 2000 und 2004 in Tageszeitungen publizierten Texte erfasst
              werden.
            
            
               Digitale Texterschließung
               Im zweiten Arbeitsschritt wird eine TEI-konforme Datei erstellt, in der die
                Texte mithilfe von Standards wie RDF (Resource Description Framework), XML
                (Extensible Markup Language) und PoS (Part-of-Speech-Tagging) codiert und
                dadurch der maschinellen Abfrage durch Abfragesprachen wie SPARQL (SPARQL
                Protocol And RDF Query Language) zugänglich gemacht werden. Im Hinblick auf
                den primären Fokus der Untersuchung, die Erfassung und Analyse der
                literarischen Topographien Aichingers, werden vorrangig Personennamen sowie
                Orts- und Zeitangaben kodiert. Außerdem ist eine Analyse anhand semantischer
                Felder geplant, wofür eine Vernetzung mit unterschiedlichen Datenbanken (z.
                B. Dornseiff) vorgesehen ist. Von vornherein soll so gearbeitet werden, dass
                die Möglichkeit weitere bzw. speziellere Codierungen zu ergänzen offen
                bleibt.
            
            
               Erhebung und Einpflege zusätzlicher Daten / Metadaten
               Ergänzend zur digitalen Erfassung und Erschließung der Texte werden weitere
                  Metadaten eingebracht. Dies können textgenetisch relevante Daten sein wie
                  Entstehungs- und Publikationsdaten, oder Sacherläuterungen, wie sie in
                  Apparaten wissenschaftlicher Editionen oder Kommentaren üblich sind, sowie
                  Hinweise auf Varianten, Querverweise, Illustrationen etc. Ein Teil dieser
                  Daten ist durch Recherchen in Wiener Archiven oder am Aichinger-Vorlass im
                  Deutschen Literaturarchiv (DLA) in Marbach zu erheben. Die Auszeichnung
                  durch RDF ermöglicht aber auch die Verlinkung mit online Datenbanken und
                  damit den Anschluss an das semantic web (Hitzler et al. 2008; Ivanovic /
                  Frank 2015). 
            
         
         
            Darstellung der Ergebnisse
            Das Textkorpus :aichinger soll die Basis bilden für die Durchführung von Abfragen
                  und Analysen, die eine präzise, systematische und vollständige Evaluierung der
                  Raumbezugnahmen im Gesamtwerk der Autorin ermöglichen soll. Erfassbar werden
                  dadurch beispielsweise Personenkonstellationen in Verbindung mit Orten sowie
                  Frequenzen der Nennung bestimmter Orte resp. Wege in Korrelation zur
                  beschriebenen Zeit wie zur Zeit der Textabfassung. Diese Ergebnisse verlangen
                  unterschiedliche Darstellungsformen. So sind Diagramme möglich, oder Wordclouds,
                  die wiederum Häufungen oder Übereinstimmungen bzw. Korrelationen darstellen
                  können. Auf der Basis der RDF Codierung lassen sich z. B. maschinell Karten
                  generieren, in denen die erwähnten Orte oder Wege der in den Texten genannten
                  Figuren u. a. aufscheinen. Die kartographische Darstellung ermöglicht es darüber
                  hinaus Leerstellen ihres Werkes (nie genannte Orte oder Zonen) oder verdeckte
                  Strukturen (die Wientopographie, die der für Aichinger maßgebliche Film Der
                  Dritte Mann darstellt) sichtbar zu machen. Insbesondere anhand solcher Karten
                  wird das Poster das Konzept und die Analysemöglichkeiten unseres Projektes
                  darstellen.
         
         
            Prototyp
            Das Projekt dient der Sichtbarmachung und besseren Analyse der raumrelevanten Strukturen im Werk Aichingers und deren Relevanz für die erinnerungskulturell motivierte Schreibweise, der die Autorin verpflichtet ist. Das Projekt hat insofern paradigmatischen Charakter, als die an diesem Beispiel entwickelten Methoden den Status eines Prototyps haben und auch bei der Analyse anderer Textkorpora Anwendung finden sollen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Aichinger, Ilse (1991): Werke in acht
                      Bänden. Herausgegeben von Richard Reichensperger (Die größere
                      Hoffnung / Der Gefesselte / Eliza Eliza / Schlechte Wörter / Kleist, Moos,
                      Fasane / Auckland / Zu keiner Stunde / Verschenkter Rat). Frankfurt / Main:
                      S. Fischer. 
               
                  Fässler, Simone (2011): Von Wien
                      her, auf Wien hin. Ilse Aichingers „Geographie der eigenen
                      Existenz.“ Wien: Böhlau.
               
                  Hitzler, Pascal / Krötzsch, Markus
                        / Rudolph, Sebastian (2008): Semantic
                        Web. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer. 
               
                  Ivanovic, Christine / Frank,
                          Andrew (2015): „Auf der Suche nach dem erfüllten Raum: Digitale
                          Korpusanalyse in der Literaturwissenschaft am Beispiel Ilse Aichinger“, in:
                          Tagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen
                            Raum, Graz. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In unserem Poster möchten wir unsere neueste FinderApp GoetheFind vorstellen, die mit
          computerlinguistischen Methoden die Originalausgabe von Goethes Faust
          durchsucht. GoetheFind hat einen neuen browser-basierten Faksimile-Viewer, der
          die Schaltstelle der multimedialen Ausgabe der Suchtreffer darstellt: Die
          Treffer werden im Faksimile der Originalausgaben gehighlighted dargestellt und
          mit einer gesprochenen Faust-Hörbuchausgabe verlinkt. Bei Faust I werden die
          Treffer mit der entsprechenden Szene des Videos der Bühnenaufführung vom
          Hamburger Schauspielhaus mit Gustav Gründgens (1960) verlinkt. GoetheFind
          entstand aus unserer FinderApp WiTTFind (Hadersbeck / Pichler; Hadersbeck et al. 2014), die den
          öffentlich zugänglichen Teil des Nachlasses von Ludwig Wittgenstein durchsucht
          und mit der wir im Sommer 2014 den EU-AWARD des EU-Projekt Digitised Manuscripts to Europeana (cf.
          Ploeger 2014) gewannen. 
            In unserer neuen FinderApp GoetheFind, setzen wir Ideen des „Standoff-Markups“ um, damit „overtagged“-XML vermieden wird. Wir entwickelten eine reduzierte „XML-TEI-P5 anchor-key“ Edition und speichern die Metainformatione in einer „NoSQL-mongo“-Datenbank. Alle relevanten Editions-, OCR- und Transkriptionsinformationen zur multimedialen Trefferausgabe sind in der Datenbank gespeichert.
         
         
            Modellierung der Editionsdaten 
            
               Anstatt „overtagged“ XML ein reduziertes „anchor-key“ XML-TEI-P5 mit „NoSQL“-Database
               Grundlage unserer FinderApp GoetheFind ist die XML-TEI-P5 Textedition im
              DTABf Format vom Deutschen Textarchiv (DTA) der Berlin-Brandenburgischen
              Akademie der Wissenschaften (BBAW 2013; Haaf et al. 2015), dazu die
              Bilddigitalisate der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin (BBAW 2013) und dem freiem
              Hochstift Frankfurt des Frankfurter Goethe-Hauses (Signatur: III B / 23).
              Da wir zur multimedialen Ausgabe der Suchtreffer zahlreiche
              Metainformationen benötigen und "overtagged" XML des Editionstexts vermeiden
              wollten, verwenden wir Ideen des „Standoff-Markups“ und lagern alle
              notwendigen Meta-Informationen in der „NoSQL“ mongo-Datenbank GoetheDB aus.
              Eine eindeutige Referenz der Datenbankeinträge zum Editionstext lösen wir
              über den XML-TEI-P5 Tag , der an Seitenanfängen in die
              Edition eingefügt ist. Die Trefferpositionen werden über ein
              XML-Attributtrippel (Seite, Zeile, Token) genau spezifiziert. 
            
            
               Vorverarbeitung der Edition, Faksimile, Videoaufführung und Audioaufnahme
               Da unsere FinderApp die Suchanfragen regelbasiert mit Hilfe von lokalen
                Grammatiken im Kontext eines Satzes realisiert, verwenden wir als wichtigste
                Strukturierungsebene Sätze. Goethes Faustdrama bettet Sätze in Rede und
                Gegenrede, sogenannte Repliken ein, die die zweite Strukturierungsebene
                darstellt. Zur visuellen Hervorhebung und multimedialen Ausgabe der
                gefundenen Textstellen im Faksimile ermitteln wir für die Replike
                geometrische Informationen mit Hilfe eines von uns entwickelten
                semiautomatischem OCR-Correction Tools. Die Bühnen- und Audioaufnahme werden
                mit Hilfe des Clarin-Tools: „Munich Automatic Segmentation System WebMAUS“
                (CLARIN) semiautomatisch transkribiert. 
            
         
         
            Computerlinguistische Methoden zur Textinterpretation 
            Mit Hilfe unseres Speziallexikons GoetheLEX, angereichert um historische Sprachvarianten, Part of Speech Tagging und lokalen Grammatiken implementierten wir eine Partikelverb- und Semantische Suche. Bei der Eingabe von Suchanfragen verwenden wir eine symmetrische Autovervollständigung mit Informationen zur Häufigkeit des Auftretens im Text.
         
         
            Treffer im Faksimile-Viewer und multimediale Ausgabe
            Ähnlich wie bei Google-Docs entwickelten wir einen Browser basierter Faksimile-Viewer mit dem man in einem doppelseitigen Buchlesemodus durch das Dokument blättern kann und die gefundenen Textstellen farblich hervorgehoben werden. GoetheFind vernetzt alle Treffer mit der entsprechenden Replik in der Bühnenaufführung und der Hörbuchausgabe. Sobald der Nutzer auf die Mulitmediabuttons des Treffers drückt, startet im Browser ein Videoviewer oder eine Ausdioausgabe ab dieser Stelle. 
         
         
            Danksagung
            Wir danken dem Deutschen Textarchiv für die gute Zusammenarbeit und die
                freundliche Verfügungsstellung der Editionsdaten von Goethes Faust (BBAW 2013).
                Der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz und dem Freien
                Deutschen Hochstift, in Frankfurt danken wir für die Wiedergaberechte der
                Bilddigitalisate der Originalausgabe Goethes Faust.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  BBAW (2013): Das DTA-Basisformat
                    DTABf. Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften (BBAW)
                    http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat [letzter
                      Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  CLARIN (o. J.): CLARIN-D
                      WebMAUS. Automatic Segmentation of Speech. https://www.clarin.eu/movies/clarin-d-webmaus-automatic-segmentation-speech
                      [letzter Zugriff 08. September 2015]. 
               
                  Haaf, Susanne / Geyken, Alexander / Wiegand, Frank
                        (2015): "The DTA 'Base Format': A TEI Subset for the Compilation of a Large
                        Reference Corpus of Printed Text from Multiple Sources", in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8 https://jtei.revues.org/1114
                        [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                   Hadersbeck, Max / Bruder, Daniel / Capsamun, Roman / Conforti, Costanza / 
                            Eder, Elisabeth / Eichfeldt, Nora / Fink, Florian / Herteis, Simeon / Höps, Raphael /
                            Lindinger, Matthias / Ling, Jennifer / Mittelhammer, Katharina / Schmidt, Katharina / 
                            Schweter, Stefan
                  FinderApp GoetheFind.
                          Centrum für Informations- und Sprachverarbeitung (CIS), Ludwig Maximilians Universität
                          München
                          http://goethefind.cis.uni-muenchen.de/
                           [18.02.2016]. 
               
                  Hadersbeck, Max / Pichler, Alois (eds.) (o. J.) FinderApp WiTTFind. Centrum für Informations- und
                          Sprachverarbeitung (CIS), Ludwig Maximilians Universität München &
                          Wittgenstein Archives, University of Bergen http://wittfind.cis.uni-muenchen.de/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar
                          2016].
               
                  Hadersbeck, Max, Pichler, Alois, Fink, Florian , Gjesdal,
                              Øyvind Liland (2014): "Wittgenstein's Nachlass. WiTTFind and
                              Wittgenstein advanced search tools (WAST)", in: Digital
                              Access to Textual Cultural Heritage (DaTeCH 2014), Madrid 91-96
                              http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/datech/datech2014.html#HadersbeckPFG14
                                [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Hadersbeck, Max / Pichler, Alois / Fink, Florian / Bruder,
                                  Daniel / Arends, Ina / Baiter, Johannes (2015): "Wittgensteins
                                  Nachlass. Erkenntnisse und Weiterentwicklung der FinderApp WiTTFind", in:
                                  2. Tagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen
                                    Raum 23.-27.2.2015, Graz.
               
                  Ploeger, Lieke (2014): "Open Humanities Awards round 2
                                      – Winners announced", in: DM2E. Digitised Manuscripts to
                                      Europeana
                  http://dm2e.eu/open-humanities-awards-round-2-winners-announced/
                                        [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  TEI (2015): "Stand-off Markup", in: TEI Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange,
                                        Version 2.9.1, 16.9 http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/SA.html#SASO
                                        [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016].
            
         
      
   



      
         Ambiguitäten allerorten: Ambiguität ist ein integraler Bestandteil menschlicher
        Kommunikation. Sie kann unbeabsichtigt produziert werden, wie in (1a), oder zu
        strategischen Zwecken eingesetzt werden, z. B. für komische Effekte wie in (1b). 
         1a. William isn’t drinking because he’s unhappy (vgl. Hirschberger / Avesani
          1997).
         1b. …men who can sheer sheep and women with long hair… (vgl. Cutting from BBC News
            Website).
         Ambiguität findet sich vornehmlich in sprachlichen Ausdrücken, kann jedoch auch in
              der Interaktion mit Bildern oder in Bildern selbst zu finden sein, sowie auf
              nicht-sprachliche Kommunikation übertragen werden. Daher eröffnet das Thema
              Ambiguität ein interdisziplinäres Forschungsfeld, an dem neben Sprach- und
              Literaturwissenschaft auch Rhetorik, Psychologie, Theologie, Rechtswissenschaft und
              Medienwissenschaften größtes Interesse bekunden (siehe beispielsweise Klein /
              Winkler 2010; Winkler 2015).
         Das Datenbankprojekt TInCAP (Tübingen Interdisciplinary Corpus of Ambiguity Phenomena), das im Rahmen des interdisziplinären Graduiertenkollegs 1808 „Ambiguität: Produktion und Rezeption“ entsteht, zielt darauf ab, Belege von Ambiguität verschiedener Provenienz zu sammeln und diese interdisziplinär zu annotieren und nachhaltig zu speichern. Dabei stehen drei Ziele im Vordergrund: (a) die interdisziplinäre Auseinandersetzung mit dem Thema Ambiguität durch die Erstellung eines gemeinsamen Annotationsschemas, (b) die Nachhaltigkeit der gesammelten Daten und (c) die Zugänglichkeit der Datensammlung für die nationale und internationale Forschungsgemeinschaft.
         
            ANNOTATION. Jeder Beleg zur Ambiguität kann interdisziplinär im
                Hinblick auf fünf verschiedene Aspekte annotiert werden. Die (i) Kommunikationsebene
                legt fest auf welcher Ebene die Ambiguität in der Kommunikation eine Rolle spielt,
                beispielsweise auf der Ebene der fiktiven Charaktere vs. Erzähler-Leser vs. konkrete
                Kommunikation. Wir unterscheiden außerdem (ii) zwischen strategischem vs.
                nicht-strategischem Einsatz der Ambiguität in Produktion und Rezeption. Darüber
                hinaus wird (iii) sowohl die Ebene des Auslösers der Ambiguität (z. B. auf
                Wortebene, Phrasenebene etc.) annotiert als auch ihre Reichweite, d. h. bis zu
                welcher Ebene sie für die Interpretation relevant ist. Als weiteren Punkt
                kennzeichnet (iv) eine qualitative Annotation wie sich die unterschiedlichen
                Lesarten zueinander verhalten: Sind sie voneinander abgeleitet oder komplett
                unabhängig? Spielt Vagheit eine Rolle? Nicht zuletzt sieht die Datenbank die
                Möglichkeit vor, (v) disziplininterne Begrifflichkeiten zur Beschreibung des
                behandelten Phänomens zu verwenden. Dieses interdisziplinär erarbeitete und
                anwendbare Schema erlaubt es uns langfristig Korrelationen in den Daten zu finden,
                die über die unterschiedlichen Modi (unterschiedliche Typen von Ambiguität in
                unterschiedlichen Texttypen / Bildern) hinweg gelten, sodass wir damit ein genuin
                interdisziplinäres Forschungsergebnis erreichen können. 
         
            NACHHALTIGKEIT. Ein wichtiges Ziel der Datenbank ist es, die gesammelten Daten langfristig und nachhaltig zu speichern. Dazu haben wir ein XML-Schema entwickelt, das weitestgehend TEI-konform [5] ist. Diese XML-Dateien können im Rahmen der universitären Infrastruktur langfristig gespeichert, katalogisiert und zugänglich gemacht werden. Bei Video-, Audio- und Bilddateien halten wir uns an die üblichen Standards für nachhaltige Datenformate.
                
         
            INTERFACE. Für die aktive Arbeitsphase mit der Datenbank im
                  Rahmen des GRK 1808 und für die Zugänglichkeit für die (inter)nationale
                  Forschergemeinschaft haben wir eine Datenbankanwendung spezifiziert, die von einem
                  externen Dienstleister implementiert wird. Dabei setzen wir auf die
                  objektorientierte hierarchische Datenbanktechnologie LDAP (vgl. Zeilenga 2006), die
                  bereits im BMBF-Projekt RiR eingesetzt wurde. So lässt sich nicht nur die
                  XML-Hierarchie bestens abbilden, sondern es wird auch eine sichere und feingranulare
                  Zugriffskontrolle ermöglicht. Mittels einer entsprechend angepassten
                  Synchronisierungssoftware konnte die Datenbank während der XML-Erfassungsphase
                  ständig aktualisiert werden. Eine webbasierte Benutzeroberfläche ermöglicht u.a.
                  komplexe Suchen in den verschiedenen Hierarchieebenen, wobei mehrere Einträge in der
                  Hierarchie (also z. B. ein Haupteintrag sowie mehrere Annotationseinträge und
                  bibliographische Einträge) als ein virtueller Eintrag zusammengezogen werden. Über
                  die Benutzeroberfläche können neue Einträge erstellt und vorhandene Einträge
                  modifiziert werden, wobei die Zugriffskontrolle erlaubt, auch nur Teile eines
                  solchen virtuellen Eintrags sichtbar/bearbeitbar zu machen. Gleichzeitig erlaubt der
                  Export einzelner bzw. aller Datensätze, im XML-Format die Nachhaltigkeit der
                  eingegebenen Daten auch über einen längeren Zeitraum hinweg sicherzustellen. 
         Damit zeigt das Datenbankprojekt, wie sich interdisziplinäre inhaltliche Arbeit innovativ mit den Zielen der Nachhaltigkeit verknüpfen lässt, ohne die Benutzerfreundlichkeit in der aktiven Arbeitsphase zu vernachlässigen.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               Cutting from BBC News Website, quoted BBC 4, Friday Night Comedy, the News
                        Quiz, Series 82, Episode 2; Broadcasted: 15.Nov 2013.
               
                  Hirschberg, Julia / Avesani, Cinzia (1997): „The role
                          of prosody in disambiguating potentially ambiguous utterances in English and
                          Italian“, in: Botinis, Antonis / Kouroupetroglou, Georgios / Carayannis,
                          George (eds.): Intonation. Theory, Models and
                          Applications 189–192. 
               
                  Klein, Wolfgang / Winkler, Susanne (eds.) (2010): Ambiguität. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
                            Linguistik 40, 158. Stuttgart: Metzler. 
               
                  RiR (2012-2015): Relationen im
                              Raum
                  
                              http://www.steinheim-institut.de/wiki/index.php/RiR [letzter
                              Zugriff 15. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.):  Guidelines
                                for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                  http://www.tei-c.org/P5/
                                [letzter Zugriff 15. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Winkler, Susanne (ed.) (2015): Ambiguity. Language and Communication. Berlin / New York: de
                                  Gruyter. 
               
                  Zeilenga, Kurt (2006): Lightweight
                                    Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). Directory Information Models,
                                    IETF RFC 4512, June 2006. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das Vorhaben
            Die Uwe Johnson Werkausgabe ist ein Vorhaben der Berlin Brandenburgischen
          Akademie der Wissenschaften an der Universität Rostock. Erstmals wird mit Uwe
          Johnson ein Autor des 20. Jahrhunderts in einem Akademienvorhaben ediert. Die
          Werkausgabe gliedert sich in die Abteilungen Werke, Schriften und Briefe und wird
          sowohl als Buch wie auch digital erscheinen. Für beide Medien bilden gemäß TEI
          (P5) ausgezeichnete Texte die gemeinsame Datengrundlage, im Digitalen ergänzt um
          die digitalisierten Materialien des Uwe Johnson-Archivs. Um „lesbare“ Bücher zu
          ermöglichen, werden textkritische Apparate, Kommentare und Erläuterungen in
          einer exemplarisch sinnstiftenden Auswahl in den Druck aufgenommen, digital wird
          historisch-kritische Vollständigkeit angestrebt. 
            Zu den Eigenheiten des Autors Uwe Johnson gehört eine textsortenübergreifende Arbeitsmethode: In Briefen formuliert er Prosaversuche, aus Zeitungen übersetzt er in seine Bücher, Personen, Dokumente und Ereignisse der Zeitgeschichte treten in seinen Romanen auf.
         
         
            Aus der Werkstatt
            Aus dieser Arbeitsweise ergibt sich beinahe zwingend, dass im Digitalen mit den
            Buchdeckeln auch die Grenzen zwischen den drei die Buchausgabe gliedernden
            Abteilungen durchlässig werden. Anhand einiger Beispiele soll Johnsons Arbeiten
            gezeigt werden: welche Brücken zwischen Texten und unterschiedlichen Medien er
            schlägt, und welche Auswirkungen das auf einen Editionsprozess hat, der diesen
            Pfaden nachgehen will, um sie den Nutzern zu präsentieren. Hinzu kommen Fragen
            der Einbindung externer Ressourcen, audiovisuellen Materials und der
            Berücksichtigung von Urheberrechtsfragen.
            Durch die beiden Zielmedien ergibt sich ein unterschiedlicher Bedarf in der Tiefe der TEI-Auszeichnung der jeweiligen Dokumente. Die Ansprüche an die Auszeichnung für ein Buch sind selbstverständlich andere als die, für eine digitale Edition, in der die Grenzen lediglich durch die editorischen Kriterien gezogen werden. Das Erforderliche kann aufgenommen werden, während auf zu weit Entferntes oder Weiterführendes nur hingewiesen wird. Aus diesem Grund wird für jedes Werk eine vollausgezeichnete „Masterdatei“ erstellt, aus der sich beide Versionen speisen und somit dieselbe Textgrundlage haben, wodurch eine doppelte Datenhaltung vermieden wird. Neben der Erfassung der verschiedenen Varianten finden sich in dieser Datei sowohl der text- als auch der historisch-kritische Kommentar. Das Ziel der Buchfassung, nämlich eine lesbare Ausgabe zu sein, die das zum Textverständnis Notwendige enthält, steht dem der digitalen Edition gegenüber, welche losgelöst der analogen Grenzen funktioniert. Hier kann vom Optimum ausgegangen werden und dann durch den Nutzer entsprechend seiner Fragestellung reduziert werden. Durch Zuweisung von Attributen ist es möglich per XSL Transformation das gewünschte Endprodukt zu generieren. Dazu werden einerseits einige der typischen TEI-Elemente als „Filtersignal“ genutzt, andererseits ein „Digital“- oder „Print“-Attribut, welches in dem Prozess wieder entfernt wird. Die so generierte print-XML wird per XSL-FO in PDF umgewandelt, um eine orientierende Vorlage für den Verlag zu erhalten, der diese beiden Dateien für den Satz erhält. Nach dem gleichen Prinzip wird die Digital-XML als Grundlage der digitalen Edition generiert.
            Künftig wird eine weitere Auszeichnungsebene hinzukommen. In der praktischen Arbeit hat sich gezeigt, dass eine zusätzliche semantische Auszeichnung sinnvoll ist. Daher konzipieren wir zurzeit eine Möglichkeit neben der TEI- auch eine semantische Auszeichnung vorzunehmen. In welcher Ebene dies geschieht ist noch in der Überlegung. Anzunehmen ist ein erneutes Transformationsszenario.
            Johnsons Arbeitsmethoden bieten einen sehr großen Anreiz zur Vernetzung und Visualisierung in der digitalen Präsentation. Intertextualität und Collage sind nur zwei von vielen Termini, die sich auf ihn anwenden und im digitalen Raum auf eine Art und Weise präsentieren lassen, wie es in einem Buch nicht möglich wäre. So können Zusammenhänge sicht- und erfahrbar gemacht werden, die sonst nur Abstrakt zu erfassen wären.
            Dazu gehört auch die angestrebte Multimedialität. Johnson hielt vielerlei Lese- und sonstige Reisen ab, welche zum Teil als Video- oder Audiodokument vorliegen. Im Zusammenspiel mit seinen Manuskripten – er hat oft dokumentiert, wo er was geschrieben hat – lässt sich die Entstehung seines Œuvres auch räumlich nachverfolgen und etwaige Koinzidenzen erforschbar machen.
            Die spätere Präsentation dieser Ergebnisse wird sich der Nutzer gemäß seinen Bedürfnissen komplett selbst anpassen können. Die Textvarianten, die von Interesse sind, werden sich nach eigenem Wunsch anordnen, zu- oder abschalten lassen. Die einzelnen Anzeigeelemente werden also nicht in einem Layout „gefangen“ sein, sondern können durch den Nutzer selbst angeordnet werden. Entscheidungen, welche Varianten wie nebeneinander gelegt werden und ob ein Faksimile hinzugeschaltet werden soll liegen in der Hand des Benutzers, der seinen Schreibtisch in der Art anordnen kann, wie es seiner Arbeit dienlich ist.
         
      
   



      
         
            Untersuchungsgegenstand und Zielsetzung
            In der neueren deutschen Literatur steht Stefan George (1868-1933) wie kein anderer für die außergewöhnliche Beschäftigung eines Autors mit bzw. für die Verwendung von Typografie. Ab 1904 werden seine Werke in
          Stefan-George-Schrift (St-G) gedruckt. Der Formenkanon der serifenlosen Type basiert auf Georges Buchschrift1 sowie auf der
          Akzidenz-Grotesk der Schriftgießerei Berthold und zeigt zudem Einflüsse historischer Schriften wie der Unziale und der karolingischen Minuskel. Bis zu der vom Dichter autorisierten
          Gesamt-Ausgabe der Werke (1927-1934) entwickelt sich das Typenrepertoire der Schriftart, sodass die St-G-Schrift nicht in einer, sondern in mehreren Fassungen vorliegt.
        
            Eine serifenlose Schrift inmitten der in Deutschland tobenden Antiqua-Fraktur
          Debatte zu verwenden, ihr Design an der eigenen Handschrift zu orientieren und
          gleichzeitig auf historische Vorbilder zu referieren – lediglich ausschnitthaft
          verdeutlichen diese Aspekte die große Relevanz von Typografie für Georges Werk.
          Umso verwunderlicher ist es, dass bisherige Editionen2 keine tiefentypografische Analyse der Drucke
          vornehmen. Die Abhandlungen der einschlägigen Forschung zur Gestaltung und
          Genese der Type sowie zu ihrer Verwendung und Wirkung sind dementsprechend
          dürftig. Daher ist das Ziel des Projekts Stefan George Digital
        (StGD) die erstmalige Edition der Drucküberlieferung der Georgeschen Lyrik,
        wobei der Schwerpunkt auf der Erschließung typografischer Formen mittels eines
        semantischen Modells liegt.3
            
         
         
            Vorgehen und Methodik
            Das Editionskorpus StGDs besteht aus 29 Druckausgaben der insgesamt 11 lyrischen
        Werke4 Georges, in denen die Anwendung und die Entwicklung der typografischen
        Gestaltung sichtbar werden. Die digitalen Volltexte werden größtenteils aus
        bestehenden Repositorien (z. B. Deutsches Textarchiv und TextGrid
        Repository) semi-automatisch in ein projektspezifisches XML/TEI Schema
        konvertiert. Da der Schwerpunkt der Edition auf der buchwissenschaftlichen
        Erschließung des Materials liegt, werden die Daten entsprechend mit Metadaten
        (z. B. FRBR, METS) angereichert. Schließlich werden digitale Faksimiles,
        vereinzelt aus bestehenden Repositorien (z. B. ULB Düsseldorf), größtenteils jedoch erstmalig hochauflösend
        digitalisiert, auf einen IIIF basierten Imageserver mit angepassten Viewern
        (Open Seadragon, Mirador) in die Edition integriert. Die digitalen Bilder werden
        sowohl parallel zum edierten Text als auch separat typografisch annotiert.
        Während die Ebenen der Meso- (Schrift in der Fläche), Makro- (Organisation von
        Schrift) und Paratypografie (Materialität und Technik) im Rahmen der digitalen
        Edition weitestgehend mit bestehenden Datenmodellen erfasst werden können, wird
        das Modell zur Erschließung der Mikrotypografie (Formausstattungsmerkmale) erst
        im Rahmen des Projekts entwickelt (zu den typografischen Ebenen vgl. Stöckl
        2004). 
            Die Modellierung der typografischen Detailformen erfolgt in Form einer Ontologie, welche ihre eindeutige Identifikation, formalisierte Beschreibung und Zitation ermöglicht. Damit wird eine netzwerkartige Erschließung und Verknüpfung unterschiedlicher Aspekte und Charakteristika von Schrift unternommen, welche sowohl für Mensch als auch für Maschine interpretierbar sind. Die Technologien des Semantic Web zur Wissensrepräsentation in Thesauri (SKOS), Klassenmodelle (RDFs) und Ontologien (OWL) können dafür ebenso verwendet werden wie Methoden der Daten- und Softwaremodellierung (UML). 
            Sowohl die Digitale Edition als auch die Ontologie zur Beschreibung von Typografie werden unter CC BY-SA Lizenz auf der
          GAMS, der technischen Infrastruktur des
          Grazer Zentrums für Informationsmodellierung, bereitgestellt.
        
         
         
            Kontextualisierung in den Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften
            Das Projekt ist vorrangig für die digitale Editorik relevant, die seit geraumer Zeit
          verstärkt auch die Materialität von Dokumenten zu erschließen versucht. Statt den Weg der
          Abbildung von Schrift mittels Faksimiles oder ihrer Rekonstruktion im Rahmen der
          Transkription (z. B. Schriftfaksimile ) zu gehen, wählt das Projekt die formale
          Modellierung und macht die Informationen so analysierbar. In diesem Zusammenhang trägt
          StGD auch zur Bildung einer 5 noch kaum
          bestehenden Digitalen Buchwissenschaft und Typenkunde bei, für welche der Ansatz der
          semantischen Modellierung von Typenformen ebenfalls neu ist.6
            
            Schließlich kann das StGD auch als exemplarisch für den Einsatz und Umgang mit projektspezifischen Datenmodellen gelten. Um die Ontologie für die breitere Forschungscommunity nutzbar zu gestalten, wird die Übertragbarkeit des Modells auf verschiedene Arten von Typen, wie beispielsweise bewegliche Lettern und frühneuzeitliche Typen, getestet. Außerdem ist der Versuch eines mappings des Modells auf Handschriften in Zusammenarbeit mit
          DigiPal vorgesehen.
        
         
         
            Zentrale Aspekte auf dem Poster
            Neben einer Gesamtpräsentation des Projekts StGD, wird das Poster vorrangig drei aktuelle Herausforderungen illustrieren:
            
               Modellierung mikrotypografischer Formen basierend auf einer stabilen
            Terminologie, festgelegten Beschreibungskategorien (z. B. Form und Stil)
            sowie zentraler Unterscheidungsmerkmale (z. B. Serifen und Strichdicke). 
               Vernetzung der vier typografischen Ebenen Mikro-, Meso, Makro- und Paratypografie, welche mit unterschiedlichen Datenmodellen an unterschiedlichen Orten der Edition erfasst werden.
               Visualisierung typografischer Genese sowie gestalterischer Brüche und Kontinuitätslinien über das lyrische Gesamtwerk Georges hinweg. 
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Ab circa 1896 stilisierte George seine Kursivhandschrift verstärkt zu einer Buchschrift, welche in der Folgezeit auch von Mitgliedern des George-Kreises verwendet wurde.
          
             Neben den Editionen einzelner Werke v.a.: Sämtliche Werke in 18. Bänden. Herausgegeben von der
            Stefan George-Stiftung; bearbeitet von Peter Landmann und Ute Oelmann.
            Stuttgart 1981-2013. 
             Das Projekt
            Stefan George Digital entsteht im Rahmen von DiXiT (Digital Scholarly
            Editions Initial Training Network), als Teil der Marie Curie Actions im 7.
            Rahmenprogramm der Europäischen Kommission. 
            Die Bandzählung und -aufteilung folgt der
            Veröffentlichung der Werke in der Gesamt-Ausgabe (1927-1934). „Der
            Teppich des Lebens“ ist beispielsweise vier Mal (1900/1,1901/2,1904/3,
            1932/Gesamt-Ausgabe), „Der Stern des Bundes“ nur zwei Mal (1914/1,
            1928/Gesamt-Ausgabe) im Korpus repräsentiert. Im Laufe des Projekts
            werden außerdem auch einzelne Gedichte, welche im Vorfeld in der von
            George gegründeten Zeitschrift Blätter für die
              Kunst (1892-1919) veröffentlicht wurden, in das Editionskorpus
            aufgenommen.
            Vgl. die „stilisierte Ursprungsschrift“
            (Tool Dreifachlupe der Universität Würzburg).
            Das Typenrepertorium des Gesamtkatalogs der
            Wiegendrucke beschreibt die formalen Aspekte von Typen beispielsweise in
            Prosaform (vgl. Inkunabelreferat der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin –
            Preußischer Kulturbesitz).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Eide, Øyvind (2015): "Ontologies, Data Modeling, and
              TEI", in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8.
              http://jtei.revues.org/1191 [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Inkunabelreferat der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin –
                  Preußischer Kulturbesitz (o.J.): TW.
                  Typenrepertorium der Wiegendrucke http://tw.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/ [letzter Zugriff 15.
                  Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Lucius von, Wolf D. (2012): "Buchgestaltung und
                    Typographie bei Stefan George", in: Aurnhammer, Achim / Braungart, Wolfgang
                    / Breuer, Stefan / Oelmann, Ute (eds.): Stefan George und
                    sein Kreis. Ein Handbuch, 1. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter 467-491. 
               
                  Stöckl, Hartmut (2004): "Typographie: Körper und Gewand
                      des Textes. Linguistische Überlegungen zu typographischer Gestaltung", in:
                      ZfAL Zeitschrift für Angewandte Linguistik 41:
                      5-48. 
               
                  Stokes, Peter A. (2011): Describing
                        Handwriting. Part I: http://www.digipal.eu/blog/describing-handwriting-part-i/
                        [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Universität Würzburg (o. J.): Dreifachlupe
                  http://vb.uni-wuerzburg.de/ub/lskd/dreifachlupe.html [letzter
                          Zugriff 15. Februar 2016].
               
                  Wehde, Susanne (2000): Typographische
                            Kultur. Eine zeichenhistorische und kulturgeschichtliche Studie zur
                            Typographie und ihrer Entwicklung. Tübingen: Niemeyer. 
            
         
      
   



      
         Der Poster beschreibt den gegenwärtigen Stand des Projekts WALDI (World Atlas of Little Data Infrastructure), das am Institut für Empirische Sprachwissenschaft gemeinsam mit dem StudiumDigitale seit Mai 2015 realisiert wird. 
         Durch empirische Arbeit in der Sprachforschung entstehen verhältnismäßig kleine
        Daten, die i. d. R. von einzelnen Forschern erhoben werden und für die aktuelle
        Zwecke lokal (d. h. nicht-netzbasiert) abgespeichert. Die Verwendung von solchen
        „Little Data“ ist durch eine konkrete Fragestellung und das Forschungsinteresse
        beschränkt. Aus diesem Grund geraten sie nach dem Auslaufen einer Forschungsphase
        schnell in Vergessenheit. 
         Das primäre Ziel des Projektes ist die Konstruktion eines webbasierten Tools, das den linguistischen Feldforschern erlaubt lokal abgespeicherte Sprachdaten auf einem digitalen Atlas abzubilden und die Existenz dieser Daten für die Nutzer des Atlasses bekanntzugeben. 
         Eine webbasierte Anwendung erlaubt die freie Nutzeranmeldung auf einer digitalen
          Weltkarte (basierend auf Google Maps). Die Nutzer_innen editieren die Karte, indem
          sie die elizitierten Daten der dokumentierten Sprache (kleine Sprachkorpora)
          geographisch fixieren (pinnen) und den fixierten Pin mit einem TEI-ähnlichen Header
          versehen. Das Pinnen geschieht anhand von GPS-Angaben, die durch einfache
          Mauszeigerbewegungen generiert werden (man kann für viele Sprachen z. B. im Amazonas
          oder kaukasischen Hochland keine Orte in Google Maps lokalisieren). Der Header
          beinhaltet alle relevanten Sprachdateninformationen, die in folgende 5
          Reiter-Kolumnen unterteilt sind: 1. Korpus Information (Autoren, Institutionen,
          Release, Größe etc.); 2. Sprache (Status, Schrifttum, Typologie etc.); 3. Die Art
          und der Aufarbeitungsstand der Daten (Transkription, Annotation etc.); 4. Erfasste
          Texte (Art, Epoche, Genre etc.); 5. Zugänglichkeit und Kontakt.
         Zur technischen Realisierung des Tools kommen die Elemente aus Google Maps, JavaScript, MySQL zum Einsatz.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bubenhofer, Noah (2014): Visual
              Linguistics - Sprache sehen. http://www.visual-linguistics.net/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Februar
              2016].
               
                  Dryer, Matthew S. / Haspelmath, Martin (2013): World Atlas of Language Structures Online (WALS).
                Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology http://wals.info/ [letzter Zugriff 14.
                Februar 2016].
               
                  Krämer, Sybille (2009): „Operative Bildlichkeit. Von
                  der ‘Grammatologie’ zu einer ‘Diagrammatologie’? Reflexionen über
                  erkennendes Sehen“, in: Hessler, Martina / Mersch, Dieter (eds.): Logik des Bildlichen. Zur Kritik der ikonischen
                  Vernunft. Bielefeld: transcript 94-123. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die digitale Edition
            Das Theodor-Fontane-Archiv konzipiert eine digitale, kritische Edition aller Briefe von und an Theodor Fontane. Hierbei handelt es sich um etwa 10.000 Briefe, die bislang unvollständig und nach heutigen editionswissenschaftlichen Standards unzureichend veröffentlicht sind. Ein Großteil des Briefnachlasses befindet sich im Archiv, doch sind weitere Bestände aus anderen Institutionen und Privatbesitz zu berücksichtigen. Somit wird der gesamte, stark verstreute Briefnachlass virtuell zusammengeführt und erstmalig als ein Korpus recherchierbar, wodurch die Voraussetzung für die systematische Erforschung dieses zentralen Werkbestandes geschaffen wird.
            Verschiedene editorische Herausforderungen stellen sich bezüglich der Briefe.
          Neben den Originalhandschriften sind mitunter mehrfache Abschriften sowie
          bisherige Drucke einzubeziehen. Somit werden mehrere Überlieferungsträger eines
          Briefes verzeichnet und in der Edition präsentiert, wodurch sich die Frage einer
          sinnvollen Darstellung von Überlieferungsvarianten stellt. Daneben muss eine
          Lösung für die digitale Umsetzung materialspezifischer Besonderheiten gefunden
          werden, z. B. die häufig beschriebenen Briefränder. Diese Textbestandteile sind
          oft seitenübergreifend und stehen in den unterschiedlichsten Winkeln zur
          regulären Beschreibrichtung. In der Online-Präsentation werden neben den
          Digitalisaten und Transkriptionen die Metadaten, die Kommentierung sowie die XML
          / TEI P5-Auszeichnung verfügbar gemacht. Für die individuelle Benutzbarkeit soll
          die Anzeige der genannten Daten flexibel anzupassen sein. Aufgrund der
          besonderen Schriftbildlichkeit müssen die Digitalisate drehbar und im Falle von
          mehreren Textzeugen soll deren parallele Anzeige möglich sein. Auf die
          Verwendung von Standards (z. B. XML / TEI P5) und Normdaten (z. B. GND für
          Personen) und die Erstellung von projektinternen Indizes (zu Personen,
          Institutionen, Orten, Werken, Periodika) wird besonderer Wert gelegt. So können
          etwa personelle und institutionelle Netzwerke, an denen Fontane teilhatte,
          rekonstruiert und intertextuelle Verbindungen nachvollzogen werden.
         
         
            Das Fontane-Forschungsportal
            Die Edition der Briefe steht im Zusammenhang mit dem ebenfalls in der
            konzeptionellen Entwicklung befindlichen Fontane-Forschungsportal. Dessen Ziel
            ist die Präsentation der Digitalen Sammlungen des Archivs und optional anderer
            Bestandshalter. Die aufbewahrten Handschriften liegen digitalisiert vor, die
            Verknüpfung der Digitalisate mit dem technischen und bibliographischen
            Metadatensatz wird über den METS / MODS- bzw. METS / EAD-Standard erfolgen. Die
            Handschriften- und Bibliothekskataloge des Archivs, bisher intern als allegro-C-
            und allegro-HANS-Datenbanken geführt, werden ebenfalls über das Portal als OPACs
            zugänglich gemacht. Somit stellt das Portal die Verknüpfung von archivalischen
            Quellen- und Erschließungsdaten und von Forschungsprimärdaten her.
            Neben der virtuellen Zusammenführung des zerstreuten Nachlasses ist das zweite Ziel des Portals, alle Forschungsressourcen zu Fontane schnell zugänglich bereitzustellen. Die Fontane-Aktivitäten außerhalb des Archivs sollen hier gebündelt werden und das Portal als Kommunikationsplattform für die verschiedenen Akteure dienen. Dafür werden technische Schnittstellen für Datenaustausch sowie Kooperationen mit anderen Projekten geschaffen. Doch richtet sich das Portal nicht nur an die Wissenschaft, sondern auch an die breite Öffentlichkeit, der hier ein umfassender Zugang zu Fontane, seinem Leben und Werk ermöglicht werden soll.
         
         
            FuD und CMS
            Die technische Umsetzung der digitalen Edition und des Forschungsportals wird im Rahmen der virtuellen Forschungsumgebung FuD („Forschungsnetzwerk und Datenbanksystem“) erfolgen, die am Kompetenzzentrum für elektronische Erschließungs- und Publikationsverfahren in den Geisteswissenschaften an der Universität Trier entwickelt wurde. Die in FuD bereitgestellten Tools werden an die projektspezifischen Bedürfnisse angepasst und weiterentwickelt, etwa für die Verzeichnung unterschiedlicher Textzeugen. Diese Weiterentwicklungen sollen von anderen Institutionen nachgenutzt werden können.
            Im Hintergrund stehen eine Neustrukturierung der gesamten Datenstruktur des Theodor-Fontane-Archivs und die Überführung in ein Content Management System, das ebenfalls in Zusammenarbeit mit dem Kompetenzzentrum Trier erarbeitet wird. Die Datenmodellierung des CMS, auf das Edition und Portal gleichermaßen zugreifen, muss gewährleisten, dass unterschiedliche Arten von Daten in FuD zusammengeführt, angereichert und weiterverarbeitet werden können. Hierzu gehören bibliographische Metadaten von Handschriften und Bibliotheksbeständen des Archivs, bibliographische Metadaten anderer Institutionen, Digitalisate plus deren Metadaten, Normdaten, die Transkriptionen der Edition, die TEI-Textauszeichnung, editorischen Kommentare und die erstellten Indizes. Auch werden Schnittstellen zu anderen Projekten und zu Archivdatenbanken hergestellt und der Zugang per Open Access gewährleistet.
         
         
            Edition und Portal als Forschungsumgebung
            Die digitale Edition und das Forschungsportal werden auf Grundlage der gemeinsamen Datenbasis so konzipiert und miteinander verbunden, dass zwischen ihnen Datenaustausch möglich wird. So wird der jeweilige Rechercherahmen erweitert, eine umfassendere Kontextualisierung der Informationen erreicht und eine digitale Arbeits- und Forschungsumgebung geschaffen, die den Erfordernissen eines Archivs in seinen Aufgaben des Sammelns, Erschließens und Langzeitarchivierens sowie den Erfordernissen einer Forschungseinrichtung gleichermaßen gerecht wird. Dies und die Vernetzung mit verschiedenen Forschungsvorhaben ermöglicht nicht nur neue Erkenntnisse für die Fontane-Forschung selbst, sondern auch zur Literatur- und Geistesgeschichte des 19. Jahrhunderts. Für weitere, interdisziplinäre und neue Fragestellungen wird die Struktur offen und flexibel angelegt. Zudem soll die entwickelte Arbeitsumgebung in ihrer Datenstruktur auch Modellcharakter für kleinere Archive, Museen und Sammlungen haben.
            Im Poster werden der derzeitige Konzeptionsstand von Edition und Portal vorgestellt, Probleme und offene Fragen aufgezeigt sowie Lösungsansätze zur Diskussion gestellt.
         
      
   



      
         Der Beitrag „explore.bread.AT! Die österreichische Brotkultur dialektal“ informiert
        über eine Pilotstudie, die synchron und diachron Lemmata für Brot und Gebäck
        betrachtet. Die Studie bettet sich in das Projekt „exploreAT! exploring austrias
        culture through the language glass“ (Wandl-Vogt 2015) am Austrian Centre for Digital
        Humanities der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ACDH-ÖAW) ein. Das
        Projekt „exploreAT!“ baut auf dem „Wörterbuch der bairischen Mundarten des
        Österreichischen“ (WBÖ) und der dazugehörigen „Datenbank der bairischen Mundarten
        des Österreichischen“ (DBÖ) auf, welche Daten aus der Zeit von 1911-1998 der
        (ehemaligen) Habsburger Monarchie beinhalten. Die DBÖ umfasst u. a. auf bestimmte
        Fragen genannte Lemmata. Eine genaue Aufstellung der Ressourcen stellen Siemund et
        al. (in Vorbereitung) dar. 
         Für die Studie werden Fragen aus den Fragebögen „30. Brot backen (III)“ sowie „31. Weißgebäck“ der WBÖ verwendet. Hierin befinden sich unter anderem Fragen nach der Benennung bestimmter Brotsorten, ob handgebackenes Brot anders genannt wird als Bäckerbrot, welche sonstigen Brotsorten bekannt sind und Verwendung finden, wie einzelne Teile sowie Eigenschaften des Brotes genannt werden, aber auch zur Brotzubereitung sowie zu Redensarten, welche in irgendeiner Form im Zusammenhang mit Brot stehen. Die verschiedenen benutzten Wortstämme der genannten Lemmata werden miteinander verglichen und Tendenzen der Verbreitung – zunächst im österreichischen Raum – aufgezeigt. Ein weiterer Untersuchungsschwerpunkt liegt in der Ermittlung der regional vorkommenden Brot- und Gebäcksorten anhand des Auftretens ihrer entsprechenden Lemmata. Im historischen Verlauf kann daraus geschlossen werden, inwiefern sich die Brotkultur innerhalb von Österreich unterscheidet und im Laufe der Zeit angepasst beziehungsweise weiter voneinander abgegrenzt hat. Ähnlich geartete Fragen anderer Sprachatlanten wie beispielsweise dem Sprachatlas von Oberösterreich (SAO) werden analysiert, sodass die Lemmata der DBÖ mit ihnen in Verbindung gesetzt werden können. Außerdem werden weitere Lexika und Atlanten wie der österreichische Volkskundeatlas (
          Burgstaller et al. 1959-1981) zu Rate gezogen, um die Ergebnisse in einen kulturhistorischen Kontext einbetten zu können. Langfristiges Ziel ist es, die Betrachtungen auf den deutschsprachigen Bereich sowie deren Grenzregionen auszuweiten und somit Gemeinsamkeiten, aber auch Unterschiede zwischen den einzelnen Ländern sichtbar zu machen sowie die Entwicklung mit Migrationsströmen zu vergleichen.
        
         Technisch werden die verwendeten Lemmata aus den Datenbanken exportiert und in XML
          modelliert. Dafür sollen die XML-Auszeichnungssprachen TBX und TEI genutzt werden.
          Es ist vorgesehen die genutzten Daten in die Eweiterung von Standards für die
          Kombination von TBX und TEI einfließen zu lassen. Die Ergebnisse sollen in
          Kooperation mit Roberto Theron (Universidad de Salamanca)
          visualisiert werden. Einblicke in die Arbeit, aber auch praktische Realia wie
          Brotrezepte sollen auf dem Projektblog http://brot.linguence.de (Siemund 2015-*) veröffentlicht werden, um die
          Forschung nicht der Wissenschaft exklusiv zu halten, sondern auch interessierte
          Laien partizipieren zu lassen und sich im Citizen Science-Kontext des Projekts
          „exploreAT!“ einzubetten. Das Blog ist im Rahmen des 10. World Bread Day am
          16.10.2015 mit einem Rezept für Kletzenbrot online gegangen und hat sich bei einer
          Bloggerinitiative (zorra
          25.09.2015) zu selbigem Tag beteiligt, um möglichst publikumswirksam zu starten. Es ist anvisiert, die
          Forschungsergebnisse in verschiedene europäische Initiativen und Netzwerke
          einzubetten. Eigentlich nicht erwähnt werden muss, dass die Forschungsergebnisse
          open access unter creative commons-Lizenz zur Verfügung gestellt werden sollen. 
         Im Fokus des Posters liegen zum einen die technischen Vorgehensweisen, zum anderen die Methoden des Citizen Science.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Burgstaller, Ernst / Wolfram, Richard / Helbok, Adolf
                (eds.) (1959-1981): Österreichischer Volkskundeatlas.
                Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
               
                  Siemund, Melanie (2015-*): explore.bread.AT!. Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
                  Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities http://brot.linguence.de/
                  [letzter Zugriff 08. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Wandl-Vogt, Eveline (2015): exploreAT! exploring austrias culture through the language glass
                  https://acdh.oeaw.ac.at/dha/de/node/78 [letzter Zugriff 17.
                    Februar 2016].
               
                  zorra (25.09.2015): "World Bread Day 2015 – Invitation
                      / Einladung", in: 1x umrühren aka kochtopf. Food-Blog
                      http://www.kochtopf.me/world-bread-day-2015-invitation-einladung
                        [letzter Zugriff 08. Januar 2016]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Seit 2014 arbeitet das Projekt „Repositorium Steirisches Wissenschaftserbe“ an der digitalen Erschließung, Archivierung und Veröffentlichung von für den Regionalraum Steiermark bedeutsamem Quellenmaterial. Das Projekt vereint nicht nur zahlreiche Konsortialpartner sondern auch unterschiedliche Quellengattungen, von Museumsobjekten, über Handschriften, bis zu Postkarten oder historischen Glasdias. Die homogene Beschreibung dieser Mischung aus objekt-, bild- und textzentrierten Ressourcen ist eine Herausforderung. Das Poster zeigt die ersten Zwischenergebnisse des Projektes. Dabei wird nicht nur der Kernteil der digitalen Erschließung, Langzeitarchivierung und Dissemination vorgestellt, sondern auch Aspekte, denen im Vorhinein oft weniger Beachtung geschenkt wird, die aber für einen erfolgreichen Projektverlauf ebenso zentral sind.
         
         
            Fachlich-inhaltliche Aspekte
            In einem ersten Schritt wurden disziplinenspezifische Fragestellungen an
          Einzelbestände eruiert, sowie die Funktionalitäten der geplanten gemeinsamen
          Webplattform und die dafür benötigten Daten mit den Partnern festgelegt. Als
          größte Herausforderung aus der Sicht der Digital Humanities ergab sich dabei die
          Homogenisierung der Metadaten: Die Inhalte der unterschiedlichen Objekttypen
          werden im Projekt zunächst mit domänenspezifischen und international anerkannten
          XML-Metadatenstandards (etwa TEI, LIDO, EAD) beschrieben. Die Datenerfassung und
          Erschließung erfolgt dabei nach eigens entworfenen bestands- und
          disziplinenübergreifenden Richtlinien, um eine möglichst konsistente Datenbasis
          zu schaffen. Das umfasst auch die Verwendung von kontrollierten Vokabularien und
          Thesauri (z. B. Geonames, AAT, GND) für die semantische Anreicherung der
          Quellen. Für das gemeinsame Portal werden aus dieser Datenbasis festgelegte
          Metadaten-Kernkategorien (Person, Ort, Zeit, Objekttyp, Medientyp und
          Kurzbeschreibung) extrahiert und auf Dublin Core und Europeana Data
          Model-Kategorien gemappt. Dieser Ansatz soll der Diversität der Quellen Rechnung
          tragen und eine qualitativ hochwertige Einzelbeschreibung mit generischen
          Beschreibungskategorien verbinden, die die Grundlage für einen gemeinsamen
          Suchraum bilden. Die Langzeitarchivierung der digitalen Forschungsdaten erfolgt
          in bereits vorhandenen institutionellen Repositorien der universitären Partner.
          1
            
         
         
            Finanzielle, organisatorische und rechtliche Aspekte
            Kooperationen zwischen Universitäten und Gedächtnisinstitutionen sind oft schwierig formal abzusichern. Neben der inhaltlichen Bereitschaft zur Partnerschaft müssen sich alle Beteiligten zunächst auch auf ein gemeinsames Geschäftsmodell einigen. Während an den wissenschaftlichen Forschungseinrichtungen immer mehr auf Open Access gesetzt wird, sind Gedächtnisinstitutionen traditionell stärker auf persönliche BesucherInnen fokussiert, und sehen die Onlinepräsentation ihrer Sammlungen als potentielle Konkurrenz zu analogen Ausstellungen. Da die meisten Partnerinstitutionen öffentlich gefördert werden und öffentliches Gut verwahren, ist ein freier Zugang zu den Online-Ressourcen jedoch wünschenswert. In das entstehende gemeinsame Projektportal werden daher per Definition nur kostenfrei zugängliche digitale Objekte aufgenommen.
            Doch nicht nur finanzielle Interessen können für einen beschränkten Zugang zu Ressourcen verantwortlich sein sondern auch rechtliche Aspekte. Archive müssen gesetzliche Sperrfristen beachten, Fragen des Datenschutzes sowie Persönlichkeitsrechtes spielen oft bei Korrespondenzen und Bildsammlungen eine Rolle. Selbstverständlich müssen alle Institutionen auf die Urheberrechte der WerkschöpferIn Rücksicht nehmen.
            Während fachlich-inhaltliche Nachhaltigkeit durch bereits vorhandene Infrastruktur und entsprechendes Know-How bei den jeweiligen Partnern relativ mühelos umgesetzt werden kann, ist finanzielle und organisatorische Nachhaltigkeit schwieriger sicherzustellen. Gerade bei institutionsübergreifenden Projekten mit begrenzter Laufzeit stellt dies ein Problem dar. In diesem Fall kann die Projektarbeit nur als Anschubfinanzierung für den Aufbau einer Infrastruktur und von Arbeitsabläufen verstanden werden, die darauffolgend in den Regelbetrieb übergehen sollten.
         
         
            Kooperativ-kommunikative Aspekte
            Differenzen zwischen Wissenschafts- und Gedächtnisinstitutionen können nur durch kontinuierliche Gespräche überbrückt, Ziele und Lösungsansätze nur gemeinsam erarbeitet und umgesetzt werden. Spezielle Begrifflichkeiten, die auf divergierende disziplinäre Hintergründe zurückzuführen sind, sind von Beginn an explizit zu machen. Vorstellungen und Erwartungen bezüglich des Projekt-Ergebnisses oder der visuellen Umsetzung unterscheiden sich häufig gravierend. Das zentrale Augenmerk der Digital Humanities muss hier auf der Vermittlerrolle liegen: Die Kommunikation mit den unterschiedlichen Institutionen, Disziplinen und FachwissenschaftlerInnen erfordert oft Fingerspitzengefühl, da nicht nur die Kooperation selbst hinterfragt wird, sondern auch die Vorteile der digitalen Komponente des Projektes. 
         
         
            Ausblick
            Speziell in den Geisteswissenschaften darf nicht vergessen werden, dass viele der zentralen Forschungsobjekte in BAM-Institutionen gepflegt und aufbewahrt werden. Unter diesem Gesichtspunkt ist die enge Kooperation zwischen der (digitalen) Wissenschaft und den Gedächtnisinstitutionen nicht nur wünschenswert sondern unabdinglich. Die inhaltliche, organisatorische und technische Vernetzung birgt Synergien, die im Idealfall über den begrenzten Zeitraum eines Projektes hinausgehen und in nachhaltigere Formen der Kooperation überführt werden. Beide Bereiche profitieren von dieser Zusammenarbeit und können damit nicht zuletzt der Öffentlichkeit auch einen Teil der eigenen Geschichte und Kultur besser vermitteln und zugänglich machen.
            Nachdem im ersten Projektabschnitt die Grundlagen für eine erfolgreiche Zusammenarbeit gelegt und die Daten der Partner nach den festgelegten Richtlinien erfasst und angereichert wurden, folgt in der nächsten Phase die technische Umsetzung der Projektplattform und des Suchportals.
         
      
      
         
            Die Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz und die
            Kunstuniversität Graz betreiben jeweils eine auf der open source
            Software FEDORA Commons basierende Archivierungslösung: GAMS ( http://gams.uni-graz.at) und
            PHAIDRA ( http://phaidra.kug.ac.at).
         
         
            
               Bibliography
               
                  GAMS (2014-*): GAMS:
              Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System. Zentrum für
              Informationsmodellierung - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities,
              Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz http://gams.uni-graz.at/ [letzter Zugriff: 08. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Phaidra (o. J.): Phaidra: Permanent
                Hosting, Archiving and Indexing of Digital Resources and Assets.
                Universität Wien, Bibliotheks- und Archivwesen https://phaidra.kug.ac.at/
                [letzter Zugriff: 08. Januar 2016]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Textarchiv und Umfang der Studie
            Das DFG-geförderte Projekt „DeutschesTextarchiv“ (DTA) der
          Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (BBAW) stellt
          deutschsprachige Drucke als Bilddigitalisate und TEI-XML-annotierte Volltexte
          aus mehr als 300 Jahren, vom Beginn des 17. bis zum frühen 20. Jahrhundert, über
          das Internet zur freien Nutzung bereit. Das DTA mit seinen Erweiterungskorpora
          umfasst derzeit knapp 2800 Dokumente mit mehr als 630 000 digitalisierten Seiten
          und ca. 1,1 Mrd. Zeichen (Stand: 7.10.2015). Neben dem Anspruch, vielseitig
          nutzbare und qualitativ hochwertige Primärquellen frei verfügbar zumachen, liegt
          der Fokus des DTA-Projekts auf der korpus- bzw. computerlinguistischen Analyse
          der elektronischen Volltexte. Alle Quellen stehen in verschiedenen Formaten zum
          Herunterladen und auch zum „Harvesten“ über eine API bereit (BBAW 2007-2015). 
            Im Rahmen des DTA wurden in den letzten beiden Jahren verschiedene automatische und semiautomatische Ansätze zur Erkennung von Personen- und Ortsnamen evaluiert. Immer wieder bedeuteten dabei die Heterogenität des Korpus und die große sprachliche Varianz innerhalb des Textkorpus eine Herausforderung für die Tools: Je früher die Entstehungszeit eines Textes liegt, desto größer werden sprachliche und sachliche Differenz bei der Benennung von Eigennamen. Der Fokus wird im Folgenden auf Ortsnamen in historischen Texten des DTA liegen.
            Das Ziel der Studie besteht darin, die Verteilung der im DTA erwähnten Ortsnamen darzustellen, um ein synthetisches Bild der Sammlung zusammenzustellen und gleichzeitig Rückschlüsse auf den Inhalt zu ermöglichen. Sie erfolgt im Rahmen einer Kooperation zwischen der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Zentrum Sprache) und der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ICLTT, Institut für Corpuslinguistik und Texttechnologie), beide Zentren verfügen über digitalisierte historische Textkorpora.
         
         
             Erkennung von Ortsnamen
            Spezialisierte Werkzeuge aus dem Gebiet der Computerlinguistik werden im Rahmen
            dieser Studie eingesetzt. Erstens wird für die Tokenisierung (Segmentierung in
            Wortformen) die Software WASTE (Jurish / Würzner 2013) benutzt, die speziell für
            Texte verschiedener Epochen im Rahmen des DTA entwickelt worden ist. So lassen
            sich Sprachqualitäten besser annähern, die von den heutigen Standards
            abweichen.
            Die deutsche Version des „Wikiwörterbuchs“ Wiktionary der Wikimedia Stiftung, das von Internetnutzern gepflegt wird, wird verwendet, um lexikalische Informationen über Wörtern zu sammeln. Ziel dieses Vorgehens ist es unter anderem, solche Token zu erkennen, die mit Sicherheit keine Eigennamen sind. Ein weiteres mögliches Problem besteht bei Eigennamen, die keine Ortsnamen sind, jedoch aus verschiedenen Gründen als solche ausgezeichnet worden sind, u. a. Namen von bekannten Autoren so wie fiktive Namen und Vornamen. Listen werden also benutzt, um bereits bekannte Eigennamen auszugrenzen.
            Die Erkennung von Ortsnamen beruht oft auf Verfahren aus der künstlichen
              Intelligenz sowie named-entity recognition (Leidner / Lieberman 2011).
              Wissensbasierte Methoden zeigen jedoch auch vielversprechend Ergebnisse, so wie
              zum Beispiel anhand von Datenbanken aus Wikipedia (Hu et al. 2014).
            Unsere Erkennung der Ortsnamen erfolgt über Datenbanken, die die Vorteile von geisteswissenschaftliche Sorgfalt und Opportunismus aus Big Data Herangehensweisen kombiniert. Über ein gleitendes Fenster wird nach Treffern (einschließlich Mehrwortausdrücken) gesucht. Aus der passenden Datenbank werden Koordinaten und gegebenenfalls weitere geographisch relevante Informationen extrahiert, diese Daten werden wiederum in einer weiteren für das gesamte Verfahren angelegten Datenbank zusammengefasst. Falls mehrere Möglichkeiten bestehen, ist ein Disambiguierungsverfahren nötig, das Informationen wie Distanz, Kontext und aktuelle Bevölkerungszahlen benutzt.
            Die Erkennung erfolgt über die Durchsuchung von Listen unterschiedlichen Ranges:
                als Erstes wird nach aktuellen sowie ehemaligen Ländern und vergleichbaren
                Hoheitsgebieten gesucht (z. B. Österreich-Ungarn), dann wird die Suchanfrage um
                Regionen oder regionale Landschaften erweitert (z. B. Schwaben), bei einem
                negativen Ergebnis wird anschließend nach Städten und schließlich nach
                geographischen Merkmalen wie Flüssen oder Bergen gesucht. Die dafür nötigen
                Informationen wurden zum Teil händisch (Staaten und Regionen) und zum Teil
                automatisch gesammelt und händisch zusammengefasst oder überprüft (Städte und
                Geographie). Da mancherorts die Staatsgrenzen bis ins 20. Jahrhundert instabil
                geblieben sind und da gewisse Staaten sich durchaus als multinational verstehen
                lassen, wurden insbesondere für Mitteleuropa Listen einschließlich der aktuellen
                oder ehemaligen deutschen Namen erstellt, u. a. anhand von bereits im Web
                auffindbaren Listen wie zum Beispiel Kategorien oder Listen von Wikipedia.
            Jedem eindeutigen Ortsnamen wurden dann Koordinaten hinzugefügt, entweder durch automatische Abfrage von Wikipedia und Wikidata oder händisch unter Heranziehungen historischer Beschreibungen oder Atlanten. Bei politischen Entitäten wurde bisher Europa im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert in Betracht gezogen. Die Listen werden regelmäßig erweitert, sie umfassen derzeit 78 Hoheitsgebiete, 858 Regionen, 9.846 Städte und 13.962 geographische Merkmale.
            Wenn kein Treffer in den Listen gefunden wird, werden größere, automatisch erstellte Ortsregister in Betracht gezogen. Geographische Informationen über Orte stammen dann aus den Geonames-Datenbanken, die zum Beispiel von dem Openstreetmap Projekt benutzt werden, und dessen Creative Commons Attribution Lizenz eine Wiederverwendung der Daten ermöglicht. Alle Datenbanken für aktuelle europäische Länder sind gesammelt und verarbeitet worden: gewisse Ortstypen (nämlich Region und bewohnter Ort) sind ausgewählt worden, und existierende Varianten in diversen europäischen Alphabeten sind extrahiert worden, um mögliche Änderungen im Laufe der Geschichte zu reflektieren.
         
         
            Projektion auf einer Karte
            Schließlich werden die Ergebnisse auf eine Karte Europas projiziert, die die tatsächliche politische Lage dieser Zeit spiegelt. Dafür werden die Grenzen von 1914 gezeigt. Der quantitative Schwerpunkt des Korpus liegt nämlich auf dem 19. Jahrhundert liegt und der Stand vor dem ersten Weltkrieg gibt ein vernünftiges Bild von Europa während des 'langen 19. Jahrhunderts'. Die Qualität der Daten so wie des graphischen Resultats wurde in mehreren Durchläufen geprüft, dabei wurden jeweils verbliebene Fehler eliminiert: die Karte bzw. die Projektion der Daten wird so sukzessive verbessert und feiner justiert.
            Zur Projektion wird die Kartographieumgebung TileMill benutzt, die eine Anpassung anhand der Stylesheet-Sprache CartoCSS ermöglicht. So können wichtige Punkte im Graphen hervorgehoben werden. Die Wahl verschiedener Farben erleichtert den Überblick über das visualisierte Ergebnis und dessen Interpretation, da im Feld der Visualisierungsstudien bekannt ist, dass das menschliche Auge instinktiv unterscheiden und klassifizieren kann (Bertin 1967).
         
         
            Karte
            
               
            
            Karte von Europa in den Grenzen von 1914 (Hoheitsgebiete in Gelb, Regionen in Orange, Städte sowie aus Geonames extrahierte Ortsnamen in Grün, geographische Merkmale in Blau).
            
               
            
            Zoom: Karte von Mitteleuropa in den Grenzen von 1914 (Hoheitsgebiete in Gelb, Regionen in Orange, Städte sowie aus Geonames extrahierte Ortsnamen in Grün, geographische Merkmale in Blau).
         
         
            Diskussion
            Wir hegen die Hoffnung, dass solche Visualisierungsstudien den Weg nach einer größeren Sichtbarkeit von digitalem Kulturerbe und von literarischer Forschung im digitalen Zeitalter ebnen. Genauer betrachtet glauben wir, dass detailreiche Annäherungsweisen gefragt werden, die sowohl auf technischer Kompetenz als auch auf historisches und literarisches Wissen aufbauen. In diesem Sinne planen wir, mehr Metadaten einzubeziehen sowie vielseitige Visualisierungen zu erzeugen.
            Es sollte immer berücksichtigt werden, dass die linguistischen Korpora, die als Basis für die Karte benutzt werden, immer schon ein Konstrukt sind, woraus folgt, dass die auf diesen Daten basierenden Projektionen ebenso Konstrukte sind: Auch wenn sie unmittelbar interpretierbar scheinen, spielen Qualität der Daten, Spezialisierungsgrad der Verarbeitungskette und Qualitätsprüfung eine maßgebende Rolle. Deswegen sind wir der Meinung, dass eine gewisse Dekonstruktion des Prozesses nötig ist, im Sinne einer Öffnung der black box, die dem Betrachter das originelle Moment der Entzückung vielleicht wegnimmt, aus wissenschaftlicher Sicht jedoch wünschenswert ist. So möchten wir keine Fehler kaschieren, eventuelle Verzerrungen nicht verschweigen, und für die Reproduzierbarkeit des gesamten Prozesses sorgen, einerseits durch detailreiche Dokumentierung des Prozesses, andererseits durch die Herausgabe möglichst aller dabei verwendeten Tools und Komponenten als Open Source Software.
            So können unmögliche, in diesem Kontext falsche Verbindungen vermieden werden: es
                  gibt zum Beispiel einen Ort namens "Hermann" in Norwegen, was Fakt und Datum
                  zugleich ist. Es ist jedoch nötig, sich nicht allein auf diese Datengrundlage zu
                  verlassen, wenn man nach Orten sucht, sonst wird das Endprodukt – d. h. die
                  Karte – verfälscht.
            Interessanterweise bietet die Karte für einen möglichen Hermeneuten genau diese Fälle in Perspektive, die Existenz eines möglicherweise falschen Knotens bleibt nicht unbemerkt und wirft Fragen auf. Auf dieser Weise ist uns zum Beispiel ein systematischer Fehler mit den Vornamen aufgefallen. Durch diese hermeneutische Schleife wird die Analyse nach und nach verschärft.
            Die Säuberung der Daten ist in dieser Hinsicht entscheidend, die Anzahl und Vielfalt von Filtern, die eingesetzt werden, erheben unsere Arbeit von einer massiven Datensammlung und -Analyse auf das Niveau einer Studie in Digital Humanities, die Rücksicht auf Besonderheiten einer Sprache und einer Epoche nimmt.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  BBAW (2007-2015): Deutsches
                      Textarchiv. Berlin: Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der
                      Wissenschaften http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/ [letzter Zugriff 30. Januar
                      2016]. 
               
                  Bertin, Jacques(1967): Sémiologie
                        graphique. Paris: Mouton / Gauthier-Villars. 
               
                  Hu, Yingjie / Janowicz, Krzysztof / Prasad, Sathya
                          (2014): „Improving Wikipedia-Based Place Name Disambiguation in Short Texts
                          Using Structured Data from Dbpedia“, in: Proceedings of
                          the 8th ACM Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval, Dallas,
                          Texas 8–16. 
               
                  Jurish, Bryan / Würzner, Kay-Michael (2013): „Word and
                            Sentence Tokenization with Hidden Markov Models“, in: Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 28,
                            2: 61–83.
               
                  Leidner, Jochen L. / Lieberman, Michael D. (2011):
                              „Detecting Geographical References in the Form of Place Names and Associated
                              Spatial Natural Language“, in: SIGSPATIAL Special 3,
                              2: 5–11. 
            
         
      
   



      
         Dank Bibliotheken und Archiven konnten große Bestände mittelalterlicher Handschriften über die Jahrhunderte erhalten werden. Zur Beantwortung zentraler Fragestellungen der buchhistorischen Forschung werden die Handschriften analysiert und insbesondere die verschiedenen Bestandteile des Layouts – beispielsweise Seitengröße, Schrift- und Bildraum – vermessen. Die meist manuelle Analyse ist jedoch sehr zeit- und arbeitsintensiv, so dass nur eine geringe Anzahl mittelalterlicher Handschriften auf diese Art und Weise untersucht werden kann. Mit Hilfe digitaler Methoden und Werkzeuge können vorhandene Digitalisate der Handschriftenseiten automatisch oder halbautomatisch ausgewertet werden. Im Gegensatz zum manuellen Ansatz kann in diesem Fall mit einer signifikanten Verbesserung im Hinblick auf Schnelligkeit, Genauigkeit sowie Reproduzierbarkeit gerechnet werden. Bisher mangelt es jedoch an grafischen Oberflächen, die die entstehenden hochdimensionalen Metadaten großer, elektronisch erfasster Bestände dynamisch visualisieren können. Als Mehrwert wird es Geisteswissenschaftlern ermöglicht, Zusammenhänge zwischen Handschriften einfach zu erkennen und neue Erkenntnisse aus den Daten zu gewinnen.
        Aus diesem Grund entwickelt das vom BMBF geförderte Verbundprojekt „eCodicology“ (http://www.ecodicology.org) einen Software Workflow zur automatischen Annotation und Visualisierung von makro- und mikrostrukturellen Layoutmerkmalen mittelalterlicher Handschriften.
         In diesem Kontext präsentieren wir das Visualisierungsframework CodiVis, das die Erforschung von Korrelationen im abstrakten Merkmalsraum digitalisierter mittelalterlicher Handschriften vereinfacht und unterstützt. Die Datengrundlage von CodiVis sind mittelalterliche Handschriften, die zwischen dem achten und neunzehnten Jahrhundert in der Bibliothek der Trierer Benediktinerabtei St. Matthias aufbewahrt wurden.
          Der Bestand wurde im Rahmen des Projektes „Virtuelles Skriptorium St. Matthias“ (http://www.stmatthias.uni-trier.de) digitalisiert und mit bibliografischen Metadaten, wie Datierung, Beschreibstoff, Format und inhaltlichen Informationen, in TEI P5 konformen XML-Dateien angereichert. Nach Einspeisung der Digitalisate in das Datenrepositorium CodiStore können mit Hilfe von SWATI (Software Workflow for the Automatic Tagging of Images) verschiedene Layoutmerkmale der Handschriftenseiten bestimmt sowie die bibliografischen Metadaten extrahiert werden. 
         
            
            
               Abb. 1: CodiVis Prototyp, der beide Metadatenarten zur
            Visualisierung nutzt.
         
         Für einen schnellen Überblick über den gesamten Datenbestand und eine gleichzeitige Darstellung der zugehörigen Handschriftendetails wird eine Kombination zweier Visualisierungsformen angeboten. Auf der linken Seite ist der Bestand mit Hilfe eines radialen Baumdiagramms illustriert, geordnet nach dem Jahrhundert der Entstehung. Auf der rechten Seite werden die extrahierten Merkmale Schriftraum, Seitenhöhe und Seitenbreite mittels paralleler Koordinaten dargestellt. Die verschiedenen Linien repräsentieren dabei die spezifischen Ausprägungen der Layoutmerkmale einzelner Handschriften. Zur Untersuchung der Korrelationen werden Markierungen im Radialbaum automatisch in die Ansicht der parallelen Koordinaten übernommen. 
         Bisherige Evaluationen des Visualisierungsframeworks zeigen, dass der überwiegende Teil der Nutzer durch die interaktive Zugangsweise erfolgreich Zusammenhänge zwischen ähnlichen Handschriften, fehlerhafte Informationen und Ausreißer erkennen konnte. Darüber hinaus eröffnet CodiVis neue Fragestellungen im Hinblick auf die Visualisierung von Unsicherheiten in den bibliografischen Daten sowie in den automatischen Messungen, die in einem nächsten Schritt zusätzlich zu Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten einzelner Seiten integriert werden. Insgesamt können durch CodiVis neue Möglichkeiten der intuitiven Erkundung historischer Daten aufgezeigt werden. 
         Die Präsentation gibt einen Einblick in die Entwicklung und Benutzung von CodiVis im
            Rahmen des Projektes eCodicology mit einem Ausblick auf die mögliche Weiternutzung
            mit anderen Beständen. Zum Ende der Projektlaufzeit ist die Veröffentlichung als
            Teil des DARIAH Portals geplant.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  DARIAH: DARIAH-EU. Digital
                Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities http://www.dariah.eu/ [letzter
                Zugriff 11. Februar 2016].
               
                  Technische Universität Darmstadt / KIT Karlsruhe /
                  Universität Trier (2014): eCodicology.
                  Algorithmen zum automatischen Tagging mittelalterlicher Handschriften http://www.ecodicology.org
                  [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar 2016].
               Kompetenzzentrum für elektronische Erschließungs- und
                    Publikationsverfahren in den Geisteswissenschaften (2010-2014): Virtuelles
                    Skriptorium St. Matthias. Der mittelalterliche Bibliotheksbestand der
                    Trierer Abtei St. Matthias digital im Netz. Universität Trier: http://www.stmatthias.uni-trier.de/index.php [letzter Zugriff 16.
                    Februar 2016].
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Forschungskontext
            Im Rahmen des Projekts „travel!digital“
            1 wird erstmals der Versuch unternommen, die vielfältige Terminologie in historischen Reiseführern systematisch zu erschließen. Der Fokus auf
            Menschen und
            Monumente stellt zwei dominante semantische Felder in den Mittelpunkt, die sowohl Schlüsselelemente der Textsorte Reiseführer als auch wesentliche Komponenten kultureller Narrative darstellen. Damit sind Reiseführer keineswegs bloße historische Quellen, sondern vielmehr als bedeutende diskurshistorische Artefakte
            2 zu betrachten. Zudem eignet sich das in ihnen enthaltene enzyklopädische Wissen in besonderem Maße für die Datenmodellierung. Vor diesem Hintergrund erstaunt das Fehlen systematischer diachroner Forschung auf diesem Gebiet mindestens genauso wie der eklatante Mangel an digitalen Ressourcen, die für historische Untersuchungen geeignet wären.
            3
            
            Mit dem Baedeker Corpus, einer digitalen Sammlung
              deutschsprachiger Reiseführer aus dem Zeitraum 1875–1914, zielt das Projekt
              nicht nur darauf ab, wertvolles kulturelles Erbe mit den Methoden der Digital Humanities nachhaltig und langfristig
              sicherzustellen, sondern besonders darauf, semantische Technologien verstärkt
              zur Erforschung des deutschsprachigen Repertoires kultureller Diskurse an der
              Wende vom 19. zum 20. Jahrhundert einzusetzen. Als „komplexe Intertexte“ (vgl.
              Wierlacher 1997; Koshar 2000), die dominante Diskurse (re)produzieren bzw.
              (re)konstruieren, stellen Reiseführer „kodifizierte und autorisierte Versionen
              lokaler Kultur und Geschichte“ dar (vgl. Jaworski / Pritchard 2005). Die in den
              Reiseführern transportierten zeitgenössischen Lesarten zu Tourismus und
              kulturellem Erbe sowie Orientalismus und kolonialem Diskurs sind kultur- und
              diskurshistorisch von besonderem Interesse. Darüber hinaus lassen sich
              strukturell, linguistisch und insbesondere semantisch erschlossene digitale
              Reiseführer im Rahmen vergleichender literaturwissenschaftlicher Forschung, der
              historischen Lexikographie und Linguistik, der historischen Geographie und
              Kulturanthropologie nutzen. 
            Das vorliegende Korpus vereint alle Erstauflagen zu
              außereuropäischen Reisezielen aus dem Hause Baedeker, die vor der Zäsur des
              Ersten Weltkriegs erschienen sind. Es umfasst mehr als 1,5 Mio. running words und deckt eine Vielzahl an Regionen ab.
                4 Mit Blick auf differenzierte Analysemöglichkeiten stehen neben der
                linguistischen Basis-Annotation der Volltexte (Lemmatisierung, Part-of-Speech-Tagging) der Aufbau kontrollierter Vokabulare und deren
                Anbindung an LOD-Ressourcen im Mittelpunkt. Die semantischen Repräsentationen
                werden mithilfe des RDF-basierten Simple Knowledge
                Organization System SKOS und dessen Erweiterung SKOS-XL realisiert, mit dem sich auch ambige lexikalische Einheiten
                und nicht-hierarchische Relationen sinnvoll organisieren lassen. Zur Erstellung
                der SKOS-Repräsentation des Baedeker
                  Corpus wird der OpenSKOS Editor 5 eingesetzt; eine Entwicklung des Meertens
              Institute, die bereits für CLAVAS (CLARIN OpenSKOS
              Vocabulary Service) verwendet wird, das u. a. die ISO-639-3 language codes im SKOS Format
              enthält. Auch die DARIAH-EU Arbeitsgruppe Thesaurus Maintenance verwendet OpenSKOS für eine erste Version der SKOS-Repräsentation des in Entwicklung befindlichen Backbone Thesaurus. Der OpenSKOS Editor sichert
              daher die Kompatibilität mit aktuellen Standards und Entwicklungen. 
         
         
            bdk:ConceptScheme(s)
            Neben Personennamen beinhalten Reiseführer auf Seiten der
                Menschen eine Vielzahl an Gruppenbezeichnungen, die generische Referenzen und als solche, Subjekte charakterisierender Eigenschaftszuschreibungen darstellen (vgl. Schmidt-Brücken 2015). Diese für diskurshistorische Analysen relevanten Belege des Sprachgebrauchs werden jeweils von einem
                bdk:Descriptor, einer Unterklasse von
                skos:Concept, repräsentiert. Ihnen zugeordnet sind einzelne Terme als
                skosxl:prefLabel und
                skosxl:altLabel. Mithilfe der
                Properties hasTranslation / isTranslationOf und
                hasVariant / isVariantOf finden die in den Reiseführern enthaltenen Übersetzungen und Varianten auf Ebene der Terme Berücksichtigung. Auf diese Weise wird der Wortschatz vollständig erfasst und in einem
                skos:ConceptScheme zusammengefasst. Der Strukturierung dieses
                bdk:ConceptSchemeGroups dienen sechs mit
                skos:topConceptOf zugeordnete Kategorien: 1) allgemeine Sammelbegriffe, 2) ethnisch/nationale Gruppen, 3) geographische Konzepte im weitesten Sinne, 4) Berufsgruppen, wozu auch politische, religiöse und wirtschaftliche Funktionen sowie Lebensstile zählen, 5) Religionsgemeinschaften und 6) soziale Gruppierungen. Aufgenommen werden als eigene Konzepte nicht nur Nomen, sondern auch Adjektive, wobei die entsprechenden Konzepte mit
                skos:related aufeinander bezogen sind. Abbildung 1 listet die
                skos:topConcept(s) und ihre Definitionen auf und gibt einige Beispiele der ihnen zugeordneten Konzepte und Labels sowie deren Beziehungen.
              
            
               
               
                  Baedeker Group Taxonomy. Farbliche Hervorhebungen Spalte 2: Konzepte, die in Beziehung zu anderen Konzepten stehen; farbliche Hervorhebungen kursiv Spalte 3 und 4:
                  Properties für Übersetzungen und Varianten auf Ebene der Terme.
                
            
            Ein ähnlich vielfältiges Bild ergibt sich im Bereich der Monumente und Sehenswürdigkeiten, die als Gegenstand wertender Beschreibung und Einordnung eine zentrale Rolle in Reiseführern einnehmen. Aufgrund ihrer Vielzahl werden zunächst nur jene Sehenswürdigkeiten strukturiert, die mit Baedeker-Sternen als besonders sehenswert gekennzeichnet sind. Das Spektrum reicht von Architektur
                6 und Kunst
                7 bis zu Unterkünften, Landschaften und atemberaubenden Aussichten. Diese Kategorien strukturieren jeweils als
                skos:topConcept(s) das
                bdk:ConceptSchemeMonuments. Derzeit wird an einer Lösung gearbeitet, die es erlaubt, zwischen profaner und sakraler Kunst und Architektur zu unterscheiden und, sofern sakral, die jeweilige Religion zuzuordnen.
              
         
         
            Ausblick
            Die linguistische Annotation des
                Baedeker Corpus und die Erstellung der vorgestellten kontrollierten Vokabulare stellen die Voraussetzung für eine weitergehende systematische Analyse der Textsorte Reiseführer dar. Neben der Identifikation der in den untersuchten Baedeker-Bänden genannten historischen Persönlichkeiten mithilfe der
                Virtual International Authority Files und der
                Deutschen Biographie erscheint insbesondere die Anbindung der hier beschriebenen Taxonomien an Ressourcen wie die
                DBpedia, den
                GESIS Thesaurus Sozialwissenschaften, den
                AAT Art & Architecture Thesaurus des
                Getty Research Institute oder den
                UNESCO Thesaurus erfolgversprechend, zumal die Verschränkung der lexikalischen Bestandsaufnahme mit der Kontextualisierung dieser externen Quellen neue Perspektiven auf den Text zu eröffnen vermag. Vor allem aber kann das hier vorgestellte Datenmodell die granulare Analyse jener semantischen Komponenten unterstützen, die das Sprechen über sowohl das ‚Fremde‘ als auch das ‚Eigene‘ bestimmen, und erschließt somit mit rezenten Technologien die Funktionsweise eines Diskurses, dessen Wirkungsgrad bis heute weit über das Feld der Reiseliteratur hinausreicht.
              
            Die digitalen Texte inklusive der Faksimiles und die SKOS-Vokabulare werden zu Projektende in Form einer Web-Applikation
                8 zur Verfügung gestellt. Die Navigations- und Abfragemöglichkeiten sowohl in den Volltexten als auch der linguistischen Annotation werden ergänzt durch Register der Wortformen, der Lemmata sowie der semantischen Komponenten. Die vorgestellten SKOS-Vokabulare zu
                  Menschen und
                  Monumenten fungieren zudem als Verbindung der konkreten Belegstellen im
                  Baedeker Corpus und externen LOD-Ressourcen.
                
         
      
      
         
            Das Projekt „travel!digital. Exploring
                  People and
                  Monuments in Baedeker Guidebooks (1875–1914)” wird im Rahmen der Plattform
                  
                  Digital Humanities Austria
                gefördert.
             Dominique Maingueneau (2014: 437) nennt Reiseführer explizit als
                Vertreter sogenannter Diskursgenres, „[…] das
                heißt, soziohistorisch variierende Kommunikationsdispositive“.
            Gründe dafür finden sich u. a. darin, dass die Textwissenschaften in der
                Vergangenheit stets der Reiseliteratur den Vorrang gegenüber den
                Gebrauchstextsorten eingeräumt haben. Koshar, der das Fehlen einer
                allgemeinen Geschichte des Genres beklagt, verweist auf den schlechten
                Ruf der Reiseführer und bringt dies u. a. damit in Zusammenhang, dass
                die Textsorte äußerst variabel und daher konzeptuell schwer fassbar ist
                (Koshar 2000: 15-16). Eine Einschätzung, die eineinhalb Jahrzehnte
                später noch immer zutreffend ist. Als erwähnenswerte Ausnahme sei die
                Arbeit von Sabine Müller (2012) genannt. Dass die digitalen
                Geisteswissenschaften bisher kaum zur Verbesserung der Lage beigetragen
                haben, hängt vermutlich damit zusammen, dass die (Retro-)Digitalisierung
                der komplex strukturierten historischen Bände sehr aufwändig ist.
                Derzeit stehen wenige exemplarische Analysen kleiner analoger Korpora
                mit Fokus auf entweder Textsortenmerkmalen (vgl. Gorsemann 1995; Pretzel
                1995; Ramm 2000; Mittl 2007) oder der Entwicklung einzelner Regionen
                (Gorsemann 1995: Island; Pretzel 1995: Rheinland; Forschungsgruppe
                Tüschau 16 1998: Polen; Epelde 2004: Indien; Bock 2010: Rheinland), noch
                wenigeren computerlinguistischen Arbeiten gegenüber. Die letzteren
                basieren zwar auf umfangreicheren digitalen Datenmengen, nachdem jedoch
                ausschließlich rezentes Material herangezogen wird, bleiben historische
                Aspekte unberücksichtigt (vgl. Neumann 2003; Lam 2007; Gandin 2013,
                2014).
             Für die breite Untersuchung kultureller Narrative war es naheliegend,
                Reiseführer zu außereuropäischen Destinationen in das Korpus
                aufzunehmen. Es war Fritz Baedeker, dritter Sohn des Verlagsgründers
                Karl Baedeker und seit 1869 Leiter des Hauses, der das Verlagsprogramm
                um außereuropäische Titel erweiterte: Palästina und Syrien (1875),
                Unter- (1877) und Ober-Ägypten (1891), Nordamerika und Mexiko (1893),
                Konstantinopel und Kleinasien (1905), die afrikanische Mittelmeerküste
                (1909) und Indien und Ceylon (1914). Die strukturelle und deskriptive
                XML-Annotation nach TEI-Richtlinien (Version P5) konnte bereits für das
                gesamte Korpus abgeschlossen werden.
            Aktuell befindet sich der OpenSKOS Editor in
                Überarbeitung. Die neue um SKOS-XL Komponenten
                erweiterte Version soll mit Jahresende zur Verfügung stehen.
            Unterschieden werden: Kapelle, Kirche, Kloster, Mausoleum, Friedhof, Bildungs- und Wissenschaftseinrichtung, Gesundheits- und Sporteinrichtung, Museum, Sammlung, Palast, Theater, Industriebau, Inneneinrichtung, Verkehrsbau, Ensemble, Park.
                
             Unterschieden werden: Denkmal, Skulptur, Gemälde, anderes Kunstwerk, Sammlung.
            Die Applikation basiert auf der 
                  corpus_shell
                (Ďurčo et al.), einem modularen
                Framework für die Publikation von Sprachressourcen. Zum FCS /
                SRU-Protokoll siehe CLARIN ERIC sowie Stehouwer et al. 2012.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bock, Benedikt (2010): Baedeker &
                    Cook — Tourismus am Mittelrhein 1756 bis ca. 1914. Bern / Berlin /
                    Frankfurt am Main / New York / Paris / Wien: Peter Lang. 
               
                  CLARIN ERIC (o. J.): Federated
                      Content Search (CLARIN-FCS). https://www.clarin.eu/content/federated-content-search-clarin-fcs
                      [letzter Zugriff 10.09.2015]. 
               
                  Digital Humanities Austria: http://clarin.arz.oeaw.ac.at/dha/.
               
                  Ďurčo, Matej / Mörth, Karlheinz / Schopper, Daniel / Siam,
                          Omar (o. J.): corpus-shell. https://clarin.oeaw.ac.at/corpus_shell [letzter Zugriff 10.
                          September 2015]. 
               
                  Epelde, Kathleen R. (2004): Travel
                          Guidebooks to India. A Century and a Half of Orientalism. PhD,
                          University Wollongong http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1195&context=theses
                          [10. September 2015]. 
               
                  Forschungsgruppe Tüschau 16 (1998): Die Darstellung anderer Kulturen. Ermittlung von Stereotypen in
                          deutschen Polen-Reiseführern (der Jahre 1990-1996). Oberhausen: Athena
                          Verlag.
               
                  Gandin, Stefania (2013): “Translating the Language of
                            Tourism. A Corpus Based Study on the Translational Tourism English Corpus
                            (T-TourEC)”, in: Procedia — Social and Behavioral
                            Sciences 95: 325-335. 
               
                  Gandin, Stefania (2014): “Investigating loan words and
                              expressions in tourism discourse: a corpus driven analysis on the BBC-Travel
                              Corpus”, in: European Scientific Journal10, 2: 1-17. 
               
                  Gorsemann, Sabine (1995): Bildungsgut
                                und touristische Gebrauchsanweisung. Produktion, Aufbau und
                                Funktion von Reiseführern. Münster / New York: Waxmann. 
               
                  Jaworski, Adam / Pritchard, Anette  (eds.) (2005): Discourse, communication and tourism. Clevedon:
                                  Channel View Press. 
               
                  Koshar, Rudy (2000): German Travel
                                    Cultures. Oxford: Berg. 
               
                  Lam, Peter Y. W. (2007): “A corpus-driven
                                      lexico-grammatical analysis of English tourism industry texts and the study
                                      of its pedagogic implications in English for Specific Purposes”, in:
                                      Hildalgo, Encarnación / Quereda, Luis / Santana, Juan (eds.): Corpora in the Foreign Language Classroom. Amsterdam
                                      / New York: Rodopi 71-88. 
               
                  Maingueneau, Dominique (2014): „Diskurs und
                                        Äußerungsszene. Zur gattungsspezifischen Kontextualisierung eines
                                        Zeitungsartikels zum unternehmerischen Bildungsdiskurs“, in: Angermüller,
                                        Johannes / Nonhoff, Martin / Herschinger, Eva / Macgilchrist, Felicitas /
                                        Reisigl, Martin / Wedl, Juliette / Wrana, Daniel / Ziem, Alexander (eds.):
                                        Diskursforschung. Ein interdisziplinäres
                                        Handbuch. Bielefeld: transcript 433-453. 
               
                  Mittl, Katja (2007): Baedekers
                                          Reisehandbücher Funktionen und Bewertungen eines Reisebegleiters
                                          des 19. Jahrhunderts (= Alles Buch. Studien der Erlanger Buchwissenschaft
                                          22). Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg. 
               
                  Müller, Sabine (2012): Die Welt des
                                            Baedeker. Eine Medienkulturgeschichte des Reiseführers 1830-1945.
                                            Frankfurt / New York: Campus Verlag. 
               
                  Neumann, Stella (2003): Textsorten
                                              und Übersetzen. Eine Korpusanalyse englischer und deutscher
                                              Reiseführer. Bern / Berlin / Frankfurt am Main / New York / Paris / Wien:
                                              Peter Lang. 
               
                  Pretzel, Ulrike (1995): Die
                                                Literaturform Reiseführer im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert.
                                                Untersuchungen am Beispiel des Rheins. Bern / Berlin / Frankfurt am Main /
                                                New York / Paris / Wien: Peter Lang. 
               
                  Ramm, Wiebke (2000): “Textual Variation in Travel
                                                  Guides”, in: Ventola, Eija (ed.): Discourse and
                                                  Community. Doing Functional Linguistics. Tübingen: Gunter Narr
                                                  147-165. 
               
                  Schmidt-Brücken, Daniel (2015): Verallgemeinerung im Diskurs. Generische Wissensindizierung in
                                                    kolonialem Sprachgebrauch. Berlin / München / Boston: Walter de Gruyter. 
               
                  Stehouwer, Herman / Durco, Matej / Auer, Eric Auer /
                                                        Broeder, Daan (2012): "Federated Search: Towards a Common Search
                                                        Infrastructure", in: Proceedings of the Eighth
                                                        International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
                                                        2012): 3255–3259. 
                
               
                  Wierlacher, Alois (1997): „Verfehlte Alterität. Zum
                                                          Diskurs deutschsprachiger Reiseführer über fremde Speisen“, in: Teuteberg,
                                                          Hans Jürgen / Neumann, Gerhard / Wierlacher, Alois (eds.): Essen und kulturelle Identität. Europäische Perspektiven. Berlin:
                                                          Akademie Verlag 498-509. 
            
         
      
   



      
         Auch in Zeiten von „Big Data“ haben relativ kleine, auf eine spezifische Fragestellung hin zugeschnittene und aufbereitete Korpora ihre Bedeutung. In diesem Beitrag beschreiben wir die Aufbereitung eines solchen Korpus für die nachhaltige Langzeitarchivierung und skizzieren die sich daraus ergebenden Möglichkeiten zur explorativen Analyse.
         Das Korpus „Diskurs in der Weimarer Republik“ (DWR) wurde im Rahmen des Projektes
        „Demokratiediskurs 1918-1925“ (Kämper 2014) zur Dokumentation und Analyse des
        sprachlichen Wandels im Umbruch von der Monarchie zur Demokratie erstellt. Es
        umfasst 779 Dokumente im Zeitraum von 1912 bis 1933, davon 641 zwischen 1918 und
        1925. 551 Dokumente sind (u. a.) nach Themenbereich und Textsorte klassifiziert (s.
        Tabelle 1).
         
            
            
               Tab. 1: Themenbereiche und Auswahl an Textsorten im DWR
         
         Ursprünglich wurde das Korpus im Rich-Text-Format (RTF) bzw. MS-Office (DOC) erstellt, und die Metadaten in einer Oracle-Datenbank verwaltet. Im Rahmen des LIS-Projektes „Zentrum für germanistische Forschungsprimärdaten“
          1 wurde das Korpus für die Langzeitarchivierung aufbereitet. Im Einzelnen wurden folgende Schritte durchgeführt:
          
         
            Alignierung und Bereinigung der Metadaten: Die Verknüpfung von Metadaten mit
              Dokumenten war über Dateinamen repräsentiert, die teilweise nicht einheitlich
              enkodiert waren. Diese wurden entsprechend normalisiert, um einen eindeutigen
              Bezug herzustellen. Darüber hinaus wurden die Wertebereiche der einzelnen
              Metadatenfelder von Tippfehlern (z. B. Poitik vs. Politik) und
              Enkodierungsproblemen weitestgehend bereinigt.
            Validierung und Kuration der Datenformate: Die vorhandenen RTF-Versionen und DOC-Versionen wurden mithilfe von Open-Office-Macros in valides RTF transformiert. Zur besseren Nachnutzbarkeit wurde zusätzlich mit Hilfe des TEI Open-Office Pakets
                teioop5 eine valide TEI-P5-XML-Version erstellt, die mit Metadaten für Autor, Titel und Erscheinungsjahr angereichert wurde. Zudem wurde auch eine PDF-Leseversion erzeugt.
              
            Extraktion zusätzlicher Metadaten: Die in den Dokumenten vorhandenen bibliographischen Quellenangaben wurden mit Hilfe heuristischer Regeln extrahiert und in die Metadaten integriert.
            Generierung von CMDI-Metadaten: Die Metadaten wurden in das CLARIN-Metadatenframework CMDI (Broeder et al. 2011) transformiert.
         
         Das aufbereitete Korpus
              2 ist im Langzeitarchiv des IDS
              3 (Fankhauser et al. 2013) abgelegt.
              
         Zur Exploration sprachlicher Variation im Korpus wurde das Korpus zudem für ein am Institut für Deutsche Sprache entwickeltes System zur kontrastiven Visualisierung von Korpora (Fankhauser et al. 2014a, 2014b) aufbereitet.
         Dafür wurde das Korpus an Hand der Metadaten für Themenbereiche und Textsorten in Teilkorpora aufgeteilt, und für die einzelnen Teilkorpora Frequenzlisten aller Wörter (ohne Lemmatisierung oder Stopwortausschluss) erstellt. Diese Frequenzlisten, repräsentiert als multinomiale Verteilungen über das Vokabular, werden mit Hilfe der Kullback-Leibler Divergenz verglichen. Auf dieser Basis wird die Distanz zwischen Teilkorpora in Form von Heatmaps visualisiert, und der Beitrag einzelner Wörter zu der jeweiligen Distanz mit Hilfe von Wortwolken.
         Zur Exploration sprachlicher Variation im Korpus wurde das Korpus zudem für ein am Institut für Deutsche Sprache entwickeltes System zur kontrastiven Visualisierung von Korpora (Fankhauser et al. 2014a, 2014b) aufbereitet.
         Dafür wurde das Korpus an Hand der Metadaten für Themenbereiche und Textsorten in Teilkorpora aufgeteilt, und für die einzelnen Teilkorpora Frequenzlisten aller Wörter (ohne Lemmatisierung oder Stopwortausschluss) erstellt. Diese Frequenzlisten, repräsentiert als multinomiale Verteilungen über das Vokabular, werden mit Hilfe der Kullback-Leibler Divergenz verglichen. Auf dieser Basis wird die Distanz zwischen Teilkorpora in Form von Heatmaps visualisiert, und der Beitrag einzelner Wörter zu der jeweiligen Distanz mit Hilfe von Wortwolken.
         Abbildung 1 zeigt die Distanz zwischen Themenbereichen sowie zwischen Textsorten innerhalb eines Themenbereichs (grün für geringe, purpur für große Distanz). Es wird deutlich, dass der Themenbereich
                Kirche (KI) sich am deutlichsten von den anderen Themenbereichen abhebt. Innerhalb der Themenbereiche zeigt sich, dass die Textsorten - soweit für einen Themenbereich mit Dokumenten belegt - im Themenbereich
                Frauen deutlich stärker ausdifferenziert sind als im Themenbereich
                Politik. Inbesondere die Textsorten
                Stellungnahme (S) und
                Kundgebung (K) heben sich deutlicher von den anderen Textsorten ab als im Themenbereich
                Politik.
              
         
            
            
               Abb. 1: Heatmaps für den Vergleich von Themenbereichen (links)
                und Textsorten innerhalb eines Themenbereichs ( Politik:
              mitte, Frauen: rechts). 
         
         Abbildung 2 zeigt den Beitrag einzelner Wörter zu der Distanz zwischen Teilkorpora in Form von Wortwolken. Groß dargestellte Wörter sind hierbei besonders typisch für ein Teilkorpus, die Farbe korrespondiert mit der relativen Häufigkeit eines Wortes im Teilkorpus (blau für selten, purpur für häufig). Die Wortwolke links vergleicht
                Frauen mit dem restlichen Korpus. Sie wird sowohl auf begrifflicher Ebene (
                Frau/Mann) als auch auf grammatischer Ebene (
                die, ihre, sie, …) vom allgemeinen Diskursgegenstand
                Frauen dominiert. Die Wortwolke in der Mitte zeigt die typischen Wörter von
                Zeitungsartikeln im Vergleich zu
                Essays innerhalb des Themenbereichs
                Frauen, die Wortwolke rechts typische Wörter im umgekehrten Vergleich. Hier wird deutlich, dass
                Zeitungsartikel sich im wesentlichen um die politisch/öffentliche Stellung der Frau drehen (
                Wahlrecht, Frauenstimmrecht, politische) und
                Essays um die private Welt der Frau (
                Beziehung, Moral, Erotik). Ein sehr deutlicher Unterschied zeigt sich auch im Numerus von
                Frau: Plural in
                Zeitungsartikeln und Singular in
                Essays.
              
         
            
            
               Abb. 2: Wortwolken für die typischen Wörter des Themenbereichs
              Frauen im Vergleich mit dem restlichen Korpus (links) und
              in den Textsorten Zeitungsartikel vs. Essay im Themenbereich Frauen (mitte und rechts). 
         
         Dieser kurze explorative Überblick kann natürlich nur einen kursorischen Eindruck über Inhalt und Vielfalt des Korpus geben. Technisch wurde er erst möglich durch die konsequente Kuration der Metadaten und Daten an Hand der generellen Richtlinien der CLARIN Infrastruktur.
      
      
         
            
              Das Zentrum für
                germanistische Forschungsprimärdaten, wird gefördert von der DFG
              im Rahmen des Programms „Informationsinfrastrukturen für Forschungsdaten“.
             Korpus: „Diskurs in der Weimarer Republik“
                PID:
                http://hdl.handle.net/10932/00-01B9-43B3-1E1D-7B01-6
            
            Siehe IDS-Repositorium.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Broeder, Dan / Schonefeld, Oliver / Trippel, Thorsten / Van
                      Uytvanck, Dieter / Witt, Andreas (2011): "A pragmatic approach to
                      XML interoperability – the Component Metadata Infrastructure (CMDI)", in:
                      Proceedings of Balisage. The Markup Conference
                      2011 (= Balisage Series of Markup Technologies 7). 
               
                  Fankhauser, Peter / Fiedler, Norman / Witt, Andreas
                        (2013): "Forschungsdatenmanagement in den Geisteswissenschaften am Beispiel
                        der germanistischen Linguistik", in: Zeitschrift für
                        Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie (ZfBB) 60, 6: 296-306. 
               
                  Fankhauser, Peter / Knappen, Jörg / Teich, Elke
                          (2014a): "Exploring and Visualizing Variation in Language Resources", in:
                          Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
                            Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'14)
               
               
                  Fankhauser, Peter / Kermes, Hannah / Teich, Elke
                            (2014b): "Combining Macro- and Microanalysis for Exploring the Construal of
                            Scientific Disciplinarity", in: Proceedings of the Digital
                            Humanities 2014. 
               
                  Institut für Deutsche Sprache (IDS): Zentrum für germanistische Forschungsprimärdaten
                  http://www1.ids-mannheim.de/fi/projekte/lis.html [letzter Zugriff
                              11. Februar 2016].
               
                  Institut für Deutsche Sprache (IDS): IDS Repository
                  https://repos.ids-mannheim.de/ [letzter Zugriff 11. Februar
                                2016].
               
                  Kämper, Heidrun (2015): "Demokratiediskurs 1918-1925"
                                  http://www1.ids-mannheim.de/lexik/zeitreflexion18.html [letzter
                                    Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         In diesem Poster wird die digitale Edition der Excerpta
        Constantiniana (im Weiteren Excerpta), einer
        byzantinischen Geschichtsenzyklopädie, die im 10. Jahrhundert in Konstantinopel in
        Altgriechisch verfasst wurde, vorgestellt. 
         Zugrunde liegt ein disziplinspezifisches Forschungsprojekt im Bereich Klassische und Byzantinische Philologie, dessen Ziel darin besteht, die Edition einer wichtigen Quelle der byzantinischen Geschichtsschreibung vorzulegen. Das Ziel dieses Posters ist fachübergreifend und besteht darin, die Rolle des Herausgebers sowie das Konzept der Präsentation einer historischen Quelle in digitaler Umgebung zu definieren.
         Bei den Excerpta handelt es sich um ein groß angelegtes,
        mehrere Bände umfassendes Werk. Es besteht aus mehreren Tausend einzelnen Auszügen
        (Exzerpten), die inhaltlich aus etwa drei Dutzend antiken und byzantinischen
        Geschichtswerken stammen. Die erhaltenen Reste umfassen etwa 560 000 Wörter (es wird
        vermutet, dass fast das Zehnfache verlorengegangen ist). Die beiden erhaltenen
        Originalhandschriften der Excerpta (je ein Band) zeichnen
        sich durch ein bemerkenswertes Layout aus: zum Zweck der Navigation durch den Inhalt
        wurden an deren Rändern mehrere hundert Notizen und Piktogramme angebracht (s.
        Abbildung 2). 
         Die Edition des Gesamtwerks befindet sich in der Vorbereitungsphase; exemplarisch
          wurde bereits ein Abschnitt aus den Excerpta ediert, und zwar
          24 Seiten aus der Originalhandschrift Vaticanus graecus 73
          (ca. 9 000 Wörter). Bei der Handschrift handelt es sich um einen Palimpsest: der
          Text der Excerpta wurde etwa im 14. Jahrhundert ausradiert
          und mit einem anderen Text überschrieben, sodass der frühere Text heute nur mühsam
          lesbar ist (s. Abbildung 1). 
         Die Standardlösung wäre es, das Faksimile der Handschrift zu publizieren und eine historisch-kritische Edition des Texts anzufertigen. Die Publikation von dermaßen beschädigten Seiten erwies sich jedoch als wenig ergiebig. Auch die traditionelle Art der Textgestaltung im Rahmen einer historisch-kritischen Edition war kaum für die Wiedergabe der
            Excerpta geeignet. So bedurfte es beispielsweise einer originalgetreuen Reproduktion der Notizen und Piktogramme an den Rändern, die einen wichtigen Beitrag für das Verständnis des Textes leisten.
          
         Die Art der Gestaltung der Excerpta war ausschlaggebend bei
          der Entwicklung des Konzepts dieser Digitaledition. Es wurde eine pluralistische Herangehensweise an den Text zugrunde gelegt, die
          gleichzeitig mehrere Ansichten (Wiedergabemöglichkeiten)
          desselben Textes ermöglicht. Dabei wurden drei Grundansichten ausgewählt: (1) die
          digitale Rekonstruktion der Handschrift (topographische
          Edition), (2) die diplomatische Abschrift (diplomatische
          Edition) sowie (3) die normalisierte, historisch-kritische Version des
          Textes (digitale historisch-kritische Edition). 
         
            
               Topographische Edition: Die topographische Edition umfasst
              die digitale Rekonstruktion des Originals und die zweidimensionale, detaillierte
              Darstellung der Oberfläche. Das bedeutet, dass der ausradierte Text der
              Handschrift, stark vergrößert, auf Touchscreen mit Stylus nachgemalt wird (s.
              Abbildungen 1 und 2). Diese Methodik wurde hier m.W. zum ersten Mal angewendet
              und wird daher im Poster vorgestellt. Sie kombiniert menschliches Expertenwissen
              mit den aktuellen technischen Möglichkeiten. 
            
               Diplomatische Edition: Unter einer diplomatischen Edition
                wird eine möglichst originalgetreue Abschrift einer Handschrift verstanden. In
                dieser Ansicht wird die Gestaltung der Originalhandschrift, d. h. vor allem das
                Layout und die Navigationselemente des ursprünglichen Texts, visualisiert (s.
                Abbildung 2). Nach Möglichkeit wird die ursprüngliche Orthographie wiedergeben.
                Hier ist auch die Option vorgesehen, innerhalb derselben Ansicht auf
                normalisierte Orthographie umzuschalten (dies ermöglicht z. B. die Wahl zwischen
                mittelalterlicher und moderner Zeichensetzung, zwischen der Schreibweise mit
                Abbreviaturen oder mit deren Auflösung u. ä.) 
            
               Digitale historisch-kritische Edition: Diese Ansicht hat
                  das Layout einer modernen Edition, die Orthographie wird weitgehend
                  normalisiert. Außerdem wird unter dieser Ansicht als Option die Möglichkeit der
                  Hervorhebung unterschiedlicher Textinhalte angeboten, wie z. B. von Zitaten,
                  Orten, Personennamen, Völkerbezeichnungen usw. In diese Ansicht gehören ferner
                  der kritische Apparat sowie Indices mit Namen, Orten usw. 
         
         Technisch wird das folgenderweise implementiert. Die topographische Edition wird in Form von Bildern hergestellt. Die Transkription der Handschrift für die diplomatische und historisch-kritische Edition wird in TEI-XML angefertigt. Erscheinungen, die mit XML-Tags kodiert werden, werden in größere
                  Blöcke aufgeteilt. Die wichtigsten Blöcke sind:
                
         
            
               Physischer Zustand der Handschrift und physische Struktur des
                      Texts: physische Schäden der Handschrift, Lesbarkeit des Textes,
                      Seiten- und Zeileneinteilung an den Stellen, wo sie nicht mit der logischen
                      Struktur des Texts in Verbindung stehen (s. u.); 
            
               Logische Struktur des Texts sowie alle Elemente des Layouts,
                          welche die Navigation im Text unterstützen: Einheiten wie Bände,
                          Kapitel, Exzerpte; Elemente der Gestaltung, die auf diese Einteilung verweisen
                          (z. B. größere Leerräume im Text); Piktogramme und Randnotizen; 
            
               Orthographie der Handschrift: originale Zeichensetzung, Akzentuierung, Abbreviaturen und Ligaturen;
                          
            
               Normalisierte Orthographie: moderne Zeichensetzung, Worttrennung (fehlt in der Handschrift), Groß- und Kleinschreibung nach modernen Normen.
                          
            
               Inhalte im Text: Zitate, Namen, Orte, Völker u. a. 
         
         Die Webdarstellung wird auf der Basis von XSLT erstellt. Für jede Ansicht wird einzeln modelliert, wie die einzelnen Blöcke der Tags transformiert werden sollen. So ist beispielsweise für das Layout der diplomatischen Edition der physische Zustand der Handschrift und die physische Struktur des Texts maßgebend, während für das Layout der historisch-kritischen Edition die logische Struktur des Texts entscheidend ist. Die endgültige Darstellung wird über Cascading Stylesheets (CSS) gestaltet. Es ist geplant, die Edition bis Mitte des Jahres 2016 online zu stellen.
                            
         
         
            
            
               Abb. 1: Der Prozess der graphischen Rekonstruktion des
                            Palimpsests
         
         
            
            
               Abb. 2: Die topographische Edition
         
         
            
            
               Abb. 3: Die diplomatische Edition
         
         
            
            
               Abb. 4: Die historisch-kritische Edition
         
      
   



      
         Die hier unter dem Arbeitstitel CFDB vorgestellte Datenbank
      stellt den derzeit einzigartigen Versuch dar, Fragen zur paläographischen
      Entwicklung der babylonischen Keilschrift im ersten vorchristlichen Jahrtausend mit
      den Mitteln der Digital Humanities zu beantworten. Sie wird im Zuge des unter der
      Leitung von Michael Jursa an der Universität Wien durchgeführten Projekts Diplomatik und Paläographie neu- und spätbabylonischer
      archivalischer Dokumente ( FWF P 26104 ) am Austrian Centre for Digital
      Humanities der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften entwickelt.
      Diese Datenbank stellt ein dynamisches und flexibles Untersuchungsinstrument dar,
      das im Hinblick auf die neu- und spätbabylonische Epigraphik eine beträchtliche
      Lücke in der Forschung zu schließen beabsichtigt. 
         Verglichen mit alphabetischen Zeichensystemen weist die Keilschrift auf der Ebene des Schriftduktus eine hohe Zahl an potentiell objektivierbaren Merkmalen auf: Eigenschaften wie Schreibwinkel, Drucktiefe, Reihenfolge, Anordnung und Clustering von Keilen, Zeichengröße und andere Kriterien eignen sich ausgezeichnet für paläographische Untersuchungen. Vorrangiges Interesse dieser Seite des Forschungsprojekts ist die Identifizierung von gehäuft auftretenden standardisierten Zeichenformen (auf der Ebenen von Einzelzeichen und Ligaturen) bzw. die Frage, ob sich Abweichungen davon an die Größen Datum, Entstehungsort, Archiv oder Schreiber rückbinden lassen.
         CFDB ist analog zu konventionellen assyrologischen Zeichenliste strukturiert: Jedem Graphem dieser Liste wird ein Korpus attestierter Formen (Allographen) in Form von annotierten Bildsegmenten beigestellt. Die Allographen werden anhand ihrer Datierung und Periodisierung sowie ihres Herkunftsortes, des Archives, der Textsorte und, sofern möglich, des Schreibers klassifiziert. Somit erlaubt CFDB die Untersuchung dieses Zeichenkorpus einerseits hinsichtlich des Verhältnisses verschiedener Allographen zueinander in einer diachronen Perspektive sowie andererseits in Bezug auf die oben genannten unterschiedlichen Aspekte des Schreibduktus, und zwar über die Ebene von Einzelzeichen oder -tafeln hinaus. Auf einer Metaebene bietet die Datenbank die Möglichkeit, in der Literatur häufig anzutreffende, allerdings lediglich impressionistisch begründete Differenzierungen zwischen „formalen“, „kalligraphischen“ oder „kursiven“ Schriftduktus zu objektivieren und zur Diskussion zu stellen. 
         Die Implementierung der Applikation, die sich derzeit im Beta-Stadium befindet und
        deren Quellcode im Laufe der Entwicklung der Forschungscommunity Open Source
        verfügbar gemacht werden wird, basiert auf der XML-Datenbank exist-db. Eine integrierte, browserbasierte
        Arbeitsumgebung erlaubt die Eingabe und Manipulation der Metadaten zu einzelnen
        Tafeln, die Bearbeitung der digitalen Standardzeichenliste, Upload und Verwaltung
        von einem oder mehreren Faksimiles einzelner Tafeln sowie die manuelle
        Bildsegmentierung nach Einzelzeichen und deren Annotation. Die Verwendung von XForms
        für die Dateneingabe einerseits und von REST-Endpoints für die Kommunikation
        zwischen Annotierungsoberfläche und Server anderseits ermöglichen es, Teile der
        Anwendung auch in verändertem technischen Kontext (bspw. vor einer relationalen
        Datenbank) wiederverwenden zu können. Die Applikation sieht sich damit auch als
        kleiner Beitrag zum Aufbau einer nachhaltigen, da modularen Forschungsinfrastruktur. 
         Das Datenmodell von CFDB beruht auf den aktuellen Guidelines
        der Text Encoding Initiative und verwendet Bestandteile
        der Module transcr (Kapitel 11: Representation of Primary
        Sources) für das Markup der Bild-Text-Relation sowie des gaiji-Moduls
        (Kapitel 5: Characters, Glyphs, and Writing Modes). Die
        digitale Version der Standardzeichenliste, die im Zuge des Projekts erstellten
        Bildsegmente, Transkriptionen sowie die zugehörigen Metadaten und Annotationen
        werden nach Projektende sowohl eingebettet in cfdb als auch als Datenset in TEI-XML
        der Forschungsöffentlichkeit zur Verfügung gestellt. Die Anbindung an relevante
        Initiativen zur Digitalisierung und zum Korpusaufbau von Keilschrifttexten
        (Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative CDLI, Neo-Babylonian Cuneiform Corpus NaBuCCo)
        ist geplant. 
         CFDB ist als ein dynamisches Werkzeug für Untersuchungen zur Keilschrift konzeptualisiert, das zur einfachen Referenz in Forschung und Lehre dient und mit Blick auf die Nachhaltigkeit von Forschungsdaten entwickelt wurde. Gleichzeitig kann die Applikation leicht für analog strukturierte Forschungsprojekte in anderen Bereichen der Bild-Text-Korrelation adaptiert werden.
         
            
         
         
            
         
         
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Biggs, Robert D. (1973): "On regional cuneiform
              handwritings in Third Millennium Mesopotamia", in: Orientalia 42: 39-46.  
               
                  Daniels, Peter (1995): "Cuneiform calligraphy", in:
                Mattila, Raija (ed.): Nineveh, 612 BC. The glory and
                fall of the Assyrian Empire. Helsinki: Helsinki University Press 81-90.  
               
                  Devecchi, Elena (ed.) (2012): Palaeography and Scribal Practices in Syro-Palestine and Anatolia in
                  the Late Bronze Age. Papers read at a symposium in Leiden, 17–18
                  December 2009 (= PIHANS 119). Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije
                  Oosten  
               
                  Jursa, Michael (in Vorbereitung): "Late Babylonian
                    Epigraphy: a Case Study", in: Current Research in
                    Cuneiform Palaeography. Proceedings of the Workshop organized at
                    the 60th Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale, Warsaw 2014 
               
                  Powell, Marvin A. (1981): "Three problems in the
                      history of cuneiform writing: Origins, Direction of Script, Literacy", in:
                      Visible Language 15, 4: 419-440. 
               
                  Sallaberger, Walther (2001): "Die Entwicklung der
                        Keilschrift in Ebla", in: Meyer, Jan-Waalke / Novák, Mirko / Pruß, Alexander
                        (eds.): Beiträge zur Vorderasiatischen Archäologie
                        Winfried Orthmann gewidmet. Frankfurt am Main: Johann Wolfgang
                        Goethe-Universität 436-445.
            
         
      
   



      
         Das digitale Handbuch der Höfe und Residenzen im spätmittelalterlichen Reich ist die
        online-Ausgabe einer Druckpublikation, die zwischen 1998 und 2011 von Autorinnen und
        Autoren der Hof- und Residenzenforschung erstellt und von der Residenzen-Kommission
        der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen konzeptionell und redaktionell betreut
        wurde. Das ca. 5000 Seiten und mehrere hundert Abbildungen umfassende Werk besteht
        aus über 1000 Einzelartikeln, die dynastisch, topographisch und sachlich gegliedert
        und vielfältig miteinander verknüpft sind. Der topographische Schwerpunkt liegt auf
        Höfen und Residenzen des Heiligen Römischen Reichs Deutscher Nation in der Zeit
        zwischen etwa 1200 bis 1650 (Hirschbiegel / Wettlaufer 1999, 2000, 2002; Wettlaufer
        2005). In einer Zusammenarbeit mit der SUB Göttingen wurde ein Konzept für eine
        Online Präsentation der Druckdaten, die vom Thorbecke Verlag im TEI-Format zur
        Verfügung gestellt wurden, entworfen und umgesetzt.
         In dem Projekt spielen Datenmodellierung, Vernetzung und Visualisierung eine entscheidende Rolle. Aufbauend auf einen SOLR - Index wird ein Zugriff auf Text und Bilder über eine string-basierte Suche sowie über eine topographischen Zugriff mittels Open-Street-Map Karten und dem leaflet Javascript Framework angeboten, die die ortsgebundenen Informationen zu den Artikeln erschließen. 
         
            
         
         Eine Facettierung zu Handbuchteilen, Autoren und Artikeln erlaubt die Einschränkung der Suchergebnisse auf bestimmte Teilmengen. Die Texte und Bilder werden sowohl über eine HTML-basierte Ansicht als auch im PDF Format für die Benutzer präsentiert. Abkürzungen werden zur besseren Verständlichkeit bei mouse-over Events aufgelöst. Quellen und Literatur zu den einzelnen Artikeln können bei Bedarf ausgeklappt und angezeigt werden. Ein Zitierlink erlaubt die Referenzierung zur seitenidentischen Druckausgabe des Handbuchs. Eine besondere Herausforderung stellte die Verlinkung der Artikel untereinander dar, die über eindeutige Identifikatoren für alle Texte und Bilder miteinander verknüpft sind. Aufgrund der Datengrundlage waren die End- und Zielpunkte der zu verknüpfenden Strings, die nur durch einen Pfeil im Fließtext gekennzeichnet sind, nicht leicht zu bestimmen. Trotzdem konnte eine über 90% korrekte Verlinkung durch automatisierte string-matching Verfahren mit Hilfe des kontrollierten Lemmavokabulars erreicht werden. 
         
            
         
         Die Architektur des Projekts ist auf eine leichte Archivierbarkeit und langfristige
          Nachnutzung hin optimiert, da nach dem Auslaufen von Akademieprojekten in der Regel
          keine Mittel mehr für eine Pflege von digitalen Projektergebnissen mehr zur
          Verfügung stehen (Wettlaufer 2012). Über XML TEI stehen die Textdaten langfristig
          lesbar bereit und durch Apache SOLR können die Daten mit Hilfe einer etablierten
          Technologie effizient gesucht und angezeigt werden. Die Nutzung von Typo3 und der
          Extension "Find" erlauben die Integration in die schon bestehende digitale
          Infrastruktur der Göttinger Akademie. Die "Find"-Erweiterung der SUB
          Göttingen schafft eine Schnittstelle zu beliebigen SOLR-Indizes in Typo3 und
          zeichnet sich durch eine leichte Konfigurierbarkeit und erweiterte
          Templating-Fähigkeiten aus, mit denen komplexe Ansichten der Suchergebnisse
          realisiert werden können. Das Hosting an der Göttinger Staats- und
          Universitätsbibliothek lassen die langfristige Pflege und Verfügbarkeit der
          Handbücher im Rahmen einer bestehenden Kooperationsvereinbarung erwarten. 
         Für die Zukunft sind neben einer Erweiterung des Userinterface mit zusätzlichen Materialien und einer Verknüpfung der Artikel mit prosopographischen Datensätzen von Hofinhabern auch eine Bereitstellung der Metadaten der Einzelartikel als Linked Open Data sowie eine Verknüpfung mit weiteren Handbüchern zu einem ähnlichen Themenbereich aus einem Nachfolgeprojekt geplant. Das digitale Handbuch wird voraussichtlich im Frühjahr 2016 öffentlich zur Verfügung stehen.
         Projektseite:
            http://adw-goe.de/forschung/abgeschlossene-forschungsprojekte-aus-dem-akademienprogramm/hof-und-residenz/
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Hirschbiegel, Jan / Wettlaufer, Jörg (1999):
                "Materialien zum Werk 'Fürstliche Höfe und Residenzen im
                spätmittelalterlichen Reich. Ein dynastisch-topographisches Handbuch'.
                Zusammengestellt von Jan Hirschbiegel und Jörg Wettlaufer", in: Mitteilungen der Residenzen-Kommission der Akademie der
                Wissenschaften zu Göttingen. Sonderheft 3 http://resikom.adw-goettingen.gwdg.de/MRK/SH3.pdf [letzter
                Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Hirschbiegel, Jan / Wettlaufer, Jörg (2000):
                  "Projektdatenbank: Fürstliche Höfe und Residenzen im spätmittelalterlichen
                  Reich. Ein dynastisch-topographisches Handbuch", in: Mitteilungen der Residenzen-Kommission der Akademie der Wissenschaften
                  zu Göttingen 11, 2: 9-14 http://resikom.adw-goettingen.gwdg.de/MRK/MRK11-2.pdf [letzter
                  Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Hirschbiegel, Jan / Wettlaufer, Jörg (2002):
                    "Fürstliche Höfe und Residenzen im spätmittelalterlichen Reich. Bilder und
                    Begriffe", in: Mitteilungen der Residenzen-Kommission der
                    Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen 12, 1: 12-18 http://resikom.adw-goettingen.gwdg.de/MRK/MRK12-1.pdf [letzter
                    Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  SUB Göttingen (o. J.): TYPO3
                    extension providing a frontend for Solr indexes
                  https://github.com/subugoe/typo3-find [letzter Zugriff 12.
                      Februar 2016].
               
                  Wettlaufer, Jörg (2005): "Höfe und Residenzen im
                        spätmittelalterlichen Reich. Erste Ergebnisse des Handbuchprojekts der
                        Residenzen-Kommission der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen", in:
                        Pils, Susanne / Niederkorn, Jan Paul (eds.):Ein
                        zweigeteilter Ort? Hof und Stadt in der frühen Neuzeit (=
                        Forschungen und Beiträge zur Wiener Stadtgeschichte 44). Wien: Böhlau 7-26. 
               
                  Wettlaufer, Jörg (2012): "Das digitale Handbuch der
                          Höfe und Residenzen im spätmittelalterlichen Reich. Probleme und Erfahrungen
                          einer digitalen Bereitstellung von kollaborativen Werken in Open Access nach
                          dem Projektende", Vortrag auf dem Workshop Rechtliche
                          Rahmenbedingungen der Akademievorhaben der Akademie der Wissenschaften
                          zu Göttingen und der Union der deutschen Akademien der Wissenschaften AG
                          „Elektronisches Publizieren“. 8. und 9. Oktober 2012, Göttingen,
                          Historische Sternwarte http://www.digihum.de/agep/docs/wettlaufer_2012_agep.pdf [letzter
                          Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         Das 2013 gestartete Projekt
        Die Schule von Salamanca. Eine digitale Quellensammlung und ein Wörterbuch ihrer juristisch-politischen Sprache umfasst eine Sammlung von über 100 Texten iberischer Theologen und Juristen des 16. und 17. Jahrhunderts zu politischen und rechtlichen Themen. Diese Sammlung wird ergänzt durch ein Handbuch, in dem neben biografischen Informationen zu den in der Edition vertretenen Autoren die Entwicklung zentraler Begriffe der europäischen Rechts- und politischen Ideengeschichte in diesem Diskussionszusammenhang erschlossen wird. Beide Teile werden vollumfänglich und frei online zugänglich sein; zu Beginn des Jahres 2016 werden die ersten Daten der Quellensammlung und des Wörterbuchs zur Verfügung gestellt. Dies sind insbesondere die TEI-XML Dateien der Volltexte der ersten Werke sowie die dazugehörigen Digitalisate. Parallel besorgen wir die Bereitstellung der Daten als Linked Open Data in Verbindung mit einem SPARQL-Endpoint.
      
         Zu Beginn des DHd-Vortrags wird das Projekt und seine Website kurz vorgestellt. Eine wichtige Facette besonders der künftigen Projektentwicklung sehen wir aber in der Einbindung unserer Daten in eine Linked Data Infrastruktur. Der Vortrag soll daher vor allem dafür genutzt werden, um einen Einblick in die Arbeitsschritte, Entscheidungen und Implementierungen zu geben, die in dieser Hinsicht erfolgt sind und noch ausstehen.
         1. Wie werden die TEI-Daten in einer Linked-Data-Umwelt angeboten: welche Elemente
        oder Attribute werden welchen Objekten und Prädikaten welcher Ontologien zugeordnet?
        Wie wird diese Zuordnung in Anschlag gebracht, um die Daten als semantische Daten
        anzubieten? Wie ist die zeitliche Dimension vieler biographischer Angaben
        abzubilden? Wie ist mit alternativen Werten, z. B. konkurrierenden Angaben zu
        Geburtsdaten, umzugehen? Gibt es Rückwirkungen auf unser „Kerngeschäft“, i. e. das
        TEI Schema und die Datenerfassung?
         Wir werden semantische Daten zu den Werken und zu den in der Edition vertretenen Autoren anbieten, dabei hauptsächlich auf die foaf-, bio-, relationship-, und SPAR-Ontologien zurückgreifen und die TEI Daten über den xtriples Webservice (xTriples 2015) in RDF umwandeln.
         2. Wie werden die Daten in unseren eigenen Diensten vernetzt genutzt, wie sollen sie
          zur externen Nachnutzung und Vernetzung angeboten werden: Welche Dienste und
          Ressourcen sollen – direkt oder indirekt – über das Projekt angeboten werden? 1 Welche Möglichkeiten ergeben sich durch die Vernetzung unserer Daten
          mit denen anderer Anbieter, Forschungsfragen in neuer Weise zu bearbeiten? In
          welcher Form können oder sollen solche erweiterten Möglichkeiten auf der Projektsite
          öffentlich angeboten werden, wie verhält es sich mit Rechtemanagement und
          Qualitätssicherung in föderierten Abfragen/Daten? Welche anderen Datenanbieter sind
          interessante Kooperationspartner, welches sind die einschlägigen Normdatenbanken?
          2 Was sind die
            Erfahrungen mit den verfügbaren Schnittstellen dieser Anbieter? 
         Wir werden sowohl auflösbare Entitäten URIs als auch einen SPARQL Endpoint anbieten.
              Föderierte Abfragen zur Bearbeitung spezieller Forschungsfragen werden im Vortrag
              vorgestellt. Auch für uns bislang noch ungelöste Probleme, die sich z. B. aus der
              heterogenen Struktur und Qualität der Daten ergeben, werden angesprochen.
         Über die infrastrukturelle Seite dieser Vernetzung hinaus gilt es hier die Benutzerperspektive nicht aus den Augen zu verlieren: Wie und wo sollen welche Art von Benutzern Vernetzungen und Abfragen selbständig definieren können? Weit mehr als eine Frage der technischen Möglichkeiten ist dies ein Problem der Widmung und des Einsatzes von Entwicklungsressourcen, denn sie betrifft die Entwicklung von Oberflächen, deren Nutzung weit über die Kernaufgaben der meisten Projekte hinausgeht.
                3
         
         3. Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten, aufsetzend auf verschiedene Services: Ein Problem bei der Gewinnung vieler Daten aus dem Semantic Web ist ihre Aufbereitung in einer Form, die den Anwendenden dazu befähigt, neue Entdeckungen zu machen, vielleicht sogar neue wissenschaftliche Erkenntnisse zu generieren. Je größer dabei die Quantität und die Heterogenität der Daten ist, desto anspruchsvoller wird die Aufgabe, eine gute Visualisierung zu erzeugen.
         Es gibt bereits verschiedene Open Source Programme, die sich als Visualisierungstools
                eignen und bei denen es sich lohnt, über einen Einsatz nachzudenken. Neben
                generischen Visualisierungs-Tools (z. B. NodeBox 2015, Sgvizler 2015, d3SPARQL
                2015), Google Heatmaps (Heatmaps 2015) und
                Zeitverlaufsanzeigen (z. B. über Timeline 2015; HDAT 2015) etwa durch Abfragen von
                Koordinaten aus dem TGN, lohnt es auch, einen Blick auf RelFinder (2015) zu werfen. RelFinder visualisiert die Beziehungen
                zwischen zwei Ressourcen und gibt auch den jeweiligen Inhalt der Ressource aus. Für
                alle diese Werkzeuge gilt es jedoch das mögliche Einsatzszenario sorgfältig zu
                entwerfen. Überlegungen und Kriterien für ein allgemeines Verfahren solcher Entwürfe
                sollen vorgestellt werden. 
         Die Zukunftsperspektiven für die Bereiche Vernetzung und Visualisierung werden im Salamanca-Projekt stets mitbedacht, und so umreißt der Vortrag bereits erbrachte Leistungen und Implementierungen, getroffene Entscheidungen aber auch noch offene und zu erprobende Themen: Insbesondere in Punkt 1 gehen viele Aspekte schon im Frühjahr 2016 in „production use“, in Punkt 2 werden einige konzeptuelle Fragen angesprochen, die wir für uns noch nicht gelöst haben, in Punkt 3 werden wir beschreiben, wie wir von einem eher zufälligen Spiel mit verschiedensten technischen Möglichkeiten zu einem systematischen Prozess der Reflexion über aktuelle und neue Entwicklungsziele übergehen.
      
      
         
            Z.B. Auflösung von Ressourcen-URLs, content
                negotiation, triple-store dump, Linked Data Fragments, SPARQL Endpoint
                usw.
            Projekte: z. B. Scholasticon (Schmutz 2009) mit biographischen Informationen, die
                  Sammlung Post-Reformation Digital Library 
               Scholastica (PRDL 2013) mit Informationen zu
                  Universitäten, Fakultäten und Lehrstühlen der Frühen Neuzeit oder Early Modern Letters Online (EMLO 2015) mit Daten zu
                  frühneuzeitlichen Korrespondenzen. Normdatenbanken: z. B. Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN 2015), Gemeinsame Normdatenbank der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek (GND 2015)
                  oder der CERL Thesaurus (CERL 2015).
             Die Anwendung
                  Linked Data Fragments Client (LDFC 2015) zeigt etwa Beispiele, wie sich Nutzende Ressource(n) und Abfragen zusammenklicken können. Eine graphische Oberfläche für (begrenzte) Abfragen ermöglicht einen effizienten Umgang mit Linked Open Data, ohne dafür die Abfragesyntax beherrschen zu müssen. Auch über
                  LodLive (LodLive 2012) ließe sich ein entsprechendes Abfrage-Interface realisieren.
                  
         
         
            
               Bibliography
               
                  CERL (2015): CERL Thesaurus
                  http://thesaurus.cerl.org
                      [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  d3SPARQL (2015): d3sparql.js
                        Utilities for visualizing SPARQL results with the D3 library http://biohackathon.org/d3sparql/ [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober
                        2015 ]. 
               
                  EMLO (2015): Early Modern Letters
                          Online
                  http://emlo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015
                            ]. 
               
                  GND (2015): Gemeinsame Normdatei
                  http://www.dnb.de/DE/Header/Hilfe/kataloghilfe.html#doc207526bodyText73
                                [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  HDAT (2015): Historical Dutch-Asiatic
                                  Shipping
                  http://app.thebrownmap.nl/
                                  [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  Heatmaps (2015): Google Maps
                                    Javascript API
                  https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript/heatmaplayer
                                      [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  LDFC (2015): Linked Data Fragments
                                        client
                  http://client.linkeddatafragments.org/ [letzter Zugriff 13.
                                          Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  LodLive (2012): LodLive Browsing
                                            the Web of Data http://en.lodlive.it/ [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  NodeBox (2015): Meet NodeBox 3
                  https://www.nodebox.net/node/ [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  PRDL (2013): Scholastica Early
                                                  Modern Academies & Universities http://www.prdl.org/schools.php [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015
                                                  ]. 
               
                  RelFinder (2015): RelFinder
                                                    Interactive Relationship Discovery in RDF Data http://www.visualdataweb.org/relfinder.php [letzter Zugriff 13.
                                                    Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  Schmutz, Jacob  (2009): Scholasticon Ressources en ligne pour l'étude de la scolastique
                                                      moderne (1500-1800): auteurs, sources, institutions http://scholasticon.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober
                                                      2015 ]. 
               
                  Sgvizler (2015): Sgvizler
                  http://dev.data2000.no/sgvizler/ [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober
                                                          2015]. 
               
                  TGN (2015): The Getty Thesaurus of
                                                            Geographic Names (TGN) http://vocab.getty.edu/ [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2015 ]. 
               
                  Timeline (2015): Leaflet.timeline
                  https://github.com/skeate/Leaflet.timeline [letzter Zugriff 13.
                                                                Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  xTriples (2015): Xtriples A
                                                                  generic webservice to extract RDF statements from XML resources http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/index.html [letzter Zugriff
                                                                  13. Oktober 2015 ]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In diesem Beitrag stellen wir erste Einsichten aus einer quantitativen Analyse von Dramen vor, sowie unsere Konzeption für eine darauf aufbauende interaktive Werkbank, die einen Anstoß für eine Diskussion zur Tool-Unterstützung quantitativer Dramenanalyse geben soll. Die Werkbank unterstützt interessierte Forscherinnen und Forscher beim Einlesen von Dramen aus TEI-basierten Quellen und befindet sich noch in Entwicklung
          1. Neben den in Dramen schon explizit kodierten strukturellen Informationen (Wer spricht was?) stellt die Werkbank insbesondere Möglichkeiten zur Verfügung mit Werkzeugen zur maschinellen Sprachverarbeitung auch den Inhalt der Figurenrede zu analysieren. Inspektions- und Aggregationswerkzeuge und -sichten erlauben auch die Analyse größerer Korpora.
        
            Um die Anwendungsgebiete der Werkbank aufzuzeigen, skizzieren wir – anhand einer
          Pilotstudie zur Analyse des Verhältnisses von
          dramatischer Figur zur dramatischen Handlung – den Problemhorizont quantitativer
          Literaturwissenschaft. Dabei interessieren uns insbesondere diese Fragen: Gibt
          es einen Zusammenhang zwischen angenommenen prototypischen Rollen (Protagonist,
          Intrigant, König usw.) und Länge bzw. Häufigkeit der Redebeiträge oder der
          Referenz auf die Figur? Wird über bestimmte Figuren(-rollen) auf bestimmte Arten
          gesprochen (abwertend / aufwertend, ...)? Gibt es
          Figuren(-rollen)konstellationen, die häufig kookurrieren, und zwar in Bezug auf
          ihren eigenen Rede- und Bühnenbeitrag als auch im Bezug auf die Referenzen auf
          die Figuren? 
         
         
            Dramenanalyse: Basics
            Dramentexte unterscheiden sich insbesondere durch zwei zusammenhängende
            Eigenschaften von Prosatexten: a) Dramatische Texte sind im Gegensatz zu vielen
            anderen Textsorten auf allen Ebenen (Akt- bis Redefolge) ausgesprochen gut
            strukturiert und ermöglichen somit eine verhältnismäßig unaufwändige
            Datenerhebung. Die Kehrseite der guten Strukturiertheit ist dass dramatische
            Texte damit nicht dem Prototyp eines Textes entsprechen, wie er von vielen
            Werkzeugen zur Sprachverarbeitung angenommen wird. Die maschinelle
            Sprachverarbeitung auf dramatischen Texten ist damit nicht durch existierende
            Werkzeuge „out of the box“ zu leisten. b) Die dramatischen Figuren sprechen unvermittelt. Unterscheidungen zwischen Erzähler- und
            Figurenrede und -denken spielen in Dramen keine Rolle. Während Ansätze der
            Stilometrie, das Figurensignal vom Erzähler- und jenes wiederum vom
            Gattungssignal zu trennen (Jannidis 2014), noch in den Kinderschuhen stecken,
            muss sich die (teil-)automatische quantitative Dramenanalyse diesen
            interpretativen Problemen nicht stellen. Sie hat vor allem technisch- methodische Probleme zu lösen: a)
            Erfassung und Einlesen der Daten und b) (teil-)automatische Textanalyse in
            Dramen. Zu letzterem gehört auch der adäquate Einsatz von interpretierbaren
            Maßen und transparenten Verfahren sowie visuellen Repräsentationen von
            Ergebnissen. 
         
         
            Erfassung und Einlesen der Daten: TEI-Integration
            Eine automatisierte Erfassung der Oberflächenstruktur inklusiver aller relevanten
              Metadaten dramatischer Texte ist die Grundvoraussatzung einer quantitativen
              Textanalyse im oben genannten Sinne. TEI / XML ist als Standard etabliert, um
              Texte und Korpora möglichst genau entsprechend der/einer gedruckten Edition
              digital zu kodieren (cf. TextGrid; DTA). Insbesondere erlaubt TEI auch die
              Kodierung von Seitenzahlen, Formatierungen, Zeilenumbrüchen, Kopf- und Fußzeilen
              und vieles mehr, was über den reinen Textinhalt hinausgeht.
            Wie Trilcke et al. (2015) auch schon festgestellt haben, ist die Extraktion der inhaltlichen Textstruktur aus den TEI-Daten keineswegs trivial. Für Netzwerkanalyse ist die eindeutige Identifizierung von Figuren besonders relevant, für eine (maschinelle, computergestützte) Analyse des Inhaltes und der Häufigkeit der Figurenrede kommen o.g. Formatierungsmarkierungen noch als Herausforderung hinzu. In unserer Werkbank bieten wir einen Plausibilitätscheck an, der es erlaubt, Fehler im Importprozess (die sowohl durch Fehlannahmen im Importmodul als auch durch Fehlkodierungen in den Quelldaten verursacht werden können) direkt zu erkennen und zu beheben. Einmal identifizierte und behobene Fehler fließen in die Quelldaten zurück.
         
         
            (Automatische) Textanalyse in Dramen
            In den bereits existierenden Arbeiten zur Stilometrie auf Dramen werden komplette
                Dramen verglichen (z. B. durch Vorverarbeitung mit DIGIVOY). Ein differenzierter
                Vergleich, bei dem einzelne Figuren oder Gruppen von Figuren betrachtet werden,
                ist so noch nicht möglich gewesen.
            Andere Projekte gehen genau den gegenteiligen Weg und verwerfen alle Dialoginhalte und beziehen ihre Netzwerkanalyse nur auf die Interaktion der jeweils in der Szene aktiven Figuren (cf. Trilcke et al.). Uns ist kein verfügbares System bekannt, das diese Lücke schließt und eine inhaltliche Analyse erlaubt, die sowohl die Interaktion der aktiven Figuren als auch deren Redeinhalt einbezieht. 
            In unserer Werkbank erfolgt die Textanalyse mit computerlinguistischen
                  Werkzeugen, welche durch die CLARIN-D Infrastruktur (Mahlow et al. 2014)
                  bereitgestellt werden. Der Aufbau von Dramen erfordert eine spezielle
                  Herangehensweise bei der Textanalyse, da die in der Computerlinguistik oft
                  getroffene Annahme, dass Texte aus vollständigen und grammatikalisch
                  wohlgeformten Sätzen bestehen, in Dramen nicht zutrifft (wie auch in Texten aus
                  sozialen Medien oder in gesprochener Sprache). Daneben weisen Dramen die oben
                  genannte spezifische Struktur auf, die eine adäquate Vorverarbeitung bedingt. Um
                  eine Verarbeitung mit einer nicht modifizierten CL-Verarbeitungskette zu
                  ermöglichen, wird das Drama vorher in passende Textsegmente zerlegt. Segmente,
                  die zu einem Dialog gehören müssen nach der Verarbeitung wieder der jeweiligen
                  Figur zugeordnet werden. Im Kontext der Figurenanalyse sind insbesondere
                  Eigennamenerkennung und Koreferenzresolution von Interesse. Wenn man den
                  stilometrischen Blick weitet und auch syntaktische Konstruktionen (verwendet
                  eine Figur mehr oder weniger komplexe Satzstruktur?) untersuchen möchte, sind
                  auch andere linguistische Verarbeitungsschritte möglich. 
            Die Ergebnisse dieser Verarbeitung werden nicht fehlerfrei sein, deswegen bietet
                    die Werkbank Möglichkeiten, die Ergebnisse zu korrigieren. Insbesondere die
                    Zusammenführung von unterschiedlich genannten oder geschriebenen (z. B. „Emilia“
                    vs. „Emilie“ oder „die Soldaten“ vs. „erster Soldat“) Figuren ist nicht trivial
                    und teilweise nur durch zusätzliches Weltwissen realisierbar. Damit dieser
                    Schritt vereinfacht wird kommt hier ein halb-automatischer Figurenabgleich zum
                    Einsatz. Das überarbeitete und manuell geprüfte Drama kann in einem
                    TEI-konformen Format exportiert werden, damit die so kuratierte Ressource wieder
                    der Community zur Verfügung gestellt werden kann. Linguistische Annotationen,
                    die in TEI nicht direkt repräsentiert werden können, werden in einem geeigneten
                    stand-off-Format exportiert.
            
               Pilotstudie
               In einer Pilotstudie haben wir anhand eines einzelnen Dramas exploriert, wie
                        der Zusammenhang von (der zentralen) Dramenfigur zur dramatischen Handlung
                        automatisiert sichtbar gemacht werden kann. Die (zentrale) Stellung im
                        Figurennetzwerk wird dabei nicht (wie in der aktuellen Forschung gängig;
                        vgl. Moretti 2011) lediglich durch häufige Präsenz oder Interaktion auf der
                        Bühne repräsentiert, sondern durch differenziertere Analysen der
                        Figurenaktivität. Wie häufig eine Figur spricht, wie viel sie spricht und wie häufig
                        über sie gesprochen wird, sind dabei die Kerndaten der
                        quantitativen Analyse, auf der weiter vorzustellende Analysen beruhen. Eine
                        manuelle Datenerfassung übersteigt jedoch selbst bei einzelnen Dramen
                        schnell den vom Menschen leistbaren Zeiteinsatz (wie die in Abbildung 1
                        manuell erstellte Erfassung der Redeteile in Emilia
                        Galotti zeigt): 
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 1: „ Token von
                        x“ = Gesamthäufigkeit der Nennung jeder einzelnen Namensvariante.
                        Figurennennung = Nennung der Namensvarianten in der
                        Rede anderer Figuren. Redehäufigkeit = Wie oft spricht
                        eine Figur. Gesamtzahl der Wörter… = Redelänge in
                        Wörtern. (Aktivitäts)Quotient = Summe der
                        Redehäufigkeit geteilt durch die Summe der Figurennennung: X > 1 = Aktiv
                        (Redet häufiger als über sie geredet wird); X 
               
            
         
         
            NLP-Unterstützte Analysemöglichkeiten in Dramen
            Die Kombination von in Dramen vorhandenen strukturellen Informationen und durch automatische Verarbeitung ermittelte inhaltlich-semantische Information erlaubt neue, feinkörnige Analysen von Dramen. Die im Folgenden genannten sollen durch die Werkbank unterstützt werden, entweder durch Integration existierender oder durch Entwicklung neuer Tools.
            
               Oberflächenanalyse der Figuren
               Möglich ist eine automatische Auswertung der Figurenreden nach inhaltlichen
                          Kriterien. Ohne Vorwissen bereitstellen zu müssen, lassen sich wichtige
                          Begriffe, durch deren Verwendung sich eine Figur von anderen unterscheidet,
                          mit Verfahren wie TF*IDF ermitteln und z. B. als Tabelle oder als Wortwolke
                          darstellen. Komplexere Verfahren wie topic modeling (Blei et al. 2003) oder
                          Wortfeldanalysen können natürlich auch auf den Redeinhalt einer Person (ggf.
                          auf Akte / Szenen o. ä. eingeschränkt) angewendet werden, erfordern aber
                          zumindest die Einstellung von Parametern (z. B. Anzahl der topics im topic
                          modelling) oder das Spezifizieren von Wortfeldern. Automatische Methoden zur
                          Erweiterung von Wortfeldern (angelehnt an z. B. Query Expansion, vgl.
                          Manning et al. 2008) können diesen Prozess unterstützen und sollen im
                          Rahmen der Werkbank erprobt und integriert werden. Abbildung 2 zeigt eine
                          visuelle Auswertung dieser Analyse.
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 2: Strukturelle und inhaltliche
                          Analyse von Schillers Johanna von Orleans. Unten: Figurenaktivität. Oben:
                          Prominenz ausgewählter semantischer Räume in der Figurenrede (Frankreich,
                          Gott, Militär). 
               
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 3: Anhand der Häufigkeit der
                          Figurennennung („Emilia“ vs. „Tochter“) kann der (bisher kaum erforschte)
                          Diskursverlauf im Sinne einer Unterscheidung in private und öffentliche
                          Konversation sehr gut nachvollzogen werden. 
               
            
            
               Stilometrische Analysen von Figurenreden
               Stilometrische Analysen werden durch eine Schnittstelle ermöglicht, durch die
                            man Figurenrede als Datenstrukturen in R abrufen und dann nach diversen
                            Kriterien untersuchen kann, etwa mit Hilfe von stylo (Eder et al. 2013). Es
                            ließe sich z. B. untersuchen, ob Könige bei Schiller anders sprechen als bei
                            Lessing, oder ob Bürgerfiguren in einem bestimmten Dramenkorpus anders
                            sprechen als Adelsfiguren:
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 4: Figurenreden, extrahiert aus 34
                            Dramen; nach Standeszugehörigkeit benannt.
               
            
            
               Sentiment-Analyse
               Durch Methoden aus der Sentiment-Analyse (die zur automatisierten Analyse von
                              Produktreviews eingesetzt wird) ließe sich z. B. analysieren, wie und ob
                              bestimmte Figuren über andere sprechen. Neben positiv / negativ wären auch
                              feinere, dramenspezifische Unterscheidungen denkbar (Feigling, Hahnrei,
                              ...).
            
            
               Kombination mit Netzwerkanalyse
               Die Kombination dieser Techniken mit Netzwerkanalyseverfahren würde es
                                erlauben, im Netzwerk auch Entitäten darzustellen über die geredet wird,
                                ohne dass sie direkt im Drama vorkommen (z. B. Gott), Kanten zwischen Knoten
                                können dann (z. B. durch Farben) auch inhaltliche, relationale Informationen
                                kodieren (X spricht viel / positiv über Y).
               Eine Netzwerkdarstellung, in der die Position der Figuren nicht mehr zufällig
                                  (oder durch Layout-Algorithmen gesteuert) ist ist ebenfalls denkbar
                                  (Abbildung 4). Dabei werden prototypischen Figurenrollen feste Positionen in
                                  einem Raster zugewiesen, so dass große Mengen an Netzwerken schnell und
                                  direkt verglichen werden können.
            
         
      
      
         
            
                             http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/short/dramen
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Blei, David / Ng, Andrew Y. / Jordan, Michael I.
                                    (2003): „Latent Dirichlet Allocation“, in: Journal of
                                    Machine Learning Research 3: 993–1022. 
               
                  Eder, Maciej / Kestemont, Mike / Rybicki, Jan (2013):
                                    „Stylometry with R: a suite of tools“, in: Digital
                                    Humanities 2013 Conference Abstracts 487-89. 
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis (2014): „Der Autor ganz nah.
                                    Autorstil in Stilistik und Stilometrie“, in: Schaffrick, Matthias / Marcus
                                    Willand (eds.): Theorien und Praktiken der
                                    Autorschaft. Berlin: De Gruyter 169-195. 
               
                  Mahlow, Cerstin / Eckart, Kerstin / Stegmann, Jens /
                                      Blessing, Andre / Thiele, Gregor / Gärtner, Markus / Kuhn, Jonas
                                      (2014): „Resources, Tools, and Applications at the CLARIN Center Stuttgart“,
                                      in: Akten der 12. Konferenz zur Verarbeitung natürlicher
                                      Sprache (KONVENS 2014) 11-21. 
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2011): Network
                                      Theory, Plot Analysis. LiteraryLab Pamphlet 2: http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet2.pdf [letzter
                                      Zugriff 20. August 2014]. 
               
                  Manning, Christopher D / Raghavan, Prabhakar / Schütze,
                                          Hinrich (2008): Introduction to Information
                                          Retrieval. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
               
                  Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank / Kampkaspar, Dario
                                          (2015): „Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic“, in: Digital Humanities 2015 Conference Abstracts: http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_Analysis_of_ Dramati/FISCHER_Frank_Digital_Network_ Analysis_of_Dramatic _Text.xml
                                          [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar 2016].
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung 
            Dieser Vortrag präsentiert Analysen und Visualisierungen eines derzeit im Aufbau befindlichen Corpus an graphischen Romanen (oder „Graphic Novels“, einer Unterform des Medium Comics) und stellt den für die Annotation dieser multimodalen Erzählform entwickelten Editor vor, der zeitgerecht zur DHd-Jahrestagung in Leipzig für den Download zur Verfügung stehen wird. Während sich die Analyse literarischer Text-Corpora bereits seit mehreren Jahren im Fokus der Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften befindet, stehen Bestrebungen zur Erforschung visueller Erzählformen wie Theater, Comics, Film, Fernsehen, sowie Computerspiele, oft eine Randerscheinung in den DH dar und vor einer Reihe ungelöster Herausforderungen. Diese bestehen sowohl in technischer - etwa in Bezug auf die automatisierte Erkennung visueller Objekte und die Annotation komplexer Bild-Text- Kombinationen – als auch in methodischer Hinsicht. Angesichts der Dominanz visueller Erzählformen seit dem frühen 20. Jahrhundert, sowie noch verstärkt in der Gegenwartskultur, stellt dies eine außerordentliche Forschungslücke dar. 
            In einer kurzen Einleitung wird der Vortrag den derzeit im Aufbau befindlichen Corpus sowie die Zielsetzungen der vom deutschen Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) geförderten Nachwuchsgruppe „Hybride Narrativität: Digitale und Kognitive Methoden zur Erforschung Graphischer Literatur“ erläutern. Darauf folgt die Vorstellung der für die Annotation entwickelten XML-Beschreibungssprache und des graphischen Editors. Im zweiten Teil des Vortrages stellen wir einige Methodenkombinationen vor, die es ermöglichen sollen, die Bild-­Text-­Verbindungen multimodaler Kulturformen, sowie deren Beitrag zur spezifischen Narrativität graphischer Romane, zu verstehen. 
         
         
             GNML-Editor: Werkzeuge zur (Halb-)Automatischen Annotation 
            Während die Analyse von Textcorpora oft bereits automatisiert möglich ist, bleibt eine automatische Analyse multimodaler Narrative derzeit eine Zukunftsvision. Im Fall von Comics und gezeichneter, sowie aus anderen Gründen nicht perspektivischer, Bilder gelingt die Objekt-Identifikation (etwa die Wiedererfassung eines vorab bekannten Charakters) nur mit viel Trainingsaufwand und recht hohen Fehlerzahlen. Auch bei der automatischen Erkennung Handschriften-ähnlicher Fonts versagen übliche Standard-OCRs. Daher führt der Weg über eine Annotation des Bild-­Materials mit anschließender Analyse der Annotationen und Bild-Daten. Hierzu wird im Rahmen unseres Forschungsprojektes die XML-Sprache „Graphic Narrative Markup Language“ (GNML) entwickelt, welche die visuellen und textuellen Aspekte Graphischer Literatur beschreibt. GNML baut auf der „Text Encoding Initiative“ (TEI), und damit auf etablierten Standards, auf. Basierend auf den GNML-Annotationen können die in der graphischen Literatur enthaltenen Texte analysiert werden, Auswertungen der Bildinhalte vorgenommen, oder deren Kombination analysiert werden. 
            Um die Fehleranfälligkeit bei der Annotation gering zu halten wird ein graphischer GNML-Editor entwickelt. Dieser unterstützt Fachwissenschaftler bei der effizienten Annotation mit Mechanismen wie Autovervollständigung von Charakter-Namen oder integrierten Rechtschreibprüfungen. Durch eine halb-automatische Erfassung wird die Annotation beschleunigt und so erst der Aufbau eines größeren Corpus ermöglicht. Teil des Editors ist eine Erkennung der Panel-Strukturen, sowie Werkzeuge, welche die Eckpunkte einer Sprechblase oder eines Textkästchens automatisch ermitteln. Ergänzt werden diese Werkzeuge um eine effiziente Charakter-Erfassung.
            Da sich die Konzepte des Editors (visuelle Objekte mit graphischen und textuellen Eigenschaften) nicht nur auf Comics beschränken sondern auch auf andere Bild-Text- Kombinationen anwendbar sind, lässt sich der Editor auf eine Obermenge solcher Formate erweitern. Diese Generalisierung erlaubt es, eine XML-basierte Annotationssprache zu hinterlegen und automatisch einen entsprechenden Editor zu generieren, sowie Daten in der hinterlegten Annotationssprache zu erfassen. Damit kann der Editor auch in der Annotation anderer multimodaler Medien Anwendung finden.
         
         
             Analysen und Visualisierungen eines Corpus Graphischer Romane
            Der zweite Teil des Vortrags stellt Ansätze vor, die exemplarisch für einige strukturelle Bestandteile von Comics (und insbesondere des graphischen Romans) Methoden der Bild- und Textanalyse miteinander verbinden. Für die digitale Literaturwissenschaft entwickelte Zugänge wie das Topic Modelling sind für solche Kulturformen aufgrund ihrer Bildlastigkeit nur von beschränkter Relevanz. Ansätzen zur computergestützten Bilderkennung und der Analyse großer Bildmengen fehlt hingegen bisher oft das narrative Erkenntnisinteresse. Erschwerend kommt noch hinzu, dass die Konzepte der Narratologie meist für literarische Texte entwickelt wurden und den Spezifika multimodalen Erzählens häufig nicht gerecht werden.
            In einer ersten Analyse des derzeit noch in Erstellung befindenden Gesamtkorpus
          von rund 300 graphischen Romanen vergleichen wir die historische Entwicklung der
          visuellen und Textebenen ihrer Buchcovers. Dazu gehören sowohl grammatische und
          semantische Auswertungen der Romantitel mit Hilfe des Stanford Parser (vgl. De
          Marneffe et al. 2006), als auch der farblichen und stilistischen Gestaltung. In
          einem weiteren Schritt widmen wir uns detaillierteren Analysen eines ersten
          Sub-Corpus, der aus den zehn meist zitierten Titeln des Gesamtcorpus besteht.
          Zwar lassen sich aufgrund der geringen Zahl hier keine Genre-Vergleiche
          anstellen, oder stichhaltig historische Entwicklungen nachverfolgen.
          Beispielhaft können allerdings narrative Entwicklungen dargestellt werden: so
          kombinieren wir Netzwerkanalysen der Figuren mit deren visueller Prominenz und
          zugeordnetem Textanteil, sowie mit stilistischen Analysen dieser Figurentexte.
          Weiters stellen wir, im Anschluss an Arbeiten von Lev Manovich (vgl. u. a.
          Manovich 2012), explorative Visualisierungen aller Einzelseiten im Gesamtverlauf
          der Erzählung vor.
            Abschließend wendet sich der Vortrag der Frage zu, ob die Text-Bild-Verbindungen
            multimodaler Narrative mit solchen Methodenkombinationen aus der digitalen
            Literatur- und Bildwissenschaft zu erfassen sind, oder sich durch die
            Operationalisierung alternativer Ansätze aus der intermedialen Narratologie,
            etwa Rick Altmans Konzept des „Following“ (vgl. Altman 2008), eigenständige
            Analysemethoden entwickeln lassen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Manovich, Lev (2012): „How to Compare One Million Images?", in: Berry, David (ed.): Understanding Digital Humanities Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan 249-278.
               
                  Altman, Rick (2008): A theory of narrative. Columbia University Press.
               
                  De Marneffe, Marie-Catherine / MacCartney, Bill / Manning, Christopher D. (2006): „Generating Typed Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses“, in: Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) 6: 449-454.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Digitale
      Korpora entstehen unter bestimmten Voraussetzungen, werden von verschiedensten
      Institutionen gefördert und haben unterschiedliche Ziele in Bezug auf Qualität und
      Quantität. In vielen Fällen müssen Forscherinnen weitere Verbesserungen vornehmen,
      bestehende Daten erweitern und verbessern, im schlimmsten Fall auch neu erheben. In
      diesem Paper beschreiben wir eine Vielzahl einfach(st)er Probleme, die es zu
      bewältigen gilt, will man ein Korpus bestehend aus möglichst vielen genuin
      deutschsprachigen Dramen computergestützt analysieren. Ausgehend von den Beständen
      des TextGrid Repository (TextGrid
      Konsortium 2015) soll mittels einer simplen grafischen Oberfläche – abrufbar in
      jedem Webbrowser – ein Programm zur Verfügung gestellt werden, das sich
      spielähnlicher Mittel bedient: die Nutzer auffordert, mehrere Level zu durchlaufen,
      Punkte zu sammeln und mit jeder Eingabe das Korpus zu verbessern, um schließlich
      Ausgangsmaterial für eine Vielzahl von Fragestellungen zu bieten. 
          Crowdsourcing, Social Editing und viele verwandte Begriffe sind Konzepte, die
        innerhalb der Digital-Humanities-Community in den vergangenen Jahren einen kleinen
        Hype erfahren haben. An Umsetzungen mangelt es, während man sich noch über die
        Definitionen streitet. Dabei sind die Lösungsansätze sehr vielversprechend – allen
        voran die von Zooniverse etablierten
        Projekte, die sich nun auch geisteswissenschaftlichen Themen widmen. Es werden alte
        Texte transkribiert und jede Person, die über Computer und Internetanschluss
        verfügt, kann einen aktiven Beitrag leisten und die Forschung unterstützen.
        Erfahrungen aus bereits gut etablierten Ansätzen, wie dem Projekt DigitalKoot, entwickelt von der
        Finnischen Nationalbibliothek, zeigen, dass die Anwendung und Umsetzung
        spielerischer Verfahren durchaus einen Mehrwert für die Wissenschaft generieren
        können. Darüber hinaus können Aufgaben gemeistert werden, die durch einen Einzelnen
        oder auch eine kleinere Forschungsgruppe niemals würden selbst bewältigt werden
        können. Voraussetzung dafür ist das Interesse und die Teilnahme vieler Personen an
        der zu bewältigenden Aufgabe. Diese so zu isolieren und danach zu vereinfachen, dass
        auch Laien damit umgehen können, stellt die Herausforderung dar. Viel Resonanz
        bekommen Projekte wie EyeWire oder GalaxyZoo, beides
        naturwissenschaftliche Citizien-Science-Vorhaben. Im Projekt GalaxyZoo geht es um
        die Klassifizierung und Beschreibung von Galaxien. Das Projekt war in der Lage, 50
        Millionen Klassifizierungen zu sammeln, und das innerhalb seines ersten
        Betriebsjahres (2007, vgl. Prestopnik 2011: 2). 
         Methodisch betrachtet bieten Konzepte, die auf der zunehmenden Beteiligung der
          sogenannten Crowd aufbauen, ein großes Potential zur
          Weiterentwicklung oder Herausbildung neuer Forschungsfragen und -themen. Das bereits
          erwähnte Crowdsourcing  kann dabei als Überbegriff für
          verschiedene Ansätze gesehen werden, die zwar z. T. deutlich voneinander abzugrenzen
          sind, in manchen Bereichen jedoch deutliche Ähnlichkeiten aufweisen. In einem groben
          Kategorisierungsversuch kann eventuell eine Zweiteilung vorgenommen werden, um einen
          besseren Überblick über diese verschiedenen und doch ähnlichen Methoden und Konzepte
          zu gewinnen. Serious Games, Games with a
          Purpose und Meaningful Play wollen das Spiel als
          Medium nutzen um bestimmte Inhalte oder Absichten zu transportieren und dem Nutzer
          ein bestimmtes Problem näher zu bringen. Ansätze wie Gamification, Gameful Design, Social Editing oder Human Computation nutzen
          gezielt einzelne Elemente aus dem Spieldesign, um einen eigentlich spielfremden
          Kontext anzureichern und durch die Schaffung einer neuen Atmosphäre attraktiver für
          potentielle Nutzer_innen zu gestalten.  
         Während Play(s) sich methodisch eher in der zweiten genannten Kategorie wiederfinden
            soll, ist wichtig zu betonen, dass der Erfolg solcher Projekte eng mit der
            Entwicklung und dem Design selbst zusammenhängt. Die Oberfläche sollte
            beispielsweise ansprechend gestaltet bzw. angemessen bezogen auf die Zielgruppe und
            einfach zu bedienen sein. Als  Spielelemente können Levels, das Sammeln von Punkten
            in Kombination mit einfachen Spielanweisungen dienen. Neben der tatsächlichen
            Entwicklung einer neuen Anwendung hängt ein großer Teil des Erfolgs von der zu
            tätigenden Handlung der Teilnehmer_innen ab. Die Aufgabe, die im Rahmen eines
            Crowdsourcing oder Citizien-Science-Projektes von den Teilnehmer_innen bearbeitet
            werden soll, ist im besten Fall einfach zu verstehen und in simple Teilbereiche
            unterteilt. Gleichzeitig unterliegt die Einbindung von freiwilligen, fachfremden
            Teilnehmer_innen gewissen eher impliziten und wenig ausgesprochenen Regeln. So
            sollten die Teilnehmenden generell als Partner oder Mitarbeiter_innen betrachtet
            werden und nicht als günstige Arbeitskräfte. Zudem sollten sie nicht zur Bewältigung
            von Aufgaben angehalten werden, die eigentlich einfacher und besser von einem
            Computer ausgeführt werden könnten. Diese Grundethik sollte bei jeder Umsetzung
            einer neuen Idee zumindest mitbedacht werden, um künftige Teilnehmer_innen nicht zu
            verärgern oder zu verschrecken.
         Die wenigen bisher gesammelten und verfügbaren Erfahrungen aus Projekten für die Geisteswissenschaft sollen nun ausgewertet werden und in die Umsetzung einer neuen Projektidee eingebracht werden. "Play(s)" ist der Name der Anwendung, die sich damit befassen soll, ein literaturwissenschaftliches Volltext-Korpus anzureichern. Das TextGrid-Repositorium bietet dafür optimale Voraussetzungen: alle Texte sind im TEI-Format erfasst und diese Quelle ist frei zugänglich.
         In diesem Projekt knüpfen wir an die von einer Projektgruppe (vgl. Trilcke et al. 2015) bereits herausgefilterten Dramen des Repositoriums an. Dabei wurden bereits in einem manuellen Durchgang allen Sprecherinstanzen im Auswahlkorpus eindeutige Namen (IDs) zugewiesen, um eine Ausgangsbasis für Netzwerkanalysen zu schaffen. In diesen Vorarbeiten wurden die genuin deutschen Texte ausgewählt und dabei aus den insgesamt 666 Dramen auf 465 Werke zurückgegriffen. Um diese Analysen mit einer quantitativ und qualitativ erweiterten Quellenbasis zu vertiefen, bedarf es einer noch genaueren Referenzierung. So sollten zum Beispiel die als Sprecher auftretenden Personengruppen aufgelöst werden und zu diesen die beteiligten Akteure genannt werden. Auch eine Klassifizierung des Geschlechtes, der sozialen Stellung und weitere Features sind denkbar, um differenzierte Analysen tätigen zu können. Hier wird deutlich, dass jeder Text einer bestimmten Aufbereitung bedarf, die aber in vielen kleinen Einzelschritten erfolgen kann, da die Informationen und einzelnen semantischen Anreicherungen in ihren Kategorien unabhängig voneinander sind.
          Innerhalb des TextGrid-Korpus beschränken wir uns auf die Betrachtung der Dramen und
              innerhalb derer sind es die Strukturinformationen, die auf Grundlage des XML-Codes
              Netzwerkanalysen auf Basis des gemeinsamen Auftretens in einer Szene ermöglichen.
              Gemeinsames Auftreten heißt in diesem Fall, dass innerhalb einer Szene alle
              Sprecher_innen in Verbindung gebracht werden. Dazu gilt es die einzelnen Akteure
              ausfindig zu machen, da das Korpus selbst keine Information, wie man sie im
              TEI-Attribut who (TEI Consortium 2015) erwarten kann, mitliefert. Betrachtet man als
              Beispielfall das Drama "Fraw Wendelgard" von Nicodemus Frischlin, finden sich
              innerhalb der Sprecherbenennung drei verschiedene Schreibweisen, die alle auf die
              Gräfin Wendelgard verweisen: Wendelgard, Wendelgart und Wendelgardt. In einem
              anderen Werk taucht in einem Dialog zwischen Faust und Mephistopheles ein einziges
              Mal der Sprecher "Mephistoph" auf. Häufig beobachtet man Akteure, die mit einem
              unbestimmten Artikel eingeführt werden, im Folgenden aber mit bestimmtem oder ohne
              Artikel angegeben werden, wobei offensichtlich ist, dass es sich um die vorangehende
              genannte Entität handelt. 
         Die Ursache kann drucktechnisch bedingt in den Buchausgaben liegen, in denen Sprechernamen abgekürzt werden, um Platz und Papier zu sparen, es können auch schlicht Fehler im Satz auftauchen und eine weitere Fehlerquelle kann der Digitalisierungsprozess sein. In all diesen Fällen ist die Korrekturaufgabe denkbar simpel: man muss jene Sprecher zusammenführen, bei denen es sich offensichtlich um die gleiche Person handelt. Getreu der Buchausgaben handelt es sich dabei nicht um Fehler, das Encoding muss hier schlicht um semantische Information erweitert werden, wie es das Attribute who in den TEI Guidelines vorsieht. Dazu zählen auch Fälle, in denen das Markup innerhalb des TextGrid-Korpus fehlerhaft ist. Das betrifft leere speaker-Elemente, solche, in denen noch Teile der Bühnenanweisung mit einfließen und auch jene, die noch ein leeres Element stellvertretend für zum Beispiel einen Seitenumbruch beinhalten und dadurch als Auswertung des Inhaltes von tei:speaker ein Leerzeichen voran steht.
          Man findet außerdem bei gemeinsam sprechenden Personengruppen unterschiedliche
                Nennungen. In einem Drama Friedrich Kaisers ist eine solche Aggregation mit “HELFER
                UND ROBERT”  benannt, später folgt aber "ROBERT UND HELFER”. Eine bestimmte vom
                Autor intendierte Hierarchie soll das Datenmodell nicht abdecken und somit gilt es
                die verschiedenen Zeichenketten als eine Entität zu betrachten. Zudem soll die
                Tiefenauszeichnung dieser Elemente weiter gehen und jeder Gruppe die einzelnen,
                sofern bestimmbaren, Akteure zugewiesen werden. 
         Diesen Beobachtungen folgt die Spielstruktur.
         In einem ersten Level gilt es die unterschiedlich benannten aber in der fiktiven Welt gleichen Sprecher zu identifizieren. Dazu werden alle unterschiedlichen Zeichenketten innerhalb der tei:speaker-Elemente eines Dramas zunächst in der Reihenfolge ihres ersten Auftretens gelistet. Mutmaßlich gleiche Namen sind nacheinander auswähl- und abspeicherbar. Ist dies für ein Drama vollständig geschehen, kann dieses Drama als “gelöst” markiert werden.
         Weiterhin gilt es Aggregationen ausfindig zu machen (Level 2).
         Diese Aggregationen sollen schließlich aufgelöst werden (Level 3). Dazu sind nicht nur die an einer Gruppe beteiligten Akteure zu nennen, sondern auch deren Vollständigkeit zu deklarieren. Es kann zum Beispiel das Volk sprechen und weiterhin einzelne Personen aus dem Volk auftreten. Diese sind Teil des Volkes, die Gruppe selbst ist aber eine weitaus größere und daher unvollständig durch die einzelnen Akteure belegt. Sprechen zwei auch näher bestimmte Einzelpersonen gemeinsam, so kann diese Gruppe vollständig aufgelöst werden.
         Die Geschlechter der Akteure sind in Level 4 zu bestimmen. Dabei ist zu wählen aus male, female, both, und unknown. Die letzte Gruppe umfasst dann schließlich auch metaphysische Konstrukte, die personifiziert auftreten.
         In Level 5 sollen diese dann genauer spezifiziert werden. Dabei stehen die Kategorien
                  Tier, metaphysisches Wesen (z. B. Gottheit, Hexen und Magier) und Eigenschaft /
                  Gefühl / Moral zur Auswahl.
         Schließlich lässt sich noch der soziale Status bestimmen, sofern Berufsbezeichnungen, Adelstitel oder andere Indikatoren ausfindig zu machen sind.
          Zwischen den einzelnen Levels gilt es die Eingaben anderer Spieler zu verifizieren
                    oder auch zu falsifizieren. Diese Eingabe wirkt sich auf die eigenen Punkte immer
                    positiv aus, die jeweils anonym bleibende begutachtete Spielerin wird bei
                    Fehleingaben aber Punktabzüge bekommen. Da die Dramen immer zufällig gewählt werden
                    und auch mehrfach erfasst werden, stehen damit verschiedene Qualitätskontrollen zur
                    Auswahl, die auch kontinuierliche nicht sinnvolle Eingaben erkennen lassen. Die
                    betreffenden Spielerinnen können weiterspielen, finden aber nur noch eine
                    persönliche Highscoreliste vor, während sie aus den Highscorelisten anderer getilgt
                    werden und ihre Eingaben auch nicht in den weiteren Forschungsprozess Einzug halten.
                    Zudem stehen die Daten für 465 Dramen im LINA Zwischenformat (vgl. Trilcke et al. 2015) zur Verfügung, die mit den in
                    Level 1 erfassten Eingaben übereinstimmen sollten. Zudem können alle hier
                    getätigten Erhebungen ebenfalls in das Zwischenformat einfließen, womit sie dann
                    für die Netzwerkanalysen des Projektes zur Verfüggun stünden. Bei Bedarf ließen
                    sich die Ergebnisse sogar direkt in die Quelldokumente übernehmen.
                  
          Kritisch betrachtet stammen aus der Welt der Computerspiele die Levelstruktur und
                    einzelne Elemente, wie Avatar und Highscoreliste. Tatsächlich ist das Angebot eines,
                    das Social Editing auf einfachste Fragestellungen hin anwendet und jeder Spielerin
                    die Möglichkeit bietet, aktiv an der Tiefenerschließung von literarischen Texten
                    mitzuwirken. Außerdem gibt es einen didaktischen Aspekt, da komplexe Probleme im
                    Hinblick auf Korpuserstellung implizit aufgezeigt werden. 
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Prestopnik, Nathan R. (2011): Citizen
                          Science Case Study. Galaxy Zoo / Zooniverse http://citsci.syr.edu/system/files/galaxyzoo.pdf [letzter Zugriff
                          15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  TEI Consortium (2015): TEI P5.
                          Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.9.0.
                          Updated on 9th October 2015. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober
                          2015]. 
               
                  TextGrid Konsortium (2015): Die
                          Digitale Bibliothek bei TextGrid
                  https://textgrid.de/digitale-bibliothek [letzter Zugriff 15.
                            Oktober 2015].
               
                  Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank / Göbel, Mathias /
                              Kampkaspar, Dario (2015): Network Analysis of
                              Dramatic Texts
                  https://dlina.github.io/about/ [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober
                                2015].
            
         
      
   



      
         Sprachwissenschaftler_innen und Jurist_innen haben gemein, dass sie mit Texten
        arbeiten. Der juristische Umgang mit Texten ist allerdings geprägt und überformt von
        den Verfassungsgeboten der Rechtssicherheit und Vorhersehbarkeit der Interpretation
        von Normtexten, die eine disziplinäre Standardisierung erfordern: „Im Gegensatz zur
        grundsätzlich nicht normierbaren Alltagssprache oder zur Offenheit
        literaturwissenschaftlicher Interpretationen ist die Sprache des Rechts auf
        weitestgehende Verbindlichkeit, Deutlichkeit und Disziplin (zumindest)
        angelegt“ (Jeand'Heur 1998: 1287). Juristische Fachtexte lassen sich deshalb nur mit
        einem stark spezialisierten fachsprachlichen Sach- und (impliziten) Methodenwissen
        adäquat verstehen (vgl. hierzu Vogel 2012b: 34ff.). 
         Das spezialisierte Fach(sprach)wissen in der Jurisprudenz hat mindestens drei Funktionen: Erstens soll es juristische Entscheidungsarbeit valide und zuverlässig organisieren; zweitens soll es die Komplexität der Lebenswelt auf ‚rechtsrelevante’ und verfahrenssichere, also in juristischen Kategorien verarbeitbare, Ausschnitte reduzieren; drittens stiftet es binnendisziplinäre Identität (Ingroup): Wer die Sprache und die ‚Denke’ der Jurisprudenz nicht beherrscht, hat vor Gericht schlechte Karten.
         All diese in der Regel für Laien nicht erkennbaren Funktionen stehen hinter sog. „
          
            Subsumtionen“, also der juristischen Auslegungsmethode. Damit ist kein rechtspositivistisches ‚Anwenden‘ eines objektiv oder subjektiv vorgegebenen ‚Gesetzesinhalts‘ gemeint. Die juristische „Auslegung“ von Normen ist vielmehr ein komplexer Prozess der Ko(n)textualisierung von Lebenswelt (zu beurteilender Sachverhalt, „Fall“) und Textwelt (inter- und intratextuelle Verknüpfung von Norm- und dogmatischen Texten). Lebens- und Textwelt sind dabei nicht lediglich ‚gegeben’ und „im Sinne eines kybernetischen Informationsübertragungsmodells“ im Hinblick auf ‚die’ Norm zu „decodieren“ (so noch
          Baden 1977: 14ff.; vgl. dazu kritisch
          Busse 2005). Sie ‚geben’ dem hermeneutisch tätigen Rechtsarbeiter vielmehr sinnlich wahrnehmbare Hinweisreize
          (Gumperz 1982: 131f.), die gemeinsam mit bereits bestehendem, institutionalisiertem juristischen Norm(sprach)wissen in mentalen Modellen Sinn-voll gemacht werden können
          (Hörmann 1980). Rechtsnormen sind also keine absoluten Entitäten, sondern Ergebnis konstruktiver Textarbeit mit unterschiedlichen versprachlichten Eingangsdaten und Geltungsansprüchen
          (Müller et al. 1997; Felder 2003).
        
         Seit rund 30 Jahren widmet sich die Rechtslinguistik als gemeinsame Teildisziplin von
          Rechts- und Sprachwissenschaft diesen Vertextungsverfahren im Recht (vgl. Vogel 2016). Juristische
          und linguistische Untersuchungen erfolgten dabei bislang ausschließlich mittels
          qualitativer Zugänge und auf Basis weniger hundert Texte. Die Ergebnisse geben
          wichtige Einblicke in die Mikroprozesse unseres sprachbasierten Rechtssystems, sei
          es vor Gericht, in der Verwaltung oder in der Gesetzgebung (Überblick bei Felder / Vogel 2016). In der
          frühen Rechtskybernetik und heutigen Rechtsinformatik hingegen wird das Recht meist
          als logisch operierendes Ontologiesystem zu formalisieren versucht, das die
          semantisch Struktur seiner realen performativen Bearbeitung jedoch vernachlässigt
          (vgl. zur Kritik am „Subsumtionsautomaten 2.0“ Kotsoglou 2014; Vogel 2015).
          Erst neuere Ansätze einer „evidenzbasierten Jurisprudenz“ (Hamann 2014) und
          rechtstheoretisch fundierten Korpuslinguistik in den USA (Mouritsen 2010, 2011) sowie
          in Deutschland (Vogel
          2012a; Vogel et al. 2015; Hamann 2015) versprechen praxisnahe Analysen und
          Einsichten in die ‚Makroökonomik‘ juristischer Fachsprache und -kommunikation. 
         An dieser Stelle setzt ein seit 2014 laufendes und von der Heidelberger Akademie der
            Wissenschaften finanziertes Projekt zur Konzeption und Auswertung eines
            „Juristischen Referenzkorpus“ (JuReko) an (Vogel / Hamann 2015). Ziel
            des Projektes, das den Kern der „International Research Group Computer Assisted
            Legal Linguistics“ (CAL 2 2014-2016) bildet, ist im ersten Schritt der Aufbau eines
            kontrollierten, zunächst statischen Fachtext-Korpus, das alle wichtigen Textsorten
            aus Judikative, Legislative und Rechtswissenschaft umfasst (v.a. Aufsätze aus
            juristischen Fachzeitschriften, Entscheidungstexte und Normtexte; Zielgröße: rund
            eine Milliarde fortlaufender Wortformen). Die Textdaten werden zunächst im
            html-Format gewonnen und anschließend in mehreren Konvertierungschritten
            TEI-P5-konform kodiert. Dafür kommen xsl-Transformationen zum Einsatz, die auf die
            unterschiedlichen Webseitenstrukturen angepasst werden. Im Anschluss werden die
            Texte mit Part-of-Speech und weiteren Annotationen und Metadaten angereichert, wobei
            die speziellen Anforderungen einer rechtslinguistischen Textanalyse und
            -verarbeitung im Vordergrund stehen. 
         Das Korpus bildet im zweiten Schritt die Grundlage für die Erprobung neuer computerlinguistischer Methoden zur Analyse insbesondere juristischer Semantik bzw. Dogmatik sowie zur Beschreibung von Wortschätzen und grammatischen Mustern in verschiedenen Rechtsbereichen auf Basis geeigneter Metriken. In Zusammenarbeit mit Praktikern aus Gesetzgebung und Rechtsprechung werden weitere Untersuchungsprojekte abgeleitet und vorbereitet. Hierzu zählt etwa die Entwicklung von Werkzeugen für die rechtslinguistisch wie korpusstatistisch-empirisch fundierte Optimierung der Gesetzesredaktion.
         Der Vortrag stellt das Infrastrukturvorhaben „JuReko“ vor und diskutiert Möglichkeiten und Grenzen des durch die Projektgruppe entwickelten Ansatzes der „Computergestützten Rechtslinguistik“ als komplementären Beitrag zur qualitativen, juristischen Hermeneutik. Dabei wird anhand von Beispielen sowohl auf die textlinguistischen als auch technischen Details des Projektes eingegangen. Im Ausblick steht die Erweiterung des JuReko um Rechtstexte des britischen Case Law als Ausgangspunkt für ein Europäisches Rechtskorpus (European Law Corpus) und damit eine weltweit einzigartige Grundlage für rechts(sprach)kulturvergleichende Studien.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Baden, Eberhard (1977): Gesetzgebung
                  und Gesetzesanwendung im Kommunikationsprozess. Studien zur jur.
                  Hermeneutik u. zur Gesetzgebungslehre. Baden-Baden:
                  Nomos-Verlagsgesellschaft. 
               
                  Busse, Dietrich (2005): „Ist die Anwendung von
                    Rechtstexten ein Fall von Kommunikation? Rechtslinguistische Überlegungen
                    zur Institutionalität der Arbeit mit Texten im Recht“, in: Lerch, Kent D.
                    (ed.): Die Sprache des Rechts. Recht Vermitteln:
                    Strukturen, Formen und Medien der Kommunikation im Recht. 3 Bände. Berlin:
                    Walter De Gruyter 23–54. 
               
                  CAL2
                   (2014-2016): International Research Group: Computer Assisted Legal
                      Linguistics. University of Freiburg http://www.cal2.eu/ [letzter Zugriff
                      08. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Felder, Ekkehard (2003): Juristische
                        Textarbeit im Spiegel der Öffentlichkeit. Berlin / Boston: De
                        Gruyter. 
               
                  Felder, Ekkehard / Vogel, Friedemann (eds.) (2016): Handbuch Sprache im Recht. Berlin / Boston: De
                          Gruyter Mouton 
               
                  Gumperz, John Joseph (1982): Discourse strategies. Cambridge: University Press. 
               
                  Hamann, Hanjo (2014): Evidenzbasierte
                              Jurisprudenz. Methoden empirischer Forschung und ihr Erkenntniswert für
                              das Recht am Beispiel des Gesellschaftsrechts. Tübingen: Mohr
                              Siebeck. 
               
                  Hamann, Hanjo (2015): „Der "Sprachgebrauch" im
                                Waffenarsenal der Jurisprudenz. Die Rechtspraxis im Spiegel der
                                quantitativ-empirischen Sprachforschung“, in: Vogel, Friedemann (ed.): Zugänge zur Rechtssemantik. Interdisziplinäre Ansätze
                                im Zeitalter der Mediatisierung zwischen Introspektion und Automaten. Berlin
                                / New York: Walter De Gruyter 184-204. 
               
                  Hörmann, Hans (1980): „Der Vorgang des Verstehens“, in:
                                  Kühlwein, Wolfgang (ed.): Sprache und Verstehen.
                                  Tübingen: Narr 17–29. 
               
                  Jeand'Heur, Bernd (1998): „Die neuere Fachsprache der
                                    juristischen Wissenschaft seit der Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts unter
                                    besonderer Berücksichtigung von Verfassungsrecht und Rechtsmethodik“, in:
                                    Hoffmann, Lothar / Burkhardt, Armin / Ungeheuer, Gerold / Wiegand, Herbert
                                    Ernst / Steger, Hugo / Brinker, Klaus (eds.): Fachsprachen: ein internationales Handbuch der Fachsprachenforschung
                                    und Terminologiewissenschaft. (= Handbücher zur Sprach- und
                                    Kommunikationswissenschaft 14.1). Berlin: De Gruyter 1286–1295. 
               
                  Kotsoglou, Kyriakos N. (2014): „Subsumtionsautomat 2.0.
                                      Über die (Un-)Möglichkeit einer Algorithmisierung der Rechtserzeugung“, in:
                                      Juristenzeitung 69, 9 451–457. 
               
                  Mouritsen, Stephen C. (2010): „The Dictionary Is Not a
                                        Fortress: Definitional Fallacies and a Corpus-Based Approach to Plain
                                        Meaning“, in: Brigham Young University Law Review
                                        1915–1980 http://www.lawreview.byu.edu/archives/2010/5/10Mouritsen.pdf
                                        [letzter Zugriff 07. November 2012]. 
               
                  Mouritsen, Stephen C. (2011): „Hard Cases and Hard
                                          Data: Assessing Corpus Linguistics as an Empirical Path to Plain Meaning“,
                                          in: The Columbia. Science and Technology Law Review
                                          8: 156–205 http://www.stlr.org/cite.cgi?volume=13&article=4 [letzter
                                          Zugriff 07. November 2012]. 
               
                  Müller, Friedrich / Christensen, Ralph / Sokolowski,
                                              Michael (1997): Rechtstext und Textarbeit (=
                                              Schriften zur Rechtstheorie). Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann (2012a): „Das Recht im Text.
                                                Rechtssprachlicher Usus in korpuslinguistischer Perspektive“, in: Felder,
                                                Ekkehard / Müller, Marcus / Vogel, Friedemann (eds.): Korpuspragmatik. Thematische Korpora als Basis
                                                diskurslinguistischer Analysen. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter 314–353. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann (2012b): Linguistik
                                                  rechtlicher Normgenese. Theorie der Rechtsnormdiskursivität am
                                                  Beispiel der Online-Durchsuchung (= Sprache und Wissen 9). Berlin / Boston:
                                                  De Gruyter. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann (2015): „Zwischen Willkür, Konvention
                                                    und Automaten: Die interdisziplinäre Suche nach Bedeutungen in Recht und
                                                    Gesetz“, in: Vogel, Friedemann (ed.): Zugänge zur
                                                    Rechtssemantik. Interdisziplinäre Ansätze im Zeitalter der
                                                    Mediatisierung zwischen Introspektion und Automaten. Berlin / New York:
                                                    Walter De Gruyter. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann (2016): „Rechtslinguistik: Zur
                                                      Bestimmung einer Fachrichtung“, in: Felder, Ekkehard / Vogel, Friedemann
                                                      (eds.): Handbuch Sprache im Recht (= Handbücher
                                                      Sprachwissen 12). Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter Mouton. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann / Christensen, Ralph / Pötters,
                                                          Stephan (2015): Richterrecht der Arbeit –
                                                          empirisch untersucht. Möglichkeiten und Grenzen computergestützter
                                                          Textanalyse am Beispiel des Arbeitnehmerbegriffs. Berlin: Duncker
                                                          & Humblot. 
               
                  Vogel, Friedemann / Hamann, Hanjo (2015): „Vom corpus
                                                            iuris zu den corpora iurum – Konzeption und Erschließung eines juristischen
                                                            Referenzkorpus (JuReko) “, in: Jahrbuch der Heidelberger
                                                            Akademie der Wissenschaften für 2014. Heidelberg: Winter. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In diesem Beitrag werden die Probleme skizziert, die sich aus Praktiken
          Österreichischer Archive bei der Umsetzung von online-Projekten ergeben. Die
          Beschränkung auf Österreich ergibt sich, um die Beispiel-Palette überschaubar zu
          halten; die Problembereiche und Lösungsvorschläge lassen sich allerdings
          allgemein anwenden. State-of-the-art Projekte von Bibliotheken und Archiven im
          deutschsprachigen Raum, die den neusten Stand der Forschung umsetzen, werden in
          einem ersten Schritt beschrieben. Der zweite Abschnitt skizziert Gründe dafür
          und Konsequenzen daraus, dass diese Standards häufig nicht herangezogen werden.
          Schließlich werden Lösungsvorschläge präsentiert und eine Agenda vorgeschlagen,
          die die Situation nachhaltig verbessern könnte. Diese wird im Rahmen des
          Vortrags auf der DHd 2016 im Zentrum stehen. Dort werden auch die hier allgemein
          beschriebenen Schwierigkeiten anhand mehrerer Beispielprojekte illustriert.
         
         
            Forschungsstand / Vorbildprojekte
            Vor allem im Bereich der digitalen Edition haben sich im deutschsprachigen Raum
            auf breiter Ebene Standards und “best practices” entwickelt, die von einer
            etablierten Community umgesetzt werden. Umfangreiche Bibliotheken publizierter /
            rechtefreier Werke bieten etwa das 
                  Deutsche Textarchiv
               
            oder der Forschungsverbund 
                  TextGrid
               . Diese Plattformen greifen zur Annotation der zur Verfügung gestellten
            Texte auf die Auszeichnungssprache XML und das Datenformat TEI zurück, die sich
            in den DH als Standards etabliert haben, und machen auch ihre entsprechenden
            Tools verfügbar. Die Texte selbst sind creative-commons-lizenziert und können
            von der Website des Deutschen Textarchivs downgeloadet werden, ebenso wie aus
            dem TextGrid Repository, das darüberhinaus als
            Langzeitarchiv fungiert. 
            Im Bereich der Beforschung von Archivbeständen überwiegen im digitalen Raum
              ebenfalls Editionsprojekte, die die erwähnten Standards zur Anwendung bringen.
              Beispiele hierfür sind das 
                  Heinrich-Heine-Portal
               , das u. a. vom Deutschen
              Literaturarchiv Marbach unterstützt und vom Trier Centre for
              Digital Humanities umgesetzt wird, oder die 
                  Digitale Edition der Korrespondenz August Wilhelm Schlegels
               ,
              an der letztgenanntes Zentrum ebenfalls beteiligt ist. Die Herzog August
              Bibliothek Wolfenbüttel erarbeitet für ihre in der Reihe 
                  Editiones Electronicae Guelferbytanae
               
              publizierten digitalen Editionen ebenfalls neue Editionstechniken auf Basis der
              TEI und stellt dazu Dokumentation zur Verfügung. Ein positives Beispiel mit
              Österreichischer Beteiligung (eine Kooperation zwischen dem Literaturarchiv der
              ÖNB und dem Institut für Germanistik der Universität Hamburg) ist die
              Hybridedition des Briefwechsels August Sauer – Bernhard Seuffert (ÖNB 2015), die die Metadaten der online
              edierten Briefe entsprechend TEI Standards codiert. 
            Wegweisend speziell für die Arbeit mit literarischen Nachlässen ist auch das
                Virtual Research Environment (VRE) 
                  SALSAH 
                (System for Annotation and Linkage of
                Sources in Arts and Humanities) des Digital Humanities
                Lab der Universität Basel, das ähnlich dem System von Susan Schreibmans
                
                  versioning machine
                funktioniert.
                
            Im Bereich der Archivierung und Bereitstellung von elektronischen Publikationen,
                  Multimedia-Objekten und anderen digitalen Daten wird in Österreich das Projekt
                  
                  e-Infrastructures Austria
                umgesetzt, das u. a. mit Horizon
                    2020 verbunden ist und wichtige Impulse für Forschungswebsitearchivierung
                    bringen könnte. 
         
         
            Problemanalyse
            Die in Österreichischen Literaturarchiven aufbewahrten Bestände werden im Rahmen von wissenschaftlichen Projekten mit direkt an der Institution angesiedelten Mitarbeitenden erforscht und publiziert. Aufgrund der Vergabepolitik des FWF Forschungsfonds, der in den allermeisten Fällen Geldgeber dieser Unternehmen ist, haben die betreffenden Projekte mittlerweile häufig eine digitale Komponente. Projektleitende und Mitarbeitende sind zumeist literaturwissenschaftlich ausgebildet. Sie konzipieren und entwerfen, wie die digitale Repräsentation ihrer Arbeit strukturiert wird und erarbeiten das wissenschaftliche Konzept, das Inhalt und Funktionalität zugrundeliegt. Für die technische Umsetzung werden meist erst nach Abschluss der konzeptionellen Arbeit externe Auftragnehmende engagiert, oft privatwirtschaftliche IT-Unternehmen, die von den Möglichkeiten, die im Bereich der DH bereits verfügbar wären, nur eingeschränkte Kenntnis haben.
            Aus dieser Situation ergeben sich Probleme in mehreren Bereichen:
            
               Langzeitarchivierung von Scans
               Die im Rahmen von Projekten erstellten Scans sollten in einer digitalen Langzeitarchivierung der projekttragenden Institution abgelegt werden, was fallweise versäumt wird. Gründe:
               
                  fehlender Speicherplatz 
                  fehlende Arbeitszeit (sowohl auf Projekt- als auch auf Institutionsseite)
                  pragmatische Lösungen: Langzeitarchivierungstaugliche Scans bedeuten einen aufwändigeren Arbeitsprozess
                  die Materialien werden häufig nicht in größere Projekte eingespeist
                          (z. B. Europeana)
               
            
            
               Datenmodellierung
               Die Projektzuständigen haben aufgrund ihrer Ausbildung meist einen editorischen oder von archivarischen Ordnungsprinzipien geprägten Zugang zur Modellierung und Strukturierung der Projektdaten. Gründe und Konsequenzen:
               
                  die gewählten Datenmodelle sind selbst innerhalb einzelner Geisteswissenschaften nicht homogen
                  wie konkret die gewählten Daten zu notieren und annotieren sind, wird in jedem Projekt individuell entschieden
                  selbst bei Orientierung an vorhandenen Standards ergeben sich unterschiedliche Auslegungen
                  keine ausreichenden Kenntnisse von TEI und anderen Standards
                  “Selbstverständlichkeiten” werden im Datenmodell oft vergessen (z. B.
                            die Angabe der Verfassenden, wenn ein Projekt sich mit dem Werk einer
                            Einzelperson beschäftigt.)
                  keine transdisziplinäre (Wieder-)Verwendung der Daten
               
            
            
               Technische Umsetzung, Vernetzung, Visualisierung
               Forschungsprojekte werden häufig in Zusammenarbeit mit Firmen umgesetzt, die nicht (primär) mit wissenschaftlicher Klientel arbeiten, deren Wünsche und Methoden daher nicht im Detail verstehen und nicht mit bereits existierenden DH-Tools und Ressourcen vertraut sind. Konsequenzen:
               
                  keine semantische Annotation, Vernetzung mit verfügbaren Datensätzen bzw. LOD
                  keine projektinterne Vernetzung der Daten
                  keine strukturierte Visualisierung des Datensatzes
               
            
            
               Langzeitarchivierung / Verfügbarmachung von Daten
               An hostenden Institutionen werden kaum personelle Ressourcen zur Wartung abgeschlossener online-Projekte einkalkuliert. Projekt-Websites sterben daher oft nach wenigen Jahren, mit ihnen die Daten. Auch in Projektfinanzierungsplänen wird dieser Aspekt bislang nicht berücksichtigt. Konsequenzen:
               
                  Daten werden nicht als LOD zur Verfügung gestellt
                  Trägerinstitutionen archivieren die Daten nicht sachgemäß
               
            
         
         
            Lösungsansätze
            Der skizzierten Situation muss auf allen Ebenen begegnet werden:
            
               Institutionen
               Seitens der hostenden Institutionen muss stärker daran gearbeitet werden, für langfristige Datensicherung Möglichkeiten zu entwickeln und anzubieten oder Kooperationen mit Langzeitdatenarchiven einzugehen. Dafür müssen sowohl substanzielle finanzielle als auch personelle Ressourcen explizit dieser Aufgabe zugeordnet werden. Die Postionen, die die
                            AG Datenzentren im Verband DHd 2015 formuliert hat, sind dafür wertvolle Impulse und sollten stärker an Institutionen herangetragen werden. Da die betreffenden Institutionen meist Bibliotheken bzw. an solche angeschlossen sind, scheint es auch gewinnbringend, die institutionsinterne Kommunikation zu intensivieren: "digitale Biliothek"-Abteilungen haben für viele der skizzierten Probleme bereits gute Lösungsansätze entwickelt, wie das umfangreiche Vortragsprogramm zu diesem Thema am Österreichischen Bibliothekartag 2015 gezeigt hat. Auch die ÖNB hat mittlerweile eine wichtige Initiative in Angriff genommen: Eine interne Arbeitsgruppe Digital Humanities soll dort Lösungen für die digitale Arbeit entwickeln. Diese Herangehensweise kann für Bibliotheken allgemein als Vorbild dienen, sollte aber auch mit einer Initiative verbunden sein, die im Idealfall kollaborativ erarbeiteten (technischen) Lösungen mit anderen Bibliotheken und Digital Humanists zu teilen.
                          
            
            
               Fördergebende
               Bei der Bewilligung von Projektanträgen sollten Fördergebende die skizzierten Probleme ernsthaft berücksichtigen und Projekte, die keine ausreichenden Ressourcen für die Arbeit an der digitalen Repräsentation der Projektergebnisse vorsehen, ablehnen - anstatt die Praxis, utopische Ziele in Projektanträge einzubauen, zu unterstützen. (Inter)Nationale DH-Plattformen sollten es sich zur Aufgabe machen, ein entsprechendes Empfehlungspapier zur Verfügung zu stellen. Bedenkenswert ist auch die Forderung nach einem “offenen Lebenszyklus” von Forschungsprojekten, die etwa von der Plattform
                            
                     digital humanities austria
                  
                            gestellt wird.
                          
            
            
               Forschende
               Das größte Potential zur nachhaltigen Verbesserung der Situation liegt im
                            Bereich der Projektangestellten. Geisteswissenschaftlich Forschende erfahren
                            im Rahmen des Studiums unzureichende Ausbildung zur Arbeit im digitalen Raum
                            und haben in der Folge entsprechende Hemmungen, mit digital humanists in
                            Austausch zu treten. Deshalb werden DH von nicht primär im digitalen Raum
                            arbeitenden Forschenden noch immer als eigene Disziplin wahrgenommen anstatt
                            als Teil und Methode des geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschens an sich. Hier
                            muss Bewusstsein geschaffen und Skepsis abgebaut werden, indem die Lehrpläne
                            grundlegend überarbeitet und gegenwärtigen Standards angepasst werden.
                            Dadurch würden viele der umrissenen Probleme gar nicht erst entstehen. Neben
                            den Forschenden der Zukunft, die man so erreichen kann, müssen kurz- bis
                            mittelfristig auch die Forschenden der Gegenwart stärker animiert werden,
                            sich mit seriösen Methodiken und Frameworks für Forschungsprojekte im
                            digitalen Raum auseinanderzusetzen, indem sie dort, wo sie mit ihrem Wissen
                            stehen, abgeholt werden. Dafür kann etwa die Vorgehensweise des 
                     Austrian Centre
                            for Digital Humanities
                   der Österreichischen Akademie der
                            Wissenschaften als vorbildlich genannt werden: Hier steht den Forschenden
                            ein digitaler Helpdesk zur Verfügung, der über Möglichkeiten und potentielle
                            Partner für Projekte informiert. Auch das Outreach-Programm, in dessen
                            Rahmen Vorträge, Workshops und eine jährliche DH-Konferenz veranstaltet
                            werden, bietet die Möglichkeit, sich über digitale Methoden zu informieren
                            und mit digital humanists in Kontakt zu treten. Ebenso zu begrüßen sind die
                            Outreach Programme des 
                     Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung – ACDH
                   der
                            Universität Graz, das vor allem im Bereich der Lehre ein Österreichweites
                            Vorbild sein sollte, und von e-Infrastructures
                            Austria.
               
               Die Arbeit in den Bereichen Helpdesk und Outreach zeigt, dass für eine zeitnahe Verbesserung der Situation Adaptionen in der Ausbildung der Forschenden der Zukunft alleine nicht ausreichen; um die Forschenden der Gegenwart zu erreichen, die nicht in digitaler Methodik ausgebildet wurden und sich (noch) nicht damit auseinandergesetzt haben, braucht es “Übersetzende”, die die Kommunikation zwischen rein geisteswissenschaftlich und rein digital Denkenden erleichtern und Brücken bauen. Die Wichtigkeit solcher Bindeglieder, die “beide Sprachen sprechen”, kann nicht hoch genug eingeschätzt werden, da sie allen Beteiligten Frustration, Zeit, überflüssige Arbeit und letztlich auch Geld ersparen können. Zentren, Institute und Verbände, die in den Digital Humanities arbeiten, sollten ihre Aufmerksamkeit vermehrt auf diesen neuen Arbeitsbereich der digital Übersetzenden richten und ihre Aktivitäten gezielt in diese Richtung lenken.
            
         
         
            Conclusio
            Die unzureichende Vernetzung geisteswissenschaftlich Forschender mit der DH Community führt zu technischen Unzulänglichkeiten in abseits davon ambitionierten digitalen Projekten, die ihre Nachhaltigkeit gefährden. Gegenseitige Annäherung über Outreach-Programme und die Adaption der Lehrpläne geisteswissenschaftlicher Studienrichtungen, vor allem aber verbesserte interne und externe Kommunikation sind notwendig, um zu nachhaltiger Verbesserung der Situation zu gelangen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  AG Datenzentren der DHd (2015): "Was sind und was
                          sollen Datenzentren in den Geisteswissenschaften?", in: Panel der AG Datenzentren im Verband DHd. Verbandstagung der DHd
                          in Graz, 26.02.2015 https://www.conftool.pro/dhd2015/index.php?page=browseSessions&form_session=37
                          [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016].
               
                  Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften
                          (2007-2015): Deutsches Textarchiv
                  www.deutschestextarchiv.de.
               
                  Digital Humanities Lab der Universität Basel
                            (2009-2016): SALSAH. System for Annotation and
                            Linkage of Sources in Arts and Humanities http://salsah.org/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016].
               
                  Europeana Foundation (o. J.): Europeana Collections. http://www.europeana.eu/portal/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                            2016].
               
                  Herzog August Bibliothek Wolfenbüttel (o. J.): Editiones Electronicae Guelferbytanae
                  http://www.hab.de/de/home/bibliothek/digitale-bibliothek-wdb/digitale-editionen.html
                              [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016].
               
                  Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz (2016): Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung – Austrian Centre for
                              Digital Humanities
                  https://informationsmodellierung.uni-graz.at/ [letzter Zugriff 09
                                Februar 2016].
               
                  Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften (2015):
                                Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities
                  http://www.oeaw.ac.at/acdh/
                                [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016].
               
                  Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften / Universität
                                  Wien / Universität Graz (o. J.): digital
                                  humanities austria
                  http://digital-humanities.at/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                    2016].
               
                  Österreichische Nationalbibliothek (2011-2015): Handkeonline. http://handkeonline.onb.ac.at/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                    2016].
               
                  ÖNB = Österreichische Nationalbibliothek (2015): Briefwechsel Sauer - Seuffert. http://sauer-seuffert.onb.ac.at/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                    2016].
               
                  Susan Schreibman (2010): Versioning
                                    Machine V4.0
                  http://v-machine.org/.
               
               
                  TextGrid Konsortium (2006–2015): TextGrid. Digitale Bibliothek. Göttingen https://textgrid.de/digitale-bibliothek.
               
                  Trier Centre for Digital Humanities (2014): Digitale Edition der Korrespondenz August Wilhelm
                                    Schlegels (beta-Version)
                  http://august-wilhelm-schlegel.de/briefedigital/ [letzter Zugriff
                                      09. Februar 2016].
               
                  Trier Centre for Digital Humanities /
                                        Heinrich-Heine-Institut Düsseldorf (2004-2009): Heinrich-Heine-Portal
                  http://www.hhp.uni-trier.de/Projekte/HHP/ [letzter Zugriff 09.
                                          Februar 2016].
               
                  Universität Wien (2014-1016): e-Infrastructures Austria
                  http://e-infrastructures.at/ [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                            2016].
            
         
      
   



      
         Der vorgeschlagene Beitrag dokumentiert das Ineinandergreifen philologischer und informatischer Fragestellungen und Entscheidungen bei Aufbau und Aufbereitung eines digitalen Korpus für vergleichende quantitative Stilanalysen von Franz Kafkas Prosa.
         In den letzten Jahren haben digitale Ressourcen wie TextGrid, das Deutsche Textarchiv [DTA], und Gutenberg-DE reichhaltige digitale Korpora von historischen Texten (literarischer und nichtliterarischer Art) zur Verfügung gestellt. Kafkas Werk selbst ist zudem fast vollständig digitalisiert. Dennoch liegen derzeit weder ein vollständiges Kafka-Kernkorpus noch ein „Kafka-Referenzkorpus“ vor, das eine sinnvolle quantitative Analyse seines Sprachgebrauchs durch den Vergleich mit ausreichend großen Stichproben anderer Texte zulässt. Unser Projekt möchte diese Lücke füllen und ein Kafka/Referenzkorpus vorstellen, das sowohl philologisch als auch informatisch solide aufbereitetet ist, und eine hypothesengetriebene aber auch explorative quantitative Stilistik ermöglicht. 
         Bei der Konzeption des Kafka/Referenzkorpus verfolgen wir einen autororientierten Ansatz der digitalen Stilistik. Ausgehend von der Hypothese, dass der Stil eines Autors durch von ihm rezipierte Texte beeinflussbar ist, und dass Stil quantitativ beschreibbar ist (vgl. Herrmann / van Dalen-Oskam / Schöch 2015), gehen wir zunächst vom faktischen textuellen Input Kafkas aus und ergänzen diesen durch Stichproben kanonischer und populärer zeitgenössischer Texte. Der Aufbau des Kafka/Referenzkorpus wird von drei Kriterien geleitet: 
         (a) Vollständigkeit von Kafkas Schriften in der Originalfassung (=Kafka-Kernkorpus); 
         (b) Abbildung von Texten, die Kafkas Schreibprozess beeinflusst haben könnten / Abbildung von Texten, die eine näherungsweise Repräsentativität der Epoche der klassischen Moderne herstellen (=Kafka-Referenzkorpus); 
         (c) eine hohe Akkuratheit bzw. Konsistenz bei informatischer Vorverarbeitung wie Normalisierung, linguistischer Annotation (
        Part of Speech), Metadaten und Textmarkup (XML-TEI) in einem
        Stand-Off Korpus, das einen hohen Grad an Forschungsflexibilität ermöglicht.
      
         Das Kafka-Kernkorpus (je nach Zählart ca. 120 Texte) wurde dabei intern in die Dimensionen Kafka_Publikation (zu Lebzeiten/posthum) und Kafka_Genre (Literarisch, Brief, Tagebuch, Amtliche Schriften) unterteilt. Das Referenzkorpus (ca. 8.000 Texte) wurde hauptsächlich aus TextGrid, DTA, Gutenberg-DE und Gutenberg.org extrahiert, und beinhaltet Metadaten zu Autor (Name, Gender), Publikationsdatum und -Ort, sowie Gattung. Es umfasst literarische Texte der Kategorien „kanonisch“ und „populär“ ebenso wie Gebrauchstexte. Neben Kinder- und Jugendliteratur die Kafka rezipierte sind hier auch Sach- und Fachliteratur von Interesse, nicht zuletzt weil Kafkas Stil durch Elemente der Fachsprache, aber auch ein hochsprachliches „Prager Deutsch“ ohne sozio- oder dialektale Einflüsse geprägt sein soll (vgl. Nekula 2003). Zur Korpuszusammensetzung wurden Aufzeichnungen zu Kafkas Lesegewohnheiten untersucht, wobei Zeugnisse über seine Bibliothek, biographische Berichte, aber auch Dokumente zur zeitgenössischen Rezeption sowie Autor- und Werk-Indices in Literaturgeschichten konsultiert wurden (Blank 2001; Born 1990; Born / Koch 1983; Born / Mühlfeit 1979). Das Ergebnis dieses Forschungsschrittes ist eine Liste von 765 Titeln, die das Metadatum „in Kafkas Bibliothek“ tragen, und einen Schwerpunkt zu Kafkas Lebzeiten setzen, aber eben auch Werke von älteren Autoren wie Goethe und Kleist, sowie Flaubert und Dostojewski (in Übersetzung) beinhalten. Dass die von uns einbezogenen Online-Repositorien hinsichtlich der editionsphilologischen Textqualität variieren ist ein hinzunehmendes Übel, dem wir zum einen pragmatisch (Wahl der bestmöglichen verfügbaren Ausgabe; Ziel, die Fehlermarge unter 2% zu halten), zum anderen unter Hinweis auf die flexible Struktur des Korpus (Austausch durch eine qualitativ hochwertigere Version ist möglich) begegnen. Durch die nahtlose Dokumentation des Korpus wird zudem die nötige Transparenz gewährleistet um auch Nachnutzern flexible Kontrolle der Daten zu ermöglichen.
         Die Hauptaufgabe der informatischen Dimension des Projektes
        besteht neben der Einbettung in einen praktikablen und anschlussfähigen Workflow
        (eXist Datenbank) und der Homogenisierung und informatischen Aufbereitung der
        Ausgangsdaten (Tokenisierung, Normalisierung, Lemmatisierung) in einer reliablen
        linguistischen Annotation auf POS (STTS Tagset). Wortarten gelten als verlässliche
        Indikatoren für Register und Genrevariation (vgl. z. B. Biber / Conrad 2009), und
        sind im Vergleich mit anderen Variationsmarkern durch eine relativ akkurate
        automatische Annotation besonders praktikabel. Obwohl bei der POS-Annotation gute
        Accuracy für das gegenwärtige Standarddeutsch mithilfe von Hidden-Markov-Modellen und Markov-Modellen erzielt
        wird (RF-tagger, Tree-Tagger), wurden diese Tagger auf Zeitungstexten trainiert und
        erfordern deshalb in unserem Korpus manuelles Fehlermanagement: Ein Ausschnitt des
        Gesamtkorpus (repräsentativer Querschnitt auf Satzebene, randomisiertes Sampling)
        wird manuell auf POS getaggt und mit dem Output der Tagger verglichen. Liegt die
        Übereinstimmung größer oder gleich der Standard-Accuracy (ca. 97%), ist eine
        umfangreiche Fehleranalyse nicht notwendig. Sollte die Accuracy niedriger sein, wird
        in der Folge über ein manuell kodiertes Sample von ca. 40.000 Wörtern durch Machine Learning ein Algorithmus trainiert, der bessere Werte
        erreicht. Hierbei ist auch der Gebrauch von Taggern aus dem Conditional Random Field (CRF) Framework wie MarMoT vorgesehen, die eine
        größere Input-Spanne berücksichtigen. Der Workflow beinhaltet einen automatischen
        Vergleich des Tagger-Outputs durch eine eXist-Datenbank mit Annotationsinterface.
        Der Output wird in einem Stand-Off Format (TCF) gespeichert, wie es auch das DTA
        benutzt. Geplant ist zusätzlich eine Qualitätskontrolle des TEI-Markups, der
        Metadaten und der POS-Annotation durch einen bereits entwickelten Ansatz der Gamification (s. https://personae.gcdh.de/index.html). Das Kafka / Referenzkorpus soll im
        Rahmen der TextGrid Infrastruktur in SADE veröffentlicht und so der
        Forschungsgemeinschaft zur Verfügung gestellt werden. Gleichzeitig planen wir eine
        detaillierte Dokumentation der Arbeitsschritte zu veröffentlichen, die ähnlichen
        Projekten als Leitfaden zur Verfügung zu stehen soll. 
         Unser Projekt dokumentiert in seinem gegenwärtigen Status Entscheidungen auf
          verschiedenen konzeptionellen, analytischen und prozeduralen Ebenen. Es zeigt, dass
          der Aufbau eines digitalen Autor-Korpus, das den quantitativen Vergleich mit
          synchronen und diachronen Daten erlauben soll, bei Weitem keine triviale Aufgabe
          darstellt. So wird zum Beispiel deutlich, wie Forschungsfragen beziehungsweise
          Hypothesen zur Konstitution von Schreibweisen und Autorschaft die Korpuskompilation
          steuern – und deshalb auf einer möglichst präzisen Modellierung der
          zugrundeliegenden textwissenschaftlichen Theorien fußen sollten. Gleichzeitig sind
          Metadaten (u. a. Autor, Titel, Publikationsdatum, Publikationsort, Genre) und
          linguistische Parameter (wie POS) gerade die Ansatzpunkte, an denen philologische
          Fragestellungen in präzise und praktikable Kategorien umgewandelt werden können.
          Nicht zuletzt deshalb sollten literarische Daten in flexiblen Architekturen
          gespeichert werden, die zusätzliche Annotationsebenen zulassen – denn hermeneutische
          Erkenntnisprozesse stellen eine erwachsene Stärke der Geisteswissenschaften dar, die
          auch im digitalen Zeitalter einen explizit modellierten Platz einnehmen muss.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Biber, Douglas / Conrad, Susan (2009): Register, Genre, and Style. Cambridge: Cambridge
                University Press. 
               
                  Blank, Herbert (2001): In Kafkas
                  Bibliothek. Werke der Weltliteratur und Geschichte in der Edition,
                  wie sie Kafka besaß oder kannte; kommentiert mit Zitaten aus seinen Briefen
                  und Tagebüchern. Stuttgart: Blank. 
               
                  Born, Jürgen (1990): Kafkas
                    Bibliothek. Ein beschreibendes Verzeichnis; mit einem Index aller
                    in Kafkas Schriften erwähnten Bücher, Zeitschriften und
                    Zeitschriftenbeiträge. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer. 
               
                  Born, Jürgen / Koch, Elke (eds.) (1983): Franz Kafka: Kritik und Rezeption, 1924-1938.
                      Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer. 
               
                  Born, Jürgen / Mühlfeit, Herbert (eds.) (1979): Franz Kafka: Kritik und Rezeption zu seinen Lebzeiten,
                        1912-1924. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer. 
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike / van Dalen-Oskam, Karina / Schöch,
                            Christof (2015): “Revisiting Style, a Key Concept in Literary
                            Studies”, in: Journal of Literary Theory 9, 1: 25-52. 
               
                  Nekula, Marek (2003): “Franz Kafkas Deutsch“, in: Linguistik online 13, 1 https://bop.unibe.ch/linguistik-online/article/view/879/1533
                              [letzter Zugriff 29. Dezember 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         Verstehen wir unter einer digitalen Edition eine „erschließende Wiedergabe
        historischer Dokumente“, welche dem digitalen Paradigma folgt, indem sie die
        gegenwärtigen technischen Möglichkeiten berücksichtigt (cf. Sahle 2013: 138,
        148), dann stellt sich die Frage, welche
        technischen Möglichkeiten zu welchem Zweck eingesetzt werden sollen. In diesem
        Beitrag wird die Überzeugung vertreten, dass digitale Editionen als zentraler
        Bestandteil von Forschungsumgebungen der Textwissenschaft von weit größerem Nutzen
        sein können, wenn sie über standardisierte semantische Web-Schnittstellen verfügen.
        Digitale Editionen wären dann primär als Web-Services zu verstehen, die über ihre
        Web-Schnittstellen mit anderen Web-Services oder mit Web-Anwendungen kommunizieren.
        Es wäre erst die Web-Anwendung (welche im Browser ausgeführt wird), mit der der
        menschliche Nutzer interagiert, wogegen alle übrige Kommunikation von Maschine zu
        Maschine liefe. Herkömmliche digitale Editionen sind primär auf eine Nutzung durch
        den Menschen allein ausgerichtet. Die im Folgenden zu begründende These ist, dass
        Werkzeuge der Forschungsumgebungen mit diesen herkömmlichen digitalen Editionen
        deshalb nur unbefriedigend ineinandergreifen, weil sie programmatisch abgeschlossen
        sind. Dieser Zustand ist insofern unbefriedigend, als dadurch Textforschung weit
        weniger vernetzt und kollaborativ vonstatten geht als dies möglich wäre. 
         Eine Verbesserung dieses Zustands kann natürlich nicht allein von technischen
          Neuerungen digitaler Editionen erhofft werden. Es sind ebenso technische Neuerungen
          bei allen Komponenten bestehender Forschungsumgebungen nötig (und bei Initiativen
          wie TextGrid auch im Gange). Dabei besteht eine wechselseitige Abhängigkeit des
          Entwicklungsfortschritts: Nur wenn die eine Komponente das eine neue Feature
          anbietet, besteht bei der anderen Komponente die Chance eines Entwicklungssprungs.
          Mit Blick auf diese Koevolution müssen also diejenigen
          Komponenten einer Forschungsumgebung berücksichtigt werden, die mit einer digitalen
          Edition im Datenaustausch stehen oder stehen sollten. Dabei ist es zielführend, sich
          nicht ausschließlich von der Frage leiten zu lassen, wie man digitale Editionen
          möglichst interoperabel zu den am weitestverbreiteten Werkzeug der
          Textwissenschaftler (z. B. der dominierenden Textverarbeitungssoftware) machen kann.
          Vielmehr sollte die Aufmerksamkeit darauf gerichtet werden, welche nützlichen
          Werkzeuge man schaffen könnte, wenn man die digitalen Editionen mit bestimmten
          technischen Neuerungen ausstatten würde. 
         Im Folgenden wird daher das Umfeld digitaler Editionen innerhalb einer textwissenschaftlichen Forschungsumgebung in den Blick kommen und zwar in einer Weise, die auch noch nicht existierende Systeme mitdenkt. Dies ist möglich, wenn man eine solche Umgebung zu diesem Zweck nicht als eine Ansammlung bestehender Tools auffasst, sondern die textwissenschaftlichen Tätigkeiten identifiziert, für die man sich ohne Rücksicht auf bestehende Fertiglösungen technische Unterstützung überhaupt vorstellen kann.
         Die aus informationstechnischer Sicht relevanten Tätigkeiten lassen sich in diesem Kontext sinnvoll unterteilen in: das
            Lesen,
            Schreiben und
            Verwalten von Text. Während das Lesen und Schreiben von Text in diesem Rahmen keiner weiteren Erklärung bedarf, muss näher darauf eingegangen werden, was mit Textverwaltung alles gemeint sein kann. Eine positive Definition dieses Begriffs würde wahrscheinlich keine allgemeine Zustimmung finden, daher sollen ein paar paradigmatische Beispiele zur Begriffsklärung ausreichen: Exzerpieren, Organisieren von Textschnipseln in Zettelkästen, Anlegen von Literaturlisten, Zusammenstellen eines Semesterapparats, Sortierung von Büchern, Klassifikation von Texten, Erstellen von Registern und vieles mehr – für all diese und ähnliche Tätigkeiten soll der Begriff Textverwaltung hier stehen. Zwar wird in all diesen Fällen auch geschrieben und gelesen, aber das ist nicht das Wesentliche an der Textverwaltung, sondern die in diesen Tätigkeiten erzeugten Ordnungen oder Relationen.
          
         Fragen wir uns nun, zu welchen dieser drei Tätigkeitsfeldern (Lesen, Schreiben,
            Verwalten) eine digitale Edition eine unmittelbare und eine mittelbare Unterstützung
            liefern kann. Traditionell dienen digitale Editionen (wie ihre gedruckten Vorfahren)
            in erster Linie dazu gelesen zu werden. Zwar sind die in ihr enthaltenen Texte und
            ihre Metadaten natürlich auch Ergebnis einer Textverwaltung. Jedoch bieten sie dem
            Nutzer nur in seltenen Fällen und da auch nur rudimentär die Möglichkeit selbst Text
            zu verwalten (cf. z. B. Arbeitsmappen bei Jung 2015). Eine
            außergewöhnliche Ausnahme ist ein Editionsprojekt zu Pessoas „Buch der Unruhe“ (cf.
            Silva / Portela 2015). Hier ist das Lesen, Schreiben und Verwalten gleichermaßen
            möglich und ermöglicht den Nutzern aus dem vorhandenen Textmaterial und eigenen
            Kommentaren eine eigene virtuelle Edition kollaborativ zu erstellen. In diesem Sinne
            ist diese Plattform nicht mehr eine Edition im traditionellen Sinne, sondern selbst
            eine in sich abgeschlossene Forschungsumgebung – allerdings für eine ganz spezielle
            Aufgabe über ein abgegrenztes Textkorpus. 
         All diesen digitalen Editionen ist jedoch gemeinsam, dass, sofern sie eine Textverwaltung unterstützen, diese dann nur für die im System vorhandenen (oder darin erzeugten) Texte ermöglichen. Im Allgemeinen ist der Textwissenschaftler aber nicht mit einem einzelnen Textkorpus befasst, sondern mit mehreren. Eine Textverwaltung kann dann nur ihren Nutzen entfalten, wenn sie als eigenständiger Service auf mehrere digitale Editionen zugreifen kann.
         Nehmen wir als einfaches Beispiel die Zusammenstellung der Literatur zu einem Germanistikseminar, in dem Texte verschiedener Autoren behandelt werden. Von einer komfortablen Textverwaltung würde man jetzt nicht die URL der jeweiligen digitalen Editionen erwarten, sondern man möchte am besten die Texte selbst per Mausklick zur Verfügung gestellt bekommen ohne dabei auf die Web-Seiten der jeweiligen digitalen Editionen gehen zu müssen. Schon dieser einfache Fall zeigt den Nutzen, den eine programmatische Schnittstelle von digitalen Editionen haben könnte: Ein eigenständiger Service zur Aggregation von Semesterapparaten ließe sich mit geringem Aufwand implementieren.
         Tatsächlich bieten manche digitale Editionen (z. B. das Deutsche Textarchiv) ihre
              Texte (sogar in verschiedenen Formaten: TEI, HTML, plain text) zum Download an, so
              dass man die entsprechenden Links schon als Web-API auffassen könnte. Allerdings
              beschränkt sich diese Möglichkeit entweder auf den Download einer einzelnen Seite
              oder des gesamten Textdokuments. Für eine brauchbare Textverwaltung wäre es jedoch
              wesentlich praktischer, wenn man Texte nicht nach Paginierungsgrenzen sondern
              bezüglich semantischer Sinneinheiten beziehen könnte. Es fällt nicht schwer, sich
              entsprechende Szenarien vorzustellen: Für eine Anthologie möchte man etwa Balladen
              einer bestimmten Epoche zusammenstellen.; für eine Theaterprobe möchte jeder
              Schauspieler eine Zusammenstellung derjenigen Szenen, in der seine Rolle vorkommt;
              ein Übersetzungsforscher möchte alle deutschen Übersetzungen des Monolog der ersten
              Szene im dritten Aufzug von Shakespeares Hamlet. Die Zahl weiterer Szenarien ist
              unbegrenzt. Als entscheidende Anforderung an eine digitale Edition wäre
              festzuhalten: die Adressierbarkeit und Auffindbarkeit von Texten in allen üblichen
              Struktureinheiten (z. B. Kapitel, Absatz, Drama, Akt, Szene, Gedicht, Strophe, Vers,
              etc.). Da in den meisten digitalen Editionen die Texte im TEI-XML vorliegen, welche
              die Kodierung solcher Struktureinheiten erlauben, dürfte es prinzipiell nicht
              schwierig sein, diese auch über eine Web-API adressierbar zu machen. Was die
              Auffindbarkeit betrifft, wäre es wünschenswert, die Möglichkeitender in der
              Backend-Datenbank verwendeten Anfragesprachen weitgehend in der Web-API abzubilden.
              Das ganze Feld der Suchmöglichkeiten ist allerdings so umfangreich, dass es einen
              eigenen Beitrag rechtfertigen würde und daher hier nicht weiter vertieft werden
              soll. Allein die Adressierbarkeit aller textspezifischen Struktureinheiten (s. o.)
              mittels der Web-API von digitalen Editionen wäre eine große Chance zur Entwicklung
              nützlicher Textverwaltungsdienste. Allerdings sollten neben den vorgegebenen
              Struktureinheiten auch vom Nutzer frei definierte Textauswahlen von einer digitalen
              Edition adressierbar sein. Damit soll die verbreitete Praxis, Textausschnitte mit
              einem Textmarker zu markieren, im digitalen Medium nicht nur die Funktion erhalten,
              etwas farblich hervorzuheben, sondern die so ausgezeichneten Textpassagen sollen
              durch eine generierte Adresse permanent referenzierbar gemacht werden. Damit wäre
              beispielsweise eine Sammlung von Exzerpten referenzierbar, die ein Benutzer mit
              einem virtuellen Textmarker erzeugt hat.
         Bis hierin wurde die Adressierbarkeit von jeglichen Textausschnittenin den oben
                angeführten Szenarien ausschließlich für die Erstellung von Textsammlungen
                verwendet. Das ist aber nur eine einfache Form der Textverwaltung. Denn eine
                Textsammlung ist zunächst eine in sich unstrukturierte Menge von Texten. Ziel einer
                Textverwaltung ist es aber meist, in eine Textsammlung eine bestimmte Ordnung zu
                bringen. Das ist unter anderem der Fall, wenn man die gesammelten Texte nach
                forschungseigenen Kriterien klassifiziert; z. B. als Linguist nach grammatischen
                Eigenschaften, als Literaturwissenschaftler nach Motiven, als Übersetzer nach
                Idiomen, etc.
         Textklassifikation wäre eine Relation zwischen Texten und Sammelbegriffen. Darüber hinaus wäre es wichtig, in einer Textverwaltung die Beziehung der Texte untereinander explizit machen zu können. So könnte man beispielsweise explizit erfassen, dass eine bestimmte Textpassage eine Anspielung auf einen anderen Text ist; oder dass die eine Textfassung aus jener Skizze hervorgegangen ist, etc. Soweit würde man Textausschnitte aus digitalen Editionen in Beziehung zueinander setzen. Man würde aber in einer Textverwaltung insbesondere auch die Texte der digitalen Editionen in Beziehung zu selbstverfassten Texten setzten wollen. Auch würde man Texte zu nicht textartigen Gegenständen wie Personen, Orte oder Ereignissen in Beziehung setzen wollen; beispielsweise wenn man in historischen Romanen den Bezug zu historisch belegten Sachverhalten herstellen möchte.
         Eine Textverwaltung, die all die skizzierten Funktionalitäten bereitstellen würde, könnte einen Textwissenschaftler bei der Arbeit am Text bzw. der Organisation der eigenen Texte erheblich unterstützen. Sie würde darüber hinaus das kollaborative Arbeiten erleichtern, indem sie eine auf Austausch von Dokumenten basierte Arbeitsweise durch eine Praxis der direkten Vernetzung von Inhalten im Netz ersetzen würde. Sie könnte aber nur funktionieren, wenn die Texte digitaler Editionen in aller Granularität über Web-APIs adressierbar wären.
         Abschließend soll erwähnt werden, das eine ganze Reihe von Anstrengung von
                  verschiedenen Seiten schon unternommen wurden, die durch eine geeignete
                  Zusammenführung ein solides Fundament zur Umsetzung dieser Visionen bilden könnten.
                  Allgemeine technische Grundlage wären die Semantic-Web-Technologien. Darauf
                  aufbauend wären folgende theoretische und praktische Arbeiten hervorzuheben: Von
                  Silvio Peroni (2014) zu „Semantic Publishing“ , Fabio Ciottis und Francesca Tomasis
                  (2014) Entwurf zu „Formal ontologies, Linked Data and TEI semantics“, das semantic
                  annotation Tool Pundit (2013-*) und die Open Annotation Initiative: http://www.openannotation.org/. 
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Ciotti Fabio, Tomasi Francesca (2014): Formal ontologies, Linked Data and TEI semantics. TEI
                        Conference and Members Meeting 2014. Evanston (IL), October 22-24, 2014.
                        http://tei.northwestern.edu/files/2014/10/Ciotti-Tomasi-22p2xtf.pdf
                          [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Jung, Joseph (ed.) (2015): Digitale
                            Briefedition Alfred Escher. Version: Juli 2015. Zürich: Alfred
                            Escher-Stiftung. http://www.briefedition.alfred-escher.ch/ [letzter Zugriff 09.
                            Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Peroni, Silvio (2014): Semantic Web
                              Technologies and Legal Scholarly Publishing. Switzerland: Springer
                              International Publishing http://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319047768 [letzter Zugriff
                              09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Pundit (2013-*): Pundit net7
                                http://thepund.it/ [letzter
                                Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
               
                  Sahle, Patrick  (2013): Digitale
                                  Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den
                                  Bedingungen des Medienwandels: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik (= Schriften
                                  des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 8). Norderstedt: Books on
                                  Demand. 
               
                  Silva, António Rito / Portela, Manuel (2015):
                                    "TEI4LdoD: Textual Encoding and Social Editing in Web 2.0 Environments", in:
                                    Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8 http://jtei.revues.org/1171
                                    [letzter Zugriff 09. Januar 2016]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Introduction 
            
               Background: Large Knowledge Bases 
               A large portion of the material on which scholarly editing is based today is available electronically in large knowledge bases. Some of these emerge from the archive, library and museum communities, for example
            Kalliope. Such efforts require the use of standardized vocabularies and databases of entities such as persons and locations.
            Kalliope thus links to
            Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND), which provides more than 120 million facts about approximately 11 million entities. The prevailing technique to realize such linked knowledge bases is the Semantic Web, as advocated by the W3C, characterized by the use of ontologies to express standardized vocabularies, global identifiers (URIs) and the possibility to express knowledge in a machine understandable way as subject-predicate-object statements with RDF. Further large knowledge bases, such as
            Yago (Hoffart et al. 2013) and
            DBpedia (Lehmann et al. 2015), developed mainly in computer science with Semantic Web techniques, gather and combine machine processable knowledge from "crowd-maintained" sources like
            Wikipedia and centrally maintained sources like
            GND or
            GeoNames.
          
            
            
               Beyond
            TEI
               
               The seemingly best developed machine support for scholarly editing today is
            provided with the Text
                   Encoding Initiative (TEI) format, based on document
            markup. URIs as attribute values of markup elements can provide links to
            knowledge bases. Envisaged applications include in particular the rendering
            for different media and extraction of metadata. Some of the recent
            developments are actually orthogonal to the OCHCO text model and its
            representation through XML, core characteristics of the original TEI. Connecting TEI with
            Semantic Web techniques, data modeling and ontologies is, for example, an
            ongoing topic of discussion (e.g. Eide 2015). Recent versions of TEI provide support for names,
            dates, people, and places as well as linking,
            segmentation, and alignment (The TEI Consortium 2015: Chapters 13
            and 16). In a broad long-term perspective, important aspects that further go
            into these directions become apparent: 
               
                  Incorporation of advanced semantics related techniques such as named entity recognition or statistics-based text analysis. 
                  Relationships to external knowledge bases and to formal semantics.
                  Obtaining high-quality presentations without requiring expensive development of dedicated XML transformations and stylesheets. 
                  Loose coupling of object text and markup: Alternate markup by different authors or for different purposes should be supported. Markup generated by automated methods should not clutter up the document. Queries and transformations should remain applicable also after changes of the markup. Sustainability must not be compromised by dependency on short-lived technology and specifications.
               
               Addressing these issues, we approach the requirements of today's scholarly editing here from the view of computational logic: What can logics – as machine processable symbolic languages with formally specified semantics – contribute? A starting point is that with Semantic Web technology the large knowledge bases can already be considered as large sets of logic facts. Logic languages have various further potential roles in machine supported scholarly editing, such as specifying properties and values associated with texts, specifying pieces of text, specifying knowledge sources and their combination, and specifying inferences involved in automated computation of information associated with texts.
            
         
         
            Knowledge-Based Support for Scholarly Editing 
            
               High-Quality Support at all Phases 
               Three main phases of machine assisted scholarly editing can be identified, which all should be supported: (1) Creating the enhanced object text; (2) Generating intermediate representations for inspection by humans or machines; (3) Generating consumable presentations. Support for all three phases should be of high quality – for example entity recognition should precisely identify persons, or the print layout of a finally rendered document should be professional.
            
            
               Issues of Integrating Different Types of Knowledge 
               High-quality support is not possible without inclusion of specialized techniques and the combination of automated techniques with information and adjustments provided by humans. The adequate support of this combination is an important aspect where the considered scenario differs from conventional programming or query languages. Relevant techniques include non-monotonic reasoning, semantics-based knowledge partitioning (Wernhard 2004, Ghilardi et al. 2006, Cuenca Grau et al. 2008, Kontchakov et al. 2010) and the use of explanations for inferred information, as exemplified by proofs in mathematical knowledge bases (Urban et al. 2013). A further important integration requirement concerns the combination of statistics-based techniques, which are essential for natural language processing operations such as named entity recognition or keyphrase extraction, with a symbolic logic-based framework.
            
            
               External Annotations 
               The availability of powerful techniques to identify places in text – based on syntactic as well as semantic properties – suggests to prefer external annotations to in-place markup. Annotations are then maintained separated from the object text in annotation documents. An automated processor creates an annotated document by merging annotations and object text.
            
            
               Representation of Epistemic Status 
               Scholarly editing requires to associate various forms of epistemic status with facts, which is interesting to model formally from the viewpoint of artificial intelligence. Consider for example a creation date associated with written communication: it can be given by its author or can be inferred – by the editor or by a machine, it can be only partially specified by the author, it can be specified with different precision, considered as a point or range in time, etc. The current version of
              TEI offers some related elements to indicate certainty, precision and responsibility (The TEI Consortium 2015: Chapter 21), but these are not based on any formal semantic treatment and it is seems hardly possible to express the sketched date examples with them.
            
            
            
               Utilizing Inferred Access Patterns 
               Efficient access to large knowledge bases requires caching and preprocessing,
              which ideally should be performed automatically on the basis of the queries
              performed by the knowledge processing engine. Relevant techniques come from
              optimization in databases (Toman / Weddell 2011) and in first-order model
              computation systems (Pelzer / Wernhard 2007). It seems that recent
              techniques for view-based query processing (Calvanese et al. 2007) based on
              variants of Craig's interpolation and second-order quantifier elimination
              (Toman / Weddell 2011; Bárány et al. 2013; Wernhard 2014) where access
              patterns can be specifically considered in an abstract way (Bárány et al.
              2013) are particularly useful. Logic-based languages for programming as well
              as data access facilitate the application of such abstract techniques. For
              an overview on alternate ways to associate computational meaning with logics
              see (Kowalski 2014).
            
            
               The Role of Ontologies 
               Ontologies are an important ingredient for the Semantic Web because they provide agreed vocabularies. However, to evaluate queries arising in the text processing tasks of scholarly editing, ontology reasoning alone is not sufficient. Also, the basic ontologies relevant in the context of scholarly editing are – in contrast to the biomedical area (Horrocks 2013) – rather small and trivial. 
            
         
         
            A Prototype: The
              KBSET System
            
            Important issues of complex computer systems often become apparent only with applications. Thus, the authors developed the
              KBSET system, an experimental platform to clarify the precise requirements of machine support for scholarly editing and to experiment with advanced techniques. It follows the outlined approach, but, so far, only realizes some of the discussed aspects. A draft version of an edition of
              Max Stirner: Geschichte der Reaction, Band 1. Berlin, 1852 accompanies it as comprehensive example. The system is free software and available from http://cs.christophwernhard.com/kbset/.
            
            In a typical setting, the system takes as inputs:
            
               A source text file, possibly in
                LaTeX format. The system can parse
                LaTeX, where the set of recognized commands is configurable, including user defined commands as well as commands that establish some "ordered hierarchy of content objects". In this way plain or structured text is available within the system to modules that operate on such text models.
              
               
                  Annotation documents, that is, text files with annotations, possibly in
                LaTeX format. The associated places in the source text to which they are referring are specified abstractly.
              
               Large fact bases, currently in particular
                GND and
                 
                  GeoNames, as well as extracts from
                YAGO2 and
                DBpedia.
              
               A so-called
                assistance document, that is, a configuration file, where, among other things, the fact bases are specified and information is given to bias or override automated inferencing such that fully correct results are obtained.
              
            
            A user interface is provided that integrates the system into the
              Emacs editor, which is free software. The system includes a facility for named entity recognition, which – essentially based on
              GND and
              GeoNames as gazetteers – identifies persons, locations and dates. The system produces a variety of outputs, supporting all the phases of scholarly editing mentioned above:
            
            
               
                  LaTeX documents where annotations and inferred information are merged in. By passing unrestricted
                LaTeX access to the user, high-quality layouts can be achieved.
              
               Support during development by possibilities to highlight and inspect entities recognized by the system. 
               An export possibility to visualize detected locations mentioned in the source text with the
                Dariah geobrowser.
              
            
            A typical application would be the development of an annotated essay or book, where the source text is edited in
              LaTeX and the configuration evolves step-by-step until the inferred information is fully correct.
            
         
         
            Acknowledgments
            This work was supported by
              Alexander von Humboldt-Professur für neuzeitliche Schriftkultur
               und europäischen Wissenstransfer and by
              DFG grant WE 
               5641/1-1
               .
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bárány, Vince / Benedikt, Michael / ten Cate, Balder
                (2013): "Rewriting guarded negation queries", in: Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2013 (MFCS 2013),
                volume 8087 of LNCS. Berlin / Heidelberg / New York: Springer 89-110. 
               
                  Calvanese, Diego / De Giacomo, Giuseppe / Lenzerini,
                    Maurizio / Vardi, Moshe Y. (2007): "View-based query processing: On
                    the relationship between rewriting, answering and losslessness", in: Theoretical Computer Science 371, 3: 169-182. 
               
                  Cuenca Grau, Bernardo / Horrocks, Ian / Kazakov, Yevgeny /
                        Sattler, Ulrike (2008): "Modular reuse of ontologies: Theory and
                        practice", in: Journal of Artificial Intelligence
                        Research 31: 273-318. 
               
                  Eide, Øyvind (2015): "Ontologies, data modeling, and
                          TEI", in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8. 
               
                  Ghilardi, Silvio / Lutz, Carsten / Wolter, Frank
                            (2006): "Did I damage my ontology? A case for conservative extensions in
                            description logics", in: Doherty, Patrick / Mylopoulos, John / Welty,
                            Christopher A. (eds.): Proc. 10th Int. Conf. on Principles
                            of Knowledge Representation (KR'06). Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press
                            187-197. 
               
                  Hoffart, Johannes / Suchanek, Fabian M. / Berberich, Klaus /
                                Weikum, Gerhard (2013): "YAGO2: A spatially and temporally enhanced
                                knowledge base from Wikipedia", in: Artificial
                                Intelligence 194: 28-61. 
               
                  Horrocks, Ian (2013): "What are ontologies good for?",
                                  in: Kuppers, Bernd Olaf / Hahn, Udo / Artmann, Stefan (eds.): Evolution of Semantic Systems. Berlin / Heidelberg /
                                  New York: Springer 175-188. 
               
                  Kontchakov, Roman / Wolter, Frank / Zakharyaschev, Michael
                                    (2010): "Logic-based ontology comparison and module extraction, with an
                                    application to DL-Lite", in: Artificial Intelligence
                                    174, 15: 1093-1141. 
               
                  Kowalski, Robert A. (2014): "Logic Programming", in:
                                      Siekmann, Jörg (ed.): Computational Logic (= Handbook
                                      of the History of Logic 9). Amsterdam: Elsevier 523-569. 
               
                  Lehmann, Jens / Isele, Robert / Jakob, Max / Jentzsch, Anja
                                          / Kontokostas, Dimitris / Mendes N., Pablo / Hellmann, Sebastian /
                                          Morsey, Mohamed / van Kleef, Patrick / Auer, Sören / Bizer,
                                          Christian (2015): "DBpedia – A large-scale, multilingual knowledge
                                          base extracted from Wikipedia", in: Semantic Web 6,
                                          2: 167-195. 
               
                  Pelzer, Björn / Wernhard, Christoph (2007): "System
                                            description: E-KRHyper", in: Automated Deduction 
                                            (CADE-21), volume 4603 of LNCS (LNAI). Berlin / Heidelberg / New York:
                                            Springer 503-513. 
               
                  The TEI Consortium (2015): TEI P5:
                                              Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, Version
                                              2.8.0 TEI Consortium http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 9. Oktober
                                              2015]. 
               
                  Toman, David / Weddell, Grant (2011): Fundamentals of Physical Design and Query Compilation San Rafael.
                                                CA: Morgan and Claypool. 
               
                  Urban, Josef / Rudnicki, Piotr / Sutcliffe, Geoff
                                                  (2013): "ATP and presentation service for Mizar formalizations", in:
                                                  Journal of Automated Reasoning 50 (2): 229-241. 
               
                  Wernhard, Christoph (2004): "Semantic knowledge
                                                    partitioning", in: Logics in Artificial Intelligence:
                                                    9th European Conf. (JELIA 04), volume 3229 of LNCS (LNAI). Berlin /
                                                    Heidelberg / New York: Springer 552-564. 
               
                  Wernhard, Christoph (2014): Expressing view-based query processing and related approaches with
                                                      second-order operators", Technical Report - Knowledge
                                                      Representation and Reasoning 14-02, TU Dresden, http://www.wv.inf.tu-dresden.de/Publications/2014/report-2014-02.pdf
                                                      [letzter Zugriff 9. Oktober 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         ePoetics ist ein Forschungskooperationsprojekt der Universität Stuttgart und der
        Technischen Universität Darmstadt. Gefördert vom Bundesministerium für Bildung und
        Forschung zielt es gleichermaßen auf einen Erkenntnisgewinn für die Informatik sowie
        die Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft dank einer wechselseitigen Anregung und
        Ergänzung im Sinne des ‚Algorithmic Criticism‘ nach Stephen Ramsay (Ramsay 2007).
        Dieser Ansatz ist explizit nicht darauf ausgerichtet, lediglich hermeneutische
        Hypothesen mit algorithmischen Verfahren zu überprüfen. Vielmehr zielt er darauf,
        durch den iterativen Einsatz analoger und digitaler Methoden verschiedene
        Perspektiven auf Texte einnehmen und abgleichen zu können. Darüber hinaus ist ein
        zentraler Aspekt dieses Forschungsparadigmas, Erschließungsentscheidungen und
        -verfahren sowie Analyseschritte transparent bzw. nachvollziehbar und nachnutzbar zu
        machen. Das Projekt ePoetics ist der Digitalisierung, Annotation, Analyse und
        Visualisierung eines für die Geisteswissenschaften zentralen Textkorpus‘ gewidmet:
        Poetiken und Ästhetiken von 1770 bis 1960. Diese Texte dokumentieren das Denken und
        Schreiben über Literatur und andere Künste in der zentralen Periode nach der Abkehr
        von der Normen- und Regelpoetik (vor 1770) und vor dem Übergang zur Literaturtheorie
        und damit dem Ende der Poetik als literaturwissenschaftlicher Textgattung (nach
        1960). Sie enthalten dabei grundlegendes Wissen über Sprache und Literatur
        (-wissenschaft), etwa die Erläuterungen zentraler Begriffe und deren Zusammenhänge.
        ePoetics betreibt die Entwicklung und Untersuchung eines Testkorpus‘ von zwanzig
        Poetiken, ausgewählt aus einem Gesamtkorpus von 1240 Texten (inkl. aller Auflagen),
        die Sandra Richter in ihrer Studie ‚A history of Poetics‘ (Richter 2010) als zur
        Gattung ‚Deutschsprachiger Poetik‘ zählbarer Werke bibliographiert hat. Die Auswahl
        des Testkorpus‘ enthält – historisch und systematisch betrachtet – die
        repräsentativsten Texte des Gesamtkorpus‘, d. h. die, die am häufigsten zitiert und
        in den meisten Auflagen herausgegeben wurden, und stellt dennoch auf den ersten
        Blick ein sehr heterogenes Korpus dar. Aus sprach- und literaturwissenschaftlicher
        Sich zeigen wir auf, wie sich diese Heterogenität im Einzelnen darstellt, aber auch,
        welche tiefergehenden Gemeinsamkeiten und Abhängigkeiten die Texte auf den zweiten
        Blick aufweisen und auf welche Ursprünge sich diese zurückführen lassen. Für
        ausführlichere Informationen zum ausgewählten Textkorpus und zum Projekt insgesamt
        besuchen Sie unsere Homepage (vgl. Ertl et al. 2013-2016).
         Im Zentrum unseres Interesses steht aktuell beispielsweise der Begriff der Metapher als ein zentrales sprach- und literaturwissenschaftliches Konzept, das in unserem Textkorpus verhandelt wird. Die mit diesem zusammenhängenden Fragen lauten: Wie wird der Begriff in einzelnen Poetiken verstanden und erklärt? Wie ändert sich dieses Verständnis innerhalb unseres Testkorpus‘? Welche literarischen oder theoretischen Werke werden im Zusammenhang damit genannt oder zitiert? Wie verändert sich der ‚Kanon‘ dieser Werke? Verändern sich die Zusammenhänge, in denen die Werke zitiert werden? Und schließlich: Wie verändert sich insgesamt der Umgang mit Zitaten und deren Nachweisen?
         Problemstellungen für die digitale Annotation mit dem Ziel der computergestützten
          Auswertbarkeit liegen bei solchen Texten und Anforderungen auf mehreren Ebenen vor:
          Das jeweilige Metaphernverständnis muss differenziert erschlossen und die
          Komponenten der Begriffsbestimmung müssen trennscharf kategorisiert werden können.
          Beispiele aus der Primärliteratur müssen eindeutig erkannt und den jeweiligen
          theoretischen Aspekten, für die sie stehen, zugeordnet werden. Und schließlich
          müssen die Textebenen und Referenzstrukturen der Poetik explizit gemacht werden –
          also wo der Autor selbst theoretisiert, wo zitiert oder paraphrasiert wird,
          inwiefern dies kenntlich gemacht wird oder nicht und sogar, wo bei Zitaten vom
          ursprünglichen Text abgewichen wird. Dies wird durch die Annotation nach einem
          komplexen Schema umgesetzt. Die Annotationen werden einerseits in TEI-konformen
          XML-Dateien publiziert, andererseits aber auch als Grundlage von computergestützten
          Analysen und Visualisierungen genutzt. Abbildung 1 veranschaulicht das Vorgehen im
          Projekt ePoetics im Sinne eines ‚Algorithmic Criticism‘ nach Stephen Ramsay
          (2007).
         
            
            
               Abb. 1: Intellektuelle Vorgehensweise und die algorithmischen Verfahren in ePoetics, in Anlehnung an Kuhn und Reiter (2015).
         
         Intellektuelle Vorgehensweise (Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft)
         Die Texte des Testkorpus‘ stehen als Image-Digitalisate und als nach dem ‚Double Keying‘-Verfahren transkribierte und aufbereitete digitale Volltexte zur Verfügung. Die strukturellen (und auch die semantischen) Annotationen des Korpus‘ erfolgen nach den Konventionen der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI). Das Korpus wird in virtuelle Forschungs-Infrastrukturen wie TextGrid und das Deutsche Textarchiv (DTA) integriert und dort mit den vorhandenen Referenztexten verlinkt.
         Nach der Identifikation relevanter und interessanter Begriffe und Konzepte wurden zu einzelnen ausgesuchten Begriffen wie der Metapher mithilfe des UAM CorpusTool Annotationsschemata für manuelle Annotationen erstellt. Diese wurden unter ausführlicher Dokumentation von Annotationsguidelines durch mehrere Annotatoren getestet, kontinuierlich verbessert, ausgebaut und schließlich in den Poetiken durchgeführt. Abbildung 2 zeigt eine vereinfache Version des daraus hervorgegangenen Annotationsschemas, das sich in zwei Teilbereiche gliedern lässt, die teils direkt und teils mit leichten Veränderungen auch auf andere Begriffe übertragen werden können. Das Schema resultiert aus den oben genannten sprach- und literaturwissenschaftlichen Fragen, die sich in die Aspekte der Repräsentation und des Verständnisses bzw. der Anwendung des Metaphernbegriffs in den Poetiken aufteilen lassen.
         
            
            
               Abb. 2: Vereinfachte Darstellung des Annotationsschemas zur
            Metapher: Erkennbar ist der begriffsunspezifische (oben, orange) und -spezifische
            Bereich (unten, blau). Während sich der Teil des Schemas, der die Repräsentation des
            Begriffs im Text abbildet, sofort auf andere Begriffe anwenden lässt, ist der Teil,
            der sich dem Begriffsverständnis und der -anwendung widmet, begriffsspezifisch. D.
            h. die hier zu annotierenden Kategorien lassen sich nicht für andere Begriffe
            verwenden, aber leicht durch passende für den jeweiligen Begriff ersetzen.
         
         Das Annotationsschema stellt eine Systematisierung des Begriffs, d. h. seines Vorkommens und Verständnisses in den Poetiken dar. Die für den Begriff relevanten Textstellen werden zunächst dahingehend klassifiziert, ob es sich um Poetikentext handelt (also Text vom Autor der Poetik selbst), oder ob andere theoretische oder literarische Texte zitiert, paraphrasiert oder genannt werden. Neben den Verweisungsformen annotieren wir hierbei auch die Quellenangaben – beides im Übrigen nicht nur, wenn es explizit angegeben ist. So berücksichtigen wir auch die Möglichkeit von „versteckten“ Zitaten oder solchen, bei denen die Quelle nicht oder unvollständig benannt ist. Das Auffinden bestimmter Muster sowie zum Beispiel Titel und Personennamen oder Zitate wird dabei unterstützt durch computerlinguistische Methoden und Verfahren der interaktiven Visualisierung. Darüber hinaus systematisieren wir das vorliegende Begriffsverständnis, d. h. ob die Metapher z. B. als Übertragung erklärt wird, und grenzen sie von anderen Begriffen ab, z. B. im Unterschied zum Vergleich. Zusätzlich lassen sich auch Beobachtungen zu konkreten hermeneutischen Hypothesen annotieren, z. B. ob anhand des Metapherngebrauchs zwischen poetischer und prosaischer Sprache unterschieden wird. 
         Schon durch die Annotation von implizitem Wissen entsteht somit bereits bei den manuellen Annotationen eine Metaebene an Informationen, mit der der digitalisierte Poetikentext angereichert wird. Die Systematisierung erfordert eine andere Herangehensweise an den Gegenstand, als es bei einer rein hermeneutischen Analyse der Fall wäre. Ebenso führt diese zwangsläufig zur Problematisierung der Systematisierungs(un)möglichkeit eines per se komplexen, weil heterogenen Untersuchungsgegenstandes. Das Ziel der algorithmischen Weiterverarbeitung wird zum Paradigma für die systematisch-kategorisierende Ausdifferenzierung von theoretischen Begriffen, wobei diesbzgl. neue Erkenntnisse, aber auch Grenzen aufgezeigt werden können. Die Operationalisierung der Daten führt so bereits zu Erkenntnissen, bevor computertechnologische Auswertungen durchgeführt werden, womit sie sich über den Status bloßer Vorverarbeitung erheben und einen Eigenwert besitzen. 
         Algorithmische Verfahren (Computerlinguistik)
         Mit algorithmischen Verfahren können aus kleinen Mengen annotierter Daten (aus der manuellen und damit zeitaufwendigen Annotation) große Mengen gemacht werden, indem die annotierten Arten von Informationen automatisch auf größere Datenmengen übertragen werden.
         Im Folgenden wird anhand eines Beispiels in Anlehnung an den rechten Teil von
            Abbildung 1 beschrieben, wie die manuelle Annotation, das Training von
            Klassifikationsmodellen und die Analyse der Klassifikationsergebnisse ineinander
            greifen. Zur Klassifizierung von Text zwischen Anführungszeichen als eine der drei
            Klassen ‚Hervorhebung‘ (Wörter deren Bedeutung hervorgehoben wird), ‚Titel‘
            (Werktitel) und ‚Zitat‘ (Zitate aus anderen Werken) wurde manuell ein Korpus
            annotiert, in dem jeder Text zwischen Anführungszeichen einer dieser drei Klassen
            zugewiesen wurde (Manuelles Annotieren von Konzepten). Auf der Basis dieses Korpus
            wurden Klassifikationsmodelle zur automatischen Erkennung dieser drei Klassen
            trainiert (Modell trainieren / entwickeln). Die automatischen Modelle wiederum
            wurden benutzt, um in anderen Poetiken Text in Anführungszeichen automatisch in
            diese drei Klassen einzuteilen. Es wurde durch Stichproben und formale Evaluation
            auf einem für diesen Zweck annotierten separaten Korpus erkannt, dass die
            Klassifikation gut funktioniert (Evaluierung). Da so unter anderem direkte Zitate
            und Werktitel automatisch erkannt werden, ermöglicht dieser Schritt wiederum die
            automatische Verlinkung von Werktiteln und Zitaten mit ihren Einträgen (sofern
            vorhanden) im TextGridRepository-Korpus (Evaluierung). Durch diese Information kann
            vom Analysten manuell die Verteilung von Werken und Zitaten in den Poetiken
            untersucht und bedeutende Werke / Zitate erkannt werden. Diese Erkenntnisse können
            dann wiederum als Metadaten im Dokument annotiert werden (Manuelles Annotieren von
            Konzepten und Metadaten).
         Interaktive Visualisierung
         Interaktive Visualisierung spielt eine wesentliche Rolle in der Vorgehensweise von
              ePoetics, siehe Abbildung 1, da sie eine zusätzliche Interaktion zwischen Forschern
              und den Untersuchungsgegenständen ermöglicht. Zum einen können interaktive Systeme
              die hermeneutischen Vorgehensweise unterstützen, indem sie den
              Geisteswissenschaftlern die Möglichkeiten bieten, Annotationsschemata und
              -guidelines zu entwerfen, Konzepte und Metadaten in Texten manuell zu annotieren
              sowie diese Ergebnisse zu analysieren und darzustellen. Zum anderen kann die
              computerlinguistische Vorgehensweise unterstützt werden, so dass Forscher Einfluss
              auf komplexe Prozesse nehmen können wie beispielsweise dem Trainieren maschineller
              Lernmethoden durch visuelle Veränderungsparameter. Durch diese Art der Interaktion
              kann unterstützt werden, dass Modelle mit Hilfe des Experten entwickelt, angepasst,
              trainiert sowie die Ergebnisse evaluiert werden können. Um diese Herausforderungen
              umzusetzen, wurden zwei interaktive visuelle Analysewerkzeuge konzipiert und
              entwickelt. Der VarifocalReader (Ertl et al. 2014), der auf einem hierarchischen
              Navigationskonzept basiert (Wörner / Ertl 2013), ermöglicht den Anwendern einen
              direkten Zugang zu Details und Dokumentquellen, während sie auf unterschiedlichen
              Abstraktionsebenen mit Zusammenfassungen vorhandener Annotationen interagieren
              können. Des Weiteren bietet das System die Möglichkeit, computerlinguistische
              Modelle anzupassen bzw. zu trainieren sowie Metadaten zu analysieren, zu annotieren
              und zu korrigieren. Eine beispielhafte Analyse ist in Abbildung 3 dargestellt, in
              der der Forscher einen schnellen Überblick und Zugang zur ausgewählten Annotation
              „Wallenstein“ (in der 3. Word Cloud sichtbar) erhält.
         
            
            
               Abb. 3: Emil Staigers “Grundbegriffe der Poetik” unterteilt (von
                links nach rechts) in unterschiedliche Ebenen. Kapitel (mit Word Clouds),
                Unterkapitel (mit Balkendiagrammen und Piktogrammen), Seiten (mit Piktogrammen),
                Textzeilen und gescannte Digitalisate der aktuellen Seite.
         
         Der zweite Ansatz (Heimerl et al. 2014) wurde konzipiert, um eine textvergleichende
                Analyse zu ermöglichen (siehe Abbildung 4). Die Visualisierung bietet einen
                Vergleich von mehreren Dokumenten auf einer abstrakten Ebene in Bezug auf die
                Verteilung der Annotationen, während die Textfelder eine flexible Navigation durch
                die einzelnen Texte ermöglichen. Zusätzlich unterstützt dieser focus+context Ansatz
                einen reibungslosen Übergang zwischen close und distant reading.
         
            
            
               Abb. 4: In dieser Abbildung sind drei ausgewählte Texte
                  nebeneinander dargestellt. Jedes dieser Dokumente verfügt über Seitenangabenskala
                  (linke Seite) und jeweils zwei Bänder, die zum einen Annotation darstellen (grüne
                  Balken) und zu anderen Suchergebnisse (orangene Balken). Der Analyst kann durch die
                  einzelnen Dokumente navigieren (Textboxscrollleiste) und per Mausklick zwischen den
                  einzelnen Annotationen (Balken) springen.
         
         Conclusion
         Ergebnis des Projekts ePoetics ist ein digitalisiertes und annotiertes Korpus
                  poetologischer Texte (TEI-konform und nachnutzbar), in denen zentrale Konzepte der
                  Sprach- und Literaturtheorie durch XML-Auszeichnung explizit gemacht und
                  systematisiert werden. Durch Korpus-übergreifende Analysen dieser Auszeichnungen
                  können Gemeinsamkeiten und Unterschiede sowie diachrone Entwicklungen gezeigt
                  werden. Darüber hinaus werden die Referenz- und Diskursstrukturen erschlossen (auch
                  implizite, „versteckte“ Verweisungen), die auf verschiedenen Ebenen der Texte
                  bestehen – einerseits Verweisungen auf andere Poetiken sowie die Identifikation
                  bestimmter Denkschulen bzw. Theorielinien, die bis auf Ansätze aus der Antike
                  zurückgehen (z. B. Aristoteles, Quintilian), andererseits die Diskussion von
                  literarischen Beispielen, die Rückschlüsse auf die Entwicklungen des Literaturkanons
                  erlauben. Die manuellen Annotationen werden iterativ gestützt durch automatisierte
                  Methoden und Verfahren der interaktiven Visualisierung. Die dabei entwickelten
                  computerlinguistischen Anwendungen und Visualisierungssysteme (siehe Abbildungen 3
                  und 4) stellen ebenfalls Ergebnisse des Projekts dar.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Ertl, Thomas / Wörner, Michael (2013): “Smoothscroll. A
                        multi-scale, multi-layer slider”, in: Computer Vision,
                        Imaging and Computer Graphics - Theory and Applications 274:
                        142–154. 
               
                  Ertl, Thomas / John, Markus / Koch, Steffen / Wörner,
                            Michael (2014): “VarifocalReader – In-Depth Visual Analysis of
                            Large Text Documents”, in:  IEEE Transactions on
                            Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG) 20, 12: 1723-1732. 
               
                  Ertl, Thomas / Kuhn, Jonas / Richter, Sandra / Alscher,
                                Stefan / Rapp, Andrea (2013-2016): 
                  ePoetics.
                                Universität Stuttgart /www.epoetics.de
                                [letzter Zugriff 03. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Heimerl, Florian / John, Markus / Koch, Steffen / Müller,
                                    Andreas (2014): “A Visual Focus+Context Approach for Text
                                    Comparison Tasks”, in:  VisLR Workshop, LREC 2014. 
               
                  Kuhn, Jonas / Reiter, Nils (2015): “A plea for a
                                      method-driven agenda in the Digital Humanities”, in: 
                                      Proceedings of the Digital Humanities Conference, Sydney, Australia
                                      2015. 
               
                  Ramsay, Stephen (2007): “Algorithmic Criticism”, in:
                                        Schreibman, Susan / Siemens, Ray (eds.): A Companion to
                                        Digital Literary Studies. Malden, MA: Blackwell 477-491. 
               
                  Richter, Sandra (2010): A History of
                                          Poetics. German Scholarly Aesthetics and Poetics in International
                                          Context, 1770-1960. With Bibliographies by Anja Zenk, Jasmin Azazmah, Eva
                                          Jost and Sandra Richter. Berlin / New York: de Gruyter.
            
         
      
   



      
         Die Chronik des Matthias von Edessa ist den meisten Wissenschaftlern des
        mittelalterlichen Nahen Ostens und des ersten Kreuzzuges bekannt für ihren Reichtum
        an Informationen, sowie der (mutmaßlichen) Ignoranz und Naivität ihres Autors.
        Matthias von Edessa war ein Armenischer Priester, der in der Kreuzfahrer-Grafschaft
        Edessa lebte und die Chronik zwischen den Jahren 1110 und 1132 verfasste. Gleichwohl
        der Text oft von Historikern verwendet wird, liegt er bis heute in keiner kritischen
        Edition vor und wurde zuletzt 1898 (Matthias von Edessa 1898) veröffentlicht. Die
        Chronik umfasst 35 (kopierte) Manuskripte, deren ältestes auf mindestens 450 Jahre
        nach dem Tod des Autors datiert werden kann. Diese werden zur Zeit für eine digitale
        Gesamtedition vorbereitet.
         Die Herausforderungen, die sich dabei stellen, beschränken sich nicht nur auf die
          Bearbeitung aus philologischer Sicht, sondern auch auf die Annotation und
          Präsentation als historisches Werk, mit dem Ziel, sie auch als Plattform für
          Historiker zur Verfügung zu stellen (z. B. mit Zeit- und Ortsangaben, etc.). Hierzu
          greifen wir zum Einen auf eine Reihe aktueller Methoden und Werkzeuge der digitalen
          Philologie zurück, wie zum Beispiel die Transkription aller Manuskripte,
          palaeographisches Markup unter der Benutzung des TEI-Vokabulars (TEI Consortium
          2015), automatische Manuskript-Kollation mit CollateX (Dekker et al. 2014),
          stemmatische Analyse mit Hilfe der Werkzeuge von Stemmaweb (Andrews / Macé 2013) und
          der Publikation aller Transkriptionen, sowie einer editorischen Rekonstruktion des
          Textes. Zum Anderen werden auch Textkommentare von der digitalen Plattform
          profitieren, da sie mit weiteren Informationen angereichert werden können. So können
          unter Anderem Ortsnamen nicht nur ausgezeichnet („getagged“) werden, sondern ihre
          mögliche Lokalisierung auch angegeben und soweit möglich geographisch angezeigt
          werden. Personen und ethnographische Bezeichnungen werden nicht nur in einem Index
          erfasst, sie werden, soweit möglich, mit prosopographischen Datenbanken oder
          relevanten Seiten auf Wikipedia verlinkt.
         Das derzeitige Projekt The Chronicle of Matthew of Edessa
            Online wird bis 2018 von dem Schweizer National Fond (SNF) finanziert und
            baut auf verschiedenen Projekten und gesammelten Erfahrungen der vergangenen fünf
            Jahre auf. 
         Ziel ist es, dem Forscher oder der Forscherin ein Werkzeug in die Hand zu geben, das
              es ihm / ihr erlaubt Bewegungen von Individuen und Gruppen über Raum und Zeit zu
              verfolgen, indem wir die Textedition selbst zu einer Plattform für mittelalterliche
              Geschichte machen.
         Im Folgenden werden wir zwei, aus technischer Sicht wesentliche Aspekte des Projektes vorstellen (Speichern und Wiedergabe von Informationen) und erste Ergebnisse präsentieren.
         
            Effizientes Speichern und Bearbeiten von Manuskripten und Annotationen 
            Aufbauend auf den Erkenntnissen, die wir aus dem Stemmaweb-Projekt gewonnen haben, werden die Manuskripte in Form von Graphen gespeichert
                  1. Daher ist für uns der naheliegenste Schritt, die gesamte Arbeit des Benutzers im Graph zu repräsentieren. Als mögliche Darstellungsformen für den Benutzer kommen hierfür Online-Präsentationen oder ein Export, zum Beispiel nach TEI, in Betracht.
                
            Während die Speicherung in Stemmaweb als Perl-Objekte in einer Relationalen-Datenbank
                  (MySQL (Oracle Cooperation 2015)) erfolgt, haben wir uns für dieses Projekt dafür
                  entschieden, Neo4J (Neo Technology Inc 2015), eine Graph-Datenbank zu verwenden. Zum
                  einen kommt dies unserer intern verwendeten Datenstruktur entgegen, die auf einer
                  Modellierung auf Graphen basiert. Damit verbunden hat dies auch den Vorteil, dass
                  viele, für uns wichtige Funktionen (z. B. Depth First Search, Breadth First Search,
                  etc.), nativ vom Datenbanksystem zur Verfügung gestellt werden und speziell
                  benötigte Operationen, wie z. B. Plausibilitätsprüfungen, einfacher implementiert
                  und effizienter ausgeführt werden können. 
            Des Weiteren migrieren wir derzeit große Teile, des aus Stemmaweb vorliegenden
                    Quellcodes, von Perl nach Java. Gleichzeitig überarbeiten wir die API, mit dem Ziel,
                    den Service auch über eine Web-API nutzen zu können. Die Hauptgründe hierfür sind,
                    die bestehende Stemmaweb Backend-Engine zu modernisieren und effizienter zu
                    gestalten. Dieser Schritt soll bis Ende 2015 abgeschlossen sein.
            Parallel zu der Migration, haben wir bereits einen ersten Prototypen des Editions-Interfaces erstellt. Dieser Prototyp basiert bereits auf Neo4J und implementiert ein Textmodel das interoperabel mit Stemmaweb ist und wir zu Testzwecken bereits mit zusätzlichen Annotationen versehen haben.
            In Abbildung 1 ist ein typischer Ausschnitt unserer Neo4J Datenbankstruktur zu sehen. Man erkennt, dass sich eine „TRADITION“ aus ein oder mehreren „SECTION“-Knoten zusammensetzt, die wiederum mittels gerichteter „NEXT“-Kanten miteinander verbunden sind und somit ihre Reihenfolge gewährleistet bleibt
                      2. Jeder „SECTION“-Knoten verweist wiederum auf eine Folge von untereinander mit „LEMMA_TEXT“ verbundenen „READING“-Knoten. Darüber hinaus existieren noch sogenannte „TRANSLATION“-Knoten, die die jeweilige Übersetzung in einer Sequenz aus READING-Knoten speichern. Hierbei bleibt es dem Bearbeiter freigestellt, die Granularität der Übersetzung festzulegen. So sind Einheiten, wie zum Beispiel Sigle-Wörter, Sätze oder ganze Paragraphen, etc. vorstellbar.
                    
            
               
               
                  
                   
                  
                  Abb. 1 : Beispiel für die
                        derzeitige Datenbankstruktur in Neo4J. Gut zu Erkennen ist die Gliederung in
                        Tradition (blau), Sections (orange), Readings (pink) und Translations
                        (rosa). 
            
         
         
            Eine adäquate Wiedergabe der gespeicherten Informationen
            Wie bereits erwähnt, liegt ein weiterer Schwerpunkt des Projektes auf einer angemessenen Wiedergabe der im System vorhandenen Informationen. Aus diesem Grund haben wir, parallel zu den Arbeiten am Backend, bereits damit begonnen, den Prototypen einer Webseite zur Darstellung der Informationen zu implementieren.
            Dieser Prototyp stellt zur Zeit vier Abschnitte (Sections) aus der Chronik bereit,
                        zwischen denen der Benutzer auswählen kann (Abbildung 2). Zu einem ausgewählten
                        Abschnitt werden dessen Transkription, sowie (englische) Übersetzung angezeigt. Eine
                        Karte, in Form einer eingebetteten Google-Map (Google Inc. 2012), zeigt zusätzlich
                        alle im Abschnitt vorkommenden Örtlichkeiten an, sofern sie lokalisierbar sind. In
                        der Transkription werden Textteile, zu denen Zusatzinformationen vorliegen, dem
                        Benutzer farblich kodiert angezeigt (Ortsangaben (blau), Personenangaben (rot) und
                        Zeitangaben (gelb)).
            
               
               
                  
                  Abb. 2 : Screenshot der
                          Webseite. Neben der Transkription (linke Spalte), befinden sich die
                          englische Übersetzung (rechte Spalte), sowie ein Karte mit
                          Positionsmarkierungen der im Text vorkommenden Ortsbeschreibungen. 
            
            Fährt nun der Benutzer mit dem Mauszeiger über einen solchen farblich hervorgehobenen Textteil, werden zu diesem in einem Popup-Fenster weitere Informationen oder Verlinkungen angezeigt. So ist zum Beispiel für Ortsangaben, wie in Abbildung 3 zu sehen, dies üblicherweise der Ortsname, sowie ein vergrößerter Ausschnitt der Karte mit einer Markierung der genauen Position, soweit diese bekannt ist. 
            
               
               
                  Abb. 3: Beispiel für Zusatzinformationen bezüglich
                          Constantinople (Faith).
            
            Bei Personenangaben, siehe Abbildung 4, wird die Übersetzung des Namens, der volle
                          Name und weitere Informationen, sowie Links, die zu Einträgen bezüglich der Person
                          auf externen Seiten verweisen, hier Links zu Wikipedia
                          (Wikimedia Foundation 2015) und Prosopography of the Byzantine
                          World (Jeffreys et al. 2011), in einem Popup-Fenster angezeigt. 
            
            
               
               
                  Abb. 4 : Beispiel für Zusatzinformationen bezüglich
                          Ioannes 1 (John I Tzimiskes).
            
            Darüber hinaus arbeiten wir daran, sowohl individuelle Textzeugen als auch verschiedene Variationen eines Textes anzeigen zu können.
            Hervorzuheben ist, wie oben bereits angedeutet, das die Plattform auch die
                          Möglichkeit bietet, die Edition zu exportieren. Hierzu werden relevante Standards
                          wie zum Beispiel TEI oder CIDOC-CRM (International Council of Museums 2014)
                          angeboten. 
         
         
            Zusammenfassung und Ausblick
            Wir haben einen kurzen Einblick in das Projekt The Chronicle
                            of Matthew of Edessa Online gegeben. Dieses hat als Ziel eine digitale
                            Plattform zur Verfügung zu stellen, welche das Untersuchen und Bearbeiten von
                            Manuskripten aus philologischer, als auch historischer Sichtweise unterstützt.
                            Hierzu haben wir einen Einblick in technische Aspekte und dem derzeitigen Stand der
                            Implementierung gegeben. Zusammendfassend kann man sagen, dass wir schon eine gute
                            Strecke zurückgelegt haben und dass das Projekt noch einige interessante Aufgaben
                            für uns bereit hält 3.
         
      
      
         
            Stemmaweb bietet seinen Benutzern die Möglichkeit mit Text-Kollationen und Varianten zur stemmatischen Analyse zu arbeiten und diese zu modifizieren. Des Weiteren können Texte basierend auf Kollationen und Stemmata rekonstruiert und erstellt werden. Hierfür hat es sich bewährt, Texte in einem Graph abzubilden.
            Dieser Ansatz wurde gewählt, da eine automatische Kollation für längere Texte am besten mit einer Einteilung in diskrete Abschnitte (Sections) gelingt. Desweiteren können wir somit Textzeugen, deren Abschnitte abweichend angeordnet sind, ohne Schwierigkeiten darstellen
            Interessante Aufgaben wären zum Beispiel die Gestaltung der Web-Oberfläche, die Interaktion mit dem Benutzer, Optimierung der Graph-Datenbank, Web-API oder die Bereitstellung verschiedener Exportformate, um nur einige zu nennen.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andrews, Tara L. / Macé, Caroline (2013): „Beyond the
                                  tree of texts: Building an empirical model of scribal variation through
                                  graph analysis of texts and stemmata“, in: Literary and
                                  Linguistic Computing 28, 4: 504-21 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu072 [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                  2016]. 
               
                  Dekker, Ronald Haentjens / Hulle, Dirk van / Middell, Gregor
                                      / Neyt, Vincent / Zundert, Joris van (2014): „Computer-supported
                                      collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript
                                      Project“, in Literary and Linguistic Computing 25:
                                      1-19 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu007 [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar
                                      2016]. 
               
                  Google Inc (2012): Google Maps 
                  http://www.google.com/maps
                                        [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  International Council of Museums (2014): The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model
                  http://www.cidoc-crm.org
                                          [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Jeffreys, Michael (2011): Prosopography of the Byzantine World
                  www.pbw.kcl.ac.uk [letzter
                                            Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Matthias von Edessa (Mattʿēos Uṙhayecʿi) (1898): Die Croniken des Matthias von Edessa
                                              Žamanakagrutʿiwn. Vałaršapat. 
               
                  Neo Technology Inc. (2015): Neo4j
                  http://www.neo4j.com [letzter
                                                Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Oracle Cooperation (2015): MySQL 
                  https://www.mysql.com [letzter
                                                  Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  TEI Consortium (2015): Guidelines for
                                                    Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.8.0 
                  http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/2.8.0/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/
                                                      [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Wikimedia Foundation (2015): Wikipedia
                  http://www.wikipedia.org
                                                        [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Implizite und explizite Semantik TEI-basierter Fachdatenrepositorien
            Zahlreiche geisteswissenschaftliche Fachdatenrepositorien setzen zur Modellierung
          ihrer Forschungsdaten auf die Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) und
          somit auf XML als primäres Datenformat. XML eignet sich sehr gut zur Lösung
          editorisch-philologischer Aufgabenstellungen und entspricht den geforderten
          Kriterien der Interoperabilität und Nachhaltigkeit von Forschungsdaten. Durch
          die standardkonforme Auszeichnung der Forschungsgegenstände in TEI werden diese
          formal und inhaltlich erschlossen. TEI-kodierte Daten beinhalten in jeder
          Hinsicht semantische Bezüge (bspw. Raumbezüge, Personenbezüge, begriffliche und
          konzeptuelle Bezüge etc.). Aus der Perspektive des Semantic
          Web sind diese Bezüge jedoch zunächst nur implizit und nicht explizit
          in den Daten vorhanden (Abbildung 1). Im Gegenzug gründen sich Semantic Web-Technologien auf das Resource
          Description Framework (RDF) zur Formulierung semantischer Aussagen (statements) in Form von Subjekt – Prädikat –
          Objektbeziehungen (triples). Die besondere Stärke von RDF
          liegt in der automatisiert möglichen Vernetzung (interlinking), Zusammenführung (merging) und
          Analyse (reasoning) eigentlich separater Datenbestände.
          RDF ist modellierungstechnisch auf einer höheren Abstraktionsebene anzusiedeln
          als TEI-kodierte XML-Daten (Abbildung 2; vgl. auch Polleres u. a. 2009). 
            
               
               
                  Abb. 1
               
            
            
               
               
                  Abb. 2
               
            
            
            Während die formale Erschließung geisteswissenschaftlicher
            Forschungsgegenstände mittels XML-basierter Annotationsmethoden mittlerweile als
            weit fortgeschritten gelten kann, bleibt die semantische Erschließung häufig
            noch weit zurück. Zwar wird in den Daten oft das Auftreten bestimmter Ortsnamen,
            Personennamen, Werktitel etc. annotiert. Dennoch gehen diese Annotationen meist
            nicht darüber hinaus, anzuzeigen, dass eine bestimmte Entität an einer
            spezifischen Stelle erwähnt ist. Damit bleibt die Semantik der Fachdaten weit
            hinter den Möglichkeiten zurück, die aktuelle Technologien – insbesondere die
            des Semantic Web und des Linked Open
            Data (LOD) – bieten könnten. Der durch LOD mögliche Zugang auf
            vernetzte Forschungsdaten eröffnet neuartige Perspektiven der Nutzung bisher
            isoliert stehender Fachdatenrepositorien. Wesentlich ist dabei, dass LOD und RDF
            bestehende Standards der Digital Humanities (wie bspw.
            TEI / XML) um die Verwendung gemeinsamer Terminologien und Metadatenschemata
            erweitern (vgl. Iglesia et al. 2015). Dadurch wird es möglich, auch Bestände
            verteilter Provenienz und unterschiedlicher Struktur gemeinsam inhaltlich zu
            beschreiben und zu analysieren. 
            Insgesamt existiert momentan also noch eine Kluft: Auf der einen Seite die
              zahlreichen geisteswissenschaftlichen Fachdatenrepositorien mit implizit
              semantischem Potential, auf der anderen Seite die Technologien und Datenmodelle
              des Semantic Web, die neue Sichten und Analysemethoden
              auf die Daten eröffnen könnten. Zwar existieren einige Sprachkonzepte, Methoden
              und Tools zur Übersetzung zwischen TEI / XML und RDF. Diese sind jedoch
              ausnahmslos komplex, teilweise technisch veraltet, verfügen nur über
              prototypische Implementierungen oder sind hochgradig spezialisiert auf einen
              bestimmten Datenbestand. 1 Während die dem Semantic Web zugrunde liegenden Technologien aus informatischer Sicht
              als erschlossen und anwendbar angesehen werden können (vgl. Lanthaler 2014:
              11–35), besteht zum jetzigen Zeitpunkt also ein Bedarf an exemplarischen
              Bearbeitungen repräsentativer Forschungsdatenbestände aus den
              Geisteswissenschaften, um die Tragfähigkeit dieser Technologien auch für die
              geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung zu demonstrieren. 
         
         
            
               Semantische Aussagen aus XML mit Hilfe des
                XTriples-Webservices
              
            An dieser Stelle setzt der 
                  XTriples-Webservice der 
                  Digitalen Akademie
               
                der Mainzer Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur an. Grundgedanke des
                generischen Dienstes ist das Crawling beliebiger XML-Datenbestände und die
                anschließende Generierung semantischer Aussagen aus den XML-Daten auf Basis
                definierter Aussagemuster. Das Prinzip der Explizierung semantischer Aussagen
                aus XML ist dabei nicht sonderlich komplex: Wird die URI einer XML-Ressource
                oder eine Dateneinheit in dieser Ressource als das Subjekt einer semantischen
                Aussage begriffen, können diesem Subjekt über Prädikate aus kontrollierten
                Vokabularen weitere Werte aus den XML-Daten bzw. URIs zu weiteren
                Datenressourcen als Objekte zugeordnet werden. Im Übersetzungsvorgang zwischen
                XML und RDF geht es also vor allem um die Bestimmung semantischer Aussagemuster,
                die sich gesamthaft auf alle Ressourcen eines XML-Datenbestandes anwenden
                lassen. 
            Die Aussagemuster werden in Form einer einfachen, XPATH-basierten Konfiguration
                  an den Dienst übermittelt. Dabei ist es auch möglich, über die Bestände eines
                  spezifischen XML-Repositoriums hinauszugehen und externe Ressourcen oder
                  Dateneinheiten in die Transformation mit einzubeziehen (bspw. aus der GND, der
                  Dbpedia, aus Geonames u. a ). Die technische Realisierung als Webservice hat den
                  Vorteil, dass AnwenderInnen keine weitere Software zur semantischen Übersetzung
                  von Forschungsdaten benötigen. Gleichzeitig kann der Webservice auch als eine
                  Art „externe“ RDF-Schnittstelle (im Sinne eines Proxy) für ein oder mehrere
                  XML-Repositorien eingesetzt werden. Grundvoraussetzung hierfür ist lediglich,
                  dass die jeweiligen Repositorien über HTTP erreichbar sein müssen. 
            
               
               
                  Abb. 3
               
            
            Das Ergebnis einer XTriples-Extraktion steht in einer
                  Vielzahl gängiger RDF-Serialisierungen zur Verfügung (Abbildung 3). Neben rein
                  RDF-basierten Formaten ist es auch möglich, die semantischen Bezüge eines
                  Repositoriums mittels SVG darzustellen oder das Extraktionsergebnis zur weiteren
                  Analyse und Visualisierung an Semantic Web-Tools
                  weiterzureichen. 2
            
         
         
            
               Anwendungsbeispiele
                
            
               XTriples wurde vom Autor im Kontext des Akademievorhabens
                  
                  Deutsche
                    Inschriften Online
                in Verbindung mit dem BMBF-Projekt 
                  Inschriften im Bezugssystem des Raumes
                entwickelt und steht der
                    DH-Community in einer stabilen Version unter Open Source Lizenz (MIT) zur
                    Verfügung. Das zugrunde liegende Softwarepaket ist vollständig dokumentiert und auf GitHub
                    veröffentlicht. 
            Neben den Deutschen Inschriften wird XTriples aktuell auch in den Akademievorhaben 
                  Regesta Imperii
                und
                    Die Schule von Salamanca verwendet. Das Salomon Ludwig Steinheim-Institut
                    für deutsch-jüdische Geschichte nutzt XTriples
                    für eine CIDOC-CRM basierte, semantischen Modellierung von EpiDoc-Daten im
                    Rahmen des BMBF-Projektes Relationen im Raum. Gemeinsam
                    mit der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der
                    Wissenschaften wird gerade eine Schnittstelle zwischen XTriples und 
                  correspSearch
               , dem Webservice der BBAW zur dezentralen
                    Aggregation digitaler Briefeditionen, implementiert. 
            Folgende Beispiele geben einen ersten Überblick über die unterschiedlichen Anwendungsgebiete von
                      XTriples:
                    
            
               Semantische Extraktion und nachfolgende Visualisierung von Familienbeziehungen aus dem
                        Epidat Grabstein Corpus für den jüdischen Friedhof in Hamburg-Altona (Ausgangsdaten EpiDoc/TEI):
                        
                  http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/examples/dh/epidat/index.html
               
               Semantische Extraktion und SVG-Visualisierung eines Briefnetzwerks (Teilbestand der Korrespondenz Goethes aus den in
                        correspSearch aggregierten CMI-Daten bei gleichzeitiger
                        on-the-fly Einbeziehung der RDF-Schnittstellen von
                        GND und
                        Geonames):
                        
                  http://bit.ly/1LKK1dv
               
               Beispielhafte semantische Extraktion und Visualisierung europäischer
                        Kommunikationsnetzwerke auf Basis der correspSearch
                        TEI / CMI-Daten: 
                  http://metacontext.github.io/presentation-correspsearch-xtriples/viz/map.html
               
            
            Weitere Beispiele zu den einzelnen Funktionalitäten finden sich auf der
                        XTriples-Website unter
                        http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/examples.html. Einen schnellen Überblick über die Funktionsweise des Dienstes gibt folgende Präsentation:
                        http://metacontext.github.io/presentation-correspsearch-xtriples.
                      
            Ziel des Vortrags ist eine Veranschaulichung der Methoden und Potentiale, die sich aus der semantischen Extraktion, Modellierung, Vernetzung und Visualisierung XML-basierter, geisteswissenschaftlicher Fachdaten ergeben. Neben einer Darstellung der technischen Hintergründe des
                        XTriples-Webservices werden auch Fragen der semantischen Modellierung geisteswissenschaftlicher Fachdaten mittels bestimmter Ontologien (bspw. FOAF, CIDOC-CRM u.a.) in den Blick genommen. Weiterhin werden auch beispielhafte Analyse- und Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten für semantisch modellierte geisteswissenschaftliche Fachdaten vorgestellt.
                      
         
      
      
         
            Projekte wie
                        bspw. SPQR oder
                        das Textual Encoding
                        Framework sind veraltet oder technisch nicht generalisiert. Einen
                        interessanten Ansatz bietet die XSPARQL Language Specification des DERI, die 2009 in Form einer
                        W3C Member Submission niedergelegt wurde. Hier fehlen jedoch praktische
                        Implementierungen. Die Benutzung von RDFa innerhalb von XML-Daten stellt
                        eine weitere Möglichkeit dar, doch verfolgen die wenigsten
                        geisteswissenschaftlichen Fachdatenrepositorien eine so ausgerichtete
                        semantische Markup-Strategie. Auch das bereits 2007 in Form einer W3C
                        Recommendation grundgelegte GRDDL-Framework (Gleaning Resource Descriptions from Dialects of
                        Languages) ist bis heute eine theoretische Spezifikation geblieben. Der OxGarage Transformations-Webservice der 
                  Text Encoding
                        Initiative
                bietet zwar eine Routine für die Konvertierung
                        von TEI kodierten Daten nach RDF an, legt sich für die Transformation aber
                        auf das CIDOC-CRM als Ontologie fest. Mit OxGarage
                        können out-of-the-box also keine anderen Ontologien
                        für eine semantische Modellierung benutzt werden. Zudem ist der Webservice
                        nicht darauf ausgelegt, auch weitere, externe Datenrepositorien in eine
                        Transformation mit einzubeziehen oder andere RDF-Serialisierungen jenseits
                        von RDF/XML zurückzugeben.
                      
             Beispielsweise an den
                        RDF zu SVG Transformations-Webservice oder an die RDF
                        Visualisierungsbibliothek d3sparql.
                      
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz
                        (o. J.a): Digitale Akademie
                  http://www.digitale-akademie.de [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar
                          2016].
               
                  Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz
                          (o. J.b): Regesta Imperii
                  http://www.regesta-imperii.de/startseite.html [letzter Zugriff
                            16. Februar 2016].
               
                  BBAW (o. J.): Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften
                  http://www.bbaw.de/ [letzter Zugriff
                            16. Februar 2016].
               
                  correspSearch (o. J.): correspSearch. Search diverse letter editions http://correspsearch.bbaw.de/index.xql [letzter Zugriff 16.
                            Februar 2016].
               
                  Deutsche Inschriften Online (o. J.): http://www.inschriften.net
                            [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Haft, Michael (2013): "RDF als Verknüpfungsmethode
                              zwischen geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschungsdaten und Geometrien am
                              Beispiel des Projektes 'Inschriften im Bezugssystem des Raumes'",in: Skriptum 2,3 http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0289-2013120622 [letzter
                              Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  i3Mainz / Akademie Mainz (o. J.): Inschriften im Bezugssystem des Raumes
                  http://www.spatialhumanities.de/ibr/startseite.html [letzter
                                Zugriff 16. Februar 2016].
               
                  IBR (Inscriptions in their spatial context) / Academy of
                                  Sciences and Literature, Mainz / Institute for Spatial Information and
                                  Surveying Technology i3Mainz (o. J.): XTriples
                  http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/index.html [letzter Zugriff
                                    16. Februar 2016].
               
                  Iglesia, Martin de la / Moretto, Nicolas / Brodhun,
                                        Maximilian  (2015): "Metadaten, LOD und der Mehrwert
                                        standardisierter und vernetzter Daten." In: Neuroth, Heike / Rapp, Andrea /
                                        Söring, Sibylle (eds.): TextGrid: Von der Community – für
                                        die Community. Eine Virtuelle Forschungsumgebung für die
                                        Geisteswissenschaften. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen 91–102 http://dx.doi.org/10.3249/webdoc-3947 [letzter Zugriff 14.
                                        Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Lange, Felix, Martin Unold (2015): Semantisch
                                          angereicherte 3D-Messdaten von Kirchenräumen als Quellen für die
                                          geschichtswissenschaftliche Forschung, in: Zeitschrift für
                                          digitale Geisteswissenschaften 1 http://dx.doi.org/10.17175/sb001_015 [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober
                                          2015]. 
               
                  
                  Lanthaler, Markus (2014): Third
                                            Generation Web APIs. Bridging the Gap between REST and Linked Data.
                                            Diss. Institute of Information Systems and Computer Media. Technische
                                            Universität Graz http://www.markus-lanthaler.com/research/third-generation-web-apis-bridging-the-gap-between-rest-and-linked-data.pdf
                                            [letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Polleres, Axel u.a. (2009): XSPARQL
                                              Language Specification
                  http://www.w3.org/Submission/xsparql-language-specification
                                                letzter Zugriff 14. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Salomon Ludwig Steinheim-Institut für deutsch-jüdische
                                                  Geschichte (o. J.): http://www.steinheim-institut.de [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar
                                                  2016].
               
                  Schrade, Torsten  (2013): "Datenstrukturierung", in:
                                                    Über die Praxis des kulturwissenschaftlichen
                                                      Arbeitens. Ein Handwörterbuch. Bielefeld: transcript 91–97. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Der Beitrag möchte zeigen, wie die Berücksichtigung detaillierter,
          gattungsbezogener Metadaten auf produktive Weise mit dem Verfahren des Topic
          Modeling verbunden werden kann, um bisher nicht bekannte thematische Strukturen
          im Textverlauf in einer Sammlung spanischer und hispanoamerikanischer Romane zu
          entdecken. Ausgangshypothese ist, dass die Wichtigkeit bestimmter Topics nicht
          nur im Textverlauf variiert, sondern dies auch in verschiedenen Untergattungen
          auf unterschiedliche Weise tut. Eine Pilotstudie wurde im März 2015 beim
          Workshop zu Computational Narratology bei der DHd-Tagung in Graz vorgestellt. Im
          Rahmen der interdisziplinären Würzburger eHumanities-Nachwuchsgruppe
          "Computergestützte literarische Gattungsstilistik (CLiGS)
          wurde dieser Fragestellung nun mit weiter entwickelten Methodik sowie einer neu
          erstellten Sammlung spanischsprachiger Romane aus Spanien und Hispanoamerika
          nachgegangen. 
         
         
            Stand der Forschung und Fragestellung
            Die Frage nach dem Text- oder Handlungsverlauf in narrativen literarischen Texten hat jüngst zunehmende Aufmerksamkeit in der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft erhalten. Matthew Jockers kam durch Sentiment Analysis im Verlauf zahlreicher Romane zu dem (kontrovers diskutierten) Ergebnis, es gäbe sechs oder sieben grundlegende Plotstrukturen (Jockers 2015). Ben Schmidt hat unter anderem den Verlauf von Topic-Wahrscheinlichkeiten in der "screen time" amerikanischer Fernsehserien verfolgt (Schmidt 2014). Der vorliegende Beitrag verbindet die Frage nach dem Textverlauf mit der nach den Untergattungen, seine zentrale Fragestellung lautet: Können wir nach Untergattung unterschiedliche Verlaufsmuster für bestimmte Topics über den Textverlauf hinweg feststellen?
         
         
            Daten
            Die Textsammlung enthält 150 spanische und hispanoamerikanische Romantexte aus
            der Zeit von 1880 bis 1930 (für den spanischen Roman: Altisent 2008; de Nora
            1963, für den hispanoamerikanischen Roman: Gallo 1981; Williams 2009). Die Texte
            sind in TEI aufbereitet und mit detaillierten Metadaten versehen worden. Es
            wurden vier weit gefasste Untergattungen gewählt, um die Romane miteinander
            vergleichen zu können: novela sentimental, novela histórica, novela
            político-social und novela de tendencia
            subjetiva. Die Auswahl der Texte ist auch von der Verfügbarkeit als
            digitaler Volltext beeinflusst und daher nicht unbedingt repräsentativ.
            Abbildung 1 zeigt die Verteilung der Romane nach ausgewählten Metadaten. 
            
               
               
                  Abb. 1: Verteilung der Romane nach Metadaten 
            
         
         
            Methode
            Topic Modeling ist eine unüberwachte, nicht-deterministische Methode aus dem
              Bereich des Natural Language Processing, die auf Annahmen
              aus der distributionellen Semantik basiert und verborgene semantische Strukturen
              in großen Textsammlungen aufdeckt (einführend Blei 2011, grundlegend Blei 2003).
              Gruppen semantisch verwandter Wörter werden insbesondere aufgrund ihres häufigen
              gemeinsamen Auftretens in den untersuchten Dokumenten entdeckt. Ein Topic ist
              eine Wahrscheinlichkeitsverteilung von Wörtern; ein Dokument wird als
              Wahrscheinlichkeitsverteilung von Topics beschrieben. Topic Modeling ist eine in
              den DH äußerst beliebte Methode (Anwendungsbeispiele: Blevins 2010; Rhody 2012;
              Jockers 2013; Schöch 2015). 
            Hier wurde Topic Modeling als Teil eines umfassenden, weitgehend automatischen Arbeitsablaufes als Serie von Python-Skripten implementiert: Präprozessieren der Texte (Segmentierung, Binning, Lemmatisierung, POS-Tagging), das eigentliche Topic Modeling (mit Mallet, siehe McCallum 2002), Aufbereitung des Mallet-Outputs, zahlreiche Visualisierungen als Perspektiven auf die Ergebnisse. Die wichtigsten Parameter: Berücksichtigung ausschließlich der Substantive, Weglassung der 70 häufigsten Substantive, Romansegmente von ca. 600 Wörtern (unter Berücksichtigung von Absatzgrenzen), Anzahl von 70 Topics. Die Python-Skripte sind frei verfügbar und ausführlich dokumentiert, Begleitmaterialien (Skripte, Parameterdatei, Metadaten, Abbildungen) sind unter
                https://github.com/cligs/projects/tree/master/2016/dhd einsehbar.
              
         
         
            Ergebnisse und Diskussion
            Es werden zunächst die Topics selbst dargestellt, dann Unterschiede in den Topic-Verteilungen nach Untergattungen, über den Textverlauf hinweg und schließlich über den Textverlauf in Abhängigkeit der Untergattung.
            
               Topics
               Die Mehrheit der erhobenen Topics beinhaltet konkrete typische Themen und
                  Motive des spanischsprachigen Romans der Epoche. Man erkennt eine klare
                  semantische Beziehung der Wörter: ein konkreter Bereich menschlicher
                  Tätigkeiten, wie in Topic 19 (maestro-colegi o-escuela, dt.
                  "Lehrer-Schule-Schule") oder Topic 23 (sangre-golpe-arma, dt.
                  "Blut-Schlag-Waffe"); oder abstrakte Begriffe und Gefühle, wie bei Topic 69
                  (conciencia-honor-crimen, dt. "Gewissen-Ehre-Verbrechen"). Weniger kohärent
                  ist Topic 45 (marido-rato-chico, dt. "Ehegatte-Weile-Junge"). Die folgenden
                  Wordclouds (Abbildung 2) veranschaulichen die erwähnten Topics.
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 2: Wordclouds für ausgewählte Topics.
               
            
            
               Untergattungen und Topics
               Die folgende Heatmap (Abbildung 3) zeigt die Verteilung der
                    durchschnittlichen Topic-Wahrscheinlichkeiten in den vier Untergattungen für
                    diejenigen 20 Topics, deren Werte zwischen den Untergattungen besonders
                    stark schwanken (nach Standardabweichung). Besonders distinktive Topics
                    existieren für die novela de tendencia subjetiva
                    (Topic 11: mirada-huerto-silencio, dt. "Blick-Garten-Stille") und die novela sentimental (Topic 45). Wenig überraschend
                    auch, dass die novela histórica als distinktiven
                    Topic unter anderem Topic 57 hat (rey-caballero-príncipe, dt.
                    "König-Ritter-Prinz"). Für die novela
                    histórico-social, für die aufgrund der großen Zahl von Beispielen
                    eine größere Bandbreite an Topic-Verteilungen zu erwarten ist, gibt es
                    keinen vergleichbar stark distinktiven Topic. Dennoch sind die
                    Untergattungen ein wichtiger Faktor für die Verteilung der Topics in der
                    Sammlung und die thematische Komponente spielt für die Definition der
                    Untergattungen tatsächlich eine wesentliche Rolle. 
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 3: Verteilung von Topic-Scores nach Untergattungen.
               
            
            
               Topics im Textverlauf
               Die Ausprägung der Topics variiert nicht nur hinsichtlich der Untergattungen,
                      sondern auch über den Textverlauf hinweg. So gibt es einige Topics, deren
                      Vorkommen am Anfang der Romane besonders wahrscheinlich ist (Abbildung 4a).
                      Dazu zählen Topic 10 (vino-plato-pan, dt. "Wein-Teller-Brot"), Topic 17
                      (sombrero-ropa-bota, dt. "Hut-Kleidung-Stiefel") und Topic 19, welche auf
                      die Beschreibung von Ambiente, Situation und Personen hindeuten. Gegen Ende
                      der Romane sind andere Topics wahrscheinlicher (Abbildung 4b), z. B. Topic 2
                      (pecado-caridad-conciencia, dt. "Sünde-Wohltätigkeit-Gewissen"), Topic 23
                      und Topic 69, also abstraktere Themen oder solche, die sich auf
                      Wertvorstellungen beziehen. Dies deutet darauf hin, dass in den Romanen am
                      Ende Bilanz gezogen wird, die Handlung einen drastischen Ausgang nimmt oder
                      das im Textverlauf Behandelte in gesellschaftliche oder religiöse Diskurse
                      eingebunden wird.
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 4a: Verteilung von Topics im Textverlauf (fallend).
               
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 4b: Verteilung von Topics im Textverlauf (steigend).
               
            
            
               Textverlauf abhängig von den Untergattungen
               Für einige der genannten Topics, die in bestimmten Bereichen des Textverlaufs
                        wahrscheinlicher sind, kann die Tendenz über alle Untergattungen hinweg
                        bestätigt werden (bspw. bei Topic 10 und 17, siehe oben). Es gibt aber auch
                        Themen, bei denen sich durch die Betrachtung des Verlaufs in den einzelnen
                        Untergattungen ein differenzierteres Bild ergibt. Die Wahrscheinlichkeit von
                        Topic 23 beispielsweise nimmt nur für die novela
                        político-social zum Ende hin zu (Abbidung 5a): 
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 5a: Topic 23 nach Textverlauf und Untergattung.
               
               Das kann so interpretiert werden, dass die novela
                          político-social im Gegensatz zu den anderen Untergattungen dazu
                          tendiert, am Ende des Textes mit einer gewalttätigen Szene und einem Umbruch
                          zu schließen. Topic 19 ist nicht in allen Untergattungen zu Beginn des
                          Textverlaufes stark ausgeprägt, sondern nur bei der novela
                          de tendencia subjetiva. Dies erklärt sich, weil bei diesen Romanen
                          das Schulthema als Teil einer autofiktionalen Erzählung zu Beginn erscheint
                          (Abbildung 5b): 
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 5b: Topic 19 nach Textverlauf und Untergattung 
               
               Allgemein gilt, dass die Untergattungen sich in ihrer Topicverteilung im Textverlauf auch dann deutlich unterscheiden können, wenn dies für alle Untergattungen zusammengenommen nicht der Fall ist und so leicht übersehen werden könnte.
               Für die Berechnung wurden die Romansegmente von 600 Wörtern bezüglich des Textverlaufs auf 15 Romanabschnitte (Bins) verteilt, um die unterschiedliche Romanlänge zu berücksichtigen. Diese Bins wurden hinsichtlich der Untergattung gruppiert und jeweils das arithmetische Mittel bestimmt. Die in den Plots eingezeichneten Kurven entsprechen der linearen Interpolation dieser gemittelten Werte. Zusätzlich wurde der Standardfehler vertikal um den jeweiligen Kurvenpunkt eingezeichnet, der deutlich macht, wie sehr die jeweiligen dem Mittelwert zugrunde liegenden Werte streuen, also wie gut der Mittelwert die Gesamtheit der Segmentwerte repräsentiert.
            
         
         
            Die Ergebnisse im literaturgeschichtlichen Kontext
            Insgesamt zeigen sich verschiedene Zusammenhänge: Zwischen bestimmten Topics und einzelnen Roman-Untergattungen, zwischen Topics und dem Textverlauf, und dies zum Teil dann auch wieder in Abhängigkeit von den Untergattungen. Aus literaturgeschichtlicher Perspektive betrachtet erweisen sich die in die Untersuchung einbezogenen Metadaten für eine Einordnung der Topic-Resultate als nützlich. Topics sind für die Romangattungen im vorliegenden Korpus ein wichtiger Faktor, ähnlich wie dies für Gattungen wie die klassische Komödie und Tragödie bereits gezeigt werden konnte (Schöch 2015).
            Ein detaillierterer Blick zeigt beispielsweise Folgendes: Topic 11, welches typisch für die
                          novela de tendencia subjetiva ist, ist vor allem in den 1910er- und 1920er-Jahren wichtig sowie für bestimmte Autoren. Interessanterweise ist dieses bei spanischen und hispanoamerikanischen Modernisten vorkommende Thema auch bei der früher wirkenden Schriftstellerin Juana Manuela Gorriti schon wichtig, die offenbar thematische Präferenzen späterer Autoren vorweggenommen hat. Außerdem kommt Topic 11 bei Larreta in einem (modernistischen) historischen Roman vor, obwohl es ansonsten vor allem für die Romane subjektiver Tendenz typisch ist. Es ist anzunehmen, dass für dieses spezielle Thema eher die literarische Strömung bestimmend ist als die Untergattung. Der Topic enthält einige für die modernistische Strömung typische Wörter, etwa zu Sinneseindrücken (azul, dt. "blau", olor, dt. "Geruch") und Zurückgezogenheit (huerto, silencio, campo, soledad, dt. "Garten, Ruhe, Land, Einsamkeit").
                        
         
         
            Fazit und Ausblick
            Die Nutzung von Topic Modeling als Methode kann für die digitale Literaturwissenschaft verbessert werden, wenn spezifisch literaturwissenschaftliche Metadaten in die Betrachtungen einbezogen werden und die Textstruktur - hier als Sequenz von Textverlaufseinheiten - berücksichtigt wird. Verschiedene Visualisierungsstrategien erweisen sich als entscheidende "Interfaces" zu den Daten (im Sinne von Doueihi 2012), die Muster sichtbar machen und den Blick lenken. Die Ergebnisse des Topic Modelings können differenzierter und aus verschiedenen Perspektiven betrachtet und mit literaturhistorischem Wissen in Verbindung gebracht werden. Die Ergebnisse ergänzen und erweitern etablierte hermeneutische Lektürestrategien, insofern sie einen synthetisierenden Blick auf sehr umfangreiche Textsammlungen erlauben.
            Nächste Schritte betreffen insbesondere die weitere Auseinandersetzung mit der
                          Signifikanz von Unterschieden in den Topic-Wahrscheinlichkeiten im Textverlauf,
                          deren Berechnung u. a. durch die mangelnde Normalverteilung der Werte nicht
                          trivial ist. Zusätzlich zu den Untergattungen sollen auch Kategorien wie das
                          Setting modelliert werden. Zudem sollen die Textverlaufs-Daten für die
                          automatische Klassifikation von Romanen nach Untergattungen genutzt werden.
                          Schließlich wird bereits an der Erweiterung der Textsammlung gearbeitet,
                          insbesondere mit Blick auf den Umfang und ein ausgeglicheneres Verhältnis der
                          Untergattungen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliography
               
                  Altisent, Marta E. (2008): A
                            Companion to the Twentieth-Century Spanish Novel. Woodbridge:
                            Tamesis. 
               
                  Blei, David M. (2011): “Introduction to Probabilistic
                            Topic Models,” in:  Communication of the ACM. 
               
                  Blei, David M. / Ng, Andrew Y. / Jordan, Michael I.
                            (2003): “Latent Dirichlet Allocation,” in:  Journal of
                            Machine Learning Research 3: 993–1022. 
               
                  Blevins, Cameron (2010): “Topic Modeling Martha
                              Ballard’s Diary,” in:  Historying
                  http://historying.org/2010/04/01/topic-modeling-martha-ballards-diary/
                                [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Doueihi, Milad (2012):  Pour un
                                humanisme numérique (2011). Paris: Seuil. 
               
                  Gallo, Marta (1981):  La Novela
                                Hispanoamericana En El Siglo XIX. Madrid: La Muralla. 
               
                  García de Nora, Eugenio (1963):  La
                                Novela Española Contemporánea. Madrid: Gredos. 
               
                  Jockers, Matthew L. (2013):  Macroanalysis - Digital Methods and Literary History. Champaign,
                                IL: University of Illinois Press. 
               
                  Jockers, Matthew L. (2015): “Revealing Sentiment and
                                Plot Arcs with the Syuzhet Package” in:  Matthew. L.
                                Jockers
                  http://www.matthewjockers.net/2015/02/02/syuzhet/ [letzter
                                  Zugriff 09. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  McCallum, Andrew K. (2002): MALLET:
                                  A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit
                  http://mallet.cs.umass.edu
                                  [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Nachwuchsgruppe CLiGS (o.J.): Computergestützte literarische Gattungsstilistik
                  http://cligs.hypotheses.org/ [letzter Zugriff 16. Februar
                                    2016].
               
                  Rhody, Lisa M. (2012): “Topic Modeling and Figurative
                                    Language,” in:  Journal of Digital Humanities 2  http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-and-figurative-language-by-lisa-m-rhody
                                    [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Schmidt, Benjamin M. (2014): “Typical TV Episodes:
                                    Visualizing Topics in Screen Time,” in:  Sapping
                                    Attention
                  http://sappingattention.blogspot.de/2014/12/typical-tv-episodes-visualizing-topics.html
                                      [letzter Zugriff 09. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Schöch, Christof (2015): “Topic Modeling Genre: An
                                      Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama [submitted]”, in: 
                                      Digital Humanities Quarterly. 
               
                  Williams, Raymond L. (2009):  The
                                      Twentieth-Century Spanish American Novel. Austin, Texas: University
                                      of Texas Press. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Introduction
            This paper introduces into the transformation process of the Dagaare – Cantonese
          – English dictionary into an open, online research infrastructure in the
          framework of European research infrastructures and – in doing so – open those
          for Non-European researchers, research data as well as topics.
            The trilingual dictionary is designed for use in lexicographical and linguistic
            field methods training. It serves as a database to illustrate many linguistic
            principles and phenomena in phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics. First
            and foremost it is intended as a reference source for Chinese and English
            speaking students. Dagaare is a language spoken in Ghana and Burkina Faso
            by about two million people. It belongs to the Gur branch of the Niger-Congo
            family. In spite of the fact that Dagaare is genetically unrelated to Chinese,
            there are some interesting typological features under which the two languages
            can be compared. To illustrate, both Dagaare and Chinese are tone languages,
            unfortunately lacking audio files in the printed dictionary version. But while
            Chinese has a complex system of four to nine tonemes, Dagaare - like most West
            African languages - has a two-tone system. The first part of the dictionary
            includes information of the orthography and sound system of Dagaare followed by
            an explanation of the verbal and nominal morphology of this language. Part two
            is the proper dictionary which comprises more than thousand head words and a
            total of 3,000 to 4,000 words. Subsequent to the lexicon are represented sample
            field work projects that are intended to aid both the field trainer and trainee.
            They cover the areas of phonology, morphosyntax, lexical semantics ans
            sociolinguistics. 
            The valuable lexicographical data mentioned before were meant to be made
              sustainable available on the internet. To this end, they had to be transferred
              into an existing infrastructure, the research infrastructure for lexicography
              available at the Austrian Centre of Digital Humanities (ACDH) of the Austrian
              Academy of Sciences. The Academy has a long-standing tradition in eLexicography
              to which several departments contributed over more than hundreds of years. Most
              recently, the ACDH hosts a research group on eLexicography, the lexicography
              laboratory (1.1.2015-), to support, coordinate and methodically explore
              experimental scholarship in the fields of lexicography. The emerging
              infrastructure is made up of several components: (1) an editor, (2) a formalised
              encoding framework, (3) a depositing back end and (4) a publishing system, all
              of which have been integrated into one system. An important keyword in this
              endeavour has been modularisation, the system not being one single piece of
              software but a number of complementary components that interlock neatly through
              clearly defined interfaces. 
         
         
            Workflow
            The work of integrating the lexicographical data into the infrastructure was
                performed by the eLexciography working group of the ACDH. The workflow is a five
                step procedure: (1) analysing and discussing the research focus and data
                structure (2) converting the data from a simple table into a
                standards-based XML format (TEI P5)(3) importing it into
                the database (4) manual post processing (5) and publication on the
                internet. At the end of the process the data will be available in a
                persistent manner. 
         
         
            Editor
            The Viennese Lexicographical Editor (VLE) is a fairly new piece
                of software that first came into existence as a by-product of an entirely
                different development activity: the creation of an interactive online learning
                system for university students. Thus, it was first used in a collaborative
                glossary editing project carried out as part of university language courses at
                the University of Vienna. As the tool proved to be flexible and adaptable
                enough, it was also used and further developed in a number of other projects
                collecting lexical data. 
            The interface is built around an XML editor that allows to process standard-based
                  lexicographic and terminological data. Basically any XML-based formats such as
                  LMF, TBX, RDF or TEI can be handled. The program provides a number of useful
                  functions to automate editing procedures. It can check the structural integrity
                  (well-formedness) of input on the fly. Technologically, it draws not only on the
                  XML core specification but also on several cognate technologies. XSLT and XPath
                  play an important role both for visualising and modifying existing datasets.
                  Lexicographers can insert elements on the basis of predefined XML schemas. Most
                  of the functions can be applied both to single and multiple lemmas. One of the
                  most recent improvements is a versioning system and an improved working mode
                  that allows lexicographers to work on the XML data without actually seeing the
                  tags. Furthermore, the editor also has a configurable interface enabling
                  lexicographers to access external corpora and to integrate example sentences
                  from them into dictionary entries. The communication between the dictionary
                  client and the server has been implemented as a RESTful web service.
            The tool forms part of Austria’s contribution to the pan-European CLARIN Research Infrastructure
                  Consortium and is freely available from the ACDH Website.
         
         
            Formalised encoding framework
            While the list of formats used in the lexicographic community is unfortunately
                    very long, there exists a de- facto standard which has been used widely in many
                    digital humanities projects, in numerous lexicographic projects and most of the
                    ACDH’s lexicographic endeavours: the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative
                    (TEI). The application of digital (de-facto) standards in building digital
                    language resources is of particular concern when we think about interoperability
                    and re-usability of resources. The buzz-word of open life-cycles for research
                    data will remain meaningless unless researchers succeed in achieving a certain
                    degree of harmonisation in structuring their data and
                    meta data. The ACDH has been working on specialised schemata based on the
                    TEI (P5) dictionary module for quite some time. In all these efforts, they
                    have also aimed at a high degree of interoperability with the ISO standard
                    LMF (Lexical
                    Markup Framework). In order to realise mechanisms for cross-dictionary
                    access, they have also been working with semantic technologies such as RDF
                    and SKOS.
                  
             The basic reduced TEI schemata have been documented in form of guidelines which
                    give detailed accounts of how dictionaries in the ACDH collection were encoded.
                    These guidelines document and discuss the schema and furnish a number of
                    examples taken from actual dictionaries. The target group for this guide are
                    both the lexicographers working on ACDH projects as well as others who might
                    want to work along similar lines. These particular Guidelines were themselves
                    produced making use of the TEI framework. 
         
         
            Depositing infrastructure
            The dictionary editor is a web-based application that allows lexicographers to work in groups. The data is stored on a server of CLARIN Centre Vienna. Being part of an official infrastructure, long-term availability will be vouchsafed. In addition, the owners of the lexicographical data can draw copies of their dictionaries at any time of the compilation process. 
         
         
            Publishing framework
            The publishing infrastructure builds on
                      corpus_shell, a service-oriented architecture and a distributed and heterogeneous virtual landscape. The core functionality of this modular framework is to expose well-defined interfaces based on acknowledged standards. The principle idea behind the architecture is to decouple the modules serving data from the user-interface components. One of the nice features of the system is that you can build new interfaces via XSLT styles almost on the fly.
                    
         
         
            Status and outlook
            The conversion and import of the data has already been undertaken. Dagaare – English – Cantonese Dictionary is already available online. However, the working group is still improving the web-interface, a stable URL will be assigned by the end of 2015.
            The Dagaare – English – Cantonese Dictionary is about to be improved from a content as well as collaboration / social infrastructure point of view:
            (1) Audio files are to be added to support – mainly – the representation of the tone languages Dagaare and Cantonese. Doing so, we enlarge the network of people participating into the project for both,
            (a) free and open Wikimedia audio tools as well as 
            (b) high performance audio tools e.g. supported by Forschungszentrum
                      Telekommunikation Wien (FTW http://www.ftw.at/) or Phonogrammarchiv at the AAS
                      http://www.phonogrammarchiv.at/,
            (c) speakers with Cantonese mother tongue. (Bodomo Adams himselves represents Dagaare mother tongue).
            (2) The dictionary will be fully embedded into the lexicographical research infrastructure of ACDH as well as the research of the Institut für Afrikawissenschaften at the University of Vienna. This implies both,
            (a) experimental development of the dictionary content applying methods of other
                        disciplines e.g. Natural Language Processing and Semantic Technologies for
                        interlinking with other dictionaries, semi-automatic translation into other
                        languages starting with German, connecting with cultural content etc., e.g.
                        interlinking with cultural resources like songs; (b) embedding it into a
                        research framework for African Diaspora studies. In doing so, the
                        representatives of both institutes open towards collaboration of global
                        communities of several disciplines that are until now not in touch. 
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bodomo, Adams (2004): Dagaare –
                            Cantonese – English Dictionary for Lexicographical Field Research
                            Training (= Afrikawissenschaftliche Lehrbücher 14). Köln: Köppe. 
               
                  Bodomo, Adams / Mora, Manolete (2007): “Documenting
                              Spoken and Sung Texts of the Dagaaba of West Afrika”, in: Empirical Musicology Review 2, 3: 81-102. 
               
                  Budin, Gerhard / Majewski, Stefan / Moerth, Karlheinz
                                (2012): “Creating Lexical Resources in TEI P5”, in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 3 https://jtei.revues.org/522
                                [letzter Zugriff 08. Februar 2016]. 
               
                  Budin, Gerhard / Moerth, Karlheinz (2011): “Hooking up
                                  to the corpus: the Viennese Lexicographic Editor’s corpus interface”,in:
                                  Kosem, Iztok / Kosem, Karmen (eds.): Electronic
                                  lexicography in the 21st century. New applications for new users.
                                  Proceedings of eLex 2011 conference. Bled, Slovenia: Trojina, Institute for
                                  Applied Slovene Studies 52-59.
               
                  Budin, Gerhard / Moerth, Karlheinz / Durco, Matej
                                  (2013): “European Lexicography Infrastructure Components”, in: Kosem, Iztok
                                  / Kallas, Jelena / Gantar, Polona / Krek, Simon / Langemets, Margit /
                                  Tuulik, Maria (eds.): Electronic lexicography in the 21st
                                  century: thinking outside the paper. Proceedings of the eLex 2013
                                  conference, 17-19 October 2013. Tallin, Estonia: Trojina, Institute for
                                  Applied Slovene Studies / Eesti Keele Instituut 76-92. 
               
                  Declerck, Thierry / Lendvai, Pirsoka / Moerth,
                                      Karlheinz (2013): “Collaborative Tools: From Wiktionary to LMF, for
                                      Synchronic and Diachronic Language Data”, in: Francopoulo, Gil (ed.): LMF. Lexical Markup Framework. London / Hoboken: John
                                      Wiley & Sons 175-186. 
               
                  Declerck, Thierry / Moerth, Karlheinz / Wandl-Vogt,
                                          Eveline (2014): “A SKOS-based Schema for TEI encoded Dictionaries
                                          at ICLTT”, in: LREC 2014, Ninth International Conference
                                          on Language Resources and Evaluation. Reykjavik, Iceland: European
                                          Language Resources Association 414-417.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Projekthintergrund: A. v. Humboldts „Kosmos-Vorträge“ (1827/28)
            Im Projekt Hidden Kosmos: Reconstructing A. v. Humboldt’s »Kosmos-Lectures«, das an der Berliner Humboldt-Universität (HU) aus Mitteln der Exzellenzinitiative über den Zeitraum von zwei Jahren (Juni 2014–Mai 2016) gefördert wird, werden sämtliche derzeit bekannte Nachschriften von Besuchern der weltberühmten Vorlesungen über physikalische Geographie Alexander von Humboldts erschlossen und als vernetztes Forschungskorpus ediert.
      
            
               
               
                  Abb. 1: „Alles ist Wechselwirkung.“ Humboldt [1803/04]: 27r,
        http://resolver.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/SBB0001527C00000000
                  1
               
            
            Humboldts heute so genannten Kosmos-Vorträge fanden im Wintersemester 1827/28
        in zwei unabhängig voneinander verlaufenden Zyklen statt: Er absolvierte
        insgesamt 62 Vortragsstunden vor etwa 400 Studierenden und Lehrbefugten in der
        Berliner Universität und parallel dazu 16 Vorträge vor einer bis dahin
        unerreichten Zahl von etwa 1000 Zuhörern im großen Saal der Berliner
        Singakademie. Humboldt verband in diesen Vorträgen seine eigenen Forschungen,
        dabei aus dem reichen Erfahrungsschatz seiner fünfjährigen Amerikareise
        schöpfend, mit dem damals aktuellen Erkenntnisstand auf faktisch jedem Gebiet
        der aufstrebenden Naturwissenschaften. Beide Zyklen unterscheiden sich
        wesentlich hinsichtlich der Abfolge der besprochenen Themen und – aufgrund ihres
        sehr ungleichen Umfangs – auch im Hinblick auf die dabei jeweils erreichte Tiefe
        und Ausführlichkeit der Darstellung. Gemeinsam ist beiden Vortragsreihen jedoch
        der Anspruch, einen in sich abgeschlossenen Überblick zu geben, d. h. die
        astronomischen und tellurischen Phänomene, die Gestalt der Erdoberfläche und das
        organische Leben auf ihr, die kulturelle Entwicklung der Menschheit in den für
        Humboldt allgegenwärtigen „Wechselwirkungen“ (Abbildung 1) darzustellen.
            
               Forschungsstand zu den Kosmos-Vorträgen und Ziele des Projekts Hidden Kosmos
               Die Kosmos-Vorträge können nach wie vor als ‚blinder Fleck‘ der
            Humboldt-Forschung gelten (vgl. Erdmann/Thomas 2014: 35f.). Zum einen wohl
            deshalb, weil aufgrund einer (nachweislich falschen) Behauptung Humboldts im
            Kosmos (Humboldt 1845: X) die Manuskripte des Vortragenden als nicht
            existent galten, zum anderen weil auch der größte Teil der Nachschriften
            seiner HörerInnen de facto unbekannt blieb. Bis zur laufenden
            Veröffentlichung mehrerer Manuskripte durch das Hidden Kosmos-Projekt waren
            nur zwei solcher Nachschriften publiziert worden – beide jedoch in kaum
            wissenschaftstauglichen Editionen. Die übrigen zehn bisher bekannten
            Nachschriften lagerten unberührt in verschiedenen Bibliotheken in
            Deutschland und Polen bzw. in Privatbesitz.
               Die digitale Edition dieser unikalen Manuskripte schafft überhaupt erst eine
              solide Materialbasis, um die intensive Erforschung der Vortragsreihen zu
              ermöglichen.2 Das Projekt Hidden Kosmos arbeitet dabei eng mit dem Deutschen
              Textarchiv (DTA) der
              BBAW zusammen, wo die Nachschriften im Kontext des derzeit umfangreichsten
              digitalen ‚Alexander-von-Humboldt-Korpus‘ (s. Thomas 2015) veröffentlicht
              werden. Die weitere Dissemination und langfristige Bereitstellung der Daten
              erfolgt über das web- und zentrenbasierte Infrastrukturprojekt CLARIN-D.3 Derzeit (15.10.2015) stehen fünf Nachschriften mit mehr als 2 100
              handschriftlichen Seiten im DTA bzw. über CLARIN-D bereit; bis zur DHd 2016 werden zehn
              Bände mit ca. 3 760 Seiten zur Verfügung stehen. 
               
                  
                  
                     Abb. 2: DTA-Präsentation der Nachschrift
                eines anonym gebliebenen Zuhörers der Kosmos-Vorträge an der Berliner
                Universität: [N. N.]: Die physikalische Geographie von Herrn Alexander v.
                Humboldt, vorgetragen im Semestre 1827/28. [Berlin], [1827/28]. 
               
            
         
         
            Gliederung des Vortrags
            
               Überblick über die edierten Materialien und erste Forschungsergebnisse
               Auf der DHd 2016 wird zunächst ein konzentrierter Überblick über die bis
                dahin publizierten Materialien gegeben und werden erste, auf dieser
                Grundlage gewonnene Forschungsergebnisse vorgestellt. Der Fokus wird dabei
                im Sinne des Konferenzthemas auf der Modellierung der
                Daten und deren Annotation in TEI-XML, der Vernetzung
                der Dokumente sowie verschiedenen Visualisierungen der
                annotierten Forschungsdaten liegen. Im Vergleich der tief strukturierten und
                annotierten Online-Volltexte mit früheren Printeditionen zweier
                Nachschriften werden die Vorzüge digitaler Editionen sichtbar: Auf der
                Makroebene, d. h. hier: mit Blick auf die Gesamtheit der vielstimmigen
                Überlieferung, liegen diese Vorzüge zum einen in deren Perfektibilität und
                permanenten Erweiterbarkeit, zum anderen in der Vernetzung aller bekannten Nachschriften untereinander und mit weiteren
                elektronischen Ressourcen. In der Mikroperspektive, d. h. hier: mit Blick
                auf die einzelne, jeweils unikale Quelle ermöglicht die digitale Edition
                eine überlieferungsadäquate Repräsentation jedes einzelnen Manuskripts und
                der Besonderheiten seiner handschriftlichen Verfasstheit. Die digitale
                Edition erreicht dabei eine tiefere Granularität und eine größere
                Flexibilität der Nutzungsmöglichkeiten als die Print-Edition. 
               Anschließend sollen die Auswirkungen diskutiert werden, die der Einsatz von Methoden und Verfahren aus dem Bereich der ‚Digital Humanities‘ sowohl auf die Produktions- als auch auf die Rezeptionsseite einer (Manuskript-)Edition haben. Ganz im oben zitierten Sinne Humboldts sollen diese als ‚Wechselwirkungen‘ zwischen Projektdesign und Produzent bzw. Rezipient erfasst werden.
            
            
               Wechselwirkung zwischen Projektdesign und Nutzerperspektive
               Anschließend an die Präsentation im vergangenen Jahr auf der DHd 2015 in Graz
                  (Thomas 2014/15) kamen zwei grundsätzliche Fragen aus dem Publikum, die
                  vor dem Hintergrund des zum Zeitpunkt der DHd 2016 fast abgeschlossenen
                  Projekts beantwortet werden sollen. Die erste Frage stellte sich aus der
                  Perspektive der/s Rezipientin/en, der/die – so die an den Herausgeber der
                  Edition herangetragene Forderung – an die Quellen ‚herangeführt‘ werden
                  müsse. Denn im Unterschied zum überkommenen Prinzip der ‚Leithandschrift‘
                  bzw. der Konstruktion eines ‚idealen‘ Textes durch den Editor, das den
                  Beschränkungen gedruckter Editionen im ‚typographischen Paradigma‘ (Sahle
                  2013: 88) geschuldet ist, stehen im DH-Projekt Hidden Kosmos zehn parallele,
                  teils einander ergänzenden, teils miteinander konkurrierende Nachschriften
                  prinzipiell gleichwertig nebeneinander. Die komplexe und vielschichtige
                  Überlieferungslage soll für den/die Nutzer/in der edierten Texte
                  transparent werden, anstatt sie wie im typographischen Paradigma einzuebnen.
                  Der/die Nutzer/in soll ermutigt und befähigt werden, sich diese Komplexität
                  und Vielschichtigkeit durch eine parallele Lektüre verschiedener Quellen und
                  durch die angebotenen, explorativen Zugänge zu erschließen.4
               
               Um dieses Ziel zu erreichen, wurden im Hidden Kosmos-Projekt mehrere Dokument-übergreifende Zugänge geschaffen. In der vergleichsweise kurzen zweijährigen Projektlaufzeit mit sehr begrenzten personellen Ressourcen konnte diese Aufgabe überhaupt nur durch den konsequenten Einsatz digitaler Methoden bewältigt werden. Da mir das Problem begrenzter Zeit- und Personalressourcen typisch für den heutigen Forschungsalltag erscheint, soll auf die dabei verwendeten Ansätze näher eingegangen werden.
               
                  Automatisch erstellte, korpusübergreifende Zugänge als Orientierungshilfen
                  Anhand der -Ebenen der TEI-strukturierten Volltexte wurden je
                    eine thematische Gliederung für den Universitätszyklus und für die
                    Singakademie-Vorträge extrahiert und diese wiederum mit der
                    chronologischen Gliederung nach Vortragsstunden des jeweiligen Zyklus
                    kombiniert. Diese abstrahierte, alle Nachschriften verbindende
                    Orientierungshilfe konnte in dieser Vollständigkeit nur durch eine
                    Kombination aller vorliegenden Quellen erstellt werden, da die
                    jeweiligen Schreiber ihre Hefte entweder nur grob thematisch
                    strukturierten oder nur die Daten der jeweiligen Vortragsstunde
                    notierten. Das Ergebnis ist eine sehr viel detaillierte Übersicht über
                    die Kurse als die von Humboldt selbst überlieferte (Abbildung 3).
                  
                     
                     
                        Abb. 3: A. v. Humboldt:
                      Vorlesungsverzeichnis für die Berliner Universität, Staatsbibliothek zu
                      Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Nachl. Alexander von Humboldt, gr.
                      Kasten 8, Nr. 5a, Bl. 1r (http://resolver.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/SBB0001676C00000000)
                  
                  Nutzer/innen der Edition können sich anhand der extrapolierten Gliederung
                      leicht einen Überblick über die beeindruckende Themenfülle der
                      Vortragsreihen verschaffen und zwischen dem Einstieg in ein beliebiges
                      Thema oder eine Vortragsstunde wählen. Zudem wird die unterschiedliche
                      Abfolge der Themen in beiden Vortragszyklen anschaulich und ein
                      gezielter Einstieg in deren vergleichende Lektüre ermöglicht. Zugleich
                      bilden die Gliederungen einen Anknüpfungspunkt für die weitere
                      Kontextualisierung der Kosmos-Vorträge im übrigen Humboldt’schen Œuvre.
                      Beispielseise übernahm Humboldt für seinen monumentalen Kosmos (1845–62) im Wesentlichen die Anordnung
                      der Singakademie-Vorträge (vgl. Erdmann/Thomas 2014: 37), wodurch sich
                      die Vorträge nun auf Grundlage der aus den Nachschriften extrapolierten
                      Gliederung mit den entsprechenden -Ebenen der im DTA
                      verfügbaren XML-Volltexte des Kosmos verknüpfen
                      lassen. 
                  Ebenso automatisch wurde aus den annotierten Daten, die mit dem
                        TEI-Element  und einem @ref-Attribut mit Link auf
                        verfügbare Normdaten versehen wurden, ein übergreifendes
                        Personenverzeichnis extrahiert, das derzeit mehr als 2000 Einträge
                        enthält (siehe http://deutschestextarchiv.de/kosmos/person.
                        Durch die Verknüpfung mit Normdaten aus der GND, VIAF o.Ä.
                        werden die zwischen den Nachschriften teilweise erheblich voneinander
                        abweichenden Vorlageformen der von Humboldt erwähnten Personen
                        vereinheitlicht. Jeder Eintrag im Gesamtregister führt per Klick zum
                        Kontext derjenigen Nachschrift, in der der gewählte Personenname getaggt
                        wurde. Eine Verbindung des Personenregisters mit weiterführenden
                        Informationsangeboten z. B. über eine BEACON-Datei bietet NutzerInnen – ohne nennenswerten
                        Mehraufwand für das Projekt – direkten Zugang zu weiteren Informationen.
                        Neben seiner Funktion als übergreifende Orientierungshilfe eignet sich
                        das Personenregister auch als Impulsgeber für die Beforschung der
                        Nachschriften: Fehlt beispielsweise ein Personenname in einem Dokument,
                        der in einem anderen an der entsprechenden Stelle referenziert wurde,
                        erlaubt dies schon erste Rückschlüsse auf die Zuverlässigkeit und
                        Vollständigkeit der Nachschrift. 
                  Weitere dokumentübergreifende Ordnungshilfen listen beispielsweise die
                          von Humboldt im Zusammenhang mit naturwissenschaftlichen Untersuchungen
                          eingesetzten Instrumente (http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/kosmos/instrument),
                          die von ihm erwähnten Himmelskörper sowie die
                          mineralischen und chemischen Elemente auf, die im Laufe der Vorträge
                          eine Rolle spielten. Diese und weitere ‚Inventarlisten‘ konnten direkt
                          aus den Volltexten extrahiert werden, dank der Verbindung mit der
                          computerlinguistischen Erschließung der Volltexte im Deutschen
                          Textarchiv. Die im DTA implementierte Kombination der linguistischen
                          Suchmaschine DDC mit dem Wortnetz GermaNet (Henrich/Hinrichs 2010;
                          Hamp/Feldweg 1997) ermöglicht es beispielsweise, alle Nachschriften
                          gezielt nach denjenigen Begriffen zu durchsuchen, die in GermaNet als
                          „Element“ bzw. übergeordnet als „Grundstoff; Urstoff“ klassifiziert
                          wurden (Abbildung 4). Eine umfassende Liste mit knapp 3000 Treffern und
                          mehr als 300 verschiedenen Mineralien, Gesteinen und Substanzen ist das
                          Ergebnis, das dem/der Nutzer/in unmittelbar zur zielgerichteten
                          Navigation angeboten werden kann.
                  
                     
                     
                        Abb. 4: DDC-Suche im Deutschen
                            Textarchiv nach Begriffen aus dem GermaNet-Synset „Grundstoff;
                            Urstoff“
                  
               
            
            
               Wechselwirkung zwischen Projektdesign und Produzentenperspektive
               Ebenfalls im Anschluss an die DHd-2015-Präsentation in Graz – und seitdem des
                          Öfteren wiederholt – wurde die manche/n Geisteswissenschaftler/in offenbar
                          beunruhigende Frage gestellt, worin denn noch die Aufgaben des Herausgebers
                          einer wissenschaftlichen (Manuskript-)Edition bestünden, wenn wie im Projekt
                          Hidden Kosmos grundständige Arbeiten wie das Transkribieren und Annotieren
                          (fast) aller Textzeugen an einen Dienstleister ausgelagert werden, wenn
                          bestehende Datenmodelle und Infrastrukturen einfach mit- oder nachgenutzt
                          und wenn immer mehr Arbeitsschritte automatisiert werden können.
               Auf der DHd 2016 möchte ich mit Bezug auf die oben skizzierten
                            Arbeitsschritte einige aus meiner Sicht notwendige Änderungen in der ‚Job
                            Description‘ des Editors bzw. allgemeiner: der/des
                            Geisteswissenschaftlerin/s in einem DH-Projekt anregen. Diese liegen m. E.
                            nach wie vor im traditionellen Bereich der hermeneutisch-interpretierenden
                            Quellenkritik, aber wesentlich mehr noch in den Bereichen der Datenkuration,
                            tieferen Annotation, der Analyse und ständigen Wiederausführung und
                            Optimierung automatisierter Prozesse. Denn selbstverständlich bleibt bei
                            jedem computergestützten Prozess der Datenanalyse ein
                            nicht-automatisierbarer ‚Rest‘, der interpretiert werden muss und der durch
                            weitere, wiederum computergestützte Optimierung der Datenbasis oder durch
                            eine Rekonfiguration des automatisierten Prozesses verringert oder zumindest
                            verändert werden kann. Dabei wird dieser Rest wohl auch durch die
                            Optimierung der Daten und die fortschreitende Verbesserung der Tools und
                            Services nicht verschwinden, möglicherweise aber immer interessanter
                            werden.
            
         
      
      
         
            Alle URLs in diesem Text abgerufen am 15. Oktober 2015.
            Humboldts eigenhändige Manuskripte liegen,
                            soweit sie sich überhaupt erhalten haben, verstreut und z. T. nicht
                            sicher identifizierbar in dessen Nachlass in der Staatsbibliothek zu
                            Berlin und der Jagiellonen-Bibliothek in Krakau. Bis voraussichtlich
                            Ende 2016 werden beide Nachlassteile komplett digitalisiert sein. In
                            einem die Hidden Kosmos-Idee weiterführenden Anschlussprojekt sollen
                            dann die ursprünglichen Vortragsmanuskripte mit Hilfe der
                            Hörernachschriften identifiziert und in die laufende Edition
                            integriert werden.
                          
            Für eine detailliertere Darstellung der
                            Kooperation zwischen Hidden Kosmos, DTA und CLARIN-D s. Thomas
                            2014/15.
                          
            Siehe auch dazu Sahle (2013: 107), der zu den
                            oben skizzierten Auswirkungen digitaler Editionsformen festhält:
                            „Die Visualität und Materialität der Überlieferung kann besser
                            sichtbar gemacht werden, die Aufforderung zur Konstruktion der einen autoritativen editorischen Fassung, die
                            alle anderen Fassungen nahezu unsichtbar macht, wird schwächer.“
                            (Hervorhebung CT)
                          
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften
                              (BBAW) (2007–16): DTA. Deutsches Textarchiv
                              http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/ [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober
                              2015].
               
                  CLARIN-D
                  http://clarin-d.net [letzter
                              Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015].
               
                  Erdmann, Dominik/Thomas, Christian (2014): „‚… zu
                              den wunderlichsten Schlangen der Gelehrsamkeit zusammengegliedert‛. Neue
                              Materialien zu den ‚Kosmos-Vorträgen‛ Alexander von Humboldts, nebst
                              Vorüberlegungen zu deren digitaler Edition". In: HiN –
                              Humboldt im Netz. Internationale Zeitschrift für Humboldt-Studien
                              (Potsdam – Berlin) XV, 28: 34–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.18443/189 [letzter Zugriff
                              27. Mai 2016]. 
               
                  Hamp, Birgit/Feldweg, Helmut (1997): “GermaNet – a
                              Lexical-Semantic Net for German.” In: Proceedings of the
                              ACL workshop Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical
                              Semantic Resources for NLP Applications. Madrid: 9–15.
               
                  Henrich, Verena/Hinrichs, Erhard (2010): “GernEdiT
                              – The GermaNet Editing Tool”. In: Proceedings of the
                              Seventh Conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation
                              (LREC 2010). Valletta, Malta: 2228–2235. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/pdf/264_Paper.pdf
                              [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Humboldt, Alexander von (1845): Kosmos. Entwurf einer physischen Weltbeschreibung, 1. Stuttgart u.
                              a.: Deutsches Textarchiv. http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/humboldt_kosmos01_1845 [letzter
                              Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Humboldt, Alexander von ([1803/04]): Tagebücher der Amerikanischen Reise: IX: Varia. Obs.
                              Astron. de Mexico a Guanaxuato, Torullo, Tiluca, Veracruz, Cuba. Voy. De la
                              Havana à Philadelphia. Geologie de Guanaxato, Volcans de Torullo et de
                              Toluca. Voyage de Veracruz à la Havana et de la Havana à Philadelphia.
                              Torulla. Berlin: Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz. http://resolver.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/SBB0001527C00000000
                              [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Lehrstuhl für Kulturtechniken und Wissensgeschichte
                              (2014–16): Hidden Kosmos. Reconstructing Alexander von
                              Humboldt‛s »Kosmos-Lectures«. https://www.culture.hu-berlin.de/de/forschung/projekte/hidden-kosmos/
                              [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015].
               
                  N.N. (1827): Die physikalische
                              Geographie von Herrn Alexander v. Humboldt, vorgetragen im Semestre
                              1827/28. Berlin: Deutsches Textarchiv. http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/nn_oktavgfeo79_1828/7 [letzter
                              Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): Digitale
                              Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den
                              Bedingungen des Medienwandels. 2: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik.
                              Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
               
                  Thomas, Christian (2014/15): „Hidden Kosmos –
                              Humboldts ‚Kosmos-Vorträge‘ als Probe der Digital Humanities", in:
                              DHd-Jahrestagung 2015 „Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen: Digitale
                              Geisteswissenschaften als Mittler zwischen Information und Interpretation“,
                              23.-27.2.2015, Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung – Austrian Centre for
                              Digital Humanities an der Universität Graz. https://www.culture.hu-berlin.de/de/forschung/projekte/hidden-kosmos/media/c-thomas-dhd-graz-paper-hidden-kosmos-20150126.pdf
                              [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Thomas, Christian (2015): „99 unselbständige
                              Schriften Humboldts als Volltext im Deutschen Textarchiv verfügbar", in: avhumboldt.de. Alexander von Humboldt Informationen
                              online. http://www.avhumboldt.de/?p=10922 [letzter Zugriff 15. Oktober
                              2015]. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ansatz 
            Neben dem ›klassischen‹ strukturalistischen Paradigma, das sich wesentlich an
          Theoremen der Linguistik orientiert (u. a. Lotman 1972; Titzmann 1977), gibt es
          in der Literaturwissenschaft bereits seit Jahrzehnten Ansätze zu einer
          Strukturanalyse, die sich auf die empirische Soziologie – insbesondere auf die
          Social Network Analysis – bezieht und Struktur
          entsprechend nicht über basale semantische Relationen (etwa als Opposition oder
          Äquivalenz) definiert, sondern über soziale Interaktionen (Marcus 1973; Stiller
          et al. 2003; de Nooy 2006; Stiller / Hudson 2005; Elson et al. 2010; Agarwal et
          al. 2012). Im Kontext der Digital Humanities haben diese Ansätze zu einer
          literaturwissenschaftlichen Netzwerkanalyse (Trilcke 2013) in den letzten Jahren
          eine neue Dynamik gewonnen (Moretti 2011; Rydberg-Cox 2011; Park et al. 2013).
          Aus literaturwissenschaftlicher Sicht versprechen diese Analyseverfahren dabei
          auf umfangreichen Korpora basierende, von quantitativen Daten gestützte
          Erkenntnisse über die Literaturgeschichte wie auch über die generischen
          Eigenarten literarischer Texte. Im Projekt dlina. Digital
          Literary Network Analysis haben wir einen Workflow zur Extraktion,
          Analyse und Visualisierung von Netzwerkdaten aus dramatischen Texten mit
          rudimentärer TEI-Auszeichnung entwickelt (Fischer et al. 2015). Der hier
          projektierte Vortrag wird Ergebnisse der netzwerkanalytischen Auswertung dieser
          Daten präsentieren und vor dem Hintergrund etablierter fachwissenschaftlicher
          Fragestellungen diskutieren. 
         
         
            Datenerhebung und -analyse
            Unser derzeitiges Korpus umfasst 465 deutschsprachige Dramen (Zeitraum 1730 bis
            1930), die aus dem Textgrid
            Repository extrahiert wurden. Die für die Netzwerkanalyse relevanten
            Strukturdaten dieser Dramen (Segmentierung, Figurenidentifikation) wurden in
            einem regelbasierten Prozess händisch ediert, um OCR- und TEI-Tagging-Fehler zu
            beheben sowie solchen ›Eigenarten‹ der literarischen Texte zu begegnen, die die
            Analyseergebnisse verfälschen würden (u. a. unterschiedliche Bezeichnungen
            identischer Figuren; Bezeichnung von Figurengruppen mit unbestimmten Numeralien
            wie ›beide‹ oder ›alle‹; etc.). Die edierten Strukturdaten liegen in einem
            eigens entwickelten Datenformat, dem dlina-Format, in Form von XML-Dateien vor.
            Die Visualisierung der Netzwerke und die Berechnung netzwerkanalytischer Werte
            erfolgt – mittels Python- und D3-Skripten – automatisiert auf Basis der in den
            dlina-Dateien gespeicherten Strukturdaten. Neben Graphen und basalen Werten, die
            die Netzwerke global beschreiben (Network Size, Density, Average Degree, Average
            Path Length), werden dabei auch Zentralitätswerte für sämtliche Figuren eines
            Dramas erhoben (u. a. Degree, Average Distance, Closeness Centrality,
            Betweenness Centrality). Die Implemtierung weiterer Berechnungsrountinen (u. a.
            Clustering Coefficient, logarithmierte Degree Distribution-Tabellen) ist für den
            Winter 2015/16 vorgesehen. Sämtliche Daten und Visualisierungen werden frei
            verfügbar im Netz publiziert (https://github.com/dlina und https://dlina.github.io/linas/). 
         
         
            Literaturwissenschaftliche Auswertung 1: Dramengeschichte 
            Die diachrone Erstreckung unseres Dramenkorpus über ca. 200 Jahre deutscher
              Literaturgeschichte macht es möglich, größere Entwicklungen im Bereich der
              strukturellen Komposition von dramatischen Texten zu beobachten (erste
              Überlegungen dazu haben wir in einem Blogpost skizziert: https://dlina.github.io/200-Years-of-Literary-Network-Data/). Neben
              Werten, die sich auf die Gesamtnetzwerke der einzelnen Dramen beziehen (u. a.
              Network Size, Density, Average Degree; s. exemplarisch zur Average Path Length,
              Abbildung 1), werden dabei auch figurenbezogene Werte, v.a. Zentralitätsmaße,
              einbezogen, die Aufschluss etwa über die Streuung des Personals eines Dramas
              bzw. dessen Zusammensetzung aus ›zentralen‹ und weniger ›zentralen‹ Figuren
              gibt. Auf Grundlage dieser Werte sollen im Vortrag einige globale Thesen der
              Literaturgeschichte diskutiert werden. So werden wir erstens diskutieren, inwieweit sich anhand der netzwerkanalytischen
              Werte eine Ausdifferenzierung der strukturellen Komposition von dramatischen
              Texten am Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts beobachten lässt: Eine solche
              Ausdifferenzierung wäre angesichts des Nebeinanders von ›geschlossenen‹, in der
              Tradition der Französischen Klassik stehenden Dramen und ›offenen‹ Dramen, die
              sich u. a. an der Drramatik Shakespeares orientieren, zu erwarten. Zweitens werden wir einige geläufige
              literaturwissenschaftliche Periodisierungshypothesen testen (u. a. aus dem
              Strukturalismus und der Sozialgeschichte); gefragt werden soll hier, inwieweit
              die Entwicklung der netzwerkanalytischen Werte mit den von der Forschung
              vorgeschlagenen Periodisierungen korreliert. 
            
               
               
                  Abb. 1: Average Path Length (Mean; nach Dekaden) 
            
         
         
            Literaturwissenschaftliche Auswertung 2: Dramentypen
            Die von uns bisher erhobenen Werte zeigen, dass Dramen in dem untersuchten
                  Zeitraum auf sehr unterschiedliche Weise strukturiert wurden. In der
                  ›traditionellen‹ Literaturwissenschaft wurden für solche unterschiedlichen
                  ›Bauformen‹ diverse Typologien entwickelt, in der Germanistik am bekanntesten
                  ist Volker Klotz’ Unterscheidung in eine ›offene‹ und eine ›geschlossen‹
                  Dramenform (Klotz 1960). Diesen typologischen Impuls wollen wir aufgreifen und
                  einen Vorschlag unterbreiten, wie sich mittels netzwerkanalytischer Daten
                  bestimmte Typen der strukturellen Komposition von Dramen unterscheiden (und dann
                  wiederum historisch verorten) lassen. Unser Vorschlag greift dabei Überlegungen
                  aus der Forschung zu sog. Small-world-Netzwerken auf. Diese Forschungen setzen
                  bei der Beobachtung an, dass die Werte von empirisch erhobenen Netzwerken nicht
                  selten signifikant von entsprechenden Random-Netzwerken (also z. B. nach dem
                  Erdős-Rényi-Modell erstellten Graphen) abweichen. Abweichungen sind dabei
                  insbesondere beim Clustering Coefficient, bei der Averge Path Length sowie bei
                  der Degree Distribution zu beobachten (Albert / Barabási 2002). Für den hier
                  projektierten Vortrag werden wir diese Werte – sowie die Werte für die
                  entsprechenden Random-Netzwerke – für unser Gesamtkorpus erheben (sowie einen
                  Workflow für die automatisierte Erhebung entwickeln) und diskutieren. Erste
                  Testläufe deuten dabei darauf hin, dass sich auf diese Weise tatsächlich
                  unterschiedliche Typen der strukturellen Komposition von Dramen beschreiben
                  lassen könnten. So zeigen sich z. B. auffällige Unterschiede bei der Degree
                  Distribution (s. exemplarisch die Tabellen für vier Dramen in Abbildung 2); und
                  mit Blick auf den Clustering Coefficient zeigt sich, dass im Vergleich zu
                  Random-Netzwerken signifikant höhere Werte, wie sie bei Small-world-Netzwerken
                  zu erwarten sind, zwar in mehreren Fällen vorkommen, jedoch keineswegs für alle
                  Dramennetzwerke charakteristisch sind (siehe exemplarisch die Werte in Abbildung
                  3). Im Vortrag werden wir diese Werte für alle Dramen unseres Korpus
                  präsentieren; wir werden diskutieren, inwieweit sich hier – aufbauend auf dem
                  Small-world-Konzept – netzwerkanalytisch basierte Typen der strukturellen
                  Komposition von Dramen unterscheiden lassen und wir werden literarhistorisch
                  fundiert erörtern, welche Eigenschaften der Dramen für die unterschiedlichen
                  Werte verantwortlich sind.
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
               
                  Abb. 2.1 bis 2.4: Node Degree Distribution für »Der
                    sterbende Cato« (1731), »Emilia Galotti« (1772), »Götz von Berlichingen« (1773)
                    und »Die Räuber« (1781) 
            
            
               
               
                  Abb. 3: Vergleich des Clustering Coefficent des
                      Dramen-Netzwerks mit dem eines jeweils entsprechenden Random-Netzwerks 
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Albert, Réka / Barabási, Albert-László (2002):
                      "Statistical mechanics of complex networks", in: Reviews
                      of Modern Physics 74: 47–97. 
               
                  Agarwal, Apoorv / Corvalan, Augusto / Jensen, Jacob /
                        Rambow, Owen (2012): "Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland" in: Proceedings of the
                        Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature. Montréal
                        88–96. 
               
                  de Nooy, Wouter (2006): "Stories, Scripts, Roles, and
                        Networks" in: Structure and Dynamics 1, 2 http://escholarship.org/uc/item/8508h946#page-1 [letzter Zugriff
                        12. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Elson, David K. / Dames, Nicholas / McKeown, Kathleen R.
                        (2010): "Extracting Social Networks from Literary Fiction", in: Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
                        for Computational Linguistics. Uppsala 138–147. 
               
                  Fischer, Frank / Kampkaspar, Dario / Göbel, Mathias /
                          Trilcke, Peer (2015): "Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts",
                          in: DH 2015, Sydney, 2. Juli 2015
                  https://dlina.github.io/Our-Talk-at-DH2015/ [Skript] und https://dlina.github.io/presentations/2015-sydney/sydney.html#/
                            [Slides] [letzter Zugriff 12. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Klotz, Volker (1960): Geschlossene
                            und offene Form im Drama. München: Hanser. 
               
                  Lotman, Jurij M. (1972): Die
                            Struktur literarischer Texte. München: Wilhelm Fink. 
               
                  Marcus, Solomon (1973): Mathematische Poetik. Frankfurt am Main: Editura Academiei. 
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2011): "Network Theory, Plot
                            Analysis" in: Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets 2 http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet2.pdf [letzter
                            Zugriff 12. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Park, Gyeong-Mi / Kim, Sung-Hwan / Cho, Hwan-Gue
                              (2013): "Structural Analysis on Social Network Constructed from Characters
                              in Literature Texts", in: Journal of Computers 8, 9:
                              2442-2447 http://ojs.academypublisher.com/index.php/jcp/article/view/jcp080924422447/7672
                              [letzter Zugriff 12. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Rydberg-Cox, Jeff (2011): "Social Networks and the
                              Language of Greek Tragedy", in: Journal of the Chicago
                              Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science 1, 3 https://letterpress.uchicago.edu/index.php/jdhcs/article/view/86/91
                              [letzter Zugriff 12. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Stiller, James / Nettle, Daniel / Dunbar, Robin I. M.
                              (2003): "The Small World of Shakespeare's Plays", in: Human Nature 14: 397–408. 
               
                  Stiller, James / Hudson, Matthew (2005): "Weak Links
                              and Scene Cliques Within the Small World of Shakespeare", in: Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:
                              57–73. 
               
                  TextGrid: TextGrid Repository
                  https://textgridrep.de [letzter
                              Zugriff 10. Februar 2016].
               
                  Titzmann, Michael (1977): Strukturale Textanalyse. Theorie und Praxis der Interpretation.
                              München: Wilhelm Fink. 
               
                  Trilcke, Peer (2013): "Social Network Analysis (SNA)
                              als Methode einer textempirischen Literaturwissenschaft", in: Ajouri, Philip
                              / Mellmann, Katja / Rauen, Christoph (eds.): Empirie in
                              der Literaturwissenschaft. Münster: mentis 201–247. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Fragen/Probleme für die Zukunft von Datenbanken musikalischer Quellen
            Die Entwicklung digitaler Medien und die daraus resultierenden Chancen für eine Weiterentwicklung computergestützter Verfahren zeitigt weitreichende Folgen auch für die musikwissenschaftliche Grundlagenforschung. Die philologisch arbeitenden Disziplinen profitieren ungemein von den Digitalisierungsvorhaben in Bibliotheken oder haben selbst an solchen Vorhaben ihren Anteil. Und sie haben starke gemeinsame Interessen: Neben Tools zur digitalen Edition sind dies vor allem Schreiber-Erkennung, Papier- und Wasserzeichenforschung sowie Provenienzrecherchen. Das Interesse, über Standards zu diskutieren und die Grundlagen für gemeinsame digitale Standards weiterzuentwickeln ist bei Editionsvorhaben genauso vorhanden wie bei Bibliotheken. Derzeit bereits gegebene Vernetzungsmöglichkeiten werden genutzt und sollten weiter ausgebaut werden; ein Beispiel dafür ist eine übergeordnete Forschungsinfrastruktur, wie sie etwa in Bezug auf Papierforschung das Wasserzeichen-Informationssystem und die Papierhistorischen Sammlungen der DNB zur Verfügung stellen. 
            Darüber hinaus werden in vielen musikwissenschaftlichen Forschungseinrichtungen seit Jahrzehnten Daten zu Komponisten und ihren Werken zusammengetragen, seit etwa 2000 erfolgt dies im deutschsprachigen Raum auch per Datenbanken. Vernetzungen dieser Daten sind dabei aber bislang die Ausnahme. Ein Austausch könnte also auch auf dieser Ebene intensiviert werden. 
            Ein weiterer Aspekt betrifft die in den letzten Jahren entwickelten Methoden der Auswertung strukturierter Daten. Auch wenn sie im Bereich der Musikwissenschaft quantitativ wohl noch nicht unter den Begriff „Big Data“ fallen, so stellen diese Daten einen Fundus dar, welcher mit Hilfe vieler, in verschiedenen Projekten unter dem Label Digital Humanities laufender Methoden einer Auswertung harrt. Voraussetzung dafür wäre allerdings eine stärkere Vernetzung.
            In der Bach-Forschung sind engmaschige Untersuchungen zur Überlieferung jedes einzelnen Musikwerks seit langem ein essentieller Bestandteil, denn viele Werke J. S. Bachs sind weder autograph überliefert noch genau zu datieren. Dies hat zur Folge, dass ein großer Teil der Untersuchungen von Bach-Quellen Handschriften des gesamten 18. und frühen 19. Jahrhunderts betreffen müssen. Sie stammen von oft unbekannten Schreibern mit unklarer Provenienz. Ihren Bezug zu verschollenen originalen Quellen zu ermitteln, ist damit seit den 1950er Jahren – angestoßen und betrieben durch die Arbeit an der Neuen Bach-Ausgabe – ein essentieller Bestandteil der Bach-Forschung. Diese hat sich so auf einigen Feldern zu einem Vorreiter in der paläographisch und philologisch orientierten Quellenforschung entwickelt. Die entsprechenden Erkenntnisse wurden in den Kritischen Berichten dieser Gesamtausgabe ausgewertet; mit Blick auf die gesamte Bach-Familie darüber hinaus in gedruckten Katalogen über einzelne Quellenbestände, vor allem in den Leipziger Beiträgen zur Bach-Forschung: Brüsseler Bibliotheken (1997), Singakademie zu Berlin (2005), Wien und ‚Alt-Österreich‘ (2011). Sowohl das Wissen als auch die Methoden wurden im Laufe der vergangenen Jahrzehnte ebenfalls für Forschungen zu anderen Komponisten nachgenutzt. Durch diese Impulse konnten wiederum auch für die Bach-Überlieferung Erkenntnisse gewonnen werden. So haben beispielsweise durch die Recherchen zu Berliner Überlieferungskreisen, namentlich der Singakademie, gerade auch die Gesamtausgaben zu den Söhnen Bachs sehr profitiert.
            Um die Fülle der auf viele Kritische Berichte und andere Publikationen verteilten
          Forschungsergebnisse strukturiert recherchierbar zu machen, wurde 1999 in
          Göttingen am dortigen Johann Sebastian Bach-Institut die Bach-Quellen-Datenbank
          erstellt (seit 2001 als bach.gwdg.de
          online, Blanken 2002), die 2010 in das Portal Bach digital integriert wurde, das
          nunmehr nicht allein Informationen zu den Werken und ihren Quellen bietet,
          sondern auch hochauflösende Digitalisate der Handschriften selbst. Seit einigen
          Jahren werden sukzessive auch Daten / Digitalisate zu den Werken weiterer
          Komponisten der Bach-Familie berücksichtigt (Alt-Bachisches Archiv, Carl Philipp
          Emanuel, Wilhelm Friedemann und Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach), so dass
          bach-digital.de mittlerweile eine Datenbank zur gesamten Bach-Familie ist, mit
          derzeit knapp 7800 Quellen-, 3500 Werk-Datensätzen sowie 1750 Digitalisaten.
          Durch die Zusammenschau von Quellen und die Möglichkeit des strukturierten
          Zugriffs auf die hierzu gehörenden Informationen wird eine immer neue
          Beschäftigung mit den Werken der Bach-Familie herausgefordert. 
            Bach digital versteht sich dabei als ein Work in Progress, das es täglich
            weiterzuentwickeln und mit neuen Inhalten zu befüllen gilt. Dafür werden
            Anregungen von Nutzern und auch die aktive Mitarbeit einzelner externer
            registrierter Nutzer in Anspruch genommen. Die Zugriffsstatistik zeigt, dass
            Bach digital auch international sehr gut angenommen wird. Derzeit wird daher
            mittels mehrsprachiger Datenvorhaltung (Teilübersetzungen in Englisch, Japanisch
            und Französisch) gerade die internationale Ausrichtung gestärkt. Über die
            Bestände der drei derzeitigen Kooperationspartner Bach-Archiv Leipzig,
            Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Sächsische
            Landesbibliothek – Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Dresden und das
            Rechenzentrum der Universität Leipzig hinaus ist es nun das Ziel, die Zahl der
            Bibliothekspartner zu erhöhen, um den Zugang zu den weltweit verstreuten Quellen
            zu erleichtern. Neben etlichen kleineren Sammlungen in Deutschland sind dies u.
            a. auch die British Library und die Library of Congress, die zugesagt haben,
            digitalisierte Bach-Quellen über Bach digital zur allgemeinen Verfügung zu
            stellen. 
            Die seit 16 Jahren ununterbrochene und tägliche Arbeit an einer open
              source-basierten Datenbank (Blanken et al. 2015) und ihre technische wie
              inhaltliche Weiterentwicklung sind nun an einem Punkt, da richtungweisende
              Entscheidungen zum Ausbau, aber auch zur Vernetzung mit anderen Projekten
              anstehen. Der Grundbestand der Daten von bach-digital.de ist jederzeit für
              andere Projekte nachnutzbar. Diese ganz oder teilweise erfolgende Überführung
              von Daten in andere Datenbanken hat Konsequenzen, über die grundsätzlich zu
              sprechen ist. 
            Hier nun sollen Erfahrungen, Perspektiven und Wünsche anderer und eventuell vergleichbarer Datenbanken oder Digitalisierungsprojekte einbezogen werden.
            Fragen / Probleme für die Zukunft von Datenbanken musikalischer
                Quellen 
         
         
            Inhaltliche Fragestellungen
            
               Potential von Provenienz-Recherchen
               Ausschöpfung des Potenzials der Gemeinsamen Normdatei (GND) für die
               Provenienz-Forschung (Dokumentation historischer Musiksammlungen, Digitalisierung von Besitz- oder Auktionskatalogen, Geo-Referenzierung etc.
               Vernetzung mit anderen Projekten, externe Nutzung dieser Daten)
            
            
               Schreiberforschung
               
                  Entwicklung von Standards für Schreiber-Nomenklaturen (Leitfragen: Wie sollten Beispiel-Sammlungen von Schriftproben strukturiert sein? Wie lassen sich gemeinsame Schreiber-Portale aufbauen?)
                  Vernetzung von bereits vorhandenen Schriftproben-Datenbanken
                  Automatische Schreiberhanderkennung (Leitfragen: Wo stehen wir in der Musikpaläographie? Was lässt sich von außermusikalischen Projekten lernen? Gibt es überhaupt Bedarf, wissenschaftliche Anstrengungen zu einer automatischen Schreibererkennung mithilfe der Informatik zu unternehmen?)
               
            
            
               Wasserzeichen/Papier-Forschung
               
                  Gemeinsamer sukzessiver Ausbau von Wasserzeichen-Recherche-Portalen:
                      Wasserzeichen-Informationssystem (WZIS), Bernstein / Memory of Paper
                      (WZ-Pause versus Aufnahmen mit moderner Kameratechnik, z. B. mittels
                      Thermographie)
               
            
         
         
            Technische Fragestellungen
            
               Vernetzung
               
                  Nutzerfreundliche Anbindung externer Angebote mit zusätzlichen Informationen (Crosslinking) durch den breiten Einsatz von Normdaten und dem BEACON-Format
               
            
            
               Austauschformate 
               
                  Bereitstellung von Forschungsdaten in standardisierten und etablierten Formaten zur einfachen Weiterverwendung und automatisierten Auswertung
                  Verwendung freier Lizenzen für wissenschaftskonforme Nachnutzung (Prinzipien guter wissenschaftlicher Praxis)
               
            
            
               Notenincipits und Libretti
               
                  Nutzen und Potenzial von TEI und MEI in Musiker-Datenbanken 
               
            
            
               Tabellen oder Ontologien? 
               
                  Datenmodelierung zwischen Standardisierung und individuellen sowie praktischen Bedürfnissen
               
            
            
               Dokumentation und Lizenzen
               
                  Offenlegung von Struktur und Inhalt zur langfristigen Verfügbarmachung
               
            
         
         
            Wissenschaftskommunikation
            
               Stringenter Ausbau einer Common Science-Plattform; Installierung eines Redaktionsteams
               Nutzerfreundliche Weiterentwicklung von bisher primär wissenschaftlich
                      orientierten Plattformen, Öffentlichkeitswirksamkeit (unter Einbeziehung
                      weiterer digitaler Medien: Audio / Video / Editionen)
            
         
         
            Datenqualität 
            
               RISM-OPAC (Chancen und Probleme bei Datenübernahmen aus Komponisten-basierten Datenbanken)
               Konsistenz von Daten (innerhalb eines Projekts und projektübergreifend) 
               Identifizierung und Auffindbarkeit durch Verwendung von Normdaten
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Betz, Florian (2016): "Papiermacher und
                      Papiermühlen in der Gemeinsamen Normdatei (GND). Das Normdaten-Projekt
                      'Papiermacherkatalog' des Deutschen Buch- und Schriftmuseums der Deutschen
                      Nationalbibliothek", in: Eckhardt, Wolfgang / Neumann, Julia / Schwinger,
                      Tobias / Staub, Alexander (eds.): Wasserzeichen –
                      Schreiber – Provenienzen. Neue Methoden der Erforschung und
                      Erschließung von Kulturgut im digitalen Zeitalter: Zwischen
                      wissenschaftlicher Spezialdisziplin und 'Catalog Enrichment' (= Zeitschrift
                      für Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie Sonderband 118). Frankfurt am Main:
                      Vittorio Klostermann 243-254
               
                  Blanken, Christine (2002): Göttinger Bach-Katalog
                  http://www.bach.gwdg.de/
               
               
                  Blanken, Christine (2016): "Die
                      Komponisten-Datenbank 'Bach digital'. Erfahrungen und Perspektiven abseits
                      einer Präsentation von Digitalisaten", in: Eckhardt, Wolfgang / Neumann,
                      Julia / Schwinger, Tobias / Staub, Alexander (eds.): Wasserzeichen – Schreiber – Provenienzen. Neue Methoden der
                      Erforschung und Erschließung von Kulturgut im digitalen Zeitalter: Zwischen
                      wissenschaftlicher Spezialdisziplin und 'Catalog Enrichment' (= Zeitschrift
                      für Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie Sonderband 118). Frankfurt am Main:
                      Vittorio Klostermann 135-148.
               
                  Blanken, Christine / Rettinghaus, Klaus /
                        Hausmann, Christiane / Kupferschmidt, Jens / Freitag, Stefan
                        (2015): Bach digital. Dokumentation: Umsetzung des
                        Projektes auf Basis der Content Management Anwendung des
                        MyCoRe-Arbeitskreises. http://www.bach-digital.de/docs/BachDigital_Doku.pdf?XSL.lastPage.SESSION=/docs/BachDigital_Doku.pdf.
               
                  Eckhardt, Wolfgang (2016): "Digitale
                        Dokumentation von Wasserzeichen in Musikhandschriften im Rahmen des Projekts
                        KoFIM", in: Eckhardt, Wolfgang / Neumann, Julia / Schwinger, Tobias / Staub,
                        Alexander (eds.): Wasserzeichen – Schreiber –
                        Provenienzen. Neue Methoden der Erforschung und Erschließung von
                        Kulturgut im digitalen Zeitalter: Zwischen wissenschaftlicher
                        Spezialdisziplin und 'Catalog Enrichment' (= Zeitschrift für
                        Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie Sonderband 118). Frankfurt am Main:
                        Vittorio Klostermann 167-196
               
                  Mühlberger, Günter (o. J.): Die
                        automatisierte Volltexterkennung historischer Handschriften als gemeinsame
                        Aufgabe von Archiven, Geistes- und Computerwissenschaftlern. Das Modell
                        einer zentralen Transkriptionsplattform als virtuelle Forschungsumgebung
                        https://www.academia.edu/7451967/Die_automatisierte_Volltexterkennung _historischer_Handschriften_als_gemeinsame _Aufgabe_ von_Archiven_Geistes-_und _Computerwissenschaftlern._Das_Modell_einer _zentralen_Transkriptionsplattform_als_ virtuelle_ Forschungsumgebung
               
               
                  Rettinghaus, Klaus (2014): "Bringing
                          together Bach and MEI – Future prospects for Bach digital", Vortrag bei der
                          “Music Encoding Conference” 2014, Charlottesville, Virginia / USA:
                          University og Virginia.
               
                  Stadler, Peter (2016): "Zum Einsatz von
                          Normdaten bei der Carl-Maria-von-Weber-Gesamtausgabe", in: Eckhardt,
                          Wolfgang / Neumann, Julia / Schwinger, Tobias / Staub, Alexander (eds.): Wasserzeichen – Schreiber – Provenienzen. Neue
                          Methoden der Erforschung und Erschließung von Kulturgut im digitalen
                          Zeitalter: Zwischen wissenschaftlicher Spezialdisziplin und 'Catalog
                          Enrichment' (= Zeitschrift für Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie Sonderband
                          118). Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann 19-26.
               
                  Transkribus. Universität Innsbruck https://transkribus.eu/.
               
                  Wenger, Emanuel (2016): "Metasuche in
                          Wasserzeichendatenbanken (Bernstein-Projekt): Herausforderungen für die
                          Zusammenführung heterogener Wasserzeichen-Metadaten", in: Eckhardt, Wolfgang
                          / Neumann, Julia / Schwinger, Tobias / Staub, Alexander (eds.): Wasserzeichen – Schreiber – Provenienzen. Neue
                          Methoden der Erforschung und Erschließung von Kulturgut im digitalen
                          Zeitalter: Zwischen wissenschaftlicher Spezialdisziplin und 'Catalog
                          Enrichment' (= Zeitschrift für Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie Sonderband
                          118). Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann 289-295
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ziele des Workshops
            Der Workshop setzt sich das Ziel, die Möglichkeiten, Aufgaben und
          Herausforderungen bei der Wiederverwendung von historischen Korpora zu
          identifizieren und zu diskutieren. Insbesondere sollen dabei deren Architektur,
          Dokumentation, Veröffentlichung und Speicherung betrachtet werden. So wollen wir
          versuchen, Methoden und Strategien für das interdisziplinäre Forschungsparadigma
          der Digital Humanities zu entwickeln und diese in den Fragestellungen der
          Konferenz der DHd 2016 zu verorten. Der Fokus wird auf die spezifischen und
          fächerübergreifenden Anforderungen historischer Texte in Bezug auf deren
          Aufbereitung und Speicherung in Repositorien zum Zweck der Wiederverwendung
          gelegt. Damit richtet sich der Workshop gleichermaßen an Korpuserstellende,
          Entwickelnde und an Betreiber_innen von Repositorien und deren Nutzer_innen.
         
         
            Forschungsfragen und Kontextualisierung des Workshops
            Historische Texte bilden den Forschungsgegenstand verschiedener
            geisteswissenschaftlicher Fächer wie der Linguistik, der Geschichtswissenschaft,
            der Literaturwissenschaft und vieler weiterer. Jede Disziplin hat dabei ihre
            eigenen Forschungsfragen und Arbeitsweisen, die sich in beispielsweise den
            genutzten Formaten und Annotationsweisen zeigen, wie beispielsweise die TEI
            Guidelines und deren TEI-XML-Format (TEI Consortium 2015) für digitale Editionen
            oder das Stand-Off-Format PAULA (Dipper 2005) für linguistische Korpora. Dennoch
            gibt es Ähnlichkeiten bei der Textauswahl und -aufbereitung, die eine gemeinsame
            Nutzung der vorhandenen Daten sinnvoll erscheinen lassen. In vielen Fällen wird
            zwischen den digitalisierten historischen Texten – den Primärdaten – und den
            hinzugefügten Interpretationen in Form von Metadaten und Annotationen
            unterschieden. Diese Begriffe – Primärdatum, Annotation, Metadatum – werden
            sowohl fachübergreifend aber auch innerhalb einer Disziplin oft sehr
            unterschiedlich genutzt. 1
           Dadurch entsteht der Eindruck, dass die Daten der Disziplinen
          grundverschieden sind. Da sich die oft unterschiedlichen Korpusarchitekturen
          jedoch auf den gleichen Forschungsgegenstand, nämlich den gleichen Text,
          beziehen können, gibt es durchaus große Schnittmengen zwischen den verschiedenen
          Disziplinen. 
            Ein Beispiel für eine ähnliche Textauswahl sind historische Zeitungen, auf deren
            Grundlage ganz unterschiedliche Fragestellungen adressiert werden (für einen
            kleinen Überblick siehe bspw. Burr et al. 2015). Die korpusbasierten
            Aufbereitungsarten reichen bei diesem Register beispielsweise von digitalen
            Editionen (z. B. „Korpus romanischer Zeitungssprachen“, Burr 1994-2007), über
            registerspezifische Referenzkorpora (z. B. „German
            Manchester Corpus“, Bennett et al. 2008) bis hin zu syntaktisch tief
            annotierten Korpora (z. B. Mercurius
            Baumbank, Demske 2003-2005). Ein weiteres Beispiel sind historische
            Briefe, die als digitale Edition literaturwissenschaftlich untersucht werden (z.
            B. „Briefe und Texte aus dem intellektuellen Berlin um 1800“, Baillot /
            Seiffert 2013b), oder die als linguistisch annotierte Korpora zur
            Untersuchung von historischen Sprachständen dienen (z. B. „Kasseler
            Junktionskorpus“, Ágel / Hennig 2007-2009).
            Die Beantwortung der jeweiligen Forschungsfrage stützt sich dann häufig auf
              Interpretationen in Form von Annotationen in einem Korpus, deren Formen sich
              disziplinübergreifend ähneln können. Dennoch existieren vielfältige manuell zu
              erstellende oder automatisch generierbare Annotationsarten wie zum Beispiel
              Named-Entity-Recognition, Referenzierung auf Personendatenbanken (wie z. B. die
              Gemeinsame Normdatei 2
            ), GEO Tagging (vgl. z. B. Elliot / Gillies 2009), Lemmatisierung (z. B.
            Schmid 1994) oder syntaktisches Parsing (z. B. Malt Parser
               3
          ), die die interpretatorischen Analysegrundlagen stellen. Da die
          Digitalisierung der historischen Texte (auf Grundlage von Handschriften, Drucken
          oder Editionen) und deren Annotation aufwändig und vielschichtig sind (vgl. u.
          a. Rissanen 2008, Kytö / Pahta 2012) kann die Wiederverwendung von historischen
          Korpora von Vorteil sein. Die Vorstellung der verschieden disziplinspezifischen
          Sicht- und Zugriffweisen auf solche textbasierten Daten (vgl. Pitti 2004) und
          deren Wiederverwendung ist ein zentraler Themenbereich des Workshops. 
            Damit diese heterogenen historischen Korpora von unterschiedlichen Disziplinen
            genutzt und wiederverwendet werden können, müssen sie über eine gemeinsame
            Plattform zugreifbar sein. Diese Plattform muss das Durchsuchen der Daten sowie
            der Metadaten, ggf. das Evaluieren sowie das Anreichern mit weiteren
            Annotationen und erneute Hochladen der Daten ermöglichen. Idealerweise können
            Repositorien diese Funktion übernehmen. Sie funktionieren dann wie eine Art
            Marktplatz, auf dem historische Korpora fachübergreifend ausgetauscht und mit
            Informationen angereichert werden können.
            Der Workshop nimmt diesen Startpunkt, dessen Voraussetzungen und Konsequenzen zum Thema und begreift ihn als einen Teilbeitrag zu einem Fragenkomplex der DHd-Konferenz:
            
               
                  „Was sind die Daten der Geisteswissenschaften? Wie
                  müssen die Daten der Geisteswis­senschaften (digitalisierte bzw.
                  digitale Texte, Bilder, Musik, Audio, Filme / Videos etc.) aufgearbeitet
                  und vorgehalten werden, um sie über die Fächer hinweg nicht nur für
                  unterschiedliche, sondern auch derzeit noch unbekannte Fragestellungen
                  nutzen zu können?“
                  4
               
            
            Der Workshop versucht für historische Korpora zu ergründen, wie und welche
                Wiederverwendungsszenarien unter welchen Voraussetzungen möglich sind und was
                der aktuelle Stand der Forschung ist. Dabei ist es enorm wichtig, dieses Thema
                vielschichtig und aus mehreren Perspektiven zu beleuchten. Fallstudien für die
                Wiederverwendung historischer Daten können exemplarisch Erfahrungen,
                Herausforderungen und Aufgaben thematisieren. Anhand von Korpusarchitekturen,
                die die Wiederverwendung unterstützen, können wichtige Konzepte und Modelle
                diskutiert und verglichen werden. Die Beschreibung von konkreten Technologien
                für die Umsetzung eines Repositoriums erlaubt es, die theoretischen Datenmodelle
                auf ihre Praxistauglichkeit zu untersuchen. Die Nutzer dieser Technologien
                tragen durch ihre Erfahrungen über die potentiellen Vorteile der Wiedernutzung
                und die Bereiche, in denen sie Sinn machen, maßgeblich zur Diskussion bei.
            Damit stellen sich folgende Fragen in Bezug auf die historischen Korpora, deren Aufbereitung, die Repositorien bzw. Technologien und deren Nutzung:
            
               Können dieselben Primärdaten unter verschiedenen Forschungsfragen unterschiedlich genutzt werden?
               Welche Gemeinsamkeiten, welche Unterschiede weisen die Korpora hinsichtlich ihrer umfangreichen Aufbereitung historischer Texte auf.
               In wie weit fördern / erschweren die Annotationen als theoretische Konzepte und
                  Interpretationen eine Wiederverwendung?
               Welche Arten von Annotationen und Analysen können wie wiederwendet werden?
               Welche Arten der Wiederverwendung können sich ergeben?
               Wie unterschiedlich bewerten Disziplinen die Qualität eines Korpus?
               Welche interdisziplinären Nutzer- und Nutzungsszenarien ergeben sich?
               Welche Anforderungen ergeben sich hinsichtlich der Korpusarchitektur inklusive Annotationsarten und Format?
               Welche Speicherformate eignen sich für die Wiederverwendung von Forschungsdaten?
               Wie können Lizenzen den Austausch und die Wiederverwendung fördern?
               Was sind die relevanten Metadaten über ein Korpus?
               Welche Art von Zugriff auf die Korpora ist notwendig, um eine Wiederverwendung zu erleichtern? Wie müssen Repositorien beschaffen sein?
               Welche Vor- und Nachteile besitzen disziplinspezifische / interdisziplinäre
                    oder / und formatabhängige oder -unabhängige Repositorien?
               Eine Diskussion und mögliche Beantwortung dieser Fragen wollen wir durch einen fächerübergreifenden Austausch von Entwicklern, Korpuserstellern und Nutzern im Rahmen des Workshops ermöglichen.
            
         
         
            Form des Workshops
            Der Workshop soll bestehend aus zwei impulsgebenden Keynotes und sechs Vorträgen
                      an einem Tag vor der DHd-Konferenz stattfinden. Eine Keynote wird das Thema des
                      interdisziplinären Zugangs und der Wiederverwendung zu historischen Daten
                      allgemein thematisieren und problematisieren (Lüdeling und Dreyer, Projektleiter
                      des LAUDATIO-Repositoriums für historische Texte. 
            Eine zweite Keynote wird die Frage nach einem Qualitätsmanagement im
                        Rahmen von Wiederverwendungsszenarien, dessen Umfang und Zweck aufwerfen und
                        diskutieren (Laurent Romary, DARIAH Director. 
            Die Vorträge, die aus dem offenen Call des Workshops hervorgehen,
                          sollen Korpuserstellende, Repositorienentwickler_innen und -nutzer_innen aus
                          ganz verschiedenen Fachbereichen die Gelegenheit geben, die oben aufgeworfenen
                          Fragen aufzunehmen und aus einer notwendigerweise interdisziplinären Sicht die
                          Möglichkeiten, Herausforderungen und Lösungen für die Wiederverwendung von
                          historischen Korpora zu diskutieren. Die Keynotes erhalten je 30 Minuten
                          Redezeit sowie 15 Minuten Diskussion und die Vorträge je 20 Minuten und 10
                          Minuten Diskussion. Eine Diskussion wird den Workshop abschließen. Die primäre
                          Sprache des Workshops ist Deutsch. 
         
      
      
         
            Zur Diskussion über Primärdatum, Transkriptionen, Normalisierungen siehe
                            bspw. Claridge 2008, Himmelmann 2012, Kramer 2014; über Metadaten siehe
                            bspw. Odebrecht 2015, Haynes 2004; über Annotationen siehe bspw.
                            Lüdeling 2011, Kübler / Zinsmeister 2015).
            „Die Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND) ist eine Normdatei für Personen,
                            Körperschaften, Konferenzen, Geografika, Sachschlagwörter und Werktitel,
                            die vor allem zur Katalogisierung von Literatur in Bibliotheken dient,
                            zunehmend aber auch von Archiven, Museen, Projekten und in
                            Webanwendungen genutzt wird.“ (DNB 2015). 
            Tool zum automatischen Annotieren von syntaktischen Dependenzen (Hall et
                              al. 2014).
            Siehe den Call for Papers DHd 2016 http://www.dhd2016.de/node/9 [letzter Zugriff:
                                12.September 2015]. 
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Ágel, Vilmos / Hennig, Mathilde (2007-2009): KAJUK (Version 1.1). Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen
                                  http://www.uni-giessen.de/kajuk/index.htm, http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-2102-8 [letzter Zugriff 10.
                                    September 2015].
               
                  Baillot, Anne / Seifert, Sabine (2013a): „The Project
                                      "Berlin Intellectuals 1800–1830" between Research and Teaching“ in:  Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 4. DOI:
                                      10.4000/jtei.707.
               
                  Baillot, Anne / Seifert, Sabine (2013b): Briefe und Texte aus dem intellektuellen Berlin um
                                      1800
                  http://tei.ibi.hu-berlin.de/berliner-intellektuelle/ [letzter
                                        Zugriff: 22.Dezember 2015].
               
                  Bennett, Paul / Durrell, Martin / Ensslin, Astrid /
                                            Scheible, Silke / Whitt, Richard (2008): GerManC
                                            Project (Version 1.0), University of Manchester http://www.llc.manchester.ac.uk/research/projects/germanc/, http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-2D1B-1 [letzter Zugriff
                                            10.September 2015].
               
                  Burr, Elisabeth (1994-2007): Korpus
                                            Romanischer Zeitungssprachen. Duisburg - Bremen - Leipzig http://www.uni-leipzig.de/~burr/CorpusLing/ [letzter Zugriff 10.
                                            Sepzember 2015].
               
                  Burr, Elisabeth / Burkhardt, Julia / Potapenko, Elena /
                                                Sierig, Rebecca / Concepción Durán, Arámis (2015): „Das
                                                Duisburg-Leipzig Korpus romanischer Zeitungssprachen und sein Textmodell“,
                                                in: Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen. 2. Jahrestagung des
                                                Verbandes der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum, DHd
                                                2015, Graz. https://www.conftool.pro/dhd2015/index.php/Burr-Das_Duisburg-Leipzig_Korpus_ romanischer_Zeitungssprachen-1771016.pdf?page=downloadPaper&filename=Burr-Das_Duisburg-Leipzig_Korpus_romanischer_Zeitungssprachen -1771016. pdf&form_id=177
                                                [letzter Zugriff: 11.September 2015]. 
               
                  Claridge, Claudia (2008): “Historical Corpora” in:
                                                  Lüdeling, Anke / Kytö, Merja (eds.): Corpus Linguistics.
                                                  An International Handbook. Volume 1. Berlin: De Gruyter 242–259. 
               
                  Demske, Ulrike (2003-2005): Mercurius (Version 1.1). Universität Potsdam http://www.uni-potsdam.de/guvdds/projekte/abgproj.html, http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-467D-6 [letzter Zugriff:
                                                    10.September 2015]. 
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie (2005): “XML-Based Stand-Off
                                                      Representation and Exploitation of Multi-Level Linguistic Annotation”, in:
                                                      Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage Berlin 39-50. 
               
                  DNB = Deutsche Nationalbiliothek (2015): Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND)
                  http://www.dnb.de/gnd [letzter
                                                      Zugriff 10.September 2015].
               
                  Elliott, Tom / Gillies, Sean (2009): “Digital Geography
                                                        and Classics. Changing the Center of Gravity”, in: Digital
                                                        Humanities Quarterly 3, 1  
                  
                     http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/1/000031/000031.html
                   [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2015]. 
               
                  Hall, Johan / Nilsson, Jens / Nivre, Joakim (2014):
                                                          MaltParser
                  http://www.maltparser.org/
                                                          [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2015]. 
               
                  Haynes, David (2004): Metadata for
                                                            information management and retrieval. London: Facet publishing. 
               
                  Himmelmann, Nikolaus. P. (2012): “Linguistic Data Types
                                                              and the Interface between Language Documentation and Description”, in: Language Documentation and Conservation 6: 187-207. 
               
                  Kramer, Michael J. (2014): “Defining Data for
                                                                Humanists: Text, Artifact, Information or Evidence?”, in: Journal for Digital Humanities 3, 2  
                  
                     http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/defining-data-for-humanists-by-trevor-owens/
                   [letzter Zugriff: 10. September 2015]. 
               
                  Kübler, Sandra / Zinsmeister, Heike (2015): Corpus Linguistics and Linguistically Annotated
                                                                    Corpora. London / New York: Bloomsbury. 
               
                  Kytö, Merja / Pahta, Päivi (2012): “Evidence from
                                                                      historical corpora up to the twentieth century” in: Nevalainen, Terttu /
                                                                      Traugott, Elizabeth C. (eds.): The Oxford Handbook of the
                                                                      History of English. Oxford o.a.: Oxford University Press 123-133. 
               
                  Lüdeling, Anke (2011): “Corpora in Linguistics:
                                                                        Sampling and Annotation” in: Grandin, Karl (ed.): Going
                                                                        Digital. Evolutionary and Revolutionary Aspects of Digitization.
                                                                        Nobel Symposium 147. New York: Science History Publications 220-243. 
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin (2015): „Interdisziplinäre Nutzung
                                                                          von Forschungsdaten mithilfe einer technisch-abstrakten Modellierung“, in:
                                                                          Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen. 2. Jahrestagung des
                                                                            Verbandes der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum DHd
                                                                            2015, Graz. https://www.conftool.pro/dhd2015/index.php/Odebrecht-Interdisziplin%C3%A4re_Nutzung_von_Forschungsdaten _mithilfe_einer_technisch-abstrakten_Modellierung-63110.pdf?page=downloadPaper&filename=Odebrecht-Interdisziplin%C3%A4re_Nutzung_von_Forschungsdaten _mithilfe_einer_technisch-abstrakten_Modellierung-63110.pdf &form_id=63
                                                                            [letzter Zugriff 12.September 2015]. 
               
                  Pitti, Daniel V. (2004): “Designing Sustainable
                                                                              Projects and Publications” in: Schreibman, Susan / Siemens, Ray / Unsworth,
                                                                              John (eds.): A Companion to Digital Humanities.
                                                                              Oxford: Blackwell 471–487. 
               
                  Rissanen, Matti (2008): “Corpus Linguistics and
                                                                                Historical Linguistics” in: Lüdeling, Anke / Kytö, Merja (eds.): Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook. Volume
                                                                                1. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter 53-68. 
               
                  Schmid, Helmut (1994): “Probabilistic Part-of-Speech
                                                                                  Tagging Using Decision Trees“, in: Proceedings of
                                                                                  International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing,
                                                                                  1994. Manchester. 
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.) (2015): TEI P5:
                                                                                    Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 2.8.0.
                                                                                    2015-04-06. TEI Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 11. August
                                                                                    2015].
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Beschreibung
             Dieser Workshop widmet sich der Textannotation und der Textanalyse mit der
          web-basierten Annotationsplattform CATMA (Computer Aided Text Markup and
          Analysis) (Meister et al. 2015), welche seit 2008 an der Universität
          Hamburg entwickelt wird. Die Bedarfe der Modellierung und Operationalisierung
          geisteswissenschaftlicher Konzepte und die Anwendung dieser Modelle auf
          Textdaten stand bei der Entwicklung von CATMA im Fokus. CATMA ist Open Source
          und außerdem XML / TEI-kompatibel, dadurch ist die Nachnutzbarkeit der mit CATMA
          erstellten Annotationen und Analyseergebnisse sichergestellt. Der Workshop wird
          neben einer Einführung in die Nutzung der Plattform für manuelles Annotieren auf
          zwei weitere – gerade bei der Umsetzung größerer Annotationsprojekte wesentliche
          – Aspekte genauer eingehen: Kollaboration und Automatisierung. 
            Im Workshop wird gezeigt werden, welche Funktionalitäten in CATMA für
            kollaboratives Arbeiten zur Verfügung stehen und wie das kollaborative Arbeiten
            unter den erschwerten Bedingungen der literaturwissenschaftlichen Praxis, wie z.
            B. der Polyvalenz literarischer Texte, möglich ist. Beim automatischen Erstellen
            von Annotationen hingegen spielen die kürzlich im Rahmen des heureCLÉA-Projektes
            1 in CATMA integrierten
            Möglichkeiten eine zentrale Rolle. 
            Ziel von heureCLÉA ist die Bereitstellung einer digitalen Heuristik zur
              Annotation von einfachen bis komplexen Konzepten der Narratologie. Unter einer
              digitalen Heuristik verstehen wir ein Werkzeug zur automatischen und
              semiautomatischen Annotation. Das heureCLÉA-Projekt konzentriert sich hierfür
              auf die Analyse temporaler Phänomene. Auf einer einfachen, an der Textoberfläche
              orientierten Ebene handelt es sich hierbei unter anderem um die Erkennung von
              Zeitausdrücken in literarischen Texten, auf einer komplexeren, metatextuellen
              Ebene beispielsweise um die Erkennung von Phänomenen der zeitlichen Ordnung wie
              Prolepse und Analepse (Gius / Jacke 2014). Dafür entwickelten wir einen auf
              manuellen und automatischen Annotationen basierten Ansatz, in dem die
              regelbasierte Extraktion und Normalisierung von Zeitausdrücken als Ausgangspunkt
              für Machine Learning Verfahren verwendet wurde (Bögel et al. 2015). Eine ganz
              wesentliche Komponente dieses Ansatzes ist das an der Universität Heidelberg
              entwickelte System HeidelTime (Strötgen / Gertz 2013). Sowohl die automatische
              Annotation von Zeitausdrücken, als auch linguistischer Oberflächenphänomene
              (Wortarten und Satzgrenzen), sowie Tempusannotationen sind bereits in CATMA
              integriert und können mit manuellen Annotationen kombiniert werden.
            Im Workshop werden zunächst wesentliche Aspekte wie Modellierung, Annotation,
                Analyse, Kollaboration und Automatisierung mit CATMA anhand der Erfahrungen des
                heureCLÉA-Projektes vorgestellt. Anschließend haben die Teilnehmer_innen die
                Gelegenheit in einer praktischen hands-on-Session CATMA sowie HeidelTime und
                andere Komponenten der in CATMA integrierten NLP-Pipeline auszuprobieren.
                Automatische Annotationen können evaluiert werden und mit manuellen Annotationen
                kombiniert in die Analyse einfließen. Es kann entweder mit eigenen oder
                kollaborativ mit von uns zur Verfügung gestellten Texten gearbeitet werden. 
            Wir erhoffen uns außerdem durch den Workshop kritisches Feedback zur weiteren Verbesserung von CATMA und eine Diskussion über die Anforderungen für Textanalyse-Plattformen in verschiedenen Bereichen der Digital Humanities.
         
         
            Beitragende
            Alle Veranstalter_innen sind Mitglieder des heureCLÉA-Projektes. Wir haben auf
                  zahlreichen nationalen und internationalen Tagungen und Konferenzen unsere
                  Arbeiten zu CATMA, HeidelTime und heureCLÉA vorgestellt. Dieser Workshop baut
                  auf Erfahrungen aus anderen Workshops zum selben Thema sowie der Einbettung von
                  CATMA in die Lehre auf. Auch das sehr positive Feedback vergangener Workshops,
                  z. B. zu unserem Tutorial im Rahmen der DH 2014, hat uns dazu motiviert, erneut
                  einen Workshop anzubieten bzw. einen Antrag dafür einzureichen.
            
               Thomas Bögel, Institut für Informatik, Universität Heidelberg,
                  
            Nach seinem Computerlinguistikstudium begann Thomas Bögel sein Promotionsstudium am Institut für Informatik an der Universität Heidelberg, wo er auch wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter ist. Seine Forschung beschäftigt sich vor allem mit "event extraction" und "timeline generation" sowie mit der Entwicklung von Machine Learning Systemen für die Extraktion von temporalen Relationen in narratologischen Texten.
            
               Evelyn Gius, Institut für Germanistik, Universität Hamburg,
                  
            Evelyn Gius forscht und lehrt im Bereich der Digital Humanities mit einem Fokus auf computergestützter Textanalyse und der Hermeneutik digitaler Zugänge zu Texten. In ihrer Promotion hat sie mithilfe von CATMA an einem Korpus von Erzählungen über Arbeitssituationen untersucht, inwiefern narratologische Kategorien aus der Literaturwissenschaft für die Analyse der Konflikthaftigkeit von Alltagserzählungen genutzt werden können.
            
               Marco Petris, Institut für Germanistik, Universität Hamburg,
                  
            Marco Petris ist Informatiker mit starker Affinität für die Geisteswissenschaften und hat von Beginn an CATMA federführend aufgebaut. Als Software Entwickler ist er in zahlreiche Projekte für die Digital Humanities involviert, wobei er sich dabei vor allem um die Konzeption und Implementierung kümmert.
            
               Jannik Strötgen, Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken,
                  
            Bevor Jannik Strötgen als Postdoc zum MPI wechselte, studierte er in Heidelberg
                    Computerlinguistik und promovierte und arbeitete am Institut für Informatik der
                    Universität Heidelberg. Im Rahmen seiner Dissertation beschäftigte er sich vor
                    allem mit Informationsextraktion sowie Information Retrieval und begann die
                    Entwicklung von HeidelTime, einem frei verfügbaren Temporal Tagger, der für
                    verschiedene Domänen und Sprachen geeignet ist. 
         
         
            Kapazität und Ausstattung
            Die Teilnehmerzahl ist auf 20 Personen begrenzt. Jede_r Teilnehmer_in braucht
                      einen Laptop (ein Tablet PC reicht nicht aus!) und ein Google Mail Konto für den
                      CATMA Login.
         
      
      
         
            heureCLEA ist ein BMBF-gefördertes
                        ehumanities Projekt zwischen der Universität Hamburg und der Universität
                        Heidelberg (Gertz / Meister 2016).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bögel,Thomas / Strötgen, Jannik / Gertz, Michael
                            (2015): „A Hybrid Approach to Extract Temporal Signals from Narratives“,
                            accepted at: International Conference of the German
                            Society for Computational Linguistics and Language Technology
                            (GSCL’15), Duisburg-Essen, Germany. 
               
                  Gertz, Michael / Meister, Jan Christioph (2016): heureCLÉA. Collaborative Literature exploration &
                            annotation. Hamburg: Universität Hamburg http://heureclea.de/ [letzter Zugriff 08. Oktober 2015].
               
                  Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina (2014): „Zur Annotation narratologischer
                              Kategorien der Zeit. Guidelines zur Nutzung des CATMA-Tagsets“. Hamburg 2014
                              [letzter
                              Zugriff 08. Oktober 2015]. 
               
                  Meister, Jan Christoph / Gius, Evelyn / Petris, Marco / Meister, Malte
                                / Jacke, Janina (2015): CATMA. Computer
                                Aided Textual Markup Computer Aided Textual Markup & AnalysisAnalysis.
                                Hamburg: Universität Hamburg http://www.catma.de/ [letzter Zugriff 08. Oktober 2015].
               
                  Strötgen, Jannik / Gertz, Michael (2013): „Multilingual and cross-domain temporal
                                  tagging“ in: Language Resources and Evaluation 47, 2:
                                  269-298. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Kurzbeschreibung
            Im Verlauf der letzten 10 Jahre hat die Menge an digital verfügbaren,
          fachwissenschaftlich annotierten Volltexten für die historische Forschung stark
          zugenommen. Damit einher geht auch eine Veränderung sowohl der Nutzungsformen
          digitaler Quellen als auch der Möglichkeiten der historischen Arbeitsweise.
          Bestand um die Jahrtausendwende noch enger Kontakt zwischen Historiker_innen und
          Quellen, nimmt dies mit zunehmender Digitalisierung perspektivisch ab. Hat der /
          die Forscher_in früher die für seine Forschungsfragen relevanten Quellen in der
          Regel alle mindestens einmal gelesen, scheint dies bei den heute
          recherchierbaren Mengen an digitalen Quellen kaum noch möglich. Ein Hauptproblem
          ergibt sich hier aus der Schnittstelle zwischen Forscher_innen und den im Netz
          erreichbaren Quellendatenbanken. Die Suchinterfaces der Datenbanken sind oft für
          die Nutzung durch Expert_innen des jeweiligen Materials optimiert. Dies ist auf
          der einen Seite zu begrüßen, da sie den Fachwissenschaftler_innen damit besten
          Zugriff auf das Material gewähren. Daneben sollten aber weitere
          Zugriffsmöglichkeiten für übergreifende Text-Mining- oder Big-Data-Recherchen
          bereitgestellt werden, mit denen verschiedene Quellenkorpora parallel im
          Hinblick auf übergreifende Fragestellungen untersucht werden können.
            Neben Such- bzw. sammlungsorientierten Zugriffen auf die Daten wird die Fähigkeit, mittels bestimmter Visualisierungsmethoden und -instrumente neue Zusammenhänge in den Daten zu erkennen und diese dann für die historische Analyse zu nutzen immer wichtiger. Insbesondere im Bereich der graphorientierten Visualisierungsmethoden ist im Moment ein regelrechter Boom an Softwarebibliotheken und Online-Tools zu beobachten. Auch in den einschlägigen Forschungsumgebungen bzw. Forschungsinfrastrukturen für die Geisteswissenschaften wie TextGrid und DARIAH werden zunehmend Visualisierungsinstrumente für annotierte Fachdaten eingebunden.
            Im Workshop zweier Partnerinstitutionen aus dem DARIAH-DE Cluster
            "Fachwissenschaftliche Annotationen" (Salomon Ludwig Steinheim-Institut für
            deutsch-jüdische Geschichte / Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur
            Mainz, Digitale Akademie) soll es mit konkretem Praxisbezug um die Potentiale,
            Methoden und Instrumente zur Visualisierung von historischen Fachdaten gehen.
            Als Anwendungsbeispiel dienen die historischen Fachdatenrepositorien, die beide
            Partner in den Workshop mit einbringen (bspw. Epidat –
            epigraphische Datenbank; die Deutschen
            Inschriften Online; die Regesta Imperii Online). 
            Visualisiert werden zunächst klassische Fragestellungen, wie beispielsweise die
              nach bestimmten Familienbeziehungen, nach Orts- oder Zeitbezügen in den Daten.
              Genutzt werden Instrumente wie beispielsweise die Graphdatenbank neo4j, das
              Netzwerkvisualisierungsinstrument Gephi, aber auch JavaScript-Tools auf Basis
              von sigma.js,
              dracula oder auch  d3 . Der Workshop wird
              schrittweise vorgehen. Ein grundlegendes Verständnis für TEI/XML, JSON, RDF
              sowie JavaScript-Webtechnologien ist für die Teilnahme am Workshop hilfreich,
              aber nicht zwingend. Nach einer allgemeinen Einführung in den Bereich des
              fachwissenschaftlichen Annotierens wird es um praktische Beispiele gehen, die in
              den Daten vorhandenen Annotationen für verschiedene Visualisierungsinstrumente
              aufzubereiten und dann die jeweiligen Visualisierungen zu erzeugen. In kurzen
              Impulsreferaten werden sich die Workshop-Teilnehmer_innen die gemeinsam
              erarbeiteten Visualisierungen und die Instrumente, mit denen diese
              Visualisierungen erzeugt worden sind, gegenseitig vorstellen. 
            Im Fazit soll der Workshop ein Bewusstsein und auch schon erste Fähigkeiten
                entwickeln, sich mit Hilfe von Visualisierungsinstrumenten neue Sichten auf das
                Quellenmaterial und somit neue Forschungsperspektiven zu eröffnen. Deutlich
                werden wird aber auch, dass dieser Ansatz nicht automatisch zu einer
                „Antwort-Maschine“ führt, die dem / der Wissenschaftler_in die interpretative
                Arbeit abnimmt. Vielmehr können sich durch Visualisierungen neue
                Interpretationsmöglichkeiten des Quellenmaterials bieten, die vorher einfach auf
                Grund der Datenmasse nicht sichtbar gemacht werden konnten.
            Weiterführende Literatur:
            Kuczera, Andreas (2015): Graphdatenbanken für Historiker.
                Netzwerke in den Registern der Regesten Kaiser Friedrichs III. mit neo4j und
                Gephi http://mittelalter.hypotheses.org/5995.
              
            Schrade, Torsten (2013): "Datenstrukturierung", in: Frietsch, Ute / Rogge, Jörg
                (eds.): Über die Praxis des kulturwissenschaftlichen
                Arbeitens. Ein Handwörterbuch. Bielefeld: transcript 91–97.
         
         
            Teilnehmerzahl
            10 - 15 Personen
         
         
            Benötigte Ausstattung
            
               WLAN-Zugang
               Beamer
               Workshop-Teilnehmer sollten ihre eigenen Laptops mitbringen
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Die Diskussion rund um digitale Editionen als Ergänzung oder sogar Ersatz für die
          klassische Buchausgabe ist in vollem Gange. Grund dafür ist auch der Siegeszug
          der plattform- und implementationsunabhängigen Metasprache XML in den „Digital
          Humanities“. Insbesondere der TEI-Standard (Burnard / Bauman 2007) hat dafür
          gesorgt, dass Informationen aller Art in einem Sammelformat vorliegen, das von
          vielen neu entwickelten Werkzeugen als Ausgabe- und Austauschformat verwendet
          wird.
            Der weitere Bearbeitungsprozess bis hin zur Fertigstellung einer Edition fußt daher heutzutage stark auf XML. Gleichwohl bleibt das Buch als notwendiges Ergebnis eines Editionsprojekts weiterhin die Regel. Somit stehen viele Wissenschaftler zu Beginn eines solchen Projekts vor dem Problem, einen Workflow auf XML-Basis zu definieren, der am Ende möglichst komfortabel – mit oder ohne Zutun eines Verlags – auch einen hochwertigen Buchdruck erlaubt.
            Projekte wie
            XML-Print oder
            Apache FOP setzen hier an und wollen das Textsatzproblem innerhalb der „X-Technologien“
            1  lösen. Es ist in den vergangenen Jahren jedoch deutlich geworden, dass der wissenschaftliche Textsatz von diesen Werkzeugen (noch) nicht in all seinen Facetten erfasst werden kann. Daher greifen aktuelle Editionsprojekte in der Regel auf etablierte Werkzeuge wie
            TUSTEP oder andere nicht notwendigerweise XML-basierte Ansätze zurück, indem der XML-Eingabetext mittels XSLT in die entsprechenden Zwischenformate überführt wird.
          
            Genau hier möchte der Workshop ansetzen und die Möglichkeiten des Textsatzsystems
            TeX 2 im Bezug auf die Erstellung
            einer historisch-kritischen Ausgabe (kritische Edition) vorstellen. Leider wird
            dieser Weg aus Unwissenheit bzw. wegen falscher oder schlicht veralteter
            Informationen bzgl. des Funktionsumfangs viel zu selten beschritten. Umso
            erfreulicher sind Forschungs- und Arbeitsumgebungen wie 
                  FuD
                oder
            
                  ediarum
               , die am Ende des editorischen XML-basierten
              Workflows eine mit TeX erzeugte PDF-Datei zur Kontrolle bzw. als Vorstufe des
              Druckergebnisses ausgeben. 
         
         
            Funktionsweise von LaTeX
            
               Allgemein
               Das quelloffene Textsatzsystem TeX und die gleichnamige Programmiersprache wurden Ende der Siebziger Jahre vom amerikanischen Mathematikprofessor Donald E. Knuth für den Druck seiner eigener Bücher entwickelt. Das Problem des Textsatzes – „Wie bringe ich unter Beachtung verschiedener Regeln möglichst schön Zeichen aller Art aufs Papier?“ – wurde von ihm als mathematisches Optimierungsproblem definiert und mit neuartigen Algorithmen gelöst. Die
                  subjektive Schönheit wurde dadurch von Knuth auf Basis typographischer Traditionen und Methoden
                  objektiviert.
                
               Die so entstandenen Algorithmen, z. B. derjenige für den Zeilenumbruch (Knuth
                  / Plass 1981) waren bahnbrechend und sind bis heute „State of the Art“.
                  Entsprechend werden sie auch in jüngerer Software wie Adobe InDesign oder Apache FOP nahezu
                  unverändert verwendet. Für den Autor eines Texts bedeutet dies, dass er sich
                  vollständig auf die inhaltliche bzw. strukturelle Gestaltung konzentrieren
                  kann. Dies entspricht der Arbeit mit XML-Quelldaten, die in der Regel
                  keinerlei typographische Anweisungen enthalten. 
               Somit lebt die klassische Trennung zwischen Autor und Setzer wieder auf, die
                    durch Textverarbeitungsprogramme in den vergangenen
                    Jahrzehnten stückweise aufgeweicht worden ist – mit negativen Folgen für die
                    Druckqualität. In heutigen digitalen Arbeitsumgebungen entspricht der Setzer
                    einem Satzprogramm, das eine Druckvorlage – heutzutage oft „hinter den
                    Kulissen“ einer virtuellen Arbeitsumgebung – auf die Quelldokumente eines
                    Autors anwendet. 
            
            
               Anwendungsfall Kritische Edition
               Eine kritische Edition stellt besondere Anforderungen an ein
                      Textsatzwerkzeug. Daher eignet sich dieser Dokumenttyp besonders gut, um die
                      Qualität von LaTeX zu demonstrieren. Plachta definiert für eine kritische
                      Edition zehn elementare Bestandteile (Plachta 2006: 14-15). Diese lassen
                      sich zu den folgenden drei Themenkomplexen zusammenfassen:
               
                  Edierter Text,
                  Apparate,
                  Verzeichnisse.
               
               Zu all diesen Bereichen liefert LaTeX entweder direkt oder über Erweiterungen (Pakete) Möglichkeiten, hochwertige Ergebnisse zu erzielen. Sie stehen über das zentrale Paketarchiv CTAN
                        3 allen Nutzern kostenfrei zur Verfügung.
                      
            
         
         
            Inhalte des Workshops
            Entlang der im vorherigen Abschnitt genannten Bestandteile einer kritischen Edition wird der Workshop den Teilnehmern die Gelegenheit geben, LaTeX als Satzprogramm kennenzulernen bzw. vorhandene Kenntnisse auszubauen. Im Detail werden die folgenden Inhalte vermittelt:
            
               Edierter Text: Neben den grundlegenden Satzalgorithmen werden
                        mikrotypographische Fragen thematisiert. Dazu gehören neben der Nutzung
                        typographisch korrekter Zeichen (z. B. bei Anführungszeichen, Gedankenstrich
                        oder Ellipse) auch der automatische optische Randausgleich oder die
                        Laufweitenänderung, die beide durch das Paket microtype bereitgestellt werden. Mehr zum Thema Mikrotypographie
                        findet man bei Beinert (2015). 
               Apparate: Die Anforderungen an den Satz von Apparaten gehen weit über
                          diejenigen „normaler“ Fußnoten hinaus. Es wird das Paket reledmac vorgestellt und neben verschiedenen Anpassungen auch
                          Lösungen für Probleme wie z. B. überlappende Lemmata erarbeitet. 
               Verzeichnisse: Eine kritische Edition enthält neben einem Quellenverzeichnis verschiedene Register. Diese sollen im Idealfall direkt aus den Druckdaten dynamisch erzeugt werden. Dazu werden die Erweiterungen
                            biblatex sowie
                            imakeidx vorgestellt, die genau dies bewerkstelligen.
                          
            
         
         
            Teilnehmerkreis / Technische Ausstattung
            Der Workshop richtet sich an alle interessierten Wissenschaftler_innen, die Wert
                          auf einen hochwertigen Druck ihrer Edition legen. Auch Entscheidungsträger, die
                          ein Textsatzsystem für ihr Editionsprojekt suchen, sind ausdrücklich
                          angesprochen. Für die praktischen Beispiele werden grundlegende Kenntnisse der
                          Textsatzsprache LaTeX vorausgesetzt.
            Da es sich um eine „Hands-on“-Sitzung handelt, sollte die Teilnehmerzahl 15 nicht
                            übersteigen, wobei ich eine Warteliste begrüßen würde. Die Teilnehmerinnen und
                            Teilnehmer benötigen einen Laptop mit einer (möglichst aktuellen)
                            TeX-Distribution (MiKTeX oder TeX Live). Für die Präsentation selbst wird ein
                            Beamer benötigt.
         
      
      
         
            Unter den X-Technologien versteht man die W3C-Standards XML, XSL und XPath sowie je nach Kontext weitere im XML-Umfeld entstandene Sprachen und Formate wie XQuery oder XLink.
            TeX wird seit langem schon nur noch
                              selten direkt angewendet, sondern in der Regel über eine Makrosprache wie
                              LaTeX (siehe z. B. http://www.latex-project.org) oder ConTeXt (siehe z. B. http://wiki.contextgarden.net/What_is_ConTeXt) angesprochen. Der
                              Workshop konzentriert sich auf LaTeX.
            Das
                                Comprehensive TeX Archive Network stellt über zwei zentrale Server und mehr als hundert Spiegelserver (Mirrors) weltweit unter
                                http://www.ctan.org insgesamt über 4500 Erweiterungen bereit.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Beinert, Wolfgang (2015): Typolexikon.de. Das Lexikon der europäische Typographie http://www.typolexikon.de/m/mikrotypographie.html [letzter
                                  Zugriff 05. Februar 2016].
               
                  Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften
                                  (2010): ediarum. Eine digitale Arbeitsumgebung für
                                  Editionsvorhaben http://www.bbaw.de/telota/software/ediarum [letzter Zugriff 05.
                                  Februar 2016].
               
                  Burnard, Lou / Bauman, Syd (2007): TEI P5. Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.
                                    Text Encoding Initiative http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ [letzter
                                    Zugriff 05. Februar 2016].
               
                  Knuth, Donald E. / Plass, Michael F. (1981): “Breaking
                                      paragraphs into lines”, in: Journal Software: Practice and
                                      Experience 1 0.1002/spe.4380111102.
               
                  Plachta, Bodo (22006): Editionswissenschaft: eine Einführung in Methode und
                                        Praxis der Edition neuerer Texte (= Reclams Universal-Bibliothek
                                        17603). Stuttgart: Philipp Reclam jun. 
               
                  Trier Center for Digital Humanities (TCDH) /
                                          Forschungszentrum Europa (FZE) (2014): FuD.
                                          Eine virtuelle Forschungsumgebung für die Geisteswissenschaften. Universität
                                          Trier http://fud.uni-trier.de/de/ [letzter Zugriff 05. Februar
                                          2016].
            
         
      
   



      
         Das Panel wird durch vier Kurzvorträge in Probleme der Nutzung digitaler Werkzeuge für nicht-indoeuropäische Sprachen einführen. Die Vorträge basieren auf Erfahrungen aus langfristig angelegten Projekten und haben jeweils individuelle Lösungen für die spezifischen Anforderungen gefunden, die hauptsächlich durch die Sprache formuliert werden.
         Allen Projekten gemein sind Probleme der Nutzung von digitalen Werkzeugen, die insbesondere bei der Verwendung von Quellen historischer oder wenig erforschter Sprachen auftreten. 
         Aktuelle Content Management Systeme und Annotationstools wurden selten im Hinblick auf Anforderungen aus Orchideenfächern entwickelt. Dies betrifft beispielsweise einige Sprachen mit nichtkonkatenativer Morphologie oder komplexen Schriftsysteme. Daher müssen für erwähnte Sprachen entweder existierende Anwendungen angepasst oder erschaffen werden.
         Bei der Adaption können während der Modellierung wichtige Eigenschaften nicht berücksichtigt werden oder bleiben nur als Kommentar erhalten, was eine weitere maschinelle Bearbeitung erschwert. Bezüglich der Datenkodierung ergibt sich das Problem der Ineffizienz. So wurden morphologische Tagsets primär für die indo-europäische Sprachfamilie entwickelt. Für eine tiefe linguistische Annotation müssen aber diese Standards beispielweise für einige semitische Sprachen angepasst werden. 
         Nicht selten ist die Alternative die Eigenentwicklung projektbezogener Lösungen, die aber aufgrund der Anforderungen mit eigenen Datenformaten arbeiten, und so nicht mehr den geltenden Standards folgen und den Austausch erschweren. Hinzu kommt der immense Zeit- und Ressourcenaufwand bei der Implementierung.
         Allerdings sind gerade im deutschsprachigen Raum viele langfristige Projekte auf digitale Tools angewiesen.
         Durch eine Vernetzung solcher Projekte können gemeinsame Anforderungen an, und Begrenzungen von aktuellen Lösungen besprochen und Initiativen zur Entwicklung digitaler Tools und Ressourcen koordiniert werden. Daher ist das Ziel dieses Panels eine erste Zusammenführung langfristig ausgerichteter Projekte im deutschen Sprachraum, die mit historischen nicht-indo-europäischen Sprachen im digitalen Kontext arbeiten. Dabei sollen die Probleme der Nachhaltigkeit entwickelter Werkzeuge und Ressourcen, sowie der bearbeiteten Daten besprochen werden. Anschließend werden die vielfältigen Herangehensweisen mit einem Fokus auf drei große Punkte diskutiert:
         
            Nachhaltigkeit von Repositorien
         
         
            Welche Frameworks werden für welche Datentypen benötigt?
            Wie können Informationen über unpräzise Daten gespeichert werden? 
            Wie gehen verfügbare Systeme mit Multilingualität um?
         
         
            Nachhaltigkeit von (Annotations-)Werkzeugen
         
         
            Analyse historischer Daten impliziert die Annotation von Textmaterialien in Sprachen, die aus verschiedenen Gründen zu Problemen führen.
            Welche Annotationstools können genutzt werden? Mit welchen Limitierungen?
            Was bedeutet es, ein neues Tool zu entwerfen?
            Häufige Anforderungen durch strukturell komplexe Sprachen: Multilevel-Annotation, Textkorrektur während der Annotationsphase, Multilevel-Segmentierung
         
         
            Nachhaltigkeit des annotierten Materials (Standards)
         
         
            Während der Standard TEI-XML als Schnittstellenformat sehr nützlich ist, ergeben sich dennoch Probleme wie:
                    
                  für interne Verarbeitung kann dessen Verwendung hinderlich sein. Daher müssen projekt-spezifische Lösungen mit standardisiertem Export entwickelt werden.
                  Können diese Daten von Dritten in TEI-XML verarbeitet werden?
                  Welche anderen Formate können genutzt werden (z.B. JSON)?
                  Sind existierende Tagset-Formate ausreichend spezifiziert, um auch nicht-europäische Sprachen taggen zu können?
               
            
         
         
            Herausforderungen in der Nutzung vorhandener Tools für arabische Daten
            Alicia González, Tillmann Feige
            Universität Hamburg
            ERC- Projekt COBHUNI (
                    )
                
            Email: 
                    alicia.gonzalez@uni-hamburg.de; 
                    tillmann.feige@uni-hamburg.de
            
            Wir beschreiben den Ansatz, einen Korpus der neben modernem auch klassisches Arabisch (siehe Romanov, 2016) enthält, mit computerlinguistischen und semantischen Verfahren analysierbar zu machen. Wir setzen auf bereits vorhandene Software für die Hauptpunkte Annotation und Analyse. Dazu wurde ein Pflichtenheft erstellt, dass mit vorhandenen Tools abgeglichen wurde.
            Da wir mit arabischen Daten arbeiten, ist eine große Herausforderung die Schrift. Es ist eine linksläufige verbundene Schrift, die durch Konsonanten und lange Vokale repräsentiert wird. Kurze Vokale sind Diakritika, die optional gesetzt werden und gerade bei Referenzen auf religiöse Quellen im Textkorpus vorkommen. Dabei ist vollständige UTF-8 Unterstützung und die saubere Darstellung der Schrift unabdingbar. Dies reduziert die Auswahl erheblich. Hinzu kommt, dass wir auf flexible Import- und Exportmöglichkeiten angewiesen sind. Ähnliche Probleme führen Peralta und Verkinderen auf (Peralta / Verkinderen 2016). Durch unsere Herangehensweise gibt es weitere Einschränkungen wie Mehrebenen-, Multitoken- aber auch Subtoken-Annotation.
            Die Auswahl für die semantische Annotation fiel auf WebAnno, dass durch sein spezielles Datenmodell die erforderliche Datenaufbereitung und Kontrolle gestattet.
            Als Visualisierungstool haben wir ANNIS ausgewählt, dass ebenfalls Arabisch unterstützt, einen konfigurierbaren Converter mitbringt und Mehrebenenkorpora erlaubt, so dass auch hier die Hauptkriterien erfüllt wurden. Zusätzlich lassen sich potentielle Probleme in der Darstellung durch eine anpassbare HTML-Visualisierung umgehen. Durch Zusammenarbeit mit den Entwicklern beider Programme wurde die Unterstützung für Arabisch stetig ausgebaut.
            Im Beitrag werden wir die einzelnen Punkte erläutern und darstellen, warum wir uns für die angeführten Programme und gegen eine Eigenentwicklung entschieden haben, sowie welche Implikationen diese Entscheidung für die Nachhaltigkeit des Projekts, der Daten und der genutzten Tools hat.
         
         
            Tiefe Mehrebenen-Annotation für semitische Sprachen: der Fall von Ge'ez
            
               Cristina Vertan
            
            Universität Hamburg
            ERC-Projekt TraCES (
                    )
                
            Email: 
                    cristina.vertan@uni-hamburg.de
            
            Das südsemitische Gәʿәz ist die Sprache des Königreichs Aksum in der heutigen nordäthiopischen Provinz Tigray, von wo aus die im 4. Jahrhundert beginnende Christianisierung Äthiopiens ihren Anfang nahm. Die in der Folge entstehende reiche Literatur ist in großem Umfang geprägt von Übersetzungen, was durch grammatische Interferenzphänomene reflektiert wird. Das Altäthiopische hat aus einer südsemitischen Schrift ein eigenes Silbenalphabet entwickelt, das bis heute in mehreren modernen Sprachen Äthiopiens und Eritreas Verwendung findet. Innerhalb der semitischen Sprachen fällt es durch die verwendete Rechtsläufigkeit auf; außerdem werden die Vokale vollständig geschrieben. Beides unterscheidet das Gәʿәz von verwandten Sprachen wie Altsüdarabisch, Arabisch, Hebräisch und Syro-Aramäisch Mit den genannten eng verwandten semitischen Sprachen teilt das Altäthiopische die nichtkonkatenative Morphologie. Durch das äthiopische Silbenalphabet sind Morphemgrenzen in der Schrift nicht darstellbar, so dass beispielsweise ein einzelner Vokal als Bestandteil einer Silbe eine eigenständige Wortart darstellt und tokenisiert werden muss.
            Die Komplexität des Annotationstools wird sehr vielfältige linguistische Anfragen und detaillierte Analysen der Sprache ermöglichen, aber auch eine vollautomatische Annotation verhindern. Ein alle morphologischen Merkmale abdeckendes Vektorraum-Modell (das für maschinelle Lernverfahren benutzt werden muss) wäre zu groß. Vorstellbar ist lediglich eine flache automatische Annotation (z. B. der Wortarten); jedoch wird auch für eine solche zunächst eine relativ große Menge an Trainingsdaten benötigt. Daher ist die Entwicklung eines Werkzeugs für die manuelle Annotation ein obligatorischer Schritt.
            Die Besonderheit der entwickelten Lösung (Vertan/Ellwardt/Hummel 2016) sind:
            
               automatische Transkription
               manuelle Korrektur der Transkription während des Annotationsprozesses
               semi-automatische Verfahren: automatische Verläufe werden farbig markiert und sind automatisch zur manuellen Korrektur hinterlegt
               Mehrebenenannotation: Linguistik, Edition, Textstruktur
               Anpassungen an unterschiedliche Schriftsysteme und Transkriptionsregeln
            
         
         
            Nutzungs- und Nachhaltigkeitsstategien im Projekt "Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya"
            Christian M. Prager
            NRW Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Künste
            
               
            
            Email: 
                    
            
            Die Mayaschrift ist das einzig lesbare Schriftsystem der vorspanischen Amerikas. Die über 10.000 Texte sind in einer logographisch-syllabischen Hieroglyphenschrift verfasst und von den rund 800 Zeichen sind erst 60% sicher entziffert. Die Texte enthalten taggenaue Kalenderangaben, die es uns ermöglichen die rund 2000jährige Sprach- und Schriftgeschichte genau zu dokumentieren. Das Projekt (Prager 2015) wird sämtliche Inschriften einschließlich Metadaten in einer Datenbank einzupflegen und darauf basierend ein digitales Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya zu kompilieren. Herausforderung dabei ist, dass die Schrift noch nicht vollständig entziffert ist und bei der Modellierung zu berücksichtigen ist. Unser Projekt verfolgt den Ansatz, wonach die Bedeutung von Wörtern ihre Verwendung ist - Texte nehmen Bezug auf den Textträger und den Verwendungskontext und nur die exakte Dokumentation sogenannter nicht-textueller Informationen erlaubt es, textuelle und nicht-textuelle Informationsbereiche zueinander in Beziehung zu setzen und bei der Entzifferung von Zeichen und Textstellen zu berücksichtigen. Zum Zweck der Nachhaltigkeit und Nachnutzung greift das Projekt bei der Beschreibung der Artefakte und der relevanten objektgeschichtlichen Ereignisse auf CIDOC CRM zurück, das eine erweiterbare Ontologie für Begriffe und Informationen im Bereich des kulturellen Erbes anbietet. Das entstandene Anwendungsprofil wird durch Elemente aus weiteren Standards und Schemata angereichert und wird damit auch für vergleichbare Projekt nachnutzbar. Die Schemata und erstellten Metadaten werden in einer Linked (Open) Data-Struktur (LOD) abgebildet. Durch die Repräsentation im XML-Format, sowie die Nutzung von HTTP-URIs wird eine einfache Austauschbarkeit und Zitierbarkeit der Daten ermöglicht. Durch diese Umsetzung können Objektmetadaten getrennt vom erfassten Text gespeichert werden und durch die Verwendung der HTTP-URI verlinkt werden. Die Nachnutzung bereits bestehender und fachlich anerkannter Terme trägt darüberhinaus auch zu einer hohen Interoperabilität mit anderen Datenbeständen und Informationssystemen bei. Das ausgestaltete Schema hat eine ontologisch-vernetzte Struktur, die komplexe Beziehungen und Zusammenhänge abbildet.
         
         
            Interdisziplinäre Digitale Zusammenarbeit für seltene Sprachen und Kulturen
         
         
            - Eine Fallstudie über jiddische Texte aus der frühen Neuzeit -
            
               Walther v. Hahn (Universität Hamburg), Berndt Strobach (Wolffenbüttel)
            
            Email: 
                    vhahn@informatik.uni-hamburg.
               de, berndt.strobach@freenet.de>
                
            In den Geisteswissenschaften werden häufig die fachlichen Interpretationen und die sprachlichen Erklärungen von verschiedenen Gruppen mit unterschiedlicher Kompetenz bearbeitet. Gute Beispiele sind Studien zu Texten aus semitischen Sprachen, wobei, speziell bei historischen Dokumenten die historische oder geistes- und sozialgeschichtliche Würdigung von Forschern verfasst werden muss, die des Hebräischen, Arabischen, Aramäischen etc. nicht mächtig sind, die sprachwissenschaftlichen Forscher dagegen bei der Interpretation gelegentlich weniger engagiert bleiben. Extremfälle wie Studien über das Sephardische in Spanien (Ladino, Djudezmo) machen etwa solide Kenntnisse zumindest des Spanischen, Hebräischen, Türkischen, Griechischen und Italienischen zur Voraussetzung für seriöse hermeneutische Forschungsergebnisse.Wir berichten über Studien zu jiddischen Texten aus dem Wolffenbüttel des 18. Jahrhunderts, in denen die Rolle der "Hofjuden" und ihres kultur- und sozialgeschichtlichen Hintergrundes diskutiert wird. 
            Die Herausforderung einer interdisziplinären Zusammenarbeit zwischen Historikern, Sprachwissenschaftlern und Informatikern besteht darin,
            1. die Lesbarkeit der Originalquellen für alle Gruppenmitglieder sicher zu stellen (Invertierte Transkriptionen, Vokalisierung, Visualisierung), sowie 
            2. in der Gruppe eine gemeinsame Behandlung von Vagheit, Unsicherheit und Unbekanntem zu definieren, so dass die Unklarheiten in den einzelnen Forschungsstufen erhalten und im Endergebis sichtbar bleiben (Vagheits-Annotationen und vage Inferenzen). Heute werden derartige Unsicherheiten meist bereits in den Annotationen unterschlagen (von Hahn, 2016).
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Hahn, Walther von (2016):
                        „Humanities meet Computer Science – Digital Humanities between Expectations and Reality“,
                        zu erscheinen in: von Hahn, Walter / Papadima, Liviu / Vertan, Cristina (eds.):
                        Humanities2020, New Trends in Education and Research. 
                        Bukarest: University of Bucharest Publishing House.
                    
               
                  Peralta, José Haro / Verkinderen, Peter (2016): 
                        „‚Find for me!‘: Building a Context-Based Search Tool Using Python“,
                        in: Muhanna, Elias (ed.):
                        The Digital Humanities and Islamic & Middle East Studies. 
                        Berlin: Walter de Gruyter GmbH 199–231. 
                    
               
                  Prager, Christian M. (2015): 
                        „Das Textdatenbank- und Wörterbuchprojekt des Klassischen Maya: Möglichkeiten und Herausforderungen digitaler Epigraphik“,
                        in: Neuroth, Heike / Rapp, Andrea / Söring, Sibylle (eds.):
                        TextGrid: Von der Community - für die Community: Eine Virtuelle Forschungsumgebung für die Geisteswissenschaften.
                        Glückstadt: Werner Holsbusch 105–124 
                        https://www.academia.edu/17957108/Das_Textdatenbank-_und_W%C3%B6rterbuchprojekt_des_Klassischen_Maya_M%C3%B6glichkeiten_und_Herausforderungen_ digitaler_Epigraphik.
                    
               
                  Romanov, Maxim (2016): 
                        Creating Frequency-Based Readers for Classical Arabic
                  http://maximromanov.github.io/2016/05-30.html [letzter Zugriff 1. Dezember 2016].
                    
               
                  Vertan, Cristina / Ellwardt, Andreas / Hummerl, Susanne (2016): 
                        „Ein Mehrebenen-Tagging-Modell für die Annotation altäthiopischer Texte“, 
                        in:
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung
                  http://www.dhd2016.de/abstracts/vorträge-061.html.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Eine zentrale Forderung zur Unterstützung digitaler Editionen ist das Anbieten virtueller Umgebungen (Interfaces, Software) zur Produktion, aber auch zum Management digitaler Daten (BMBF 2013). In den letzten Jahren wurden aufgrund dieser durch FachwissenschaftlerInnen getragenen Nachfrage mehrere Plattformen und Softwareangebote/Infrastrukturen geschaffen, die Prozesse der digitalen Datenerstellung von der Aufnahme von Informationen (Metadaten, Transkriptionen) über die Auswertung und Anreicherung bis zur Publikation unterstützen (DARIAH-DE (Hg.), 2015) und nachhaltig betrieben werden sollen. Unterschiedliche Konzepte und angebotene Abläufe sowie integrierte Hilfsmittel stehen für eine je eigene Profilierung der Plattformen. Merkmale der Angebote, insbesondere Leistungsfähigkeit, unterstützte Prozesse und Ausrichtungen unterscheiden sich zwangsläufig. Im Panel werden aus diesem Grund wichtige und häufig eingesetzte Plattformen in ihrem Leistungsumfang verglichen und einander gegenübergestellt. Im Sinne geisteswissenschaftlicher software studies (Andrews, 2016) müssen die Plattformen nicht nur aus pragmatischen Gründen gegeneinander abgewogen werden sondern auch, um in den angebotenen Prozessen angelegte Praktiken auf ihre Logik und dadurch entstehende Folgen zu untersuchen (Drucker, 2013). Anhand eines klar umrissenen Fragebogens präsentieren Monk, Textgrid, Transcribo und Transkribus Arbeitsabläufe, Services und Vernetzungsmöglichkeiten. Damit wird Interessierten in einem Panel aus erster Hand ein Vergleich wichtiger, produktiv nutzbarer Angebote geliefert.
            Das Panel wird moderiert von Michael Piotrowski (IEG Mainz).
            Folgende Frage- und Themenschwerpunkte werden schriftlich und in kurzen Präsentationen dargeboten:
            
               Idealtypischer/Schematisierter Ablauf für den Gebrauch der Plattform
               Zeitliche Anforderungen, um ein Projekt aufzusetzen/ein Dokument zu verarbeiten; zu exportieren
               Herstellung von Transkriptionen
               Bild-Text-Verknüpfung
               Text-Markup
               Ausgabemöglichkeiten (für Edition und/oder Transkription)
               Vernetzungsmöglichkeiten (Wörterbücher, externe Ressourcen, Ontologien)
               Datei-/Bildverwaltung
               Projektverwaltung
               Auswertungs-/Abfrageoptionen
               Automatisierungen
               Crowdsourcing/Optionen zum Einbezug von Laien oder Externen
               Nachhaltigkeit der Plattform/der enthaltenen Daten
               Updates bis 2018
            
            Monk (presented by Lambert Schomaker, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen)
            The Monk system is a trainable search engine for handwritten material. For the humanities, it may serve as a method for getting keyword access to scanned pages at the earliest stages after a document digitisation. For pattern recognition research, it is an observatory for complicated visual material and its human-provided labels (e.g., word or character labels). The system act as an e-Science service that is continuously available.
            An internal image and metadata format is used, which can be exported to, e.g., PAGE xml. Provisional transcriptions can be retrieved as flat text. Indices can be exported upon request.
            The system makes a distinction between four different forms of annotation: page (scan) descriptors, typically page titles, page regions of interest (tags for visual objects), transcription of segmented lines, and finally, word labeling. The system could export in TEI, however, within the OCR community, there is a preference for layout-centric description languages, as opposed to editorial descriptions. In practice, both TEI and PAGE are used, as well as other formalisms that allow to provide metadata to polygonal image sections.
            In order to proceed data in Monk, scans are uploaded via sftp or mailed hard disks. The collection is then judged on the required preprocessing steps (multicolumn, contrast enhancement, line segmentations), and ‘ingested’. Within one or two days users can start to label words. The system performs data mining on the collection and presents hit lists for words which can be labeled further, and so on. Static indices and provisional transcriptions are updated nightly.
            At the moment 400 documents from different periods and handwriting styles are being processed. The Monk system is one of the first 24/7 machine learning systems. The system detects where compute resources should be directed, on the basis of observed user activities and interests.
            The Monk system is part of the large multi-petabyte Target platform of the university of Groningen, in collaboration with astronomy, genomics and the IBM company.
            TextGrid (präsentiert durch Wolfram Horstmann, Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen)
            Hintergrund
            Die Entwicklung von TextGrid, einer Virtuellen Forschungsumgebung für die Geistes- und Kulturwissenschaften, wurde durch die zunehmende Nachfrage aus den Fachwissenschaften nach digitalen Werkzeugen v.a. des philologischen Edierens und kollaborativen Arbeitens angestoßen. Das Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) hat TextGrid als Verbundprojekt mit über zehn institutionellen und universitären Partnern zwischen 2006 und 2015 gefördert.
            Die Software steht mittlerweile in einer stabilen Version 3.0 zum kostenfreien Download bereit. Software, Archiv und damit das gesamte Angebot werden in Zusammenarbeit mit AnwenderInnen, FachwissenschaftlerInnen und Fachgesellschaften und in Kooperation mit DARIAH-DE - Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities weiter entwickelt und dauerhaft betrieben.
            Zielpublikum
            
               FachwissenschaftlerInnen, die mit TextGrid Forschungsprojekte wie z.B. digitale Editionen erarbeiten
            
            
               EntwicklerInnen, die TextGrid-Tools und Services für eigene Vorhaben anpassen oder externe Services und Tools in TextGrid integrieren
            
            
               Forschungsprojekte und -institutionen, die Daten in TextGrid archivieren und für Dritte zugänglich und nutzbar machen (Repository)
            
            Form des Einsatzes
            Die virtuelle Forschungsumgebung (VFU) TextGrid unterstützt digital arbeitende GeisteswissenschaftlerInnen im gesamten Forschungsprozess – insbesondere beim Erstellen digitaler Editionen.
            Sie besteht aus drei Kernbereichen:
            -       Die Software 
                TextGrid Laboratory stellt den Einstiegspunkt in die VFU dar und bietet unterschiedliche Open-Source-Werkzeuge und -Services für den gesamten Forschungsprozess zur Verfügung, z. B. einen Text-Bild-Link Editor für die Verknüpfung von Digitalisaten und Transkriptionen
            
            -       Im 
                TextGrid Repository, einem Langzeitarchiv für geisteswissenschaftliche Forschungsdaten, können XML / TEI-kodierte Texte, Bilder und Datenbanken sicher gespeichert, publiziert und durchsucht werden.
            
            -       Die beständig wachsende 
                TextGrid Community trifft sich bei regelmäßigen Nutzertreffen zu themen- bzw. anwendungsspezifischen Workshops, die nicht zuletzt auch den Austausch zwischen digitalen Forschungs- vorhaben aus den Geisteswissenschaften befördern.
            
            Eine Stärke
            TextGrid unterstützt den gesamten wissenschaftlichen Arbeitsprozess im Rahmen der Erstellung digitaler Editionen vom Ingest des Ausgangsmaterials (Text- und/oder Bilddatei- en / Faksimiles) über die Anreicherung und Auszeichnung der Daten (Annotationen, Verknüpfungen) bis zur Veröffentlichung (Portal, Print) und nachhaltigen Archivierung (Repository) und wird stetig basierend auf konkreten fachwissenschaftlichen Anforderungen weiterentwickelt.
            Eine Schwäche
            Technisch setzt TextGrid auf dem Eclipse-Framework auf, aus heutiger Sicht, wären webbasierte Tools wünschenswerter. Zugleich verdeutlicht dies, dass Softwareentwicklungen permanente Weiterentwicklung benötigen, um sich neuen technologischen aber auch sich wandelnden User-Requirements stellen zu können. 
            Transcribo (präsentiert durch Thomas Burch, Universität Trier)
            Transcribo wird in enger Zusammenarbeit von Philologen und Informatikern der Kooperationspartner entwickelt. Die grafische Nutzeroberfläche ist um das digitale Faksimile, also in der Regel den gescannten Überlieferungsträger, zentriert. Beliebig große Einheiten (z.B. Wörter, Zeilen oder Absätze) können mittels eines Rechteck- oder Polygonwerkzeugs markiert, transkribiert und annotiert werden. Dabei wird jede Bilddatei doppelt dargeboten: links liegt das Original zur Ansicht, die rechte Version dient als Arbeitsunterlage, hier wird der transkribierte Text topografisch exakt über das leicht ausgegraute Faksimile gelegt. Wo die räumliche Anordnung nicht der textuellen Wortreihenfolge entspricht, können Wörter in der grafischen Oberfläche zu Sequenzen zusammengefasst und so die semantischen Zusammenhänge im Transkript protokolliert werden. Ein zentrales Merkmal des Programms liegt außerdem in der Möglichkeit, in jeder erfassten Einheit textgenetische und editionsphilologisch relevante Phänomene zu kennzeichnen und mit Annotationen zu versehen. Dabei kommt ein Kontextmenü mit einer projektspezifischen Auswahl zum Einsatz. Diese umfasst bisher unterschiedliche Varianten von Korrekturen (wie etwa Sofortkorrekturen, Spätkorrekturen mit ein-, zwei- oder mehrfacher Durchstreichung und Überschreibung), die Kennzeichnung von Hervorhebungen sowie von unsicheren Lesungen oder nicht identifizierten Graphen. Diese Auswahl ist jedoch beliebig erweiterbar und wird über den gesamten Projektverlauf hinweg an die Erfordernisse der Textgrundlage angepasst.
            Transkribus (präsentiert durch Tobias Hodel, Staatsarchiv Zürich)
            Hintergrund
            Transkribus ist eine Plattform, die zur automatisierten Erkennung und Annotierung von Texten dient. Sie leistet einerseits eine Verlinkung zwischen Text und Bild (auf Block, Zeilen und Wortebene), produziert andererseits standardisierte Exportformate (XML nach TEI-Standard, PDF, aber auch METS für die Integration in Repositorien). Damit steht eine vollausgerüstete Softwaresuite zur Verfügung, die von der Segmentierung über die Erkennung, Transkription und Edition bis zur Ausgabe alle Schritte in der Herstellung hochwertiger Daten unterstützt.
            Die im Projekt READ weiterentwickelte Software vereint somit praxisnah die Bedürfnisse von GeisteswissenschaftlerInnen und Aufbewahrungsinstitutionen mit den technischen Möglichkeiten und Angeboten, die momentan im Bereich der Informatik und Computerlinguistik ermöglicht werden.
            Die Software steht in einer stabilen Version zum kostenfreien Download bereit. Das Projekt READ wird unterstützt durch das Horizon 2020 Forschungs- und Innovationsprogramm der Europäischen Union.
            Zielpublikum
            
               Aufbewahrungsinstitutionen, die eigene Bestände und Dokumente aufbereiten und zur Verfügung stellen wollen 
            
            
               Geisteswissenschaftlerinnen, die eigene Transkriptionen und Editionen in Transkribus erstellen wollen oder mit darin aufbereiteten Daten arbeiten
            
            
               Interessierte Laien, die sich an Crowdsourcing-Initiativen beteiligen wollen
            
            
               ComputerwissenschaftlerInnen, die mit den gewonnenen Daten arbeiten und eigene Algorithmen entwickeln oder verbessern wollen
            
            Form des Einsatzes
            Auf Transkribus werden Bilddateien hochgeladen, mit Layoutverlinkungen und Transkriptionen sowie Annotationen versehen. Unterstützt werden die Vorgänge durch Automatisierungsvorgänge im Bereich der Layouterkennung und der Transkription. Der Export der gewonnen Daten ist in unterschiedlichen Formaten möglich. Zusätzlich werden Module zum Crowdsourcing und zukünftig für e-Learning und Analyse mit Smartphone bereitgestellt. 
            Eine Stärke
            Transkribus nutzt neueste Automatisierungsprozesse (u.a. mit rekursiven neuronalen Netzen) somit werden bestmögliche Resultate in Aussicht gestellt.
            Eine Schwäche
            Transkribus ist eine Expertensoftware und benötigt entsprechende Einarbeitungszeit, um die Dokumente effizient und zielgerichtet zu bearbeiten.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andrews, Tara (2015):
                        „Software and Scholarship – Editorial“,
                        in: 
                        Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 40: 342–348  10.1080/03080188.2016.1165456.
                    
               
                  BMBF (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung) (eds.) (2013): 
                        Forschungsinfrastrukturen für die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften
                  https://www.bmbf.de/pub/forschungsinfrastrukturen_geistes_und_sozialwissenschaften.pdf.
                    
               
                  DARIAH-DE (ed.) (2015): 
                        Handbuch Digital Humanities: Anwendungen, Forschungsdaten und Projekte
                  http://handbuch.io/w/DH-Handbuch.
                    
               
                  Drucker, Johanna (2013):
                        „Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface“, in: 
                        DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 7 (1) 
                        http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html.
                    
               
                  Schomaker, Lambert (2016):
                        „Design considerations for a large-scale image-based text search engine in historical manuscript collections“,
                        in: 
                        Information Technology 58 (2): 80–88 10.1515/itit-2015-0049.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das vom österreichischen Wissenschaftsfonds FWF geförderte Projekt hat sich zum Ziel gesetzt, die illuminierten Urkunden des Mittelalters zu sammeln, auf der Plattform 
                    
                  monasterium.net
                zur Verfügung zu stellen und umfassend zu untersuchen. Die ExpertInnen aus den Bereichen der Diplomatik (Zajic Andreas, Gneiß Markus), der Kunstgeschichte (Roland Martin, Bartz Gabriele) und den Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften (Vogeler Georg, Bürgermeister Martina) arbeiten bewusst interdisziplinär zusammen und achten dabei vor allem auch auf Nachhaltigkeit. Das Poster wird zeigen, wie bei Materialerfassung, Erschließung und wissenschaftlicher Auswertung zukünftige Nutzerszenarien bedacht werden – also die soziale Dimension von Nachhaltigkeit konsequent berücksichtigt wird. Es reicht nicht, die Daten von Festplatte zu Festplatte zu kopieren (Langzeitarchivierung), sondern sie müssen auch nutzbar bleiben. Die im Projekt eingesetzten Mittel dafür sind 1. Datenkuratierung über eine etablierte Online-Plattform mit projektübergreifendem institutionellem Interesse, 2. Datenmanagement durch die Verwendung von gut dokumentierten und öffentlichen Datenstandards und 3. kontrollierte Vokabularien für die inhaltliche Erschließung. 
                
            
               Datenkuratierung
               Schon in der Planungsphase des Projektes war klar, dass alle Projektdaten im weltweit größten Onlineangebot von Urkunden 
                        monasterium.net verarbeitet werden sollen. Damit wird ein sozialer Aspekt von Nachhaltigkeit berücksichtigt: Monasterium ist ein seit 2002 existierendes Großprojekt zur Zurverfügungstellung und (kollaborativen) Erschließung von Beschreibungen und Faksimiles von Urkunden des Mittelalters und der Frühen Neuzeit. Das Portal wird überwiegend von Archiven gespeist, es sind aber auch retrodigitalisierte Urkundenbücher und von ForscherInnen erstellte Sammlungen enthalten. Hinter dem virtuellen Archiv Monasterium steht 
                        ICARUS, ein Konsortium von Archiven und wissenschaftlichen Institutionen, das sein Wissen und seine Erfahrungen ständig austauscht und erweitert. Die große Datenmenge, die Etabliertheit des Angebots in der Fachcommunity und der institutionelle Hintergrund haben Monasterium aus einem kleinen DH-Projekt zu einem nachhaltigen Host nicht nur für unser Projekt gemacht: 1. Die projektübergreifende Infrastruktur erlaubt, dass die projektspezifischen Forschungsdaten über die Projektdauer hinaus zur Verfügung stehen. 2. Durch die Integration der Forschungsdaten in Monasterium bekommt jeder Datensatz auch einen persistenten Identifikator. D.h. alle Datensätze sind eindeutig adressierbar und zitierbar. 3. Das Interesse am Erhalt des Angebots ist groß, sodass selbst unter widrigen finanziellen Bedingungen aktiv nach Lösungen für den Erhalt der auf 
                        monasterium.net verfügbaren Daten gesucht werden wird.
                    
            
            
                Datenmanagement
               Die im Projekt 
                        Illuminierte Urkunden entstehenden Forschungsdaten werden als strukturierte Datensätze in einer XML-Datenbank verwaltet und archiviert. Die einzelnen Urkunden-Datensätze werden nach dem Standard der CEI annotiert, die sich als TEI-P4-Dialekt in andere Datenstrukturen integriert und öffentlich dokumentiert ist. In der Datenbank ist ein für 
                        monasterium.net spezialisiertes Schema (XSD 1.1) im Einsatz, das einerseits die Verwendung der zulässigen Beschreibungselemente dokumentiert und andererseits die Konsistenz und Validität der zu importierenden Daten prüft. Schon in der Projektplanungsphase haben die Projektbeteiligten über Mittel und Möglichkeiten der Datenmodellierung gemeinsam diskutiert. Da der CEI-Standard zur wissenschaftlichen Bearbeitung von Urkunden initiiert wurde, brauchte die Überführung der aus dem Projekt 
                        Illuminierte Urkunden stammenden Forschungsdaten aus dem Bereich der Diplomatik keine Anpassungen an das Datenmodell. Um aber die Beschreibungsdaten zu Dekor und Buchschmuck aufnehmen zu können, musste das Datenmodell um die Möglichkeit einer kunsthistorischen Beschreibung erweitert werden. Dafür konnten Strukturen aus der TEI direkt übernommen werden. Die Daten werden also sozial nachhaltig, indem sie öffentlich dokumentierte und in der Fachcommunity geläufige Datenbeschreibungsstandards verwenden, Standards, die jede und jeder nachlesen kann.
                    
            
            
               Kontrollierte Vokabularien
               Im Projekt 
                        Illuminierte Urkunden ist die Vergleichbarkeit von Datensätzen für die Weiternutzung ein wichtiger Faktor. Kulturelle Kontexte und Fragen der Mehrsprachigkeit spielen seit Projektstart eine Schlüsselrolle, da von Beginn an mit Forschungspartnern aus West-, Süd- und Südosteuropa zusammengearbeitet wird.
                    
               Bisher werden noch keine vollständigen Beschreibungen in mehreren Sprachen auf 
                        monasterium.net angeboten, aber im Rahmen des Projekts wurde die Möglichkeit entwickelt, Metadaten in mehrsprachigen kontrollierten Vokabularien zu erfassen. Sie werden im W3C SKOS als RDF/XML ausgedrückt. Bisher wurden ein viersprachiges kontrolliertes Vokabular zur Klassifikation des Dekors von Urkunden (vgl. Roland 2014) und ein Glossar erstellt. Diese Neuerung steigert die Qualität einerseits des Information Retrieval und führt zu einer umfassenden Kontextualisierung des Forschungsgegenstandes. Damit sind also auch die Inhalte der Daten für eine breitere Community besser nachvollziehbar, ein Konzept, das wir vorläufig als „Langzeitverständlichkeit“ bezeichnen möchten.
                    
            
         
         
            Zusammenfassung
            Die kurze Laufzeit jedes Drittmittelprojektes – und damit auch des Projektes 
                    Illuminierte Urkunden macht Nachhaltigkeit als soziales Phänomen zu einer zentralen Frage: Die Forschungsdaten sollen einer sekundären Nutzung zur Verfügung gestellt werden und zu neuen Forschungsfragen führen. Deshalb werden im Projekt 
                    Illuminierte Urkunden drei „soziale“ Nachhaltigkeitsstrategien angewandt. Integration in eine in der Forschercommunity und bei Institutionen etablierte Plattform (monasterium.net), Verwendung von verbreiteten und facheinschlägigen Metadatenstandards und Erschließung von Inhalten mit kontrollierten Vokabularien.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  CEI, Charter Encoding Initiative: 
                        http://www.cei.lmu.de [letzter Zugriff 23. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Heinz, Karl (2010):
                        „Monasterium.net. Auf dem Weg zu einem europäischen Urkundeportal“,
                        in: Kölzer, Theo (ed.):
                        Regionale Urkundenbücher. Die Vorträge der 12. Tagung der Commission Internationale de Diplomatique, St. Pölten 2010 (Mitteilungen aus dem Niederösterreichischen Landesarchiv 14) 
                        139–145.
                    
               
                  ICARUS, International Centre for Archival Research: 
                        http://icar-us.eu/ [letzter Zugriff 23. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Krah, Adelheid (2009):
                        „Monasterium.net - das virtuelle Urkundenarchiv Europas: Möglichkeiten der Bereitstellung und Erschließung von Urkundenbeständen“,
                        in:
                        AZ 91: 221–246.
                    
               
                  Roland, Martin (2013):
                        „Illuminierte Urkunden im digitalen Zeitalter – Maßregeln und Chancen“,
                        in: Ambrosio, Antonella / Barret, Sébastien / Vogeler, Georg (eds.):
                        Digital diplomatics. The computer as a tool for the diplomatist?, Archiv für Diplomatik, Beiheft 14.
                        Köln / Weimar /Wien 245–269.
                    
               
                  Roland, Martin / Zajic, Andreas (2013):
                        „Illuminierte Urkunden des Mittelalters in Mitteleuropa“,
                        in:
                        Archiv für Diplomatik 58: 237-428.
                    
               
                  SKOS, Simple Knowledge Organization System: 
                        https://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ [letzter Zugriff 23. August 2016]. 
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Ziel von 
                PaLaFra
            1 („Le passage du latin au français“) ist der Aufbau eines digitalen Korpus spätlateinischer und altfranzösischer Texte, das durch die Kombination von Lemmatisierung, syntaktischer und morphologischer Annotation sowie diskurspragmatischen und texttypologischen Deskriptoren komplexe Abfragestrategien ermöglicht und so eine qualitativ neuartige Nutzung der Texte bei der Rekonstruktion des lateinisch-romanischen Sprachwandels erreichen soll. Daran arbeitet ein deutsch-französisches Team der Universität Regensburg, der Universität Tübingen, der 
                École Normale Supérieure in Lyon und der Universität Lille, das seit Sommer 2015 von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) und der 
                Agence Nationale de Recherche (ANR) gefördert wird. Das Projektteam ist interdisziplinär ausgerichtet und besteht aus romanischen Sprachwissenschaftlern, Computerlinguisten und Medieninformatikern. Während für den Bereich des Altfranzösischen auf das bestehende 
                Base de Français Médiéval-Korpus
                2 zurückgegriffen werden kann, so ist die Erstellung eines — was die Annotation angeht — kompatiblen Korpus spätlateinischer Texte ein wichtiges Teilziel des 
                PaLaFra-Projekts.
            
         In diesem Posterbeitrag berichten wir über Herausforderungen und Lösungsansätze bei der Erstellung einer Annotationsumgebung und eines diachronen Tagsets, das gleichermaßen in der Lage ist, die Idiosynkrasien der beiden Sprachstufen adäquat abzubilden, aber auch die diachronen Elemente im Sprachwandel einheitlich zu markieren.
         Bereits für das spätlateinische Teilkorpus zeigt sich, dass es an einem standardisierten Tagset fehlt. Mindestens drei Varianten wurden in der Vergangenheit für die Annotation (spät-)lateinischer Texte entwickelt: 
                CoLaMer (Selig et al. 2015), 
                CompHistSem (Eger et al. 2015) und 
                LASLA (Denooz 1978). Diese unterscheiden sich sowohl in den zugrunde liegenden linguistischen Konzepten als auch in ihrer Granularität. Demzufolge existiert auch kein einfaches Mapping zwischen ihnen. Für die Entwicklung eines sprachübergreifenden Tagsets in 
                PaLaFra kommt erschwerend hinzu, dass die beiden Zielsprachen — Spätlatein und Altfranzösisch — trotz ihrer Verwandtschaft klare strukturellen Unterschiede aufweisen.
            
         Zumindest für die Ebene der Wortarten (PoS, Part-of-Speech) liefert beispielsweise das Projekt 
                Universal Dependencies
            3 wichtige Anhaltspunkte für ein sprachübergreifendes Tagset. Dieses Projekt hat sich die Entwicklung sprachübergreifend-kompatibler Baumbanken als Ziel gesetzt hat, die auf universellen Wortartkategorien basieren. Trotzdem bedingt die Entwicklung eines übergreifenden Tagsets oft den manuellen Vergleich von Annotationen, z.B. durch visuelle Gegenüberstellung annotierter Parallelkorpora. Unsere Recherche ergab, dass es an einem adäquaten Werkzeug für diese Aufgabe mangelt. Einerseits gibt es unzählige Annotationswerkzeuge, welche auf die Darstellung nur eines Textes samt Annotationen fokussieren (Burghardt 2014, Neves and Leser 2014). Auf der anderen Seite gibt es Alignierwerkzeuge, die auf die parallele Darstellung von Texten spezialisiert sind, aber dabei Annotation meist ignorieren, z.B. 
                LF Aligner
            4, 
                Moses
            5 oder 
                ParaVoz
            6. Um diese Lücke zu schließen, haben wir auf der Basis von 
                InterText
            7 — einem im Webbrowser zu bedienenden Alignierwerkzeug (Vondricka 2014) — ein Vergleichswerkzeug für annotierte Parallelkorpora entwickelt. Unsere Erweiterung unterstützt sowohl die Hervorhebung zueinander kompatibler (PoS-)Tags als auch die flexible Darstellung von Lemmata und morpho-syntaktischen Annotationen (
                Abbildung 1). Die dafür nötigen Informationen werden beim Import aus den TEI-XML-Daten extrahiert und mit Hilfe von JavaScript dynamisch visualisiert.
            
         
            
            
               Abbildung 
               : Das Bildschirmfoto zeigt die modifizierte InterText-Ansicht, erkennbar oben an der zusätzlichen Schalterleiste. Links ist die lateinische „Vita Benedicti“ (Vogüe und Antin 1979) zu sehen, annotiert mit dem LASLA Tagset (Denooz 1978), rechts das französische Gegenstück „Vie de saint Benoit“ (Foerster 1876), annotiert mit dem Cattex Tagset (Guillot et al. 2010). Aktuell ist sowohl die Hervorhebung kompatibler PoS-Tags („Toogle color“) als auch die Anzeige der vollständigen PoS-Annotation („Toogle POS (full)“) aktiviert.
            
         
         Neben der eigentlichen Datenaufbereitung ist auch die Optimierung des Annotationsworkflows mit geeigneten Werkzeugen im Sinne verbesserter 
                User Experience ein wesentliches Projektziel (
                tool science, Wolff 2015). 
            
         Die Entwicklung des spätlateinisch-altfranzösischen Tagsets wird im Projekt — auch mit Hilfe unseres modifizierten 
                InterText-Tools — vorangetrieben. In unserem Posterbeitrag erläutern wir das Vorgehen und präsentieren erste Ergebnisse.
            
      
      
         
            
               http://www.palafra.org/
            
            
               http://bfm.ens-lyon.fr/
            
            
               http://universaldependencies.org/
            
            
               http://sourceforge.net/projects/aligner/
            
            
               http://www.statmt.org/moses/
            
            
               https://bitbucket.org/rvwfels/paravoz2
            
            
               http://wanthalf.saga.cz/intertext
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Burghardt, Manuel (2014):
                        „Engineering annotation usability - Toward usability patterns for linguistic annotation tools“.
                        Diss. Phil., Universität Regensburg, Institut für Information und Medien, Sprache und Kultur, urn:nbn:de:bvb:355-epub-307682.
                    
               
                  Denooz, Joseph (1978):
                        „L’ordinateur et le latin, techniques et methods“,
                        in:
                        Revue de l’Organisation Internationale pour l’Etude des Langues Anciennes par Ordinateur 4.
                    
               
                  Eger, Steffen / vor der Brück, Tim / Mehler, Alexander (2015):
                        „Lexicon-assisted tagging and lemmatization in latin: A comparison of six taggers and two lemmatization methods“,
                        in: 
                        LaTeCH 2015 105.
                    
               
                  Guillot, Céline / Prévost, Sophie / Lavrentiev, Alexei (2010): 
                        Manuel de référence du jeu cattex09. technical manual, UMR ICAR, CNRS/ENS-LSH. 
                        http://bfm.ens-lyon.fr/IMG/pdf/Cattex2009_manuel_2.0.pdf
               
               
                  Neves, Mariana / Leser, Ulf (2014):
                        „A survey on annotation tools for the biomedical literature“,
                        in:
                        Briefings in bioinformatics 15 (2): 327–340.
                    
               
                  Selig, Maria / Eufe, Rembert / Linzmeier, Laura (2015): 
                        CoLaMer (corpus du latin mérovingien). (im Erscheinen).
                    
               
                  Vondricka, Pavel (2014):
                        „Aligning parallel texts with intertext“,
                        in:
                        Proceedings of LREC 2014.
                    
               
                  Vogüé, Adalbert de / Antin, Paul (1979): 
                        GREGOIRE LE GRAND, Dialogues II. 
                        Cambridge University Press.
                    
               
                  Von Foerster, Wendelin (1876): 
                        Li Dialoge Gregoire lo Pape. Altfranzösische Uebersetzung des XII. Jahrhunderts der Dialogen des Papstes Gregor, mit dem lateinischen Original, einem Anhang: Sermo de Sapientia und Moralium in Iob Fragmenta, einer grammatischen Einleitung, erklärenden Anmerkungen und einem Glossar, première partie: Textes. 
                        Paris: Champion.
                    
               
                  Wolff, Christian (2015):
                        „The case for teaching ‚tool science‘. Taking software engineering and software engineering education beyond the confinements of traditional software development contexts“,
                        in: 
                        Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 2015 IEEE 932–938 10.1109/EDUCON.2015.7096085
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Das Poster „Interoperabilität bei der Erstellung eines deutschsprachigen Blogkorpus für die Repräsentation der Diskursstruktur“ informiert über das Vorgehen sowie die ersten Forschungszwischenergebnisse und die weiteren Ziele der Kompilierung und Annotation eines deutschsprachigen Blogkorpus. Gegenwärtig gibt es lediglich eine geringe Anzahl an öffentlich zugänglichen, umfangreichen Blogkorpora, wie zum Beispiel das englischsprachige Birmingham Blog Corpus der Birmingham Universität (vgl. WebCorp 2013) oder das bilinguale (deutsch-französische) Korpus d’apprentissage INFRAL (Interculturel Franco-Allemand en Ligne) (vgl. Abendroth-Timmer et al. 2014). Betrachtet man den großen Einfluss von Blogs für die Geschichte der Kommunikation im Internet, erscheint die geringe Anzahl überraschend.
         Bislang existiert kein Standard für das Repräsentieren von sogenannten Computer-Mediated Communication-Daten (kurz CMC), allerdings arbeitet die Text Encoding Initiative CMC Special Interest Group (TEI SIG) (vgl. Beißwenger 2016) seit 2013 an einem Schema für die Repräsentation von CMC-Genres. Eine Standardisierung, wie sie die Text Encoding Initiative für CMC anstrebt, ist ein wichtiger Punkt, wenn es um ‚Digitale Nachhaltigkeit‘ geht. Unser Forschungsvorhaben leistet hierfür einen Beitrag.
         Das Hauptziel des Vorhabens umfasst die semi-automatische Kompilation sowie die Repräsentation der Blogdiskursstruktur. Dabei sollen die Relationen zwischen den textuellen und multimodalen Elementen (Blogbeiträge, Kommentare, Hyperlinks, Bilder und Töne) und den verschiedenen Textproduzenten (Blogger, Kommentatoren) abgebildet werden. Das annotierte Blogkorpus soll am Ende als eine nachhaltige Ressource verfügbar gemacht werden. Hierfür stehen wir momentan in Kontakt mit der Redaktion von Spektrum der Wissenschaft Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, um die Form der Bereitstellung zu klären.
         Die Grundlage des Korpus bildet das Wissenschaftsblogportal SciLogs – Tagebücher der Wissenschaft (SciLogs 2016) und deckt den Inhalt des Jahres 2015 vollständig ab. Die Daten wurden aus den vier SciLogs-Blogbereichen „WissensLogs“, „BrainLogs“, „KosmoLogs“ und „ChronoLogs“ erhoben. Das Korpus soll mit drei Informationstypen annotiert werden, die einerseits direkt, andererseits indirekt in den Blogdaten vorhanden sind oder anhand von statistischen Analysen und computerlinguistischen Tools sichtbar gemacht werden. Zum jetzigen Zeitpunkt beschränken sich die Annotationen des Korpus auf die direkt auslesbaren Informationen des Blogs wie beispielsweise der Titel des Blogbeitrags, der Name des Bloggers und das Einstelldatum des Blogeintrags. Ferner wird darauf geachtet, dass sämtliche Informationen, die die Inhalte der Scilogs-Website in Bezug auf die Bloginhalte liefern, ebenfalls annotiert werden. Wir sind der Meinung, dass auch auf den ersten Blick nicht für die Diskursstruktur relevante Informationen ausgezeichnet werden sollten. Im Fokus steht der Ansatz, dass das Blogkorpus aus CMC-Daten später für die Erforschung unterschiedlicher linguistischer Fragestellungen verwendet werden kann. 
         Zusammenfassend soll das Poster nicht nur unser Vorhaben vorstellen, sondern auch einen Einblick in unser grundsätzliches Vorgehen bei der Erstellung eines CMC-Korpus geben. Der Fokus für die DHd 2017 liegt unter anderem auf der Darstellung der Entscheidungsfindung innerhalb der Auszeichnungssprachen. Es soll erläutert werden, warum wir uns beispielsweise für die deskriptive Auszeichnungssprache TEI und nicht XML (Extensible Markup Language) entschieden haben. Des Weiteren möchten wir Einblicke in die semi-automatische TEI-Annotation geben und unsere Erkenntnisse mit dem vorläufigen, von der TEI SIG bereitgestellten, TEI-Schema teilen. Letztlich wollen wir auch das bisherige Korpus selbst vorstellen, das aus ca. 3.000.000 Tokens (ca. 1.200 Blogposts von 80 Bloggern und 15.000 Kommentaren von 1500 Kommentatoren) besteht.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Abendroth-Timmer, Dagmar / Bechtel, Mark / Chanier Thierry / Ciekanski, Maud (2014): 
                        Corpus d’apprentissage INFRAL (Interculturel Franco-Allemand en Ligne). 
                        Banque de corpus CoMeRe. 
                        Nancy: Ortolang.fr 
                        https://hdl.handle.net/11403/comere/cmr-infral [letzter Zugriff 1. Juli 2016].
                    
               
                  Beißwenger, Michael (2016):
                        SIG: Computer-Mediated Communication
                  http://wiki.tei-c.org/index.php/SIG:Computer-Mediated_Communication [letzter Zugriff 1. Juli 2016].
                    
               
                  SciLogs (2016):
                        SciLogs: Tagebücher der Wissenschaft. 
                        Spektrum der Wissenschaft Verlagsgesellschaft mbH 
                        http://www.scilogs.de/impressum/ [letzter Zugriff 1. Juli 2016].
                    
               
                  WebCorp (2013):
                        Birmingham Blog Corpus. WebCorp: Linguist’s Search Engine. 
                        Birmingham City University
                        http://wse1.webcorp.org.uk/cgi-bin/BLOG/index.cgi[letzter Zugriff 1. Juli 2016].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Zielstellung
            Digitale Nachhaltigkeit verstehen wir als eine komplexe Anforderung, die aus besonders vielen Blickwinkeln betrachtet werden kann und sollte. Wir stellen mit dem LAUDATIO-Projekt
                    1 eine Möglichkeit vor, digitale Nachhaltigkeit herzustellen, in dem wir einen unabhängigen und freien Zugriff auf historische Korpora zum Zweck der Wiederverwendung für Forschungszwecke, die über diejenigen hinausgehen, für die die Daten ursprünglich gesammelt wurden, ermöglichen. Eine so definierte digitale Nachhaltigkeit realisieren wir, in dem wir eine Vielzahl an verschiedenen, teils sehr unterschiedlichen historischen Korpusdaten inklusive einer umfangreichen aber einheitlichen Dokumentation, die ihre Erschließbarkeit in Bezug auf konkrete Nutzungsszenarien gewährleistet, bereitstellen. Aus dieser Arbeit zeigt sich, dass eine interdisziplinäre und insbesondere lokale institutionelle Zusammenarbeit mit den Korpuserstellern notwendig ist, die einen engen kommunikativen Austausch von Zielen und Anforderungen diesbezüglich sowie eine Identifikation von möglichen Kooperationen erst ermöglicht. Digitale Nachhaltigkeit definiert sich dementsprechend aus der jeweiligen Perspektive der Daten, der Dokumentation und der Institutionen ein wenig anders. Diese drei Perspektiven und deren Zusammenspiel in Bezug auf die digitale Nachhaltigkeit wollen wir anhand von historischen Korpora (vgl. Claridge 2008; Kytö 2011; Gippert und Gehrke 2015) diskutieren und an einem Best-Practice-Beispiel einer interdisziplinären Zusammenarbeit der Philosophischen Fakultät und dem Rechenzentrum der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (HU) erklären. 
                
         
         
            Heterogenität von Forschungsdaten 
            Die vielfältige Datenlandschaft in den Geisteswissenschaften stellt eine große Herausforderung in Bezug auf die digitale Nachhaltigkeit dar, da es unterschiedliche Datenmodelle und -formate und verschiedene Aufbereitungs- und Analyseverfahren gibt, die alle aus immer neuen Nutzungsszenarien und ihren Forschungsfragen, resultieren. In diesem Sinne verstehen wir die Arbeit mit Korpora als eine innovative, fortlaufende, wissenschaftliche Arbeit, die sich nicht ausschließlich auf existierende Standards stützen kann (auch wenn solche Standards natürlich immer beachtet werden müssen). Es werden daher zusätzlich andere, neue Forschungsdatenmodelle und -formate sowie Ressourcentypen entwickelt und auf die unterschiedlichsten Weisen weiter- und wiedergenutzt. Beispielsweise werden in den Projekten, die LAUDATIO unterstützt, eine Vielzahl an allein XML-basierten Formaten (nach z.B. Dipper 2005; Schmidt und Wörner 2009; Romary et al. 2015; TEI Consortium 2015) sowie CSV-basierte Formate (nach z.B. Nivre, Hall und Nilsson 2004; Krause und Zeldes 2016) für die Erstellung von historischen Korpora genutzt. Daneben finden auch und graphbasierten Lösungen (nach z.B. Ide und Suderman 2014) sowie proprietäre Formate, wie bei Ágel und Hennig (2007)
                    2, und immer häufiger JSON-basierte Formate wie bei Vertan et al. (2016) Anwendung. Zusätzlich dazu können Korpora in mehreren Formaten vorliegen, vor allem wenn Korpora in einer Mehrebenenarchitektur (vgl. Romary und Ide 2004; Lüdeling 2012) entworfen und verschiedene Formate für unterschiedliche Abschnitte des Forschungsdatenzyklus (vgl. Rümpel 2011) genutzt werden.
                
            Der innovative Charakter der Korpuserstellung zeigt sich neben den verwendeten Formaten auch in den Annotationsrichtlinien: Einige Formate wie TIGER-XML (Romary et al. 2015) und tcf (Heid et al. 2010) legen die Anzahl und die Bedeutung der Annotationen inklusive ihrer Tagsets fest, andere wie TEI-XML (TEI Consortium 2015) lassen Spielraum in der Serialisierung und in der Anwendung, in dem es beispielsweise mehrere valide Möglichkeiten gibt, Autoren in einem Dokument auszuweisen.
                    3 Wieder andere Formate wie EXMARaLDA-XML (Schmid und Wörner 2009) oder PAULA-XML (Dipper 2005) geben keinerlei solcher Beschränkungen vor.
                
            Insbesondere bei solchen Formaten mit größtmöglichem Spielraum für Interpretationen in Form von Annotationen zeigt sich die Vielfältigkeit der korpusbasierten Forschung. Ein typisches Annotationsbeispiel für historische Korpora sind Normalisierungen. Viele Korpora besitzen eigene Richtlinien für die Normalisierung, vgl. zum Beispiel für historisches Deutsch Jurish (2010), Bollmann et al. (2012); Odebrecht et al., (eingereicht). Auch für verschiedene Forschungsfragen wesentliche Kategorisierungen wie Wortarten gibt es annähernd für jedes historische Korpus eine eigene Lösung. So werden beispielsweise de-facto-Standards wie das STTS (Schiller et al. 1999) jeweils für ein Korpus angepasst, z.B. Dipper et al. (2013)
                    4 oder Fürstinnenkorresondenzkorpus
                    5. 
                
            Diese Beispiele zeigen, dass sich Korpora desselben Formats und ein Korpus, das in verschiedenen Formaten vorliegt, in Bezug auf ihre Annotationen stark unterscheiden können.
            Ausgehend von dieser Datenlage erscheint die Nachvollziehbarkeit des Lebenszyklus der Korpora als ein weiterer wesentlicher Faktor für die digitale Nachhaltigkeit. Welche der bisher genutzten Formate und Annotationskonzepte sich langfristig durchsetzen, welche Formate wie technisch unterstützt und welche neuen Lösungen entwickelt werden, hängt dann im Wesentlichen von der Entwicklung der korpusbasierten Forschung ab. Daher setzen wir eine Archivierung und Dokumentation aller verwendeten Formate und Annotationen eines Korpus in LAUDATIO um. 
         
         
            Metadaten
            Über einheitliche extensive Metadaten dieser heterogenen Korpusdaten und deren Lebenszyklus kann eine umfangreiche Korpusdokumentation sowie eine einheitliche Suche und ein gezielter Zugriff über eine Plattform auf die Forschungsdaten erstellerunabhängig gewährleistet werden (Bird und Simons 2001; Broeder et al. 2010; Burnard 2013; Hedges et al. 2013; Odebrecht et al. 2015). Die relevanten Kriterien für die Dokumentation und die Suche leiten sich aus den Wiederverwendungsszenarien ab (Odebrecht 2014). Um eine überfachliche Suche zu ermöglichen, wird in LAUDATIO eine technisch-abstrakte Modellierung der Metadaten eingesetzt, um die fachspezifischen Konzepte von Korpora überfachlich abzubilden (Odebrecht 2015). Neben den deskriptiven Metadaten sind für eine nachhaltige Vorhaltung von Forschungsdaten auch administrative, strukturelle, technische und Archivierungsmetadaten relevant (vgl. Xie und Matusiak 2016; Solodovnik 2011; NISO 2004), die für eine technische Infrastruktur berücksichtigt werden müssen, um die Nachvollziehbarkeit über längere Zeiträume und wechselnde Anwendergruppen hinweg gewährleisten zu können. So ermöglicht das einheitliche Metadatenmodell eine extensive und transparente Informationsarchitektur für die unterschiedlichen Ressourcen, was wiederum ein Baustein für deren digitale Nachhaltigkeit darstellt.
         
         
            Institutionelle (Zusammen-)Arbeit
            Bedingt durch die unterschiedlichen Sichtweisen und Anforderungen zur digitalen Nachhaltigkeit aus den Fachdisziplinen und durch die technische Infrastruktur sind Lösungen nur im Team und in Zusammenarbeit unterschiedlicher Kompetenzen plan- und erstellbar. Im Beispiel ist für den erstellerunabhängigen Zugang zu historischen Korpora die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen den FachwissenschaftlerInnen und LAUDATIO erforderlich. Der Computer- und Medienservice (CMS) und die Arbeitsgruppe Korpuslinguistik am Institut für deutsche Sprache und Linguistik der HU setzen mit dem LAUDATIO-Projekt einen Schwerpunkt auf eine enge institutionelle Zusammenarbeit mit den verschiedenen Arbeitsgruppen der philosophischen Fakultät, in dem es die Anforderungen für die digitale Nachhaltigkeit von Forschungsdaten der Fakultät mit den ForscherInnen erarbeitet und umsetzt und in Bezug auf die Hochschule als Ganzes in einen Entwicklungsrahmen einbettet (Dreyer und Vollmer 2016). Der Betrieb des LAUDATIO-Repositoriums wird nach Ende des Projektes, in dem Entwicklungen und Anpassungen am System vorgenommen werden, weiterhin durch das CMS sowie durch die Arbeitsgruppe Korpuslinguistik am Institut für deutsche Sprache und Linguistik gewährleistet. Um die heterogene Datenlandschaft zu verstehen, die umfassende Dokumentation zu erstellen und die neuen Entwicklungen aufzunehmen, erweist sich eine lokale Zusammenarbeit über die Fakultäten hinweg als sehr vorteilhaft. So bestehen enge Kooperationen unter anderem mit Projekten
            
               der Sprachgeschichte: DDD-AD
                        6, HIPKON
                        7, DDB
                        8, Fürstinnenkorrespondenzkorpus
                        9
               
               der Germanistik: Märchenkorpus
                        10 und RIDGES
                        11
               
               der Slawistik: “Korpuslinguistik und diachrone Syntax: Subjektkasus, Finitheit und Kongruenz in slavischen Sprachen”
                        12
               
            
            die jeweils sehr unterschiedliche Arbeitsweisen und Zielrichtungen haben. Durch diese Synergiebildung können Projekte ohne gesonderte Finanzierung oder Ressourcen nach ihrem Projektende durch eine genaue Kenntnis der Forschungsdatenlandschaft in einer Institution identifiziert und unterstützt werden. Die durch die Förderer (z.B. Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 2015) oder Universitäten (z.B. Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin 2014) vorgegeben Richtlinien zur Veröffentlichung und Archivierung von Projektergebnissen können so ebenfalls berücksichtigt werden. 
            Mit diesem Ansatz können gleichzeitig zwei Ziele erreicht werden: Die Projekte müssen sich keinen umfangreichen semantischen Anforderungen unterwerfen und können sich frei ausdrücken. Gleichzeitig können sie ihre fachspezifischen Anforderungen direkt an die Arbeitsgruppe Korpuslinguistik bzw. an den CMS richten. Andersherum können die Korpusprojekte in Umfragen zur gewünschten Anforderungen und Softwarelösungen direkt befragt und in die Entwicklung mit einbezogen werden.
                    13 Auf diese Art findet ein Community-Aufbau statt, der sich nicht nur über gemeinsame technische Plattformen definiert, sondern rein über die inhaltliche Gemeinsamkeit der Arbeit mit historischen Korpora und somit auch über disziplinäre Grenzen hinweg. 
                
         
         
            Einordnung und Schlussfolgerungen
            Der hier vorgestellte Weg, digitale Nachhaltigkeit von Forschungsdaten zu ermöglichen, stützt sich auf eine Spezialisierung auf einen bestimmten Typ von Forschungsdaten - historisches Korpus - und grenzt sich so von Ansätzen wie Zenodo
                    14 und dem Virtual Language Observatory (Van Uytvanck 2012) ab, die keine deutliche Eingrenzung hinsichtlich der Daten und deren Nutzungsszenarien machen. 
                
            Weiterhin zielt unsere Strategie auf die Unterstützung der Diversität der genutzten Formate und Konzepte, die sich von den TEI spezialisierten Ansätzen wie dem Deutschen Textarchiv (Geyken 2013) und Textgrid (Hedges et al. 2013) unterscheiden. 
            Die Korpusersteller selbst nutzen LAUDATIO auch mehr und mehr, um ihre eigenen neuen Versionen der historischen Korpora und damit ihren wissenschaftlichen Fortschritt zu veröffentlichen. Dass unser Ansatz, sich auf die erstellerunabhängige Wiederverwendung von Korpora als eine Strategie für digitale Nachhaltigkeit zu fokussieren, auch außerhalb der Institution funktioniert, zeigt Dumont (2016).
            Um die unterschiedlichen Entwicklungen und Innovationen bei der Korpuserstellung zu identifizieren, kennenzulernen und zu dokumentieren, ist eine enge, auf eine rein fachliche Ebene bezogene Zusammenarbeit mit der Community notwendig, die wir angefangen haben, im Rahmen der Philosophischen Fakultät der HU aufzubauen. 
         
      
      
         
             LAUDATIO steht für 
                            Long-term 
                            Access and 
                            Usage of 
                            Deeply 
                            Annotated Informa
                            tion. 
                            
                  www.laudatio-repository.org
               . Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                        
             Ágel, Vilmos; Hennig, Mathilde; KAJUK (Version 1.1), Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen. http://www.uni-giessen.de/kajuk/index.htm.
             Wie es zum Beispiel mit den Element  möglich ist, vgl. 
                            http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/de/html/ref-author.html Zugriff am 19.08.2016. 
                        
             Donhauser, Karin; Gippert, Jost; Lühr, Rosemarie; ddd-ad (Version 0.1), Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. https://referenzkorpusaltdeutsch.wordpress.com/.
                            
               
                  http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-7FC2-7
               
            
             Lühr, Rosemarie; Faßhauer, Vera; Prutscher, Daniela; Seidel, Henry; Fuerstinnenkorrespondenz (Version 1.1), Universität Jena, DFG. http://www.indogermanistik.uni-jena.de/Web/Projekte/Fuerstinnenkorr.htm.
            
               
                  http://www.deutschdiachrondigital.de/
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
            
               
                  https://www.linguistik.hu-berlin.de/de/institut/professuren/sprachgeschichte/forschung/sfb632-informationsstruktur
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
            
               
                  http://korpling.german.hu-berlin.de/ddb-doku/index.htm
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
            
               
                  http://dwee.eu/Rosemarie_Luehr/?Projekte___DFG-Projekte___Fruehneuzeitliche_Fuerstinnen korrespondenz_im_mitteldeutschen_Raum
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
             Die Erstellung des Korpus erfolgte im Rahmen von universitärer Lehre 
                                http://www.textbewegung.de/lehre.html Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
            
               
                  https://www.linguistik.hu-berlin.de/de/institut/professuren/korpuslinguistik/forschung/ridges-projekt/
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
            
               
                  https://www.slawistik.hu-berlin.de/de/member/meyerrol/subjekte/corpora
                Zugriff am 16.08.2016.
                            
             Zusätzlich helfen uns auch Evaluationen mit Kooperationspartner durch Dritte, die angebotenen Lösungen zu verbessern (z.B. Stiller et al. 2016).
            
               http://zenodo.org Zugriff am 19.08.2016.
                        
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Ágel, Vilmos / Hennig, Mathilde (eds.) (2007):
                        Zugänge zur Grammatik der gesprochenen Sprache. Germanistische Linguistik 269.
                        Tübingen: Niemeyer.
                    
               
                  Bird, Steven / Simons, Gary (2001): 
                        „The OLAC Metadata Set and Controlled Vocabularies“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics 7–18 
                        arXiv:cs/0105030v1.
                    
               
                  Bollmann, Marcel / Dipper, Stefanie / Krasselt, Julia / Petran, Florian (2012): 
                        „Manual and semi-automatic normalization of historical spelling - case studies from Early New High German“, in: 
                        Proceedings of KONVENS 2012 342–350 
                        http://www.oegai.at/konvens2012/proceedings/51_bollmann12w/ [letzter Zugriff 22 August 2016].
                    
               
                  Broeder, Daan / Kemps-Snijders, Marc / Van Uytvanck, Dieter / Windhouwer, Menzo / Withers, Peter / Wittenburg, Peter / Zinn, Claus (2010): 
                        „A data category registry- and component-based metadata framework“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of LREC 2010 43–47.
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou (2013): 
                        „The Evolution of the Text Encoding Initiative: From Research Project to Research Infrastructure“, 
                        in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 5: 1–13 10.4000/jtei.811.
                    
               
                  Claridge, Claudia (2008): 
                        „Historical Corpora“, 
                        in: Lüdeling, Anke / Kytö, Merja (eds): 
                        Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook 1. 
                        Berlin: De Gruyter 242–259.
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie (2005): 
                        „XML-based Stand-off Representation and Exploitation of Multi-Level Linguistic Annotation“, in: 
                        Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage 39–50.
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie / Donhauser, Karin / Klein, Thomas / Linde, Sonja / Müller, Stefan / Wegera, Klaus-Peter (2013): 
                        „HiTS. Ein Tagset für historische Sprachstufen des Deutschen“, 
                        in: Zinsmeister, Heike / Heid, Ulrich / Beck, Kathrin (eds.): 
                        Das Stuttgart-Tübingen Wortarten-Tagset: Stand und Perspektiven. Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 28(1) 85–137.
                    
               
                  Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2015): 
                        Leitlinien zum Umgang mit Forschungsdaten. 
                        Bonn: DFG. 
                        http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/antragstellung/forschungsdaten/richtlinien_forschungsdaten.pdf [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Dreyer, Malte / Vollmer, Andreas (2016): 
                        „An Integral Approach to Support Research Data Management at the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the European University Information Systems organisation 320–327.
                    
               
                  Dumont, Stefan (2016): 
                        „Fürstinnenkorrespondenzen. Experiment einer Nachnutzung“, 
                        in: 
                        Entwicklung und Nutzung interdisziplinärer Repositorien für historische textbasierte Korpora. DHd 2016 Workshop
                  http://www.laudatio-repository.org/laudatio/workshop-dhd2016/ [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Gippert, Jost / Gehrke, Ralf (eds.) (2015): 
                        Historical Corpora. Korpuslinguistik und interdisziplinäre Perspektiven auf Sprache 5. 
                        Tübingen: Narr.
                    
               
                  Geyken, Alexander (2013): 
                        „Wege zu einem historischen Referenzkorpus des Deutschen. das Projekt Deutsches Textarchiv“, 
                        in: Hafemann, Ingelore (ed.): 
                        Perspektiven einer corpusbasierten historischen Linguistik und Philologie. Internationale Tagung des Akademienvorhabens "Altägyptisches Wörterbuch“ an der BBAW. Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae, 4: 221–234.
                    
               
                  Hedges, Mark / Neuroth, Heike / Smith, Kathleen M. / Blanke, Thomas / Romary, Laurent / Küster, Marc / Illingworth, Malcom (2013): 
                        „TextGrid, TEXTvre, and DARIAH. Sustainability of Infrastructure for Textual Scholarship“, in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 5: 1–13.
                    
               
                  Heid, Ulrich / Schmid, Helmut / Eckart, Kerstin / Hinrichs, Erhard W. (2010): 
                        „A Corpus Representation Format for Linguistic Web Services. The D-SPIN Text Corpus Format and its Relationship with ISO Standards“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 494–499.
                    
               
                  Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (2014): 
                        Grundsätze zum Umgang mit Forschungsdaten an der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Unter Mitarbeit von Elena Simukovic 
                        https://www.cms.hu-berlin.de/de/ueberblick/projekte/dataman/hu-fdt-policy/view [letzter Zugriff 6. Juni 2016].
                    
               
                  Ide, Nancy / Sudermann, Keith (2014): 
                        „The Linguistic Annotation Framework. a standard for annotation interchange and merging“,
                        in: 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation 48 (3): 395–418.
                    
               
                  Jurish, Bryan (2010): 
                        „More than Words: Using Token Context to Improve Canonicalization of Historical German“,
                        in: 
                        Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 25 (1): 23–40.
                    
               
                  Krause, Thomas / Zeldes, Amir (2016): 
                        „ANNIS3. A new architecture for generic corpus query and visualization“, 
                        in: 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31 (1): 118–139 10.1093/llc/fqu057.
                    
               
                  Kytö, Merja (2011): 
                        „Corpora and historical linguistics“, 
                        in: 
                        Revista Brasileira de Linguistica Aplicada 11: 417–457 10.1590/S1984-63982011000200007.
                    
               
                  Lüdeling, Anke (2012): 
                        „A corpus-linguistics perspective on language documentation, data, and the challenge of small corpora“, 
                        in: Seifart, Frank / Haig, Geoffrey / Himmelmann, Nikolaus P. / Jung, Dagmar / Margetts Anna / Trilsbeek, Paul (eds.): 
                        Potentials of Language Documentation. Methods, Analyses, and Utilization 4. Language Documentation & Conservation Special Publication 3. 
                        Hawaii: University of Hawai‘i Press 32–38.
                    
               
                  NISO (2004): 
                        Understanding Metadatada. 
                        Bethesda: NISO Press 
                        http://www.niso.org/publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf [letzter Zugriff 13. Februar 2015].
                    
               
                  Nivre, Joakim / Hall, Johan / Nilsson, Jens (2004): 
                        „Memory-Based Dependency Parsing“,
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning 49–56. 
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin / Belz, Malte / Zeldes, Amir / Lüdeling, Anke / Krause, Thomas (eingereicht):
                        RIDGES Herbology - Designing a Diachronic Multi-Layer Corpus. 
                        Vorversion
                        https://www.linguistik.hu-berlin.de/de/institut/professuren/korpuslinguistik/forschung/ridges-projekt/download-files/pubs/odebrechtetaleingereicht_ridgesherbology.pdf/at_download/file [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin (2014): 
                        „Modeling Linguistic Research Data for a Repository for Historical Corpora“,
                        in: 
                        DH2016: Book of Abstracts 284–285.
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin (2015): 
                        „Interdisziplinäre Nutzung von Forschungsdaten mithilfe einer technisch-abstrakten Modellierung“, 
                        in: 
                        DHd 2015: Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen
                  https://dh2014.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/dh2014_abstracts_proceedings_07-11.pdf [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin / Krause, Thomas / Lüdeling, Anke (2015):
                        „Austausch von historischen Texten verschiedener Sprachen über das LAUDATIO-Repository“,
                        in: 
                        DGfS-CL Poster Session. 37. Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Sprachwissenschaft
                  http://asvdoku.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/dgfs2015cl-ps/index.html [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Romary, Laurent / Ide, Nancy (2004): 
                        „International standard for a linguistic annotation framework“,
                        in: 
                        Natural Language Engineering 10 (3-4): 211–225.
                    
               
                   Romary, Laurent / Zeldes, Amir / Zipser, Florian (2015):
                        „: serialising the ISO SynAF syntactic object model“, 
                        in: 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation 49 (1): 1–18.
                    
               
                  Rümpel, Stefanie (2011): 
                        „Der Lebenszyklus von Forschungsdaten“, 
                        in: Büttner, Stephan / Hobohm, Hans-Christoph / Müller, Lars (eds.): 
                        Handbuch Forschungsdatenmanagement. 
                        Bad Honnef: Bock + Herchen 25–34.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas / Wörner, Kai (2009): 
                        „EXMARaLDA. Creating, analysing and sharing spoken language corpora for pragmatic research”, 
                        in: 
                        Pragmatics 19 (4): 565–582.
                    
               
                  Schiller, Anne / Teufel, Simone / Stöckert, Christine / Thielen, Christine (1999): 
                        „Guidelines für das Tagging deutscher Textkorpora mit STTS“, 
                        in: Universität Tübingen (ed.): Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft. Technischer Report. 
                        http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/resources/stts-1999.pdf [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2016]. 
                    
               
                  Solodovnik, Iryna (2011): 
                        „Metadata issues in Digital Libraries. key concepts and perspectives“,
                        in: 
                        Italian Journal of Library, Archives and Information Science 2 (2): 4663-1–4663-27. 10.4403/jlis.it-4663.
                    
               
                  Stiller, Juliane / Thoden, Klaus / Zielke, Dennis (2016): 
                        „Usability in den Digital Humanities am Beispiel des LAUDATIO-Repositoriums“,
                        in: 
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung 244–247.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium (2015): 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange (2.9.1). 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 15. November 2015].
                    
               
                  Van Uytvanck, Dieter / Stehouwer, Herman / Lempen, Lari (2012):
                        ”Semantic metadata mapping in practice: the Virtual Language Observatory“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of LREC 2012 1029–1033.
                    
               
                  Vertan, Cristina / Ellwardt, Andreas / Hummerl, Susanne (2016):
                        „Ein Mehrebenen-Tagging-Modell für die Annotation altäthiopischer Texte“, 
                        in: 
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung 258–261.
                    
               
                  Xie, Iris / Matusiak, Krystyna (2016): 
                        Discover Digital Libraries. Theory and Practice. 
                        Oxford: Elsevier.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Mit „Ulysses: A Critical and Synoptic Edition“ erschien 1984 eine der ersten Forschungseditionen, die auf Basis der systematischen Verwendung von Kollationierungssoftware digital erzeugt wurde. Das Münchner Team um Hans Walter Gabler verwendete hierzu TUSTEP sowohl zur Validierung der Transkripte einzelner Zeugen als auch zur Erschließung der zeugenübergreifenden Synopse. Für die gedruckte Edition wurden die halbautomatisch erzeugten Kollationsergebnisse mit einem eigens entwickelten System komplexer Diakritika ausgezeichnet, die es dem geübten Leser ermöglichen sollten, die Textentstehung über stellenweise mehr als zwanzig inter- und intradokumentarische Textstufen hinweg in einer synoptisch integrierten Textfassung nachzuvollziehen. Während die Konzeption und Umsetzung dieser Arbeit bis heute als bahnbrechend im Bereich der Computerphilologie zu bezeichnen ist, konnte das Potenzial der resultierenden Druckausgabe für die Joyce-Forschung nicht annähernd ausgeschöpft werden. Zu komplex war das Markup, dem es gelingen sollte, zu verknüpfen, was zuvor getrennt war und zu hoch war der Aufwand, sich in diese Systematik einzuarbeiten.
         Im Digitalen hingegen führten die Daten jene Odyssee fort, die die Druckedition beenden sollte. Auf der Suche nach einem Markup-Standard, der es vermag, die Inhalte der Druckedition digital zu repräsentieren, wurden die TUSTEP Ergebnisse zunächst von Tobias Rischer im Rahmen seiner Diplomarbeit (1997) in SGML/TEI transformiert und anschließend in mehreren Überarbeitungen über TEI P4 bis hin zur aktuellen Version der TEI P5v3 (2016) migriert. Dieser Beitrag vollzieht die Evolution dieser “Legacy Data” nach, bis hin zu ihrer jüngsten Station - der noch andauernden Bemühung einer Migration nach TEI P5v3, welche im Rahmen des DFG- und NEH-geförderten Kooperationsprojektes “Diachronic Markup and Presentation Practices for Text Editions in Digital Research Environments” am Lehrstuhl für Digital Humanities der Universität Passau durchgeführt wird. 
         Erstmals seit der zweiten, überarbeiteten Ausgabe der synoptisch-kritischen Gabler Edition 1986 gelang es, aus den TEI-Daten die synoptische Visualisierung der Druckedition zu rekonstruieren und somit eine Konsistenzprüfung gegen die ursprünglichen Daten zu ermöglichen. Erst durch diese visuelle Rückführung offenbarten sich migrationsbedingte Fehler und Provisorien, welche zuvor, wenn überhaupt, nur in Fußnoten und privaten Aufzeichnungen vergangener Beteiligter dokumentiert wurden. Neben dem allgemeinen Versuch, die vollzogenen Änderungen aus den Aufzeichnungen und Migrationsergebnissen früherer Projekte zu rekonstruieren, hat es sich das Passauer Team zur Aufgabe gemacht, Strategien zur Entdeckung, Typisierung und Korrektur derartiger „Migrationsverluste“ zu entwickeln. Ein wesentlicher Bestandteil dieser Arbeit ist die Abschätzung der Leistungsfähigkeit und Wirtschaftlichkeit von automatisierten Batch-Konvertierungen mittels XSLT und Python im Vergleich zur manuellen Intervention und Korrektur der Kodierung. 
         Neben der Identifikation und Korrektur von „Migrationsfehlern“, steht die Rekonstruktion der textgenetischen Perspektive, durch welche sich die Druckedition auszeichnete, im Vordergrund. Während Gabler die textuelle Entwicklung, welche er mittels der Kollation chronologisch aufeinander folgender Textzeugen erschlossen hatte, im Druck synoptisch darstellen konnte, beinhalteten die TEI Guidelines bis zur Version P5v2 kein Modell zur Auszeichnung textgenetischer Prozesse. Es fehlte schlicht die Möglichkeit zur formalisierten Dokumentation einer stufenweisen, zeugenübergreifenden Chronologie der Textentwicklung. In der Druckedition wurde jeder auktorialen Textänderung 
                genau eine Textstufe aus der heuristisch erschlossenen Chronologie zugeordnet. Diese lineare Textentwicklung über intra- und interdokumentarische Textstufen, in Gablers Terminologie auch Overlay und Level genannt, musste im Digitalen in eine Auszeichnung überführt werden, welche die Genese in den Hintergrund rückt und zu jeder auktorialen Modifikation anstelle einer Textstufe eine Liste sämtlicher Zeugen verzeichnet, auf welcher die spezifische Änderung Bestand hat. Diese Art der dokumentenorientierten Kodierung von Textgenese entspricht zwar bis heute der gängigen Auszeichnungspraxis historisch-kritischer Editionsprojekte, repräsentierte aber zu keinem Zeitpunkt die textgenetische Intension der 84er 
                Ulysses Edition. Erst mit der Integration eines textgenetischen Modells in die TEI Guidelines, kann die ursprüngliche Intension erstmals auch in TEI kodiert werden. Hierzu bedarf es einer weiteren Episode der Datenmigration auf der Odyssee zum richtigen Standard. 
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Brüning, Gerrit / Henzel, Katrin / Pravida, Dietmar (2014): 
                        „Multiple Encoding in Genetic Editions: The Case of Faust“,
                        in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 4. Available from: jtei.revues.org.
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou / O’Brien O’Keeffe, Katherine / Unsworth, John (2006): 
                        Electronic Textual Editing.
                        New York: Modern Language Association of America.
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou / Jannidis, Fotis / Pierazzo, Elena / Midell, Gregor / Rehbein, Malte (2010): 
                        „An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions“,
                        in:
                        TEI: Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        Retrieved from www.tei-c.org/ Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html/. 
                    
               
                  Joyce, James / Gabler, Hans Walter (eds.) (1984): 
                        Ulysses: A Critical and Synoptic Edition.
                        New York: Garland.
                    
               
                  Joyce, James (1922): 
                        Ulysses. 
                        Paris: Shakespeare and Company.
                    
               
                  Fordham, Finn (2010): 
                        I do, I undo, I redo: The Textual Genesis of Modernist Selves in Hopkins, Yeats, Conrad, Forster, Joyce, and Woolf. 
                        Oxford / New York: Oxford University Press.
                    
               
                  Rischer, Tobias (1997): 
                        Eine TEI/SGML-Edition der textkritischen Ausgabe von James Joyces Ulysses. 
                        Diplomarbeit, LMU München.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.) (2016): 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. P5v3.
                        Available from: http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Bei der Planung und Durchführung von langfristigen (Editions-)Projekten stellen sich hinsichtlich der Nachhaltigkeit besondere Herausforderungen, da sich die technischen Entwicklungen der nächsten Jahre und Jahrzehnte eben nur bedingt vorausahnen lassen. Gerade in der Anfangsphase müssen aber bereits zahlreiche, oftmals richtungsweisende Entscheidungen getroffen werden, die den zukünftigen Erfolg oder Misserfolg, potenziell auftretende Probleme und Lösungsmöglichkeiten determinieren. Allerdings scheint es auch überhaupt nur in Projekten mit langer Laufzeit möglich, jenseits von reinen Willensbekundungen umfassende Strategien zur Nachhaltigkeit zu entwickeln und entsprechende Maßnahmen zu ergreifen. Damit leitet sich gleichzeitig die Pflicht ab, dies auch zu tun.
         Am Beispiel des Projektes 
                Capitularia, einem Langzeitprojekt (2014-2029), welches mit einer Hybrid-Edition frühmittelalterlicher Herrschererlasse befasst ist, sollen die verschiedenen Ebenen digitaler Nachhaltigkeit, damit verbundene Herausforderungen sowie erste Lösungsansätze präsentiert werden. Der von uns vorgeschlagene und in Teilen bereits umgesetzte Maßnahmenkatalog betrifft die Ebenen
            
         
            Datenmodellierung und Textauszeichnung,
            Datenhaltung und Dokumentation,
            Infrastrukturen (technisch und institutionell),
            Webseite und verwendete (Web-)Technologien, 
            Präsentation, Zugänglichkeit und Nachnutzbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse.
         
         Bei der 
                Textauszeichnung sollte auf etablierte Standards zurückgegriffen werden, um die programm- und plattformunabhängige Weiterverarbeitung der Daten langfristig zu gewährleisten. Bei 
                Capitularia werden Transkriptionen, Handschriftenbeschreibungen, Register und bibliographische Daten gemäß der im Projekt erarbeiteten Richtlinien in 
                TEI-XML codiert und durch ein den projektspezifischen Anforderungen angepasstes, restriktives Schema sowie den Einsatz von 
                Schematron (ISO/IEC 19757-3) kontrolliert, um damit über die gesamte Projektlaufzeit hinweg und auch bei wechselndem Personal die Konsistenz und Einheitlichkeit und damit die Qualität der erstellten Daten zu sichern. (Hedler u.a. 2011: 11-12)
            
         Dies bedingt von Beginn an eine 
                umfassende Dokumentation, die nicht nur z.B. in Form eines Wikis vor allem für interne Zwecke verwendet wird, sondern auch möglichst viele Informationen öffentlich zugänglich macht, so dass andere Projekte von den Erfahrungen profitieren können. Die Entwicklung und Rationalisierung von Arbeitsprozessen sowie deren genaue Darlegung gewährleisten dabei neuen Mitarbeitern einen möglichst einfachen Einstieg. Für die öffentliche Dokumentation bieten sich neben der eigenen Projektwebseite beispielsweise Dienste wie 
                GitHub an, auf denen gleichzeitig eine 
                transparente Datenhaltung mit Versionierung möglich ist, und auch eigene technische Entwicklungen einfach zur Nachnutzung bereitgestellt werden können. Dies alles setzt natürlich die Verwendung entsprechender 
                Open Access Lizenzen voraus.
            
         Die 
                Sicherung der Langzeitverfügbarkeit einer Ressource lässt sich generell nur durch eine entsprechende 
                technische Infrastruktur (Daten-, Kompetenz-, Rechenzentren) in Kombination mit 
                institutioneller Anbindung (Universitäten, Forschungsbibliotheken, kulturbewahrende Institutionen) gewährleisten. (Wissenschaftsrat 2011) Zu unterscheiden ist dabei zwischen der langfristigen Archivierung und Vorhaltung der Forschungsdaten und dem möglichst langen Erhalt der Webressource insgesamt, die ja ebenfalls mit allen Funktionalitäten über die Projektlaufzeit hinaus verfügbar sein soll. (Oßwald u.a. 2012: 13-15) Die Voraussetzungen in Köln erscheinen ideal, da dem Projekt mit dem 
                CCeH ein im Bereich der DH ausgewiesener technischer Partner zur Verfügung steht, der durch enge Kooperation mit weiteren universitären Einrichtungen wie dem 
                Data Center for the Humanities und dem Kölner Rechenzentrum, ideale strukturelle Voraussetzungen für Aufbau und langfristige Erhaltung digitaler Ressourcen schaffen konnte. Zusätzlich nimmt das 
                Capitularia-Projekt auch am Webarchivierungsprogramm der Bayerischen Staatsbibliothek teil.
            
         Für die Webpräsentation wurden in enger Zusammenarbeit mit dem technischen Partner 
                geeignete (open source) Technologien ausgewählt, deren zukünftiger Erhalt sowie deren Weiterentwicklung von einer breiten Community getragen werden, und die sich in anderen Projekten bereits bewährt haben. Im Fall von 
                Capitularia wird aktuell das PHP-basierte Content Management System 
                WordPress zur Verwaltung der Webpräsenz verwendet. Dabei werden die Standardfeatures (Blog, Suche, Mehrsprachigkeit etc.) möglichst breit genutzt und vereinzelt um weitere Eigenentwicklungen ergänzt, die insbesondere den Bereich des XSLT-Pipelining betreffen. Diese im Kontext des Projektes entwickelten 
                Plugins sollen auch der Nachnutzung durch andere Projekte zur Verfügung stehen. WordPress erfüllt durch die freie Zugänglichkeit des Quellcodes, der aktiven und heterogenen Entwickler-Gemeinschaft, des Ökosystems, welches sich um diese Software etabliert hat, sowie der verwendeten Lizenzmodells wichtige Voraussetzungen digitaler Nachhaltigkeit. (Stürmer 2015, S. 36-37) Die bewusst gewählten 
                low-tech-Lösungen gewährleisten weiterhin langfristig die leichte Wartbarkeit des Systems sowie plattform- und auch personelle Unabhängigkeit. Bei Bedarf könnte somit ohne größere Probleme auf ein anderes Präsentationsframework umgezogen werden.
            
         Die 
                Präsentation der Forschungsergebnisse findet auf mehreren Ebenen statt. Die angefertigten Transkriptionen werden zusammen mit weiteren Materialien projektbegleitend auf der Webseite veröffentlicht. Die Inhalte sind dort über Permalinks adressierbar und die zugrunde liegenden Daten (
                XML) stehen zum Download bereit. Um die Nachnutzung der Daten weiter zu erleichtern, ist die Implementierung von Schnittstellen (z.B. REST) vorgesehen.
                1 Die kritische Edition erscheint in Druckfassung in der 
                Leges-Reihe der 
                Monumenta Germaniae Historica und wird somit auch langfristig über deren Online-Angebot (dMGH) verfügbar sein. Vorabversionen der kritischen Editionstexte werden aber bereits zeitnah in digital aufbereiteter Form auf der Webpräsenz zur Verfügung gestellt. 
            
         Wenn auch finanzielle Ausstattung und Laufzeit von Projekten und damit auch deren Handlungsmöglichkeiten hinsichtlich Nachhaltigkeitsstrategien durchaus unterschiedlich sind, so erscheinen doch die Bereiche, in denen Maßnahmen getroffen werden können, allgemeingültig zu sein. Mit den hier vorgestellten Ansätzen soll ein aktiver und vor allem praxisorientierter Beitrag zur Diskussion um digitale Nachhaltigkeit geleistet werden.
      
      
         
             Die freie Bereitstellung von im Rahmen von Digitalen Editionen entstandenen (XML-)Daten lässt aktuell noch zu wünschen übrig. Nur durch diese wird aber Nachnutzung und damit integrative und innovative Forschung erst ermöglicht. (Turska u.a. 2016: 1) Technische Schnittstellen können die Nachnutzung befördern und stellen daher ein Kriterium einer aktuellen Ansprüchen genügenden digitalen Edition dar. (Sahle u.a. 2014). 
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Hedler, Marko / Montero Pineda, Manuel / Kutscherauer, Nico (2011):
                        Schematron. Effiziente Business Rules für XML-Dokumente.
                        Heidelberg: dpunkt-Verlag.
                    
               
                  Oßwald, Achim / Scheffel, Regine / Neuroth, Heike (2012):
                        „Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten. Einführende Überlegungen“, 
                        in: Neuroth, Heike / Strathmann, Stefan / Oßwald, Achim / Scheffel, Regine / Klump, Jens / Ludwig, Jens (eds.): 
                        Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten: Eine Bestandsaufnahme.
                        Boizenburg: Verlag Werner Hülsbusch 13–23 
                        http://www.nestor.sub.uni-goettingen.de/bestandsaufnahme/nestor_lza_forschungsdaten_bestandsaufnahme.pdf [letzter Zugriff 9. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick / Vogeler, Georg / IDE (eds.) (2014):
                        Kriterien für die Besprechung digitaler Editionen. Version 1.1 Juni 2014 
                        http://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/kriterien-version-1-1/ [letzter Zugriff 12. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Stürmer, Matthias (2015):
                        „Wann sind Open Source Projekte digital nachhaltig?“,
                        in: swissICT und Swiss Open Systems User Group (eds.):
                        Open Source Studie: Schweiz 2015 36–37 
                        http://www.swissict.ch/fileadmin/customer/Publikationen/OSS-Studie2015.pdf [letzter Zugriff 9. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Turska, Magdalena / Cummings, James / Rahtz, Sebastian (2016):
                        „Challenging the Myth of Presentation in Digital Editions“,
                        in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 9
                        http://jtei.revues.org/1453 [letzter Zugriff 12. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Wissenschaftsrat (ed.) (2012); 
                        Empfehlungen zur Weiterentwicklung der wissenschaftlichen Informationsstrukturen in Deutschland bis 2020. 
                        Drs. 2359-12. 
                        Berlin 
                        http://www.wissenschaftsrat.de/download/archiv/2359-12.pdf [letzter Zugriff 09. November 2016].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Wo die Wörter sind: eine visuell-interaktive Erforschung von Pflanzennamen
         
          In den Digital Humanities werden häufig Visualisierungsmethoden eingesetzt, um bestimmte Trends, Beziehungen oder Inhalte innerhalb oder zwischen verschiedenen Datensätzen hervorzuheben. Oft werden gut etablierte und weit verbreitete Arten graphischer Darstellung von Daten herangezogen, wie Verbert (2015) gezeigt hat. Der Einsatz innovativer Visualisierungsmethoden für die Datenerforschung und den Datenzugriff ist jedoch bei Humanities-Projekten, die sich mit nicht-numerischen Daten beschäftigen, noch relativ selten. In diesem Beitrag stellen wir ein Visualisierungstool vor, das im Rahmen des DH-Projekts 
                exploreAT! – exploring Austria’s culture through the language glass entwickelt wird, und erläutern dessen Anwendung am Beispiel der Pflanzennamen-Sammlung für das Wörterbuch der bairischen Dialekte in Österreich.
            
         
            exploreAT! (vgl. Wandl-Vogt et al, 2015) bietet unterschiedliche Einblicke in die vielfältige Beschaffenheit der deutschen Sprache in Österreich, durch exploratives Erforschen mittels einer Synthese von digitalen Infrastrukturen, Lexikographie, visueller Analyse und Citizen Science. Das Projekt basiert auf einer Sammlung von Daten zu den  bairischen Dialekten in Österreich aus dem frühen 20. Jahrhundert aus der Region der ehemaligen österreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie. Die Datenerhebung erfolgte ursprünglich mittels Fragebögen, die eine Vielzahl von Themen aus dem Alltag abdecken. Die gesammelten Daten bestehen aus rund 200.000 Stichwörtern in geschätzten 4 Millionen Datensätzen. Teile davon wurden als fünfbändiges Wörterbuch mit etwa 50.000 Stichwörtern (WBÖ), und Teile als Datenbank (DBÖ) ausgegeben. Innerhalb des Projekts gibt es vier spezifische, aber miteinander verbundene Arbeitsbereiche: kulturelle Lexikographie, semantisch-technologieorientierte Forschungsinfrastrukturen, visuelle Analyse und Bürgerwissenschaften. Des Weiteren werden use-cases für spezifische Themen wie Pflanzennamen, Farben oder Lebensmitteln entwickelt. TEI / XML Schnittstellen werden eingesetzt, um die Organisation von Metadaten, Konzepten und linguistischen Daten zu verbessern. Darüber hinaus ist vorgesehen, weitere Zugangspunkte zur Arbeit mit LOD zu schaffen, ontologische Ressourcen zu nutzen und damit die Visualisierung von konzeptionellen und semantischen Informationen zu gewährleisten.
            
         Mit Hilfe des vorgestellten visuellen Analysetools werden weitere Einblicke in die komplexe Struktur dieser Dialektdaten gegeben, wobei ein intuitiver und leicht zugänglicher Ansatz vorgesehen ist. In diesem Beitrag nehmen wir Pflanzennamen als exemplarischen Fall für die visuelle Exploration, Analyse und Darstellung von Datenstrukturen.
         Der Prototyp dieses Tools basiert auf einer Treemap-Visualisierungsmethode (vgl. Shneiderman, 1992), da diese eine kompakte Art und Weise für die Übertragung von Hierarchien ermöglicht. Der Zweck des Tools besteht darin, ein Mittel zur interaktiven Erforschung der verfügbaren Daten bereitzustellen, so dass der Benutzer Verständnis dafür gewinnt, wie das Wissen, das sich auf ein bestimmtes Wort (oder eine Zeichenkette) bezieht, in der Datenbank "gespeichert" ist, wobei die jeweiligen Lemmata mit der Benutzerabfrage zusammenhängen. Abgesehen von der Darstellung des resultierenden Sets von Lemmata, bauen wir eine Hierarchie je nach Kontext der Lemmata (in diesem Fall sind wir daran interessiert, die Lemmata in Bezug auf verschiedene Pflanzenarten zu gruppieren). Deshalb verwenden wir die beiden wichtigsten visuellen Merkmale von Treemaps: a) das Treemap-Layout (basierend auf einem Satz von verschachtelten Rechtecken, wobei jedes Rechteck einen Zweig der Hierarchie darstellt, der dann mit kleineren Rechtecken, welche Unterzweige darstellen, gekachelt wird) und b) die Fläche jedes Rechtecks ​​(die proportional zur Größe der Daten ist).
         Da in diesem Prototyp Pflanzennamen von größter Bedeutung sind, aber dem Benutzer, der eventuell mit den wissenschaftlichen Namen der Pflanzen nicht vertraut ist, wichtige Information verborgen bleiben könnte, entschieden wir uns für eine visuelle Art den Kontext (Pflanzen) der Lemmata, die in Zusammenhang mit der Abfrage stehen, zu vermitteln: wir verwenden den Flickr-Webdienst, um Fotos abzurufen, die mit dem wissenschaftlichen Namen der Pflanze versehen sind (siehe Abbildung 1).
         
            
         
         Abbildung 1: Beispiel für eine visuelle Darstellung von Pflanzennamen mit verschachtelten Rechtecken. 
         Als Ergebnis unseres visuellen Ansatzes kann der Benutzer die Verteilung der Lemmata in Abhängigkeit von den Pflanzen, auf die sie sich bezieht, verstehen (jedes Rechteck enthält das abgerufene Foto einer bestimmten Pflanze mit einem Bereich entsprechender Größe, die davon abhängt, wie viele Lemmata in Zusammenhang damit stehen). Der Benutzer kann dann auf das Rechteck seiner Wahl klicken, um tiefer zu gehen und alle relevanten Informationen für die mit dieser Pflanze zusammenhängenden Lemmata zu erhalten (siehe Abbildung 2).
         
            
         
         Abbildung 2: Beispiel für die Exploration von Pflanzennamen-Lemmata in einem bestimmten Rechteck, in diesem Fall Vaccinium myrtillus; Heidelbeere, Schwarzbeere, Blaubeere (siehe Abbildung 1).
         Schließlich öffnen sich künftige Arbeitsfelder dank der Tatsache, dass dieser visuelle Ansatz auch noch gültig ist, wenn wir die Lemmata nach anderen Kriterien (d.h. nach einer mehrstufigen Hierarchie) gruppieren. Zum Beispiel könnte man zuerst die Lemmata nach Pflanze gruppieren; dann könnte man für eine bestimmte Pflanze die dazugehörigen Lemmata nach Zeit gruppieren, die wiederum nach Regionen gruppiert werden. Mit diesen verschiedenen Arten der Gruppierung können diverse andere Daten mit einer ähnlichen strukturellen Beschaffenheit in derselben Weise visualisiert und analysiert werden. Dies würde unser Tool vielseitig und auch offen für andere Daten, nicht nur Pflanzennamen, machen.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Verbert, Karen (2015):
                        „On the Use of Visualization for the Digital Humanities“
                        in:
                        DH2015: Global Digital Humanities.
                    
               
                  Wandl-Vogt, Eveline / Kieslinger, Barbara / O’Connor, Alexander / Theron, Roberto
                        (2015):
                        „exploreAT! Perspektiven einer Transformation am Beispiel eines lexikographischen Jahrhundertprojekts“,
                        in:
                        DHd 2015: Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen.
                    
               
                  Shneiderman, Ben (1992):
                        „Tree visualization with tree-maps: 2-d space-filling approach“,
                        in:
                        ACM Transaction on Graphics (TOG) 11 (1): 92-99.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Die Rolle digitaler Ressourcen in den Geisteswissenschaften und die zunehmende Bedeutung von Algorithmen werden noch immer unterschätzt. In den letzten Jahren bzw. Jahrzenten wurden zahlreiche Software-Werkzeuge, virtuelle Forschungsumgebungen und interaktive Publikationen, wie Datenbanken oder Digitale Editionen, für die geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung entwickelt. Diese werden innerhalb der Forschungscommunity mit zunehmender Tendenz akzeptiert und inzwischen breit eingesetzt. Jedoch stehen wir heute vor der Herausforderung diese verschiedenen Ressourcen, die zu einem großen Teil auf unterschiedlichen technischen Grundlagen basieren, weiter zu pflegen und verfügbar zu halten. Transparenz und Reproduzierbarkeit von Forschungsergebnissen, die mit einer digitalen Ressource oder Software erstellt wurden leiden darunter, dass diese Software oft nach wenigen Jahren nicht mehr gepflegt wird und damit nicht mehr lauffähig ist. 
         Der Vortrag beleuchtet die hier skizzierte Problematik am Beispiel Digitaler Editionen. Es werden drei Punkte vorgeschlagen, wie durch einen Bottom-Up-Ansatz die Nachhaltigkeit digitaler Ressourcen gefördert werden kann. Der Fokus liegt dabei auf den Erfahrungen, die im Laufe der letzten 10 Jahre mit der Entwicklung von XML-basierten Digitalen Editionen und dem Einsatz ausgewählter Software-Werkzeuge, wie der nativen XML-Datenbank eXistdb (
                http://exist-db.org), gewonnen wurden. 
            
         Bei digitalen Ressourcen handelt es sich um dynamische Objekte. Das bedeutet einerseits, dass die Inhalte jederzeit korrigiert, erweitert oder verändert werden können. Andererseits muss die technologische Basis fortlaufend aktuell, sicher und verfügbar gehalten werden. Diese beiden Prozesse sind Teilaufgaben eines größeren Aufgabenbereichs, der unter dem Begriff „
                data curation“ zusammengefasst werden kann.
            
         Eine Digitale Edition ist mehr als nur ihre Forschungsdaten. Letztere, in vielen Fällen XML-Dokumente, werden oft erst durch eine adäquate Darstellung, durch Visualisierungen, wie Text-Bild-Verlinkungen, verschiedene Ansichten auf den Text, Netzwerke oder Timelines oder auch Verknüpfungen mit anderen externen Ressourcen „zum Leben erweckt“. Dieses Leben in Form programmierter Funktionalität ist ein genuiner Forschungsbereich der Digital Humanities. Allerdings führt die Funktionalitätsschicht (siehe Abbildung 1) einer Digitalen Edition auch dazu, dass 
                data curation eine sehr komplexe Aufgabe werden kann, da hier die Flexibilität der Implementierung erheblich höher ist als auf der Ebene der Datenschicht. 
            
         
            
            Abbildung 1: Schichtenmodell Digitale Edition
         
         Digitale Editionen sind Software-Werkzeuge für die Analyse von Forschungsdaten. Damit sind sie ein Teil des Forschungsprozesses, der erhalten werden muss, um die Reproduzierbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse zu gewährleisten.
         Eine digitale geisteswissenschaftliche Ressource durchläuft üblicher Weise einen typischen Lebenszyklus. Dieser beginnt mit der Analyse der analogen Quellen, geht über die Datenmodellierung, die Auswahl bzw. Anpassung oder Neuentwicklung von Bearbeitungswerkzeugen sowie der digitalen Publikation der Forschungsergebnisse bis hin zu Fragen der Langzeitverfügbarkeit und Langzeitarchivierung. Bei jedem dieser Schritte sind verschiedenen Kompetenzen involviert. Das bedeutet, der Aufbau einer Digitalen Edition ist immer Teamwork. Dieses Team setzt sich in den meisten Fällen aus Personen zusammen, die einerseits das inhaltliche Fachwissen mitbringen und andererseits aus Personen mit einer Vielzahl unterschiedlicher technischer Kompetenzen:
         
            Analyse der Quellen (Geisteswissenschaftler)
            Anforderungsanalyse der digitalen Ressource, 
                    Requirement Engineering (alle Projekbeteiligten)
                
            Entwurf des Daten- / Dokumentenmodells, Auswahl von Standards (Geisteswissenschaftler, Datenbankspezialisten, Markupspezialisten, Metadatenspezialisten)
            Auswahl, Anpassung bzw. Entwicklung von Tools (Programmierer, Geisteswissenschaftler)
            Aufsetzen und Betreuen der Server (Systemadministratoren)
            Konzept, Design und Umsetzung der Web-Publikation (Webdesigner, Webentwickler, Geisteswissenschaftler)
            Vorbereitung für Langzeitverfügbarkeit / -archivierung (Metadatenspezialisten, Dokumentationsspezialisten)
            Betreuung und Wartung nach Projektende („
                    data curators“)
                
         
         An jeder Stelle in diesem Lebenszyklus einer digitalen Ressource werden Entscheidungen getroffen, die Auswirkungen auf den nachfolgenden Schritt haben. So bilden die eigentliche Analyse der Inhalte, die z.B. in einer Digitalen Edition publiziert werden sollen, und die Anforderungsanalyse das Fundament, auf dem alles aufbaut, vom Daten- oder Dokumentenmodell, bis hin zur Publikation und der 
                data curation. 
            
         Aus methodischer Sicht, mit besonderem Augenmerk auf das zugrundeliegende Text- bzw. Dokumentenmodell, wurden Digitale Editionen bereits ausführlich beschrieben (siehe Pierazzo 2015 und Sahle 2013). Eine Analyse aus technischer Sicht steht noch aus. Um die Entwicklung, Betreuung und Nachhaltigkeit Digitaler Editionen zu gewährleisten bedarf es eines technologischen Publikationskonzepts, das aus möglichst standardisierten Komponenten besteht. 
         Bisher existieren sehr erfolgreiche Standardisierungen auf dem Gebiet der Metadaten und der Textauszeichnungen, z.B. mit den Richtlinien der 
                Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), aber wenig bis gar nichts bei der technischen Umsetzung und der Dokumentation. Dies würde helfen anschlussfähigere, stabilere und nachhaltigere digitale Ressourcen aufzubauen und damit auch die Arbeit eines Datenkurators, der sich um die Pflege dieser Ressourcen nach Projektende kümmert, deutlich vereinfachen.
            
         Für eine aussichtsreiche Nachhaltigkeit kann die Lösung nicht allumfassend sein, sondern nur für klar definierte Anwendungsfälle gelten. In dem hier vorgestellten Fall ist dies eine XML-basierte Digitale Edition, die mit Technologien aus der X-Familie (XSLT, XQuery, XML-Schema, eXistdb) entwickelt wird. Das Grundprinzip ist jedoch auf andere Anwendungsszenarien übertragbar:
         
            Eine ausführliche Dokumentation
            Ein klar definierter Werkzeugkasten
            Die Paketierung aller Projektressourcen
         
         Dokumentation
         Eine nachhaltige digitale Forschungsressource bzw. –software ist langfristig verfügbar, gut dokumentiert, lizenziert und versioniert, um die Reproduzierbarkeit der Forschungsprozesse zu garantieren. Die wichtigste Komponente ist eine ausführliche, formalisierte Dokumentation, die mindestens die folgenden Informationen enthalten sollte:
         
            Den Namen des Projekts und aller beteiligten Institutionen und Personen.
            Den Projektstatus: geplant, in Arbeit, veröffentlicht, beendet.
            Die eingesetzten Technologien und Standards inklusive Versionsangabe.
            Lizenzangaben zu Forschungsdaten, Quellcode, und anderen Komponenten, wie Schriftarten, Audio- oder Videodokumenten.
            Informationen darüber, wo der Quellcode und die Forschungsdaten zu finden sind.
            Informationen über die bereitgestellten APIs und andere Schnittstellen, um die Forschungsdaten in verschiedenen Formaten abzurufen (XML, HTML, PDF, JSON usw.) und in anderen Kontexten weiterzuverarbeiten. 
            Details über die Forschungsmethode und den Hintergrund des Projekts. (Mehr dazu siehe Faniel 2015)
            Zitations- und Referenzierungsanweisungen für die persistente Adressierung aktueller und älterer Versionen der Forschungsdaten, Metadaten und Software.
            Eine standardisierte Historie der Projektentwicklung.
         
         Selbstverständlich kann diese Liste nur ein erster Vorschlag sein. Sie enthält keinesfalls alle möglichen Informationen, die zu einer Digitalen Edition angegeben werden können. Die Dokumentation sollte maschinenlesbar (um z.B. als XML oder JSON weiter verarbeitet werden zu können) und über eine standardisierte Adresse bzw. einen klar definierten Zugriffspunkt (z.B. http://home.of.project/api/projectdescription) abrufbar sein. Dadurch wäre es möglich eine Digitale Edition bei einem zentralen Verzeichnis anzumelden, in dem alle Informationen und Updates über Digitale Editionen, die demselben Publikationsmodell folgen, gesammelt werden. Ein solches Verzeichnis existiert noch nicht. 
         Definierter Werkzeugkasten
         Wie oben beschrieben kann Nachhaltigkeit nur in einem definierten Rahmen hergestellt werden, indem man klare Anwendungsfälle beschreibt. Selbst in diesen sind die Möglichkeiten der Umsetzung nahezu unbegrenzt. Daher ist es wichtig, genau zu definieren, welche Technologien, Standards und Software-Werkzeuge zum Einsatzkommen und welche Abhängigkeiten bestehen. Es ist ratsam die Zahl der eingesetzten Tools überschaubar zu halten und sich auf etablierte und gut dokumentierte Technologien zu konzentrieren.
         Paketierung 
         Alle zusammengehörenden Komponenten einer Digitalen Ressource (Daten, Metadaten, Quellcode, Binärdatein, Dokumentation) müssen immer zusammen abrufbar sein. Diese Pakete tragen deutlich zu einer nachhaltigeren Entwicklung bei. Es ist immer klar, wo sich alle relevanten Informationen und Daten befinden. Zudem könnte ein Paket einer zentralen Kurationsstelle, z.B. einem Digital Huamnities Data Center, übergeben werden, die sich um die Betreuung der digitalen Ressourcen abgeschlossener Projekte kümmert. Diese Anlaufstelle existiert ebenfalls noch nicht.
         Für den hier vorgestellten Anwendungsfall bietet das von eXistdb verwendete EXPath-Format ( 
                
               http://expath.org/ 
            ) einen guten Ausgangspunkt für die Paketierung. Dieses Format beschreibt ein Packaging-System ( 
                
               http://expath.org/modules/pkg/ 
            ), das es erlaubt XML-basierte Dokumente zusammen mit Abfrage- und Transformationsskripten sowie verschiedenen anderen Ressourcen auf eine standardisierte Art und Weise zu paketieren, das dieses Paket von allen Softwaresystemen, die diesem Standard folgen verstanden und ausgewertet werden kann. Damit kann dieses Packagesystem ähnlich fungieren, wie ein App-Store für Smartphones. Auch der Anpassungsaufwand für Software, die während der Projektlaufzeit eingesetzt wird, würde sich so verringern. 
            
         Andere Anwendungsszenarien lassen sich nicht auf Softwareebene paketieren. In diesen Fällen kann man auf Anwendungsvirtualisierung zurückgreifen, wie sie zum Beispiel mittels Docker (
                https://www.docker.com/) möglich ist.
            
         Um eine solche Standardisierung auf der technischen Ebene durchzuführen benötigt es eine aktive Digital-Humanities-Enwicklercommunity. Die Rolle des DH-Entwicklers ist im allgemeinen Diskurs noch deutlich unterrepräsentiert. Um wirklich erfolgreich Softwaretools für die geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung programmieren zu können, benötigt ein Entwickler mehr als nur ein grundlegendes Verständnis der typischen Problematiken in den einzelnen Fachdisziplinen. Umgekehrt erlauben Programmierkenntnisse ein wesentlich besseres Verständnis über die Funktionsweise der Software und damit bessere Einsatzmöglichkeiten sowie das Potential zu eigenen Verbesserungen. Um hier Fortschritte zu erzielen, müssen sich die DH-Entwickler besser organisieren. Die DH-Entwicklercommunity wäre der Kreis an Personen, die die Einführung und Anwendung von Standards, wie dem EXPath-System diskutieren und tragen. Mittelfristig wäre das Ziel für jeden Schritt im Lebenszyklus einer digitalen Ressource einen oder mehrere Vorschläge einer standardisierten Herangehensweise in Form eines 
                best-practice-Leitfadens zu haben, der sich als 
                technical reader zur Erstellung digitaler geisteswissenschaftlicher Ressourcen eignet und Vorschläge zu Schnittstellen, Standards, Lizenzen, Dokumentation, Zitationshinweise usw. anbietet.
            
         Ein Ansatzpunkt dafür bietet die Arbeit des 2010 gegründeten Software Sustainability Institute (
                https://www.software.ac.uk/), Hong 2010 sowie Hettrick 2016, die verschiedene Ansätze zur Forschungs-Software-Nachhaltigkeit untersucht haben.
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Faniel, Ixchel (2015): 
                        Data Management and Curation in 21st Century Archives, 21. September 2015, 
                        http://hangingtogether.org/?p=5375.
                    
               
                  Hettrick, Simon (2016): 
                        Research Software Sustainability. Report on a Knowledge Exchange Workshop.
                    
               
                  Hong, N. Chue et al. (2010): 
                        Software Preservation Benefits Framework. Software Sustainability Institute Technical Report.
                    
               
                  Pierazzo, Elena (2015): 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing, Theories, Models and Methods. 
                        Ashgate.
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013):
                        Digitale Editionsformen, Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. 3 Bände.
                        Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Dreht sich ein Roman vorab um das Roman-Schreiben, den Zustand der zeitgenössischen Literatur und die Kritik an ihr, dann ist es vielleicht gar nicht so abwegig, dass sein cleverster Witz in seiner eigenen Nicht-Veröffentlichung steckt. Der schweizerische Schriftsteller Hermann Burger griff auf den letzten Seiten seines Romans 
                    Lokalbericht (1970) zu genau dieser selbstreflexiven und auto-dekonstruktiven Volte, als er den Mentor des jungen Protagonisten und angehenden Schriftstellers urteilen lässt, so könne man heute nicht mehr schreiben, das Manuskript solle liegen bleiben, “ein Jahr, zwei Jahre, zehn Jahre lang” – und Burger sich offenbar selbst an den Ratschlag hält und den Roman tatsächlich zeit seines Lebens nicht veröffentlicht.
                
            Ausschlaggebend für die Nicht-Veröffentlichung war freilich nicht diese Pointe, sondern ein biographischer Umstand (vgl. dazu den Kommentar in Zumsteg 2016a: 257-304 bzw. http://www.lokalbericht.ch/kommentar). Aus heutiger Warte erscheint die Veröffentlichung jedoch zweifellos geboten. Der 
                    Lokalbericht nimmt in Burgers Lebenswerk und Werkleben eine Scharnierfunktion ein, indem sich Burger in diesem ‘Rohdiamanten’ erstmals ungestüm an jene unverwechselbare Poetik herantastet, die ab seinem Roman 
                    Schilten: Schulbericht zuhanden der Inspektorenkonferenz von 1976 zu seinem Markenzeichen wird. Die lang währende Beschäftigung Burgers mit dem Romantext und seinen Vorstufen – schreibend, vorlesend, auszugsweise publizierend – legt darüber hinaus Zeugnis ab für die Bedeutung, die er dem Text beimaß. Burgers Bonmot “Literatur ist, wenn man trotzdem druckt”, muss also zur Rechtfertigung dieser postumen Veröffentlichung gar nicht erst bemüht werden.
                
         
         
            Der Lokalbericht als Hybrid-Edition
            Die erstmalige Herausgabe des Romans aus dem Nachlass im Schweizerischen Literaturarchiv, Bern (SLA), erforderte eine andere editorische Handhabe als die vor zwei Jahren erschienene Leseausgabe von Burgers Werken in acht Bänden (Zumsteg 2014), die sich auf den Wiederabdruck seiner bereits zuvor publizierten Texte beschränkte. Eine Hybrid-Edition, bestehend aus einer umfassenden digitalen Edition und einem schlichten Lesebändchen als deren Spin-off (Zumsteg 2016a, 2016b), wird dem Archivfund besser gerecht, zumal sich die Entstehung des Romans dadurch auszeichnet, dass einzelne Textbausteine eine lange Vorgeschichte haben. Die Änderungen und Unterschiede werden dabei viel weniger auf den einzelnen Typoskript-Seiten manifest als zwischen den Textstufen, sie werden erst im Vergleich der betreffenden Dokumente erkennbar. Die Möglichkeiten einer digitalen Edition, die nicht durch das Format der Buchseite und die lineare Folge bestimmt und begrenzt sind, boten sich für diese Situation besonders an. Das digitale Format gab überdies Gelegenheit, die vielfältigen allographen Materialien aus dem Nachlass und aus anderer Provenienz miteinzubeziehen, die für die Kontextualisierung und das Verständnis der Autographen sowie für Burgers mosaikartige Arbeitsweise erhellend sind. Das Projekt bot also eine gute Ausgangslage, den vielgerühmten Mehrwert einer digitalen Edition gegenüber den hergebrachten Publikationsformen zu realisieren. Die digitale Edition (beta) ist seit dem 22. Oktober 2016 unter http://www.lokalbericht.ch verfügbar.
         
         
            Grundlage: hochqualitative Digitalisate, dokument-orientierte TEI-Encodings
            Neben den 179 beschriebenen Typoskriptseiten des Romans wurden von den knapp 900 weiteren Textträgern, die im Rahmen der digitalen Edition präsentiert werden, hochauflösende Digitalisate im TIFF-Format und/oder mit OCR hinterlegte PDF-Dateien angefertigt. Aufgrund der fotografisch hervorragenden Qualität und der ohnehin guten Leserlichkeit der (zumeist nur punktuell korrigierten) Typoskripte und handschriftlichen Dokumente nehmen diese Digitalisate den Rang der primären digitalen Repräsentation ein.
            Die Digitalisate aller Dokumente, die Bestandteil des eigentlichen dossier génétique sind, wurden durch dokument-orientierte, auf der Basis von OCR-Daten erstellte, TEI-Encodings (sourceDoc) ergänzt. Diese Encodings bilden die Grundlage der diplomatischen Transkription, d.h. der Umschrift aller Texte inklusive mikrogenetischer Varianz. Die minutiöse Aufzeichnung dieser Phänomene erwies sich als sehr zeitaufwändig. Retrospektiv wäre zu erwägen, die Tiefe des Encodings im Sinne des Vermeidens eines “Over-taggings” (Bernhart/Hahn 2014, Hanrahan 2015) zu reduzieren, zumal die derart codierten Phänomene aus der Perspektive der naheliegenden Forschungsfragen nur einen begrenzten Mehrwert gegenüber dem durchsuchbaren Volltext und den Digitalisaten schaffen.
            Durch Extraktion der Text-Nodes inklusive der regularisierten Varianten und basierend auf Milestone-Elementen (Absätze, Seitenumbrüche) ließen sich ab dem dokument-orientierten TEI-Encoding sowohl der für die Druckausgabe verwendete Lesetext als auch text-orientierte TEI-Encodings gewinnen, welche die Grundlage für die Lesefassung der digitalen Edition bilden (Umschrift aller Texte ohne Berücksichtigung mikrogenetischer Varianz).
            Die TEI-Encodings, die unter den Bedingungen der CC BY 2.0-Lizenz nachnutzbar sind, enthalten selbstredend auch die Metadaten des jeweiligen Typoskript-Konvoluts oder Briefes.
         
         
            Präsentation und Funktionalität
            Als digitale Edition mit ausgeprägter textgenetischer Komponente lehnt sich der Aufbau der 
                    Lokalbericht-Edition an vergleichbare aktuelle Projekte wie die textgenetische Edition Wofgang Koeppens 
                    Jugend (Krüger, Mengaldo, Schumacher 2016) und die historisch-kritische Edition von Goethes 
                    Faust an (Bohnenkamp, Henke, Jannidis 2016). Die angebotenen Interaktionsmechanismen lassen sich mit der Edition Ch. G. Heynes' Vorlesungen über die Archäologie vergleichen (Graepler o. J.). Die Benutzerin oder der Benutzer der Edition hat in jeder Dokumentansicht die Möglichkeit, zwischen den vier Präsentationsformen Digitalisat, Transkription, Lesefassung und Metadaten hin und her zu wechseln. Dabei gibt es drei Ansichtsmodi, die für unterschiedliche Lese- bzw. Benutzungspraktiken stehen:
                
            In der 
                    Grundansicht wird eine Oberfläche eines Textträgers dargestellt. Schaltflächen erlauben das Navigieren innerhalb des Texts, offerieren aber auch Verknüpfungen zu textgenetisch verwandten Seiten anderer Konvolute. Die verlinkten Ziele werden standardmäßig an Stelle des aktuellen Dokumentes geladen. Die Grundansicht eignet sich daher besonders für eine (zumeist) lineare Lektüre. Sie lässt sich im Gegensatz zu den beiden Doppelansichten auch auf kleinen Anzeigegeräten verwenden.
                
            Die 
                    Parallelansicht dient dazu, die gleiche Textstelle in zwei Ansichten zu vergleichen. Sie erlaubt z.B. die Gegenüberstellung von Digitalisat und Transkription. Vor- und Zurückblättern wirkt sich dabei jeweils auf beide Ansichten aus. Auch in der Parallelansicht lassen sich Seiten anderer Konvolute laden, die einen textgenetischen Bezug zur aktuell dargestellten Seite haben.
                
            Die flexibelste Benutzungsmöglichkeit bietet schließlich die 
                    Synopsis. Sie ähnelt beim ersten Aufruf der Parallelansicht, lässt im Unterschied zu ihr aber den Vergleich zwischen textgenetisch verwandten Textträgern Seite an Seite zu. In dieser Ansicht wird typischerweise zweimal die gleiche Präsentationsform gewählt, etwa Faksimile gegen Faksimile oder diplomatische Transkription gegen diplomatische Transkription.
                
            
               
                  
                  Digitale Edition 
                            Lokalbericht: Synoptische Darstellung
                        
               Alle drei Ansichtsmodi binden unter der Textansicht auch eine visuelle Navigation in der Form eines skizzenbasierten Graphs ein, der eine Vogelperspektive auf das gesamte Materialkorpus bietet. Indem in Benutzerinteraktion die textgenetischen Bezüge als Verbindungslinien (Links) zwischen den als Kreissymbolen (Nodes) dargestellten Einzelblättern ein- und ausgeblendet werden können, lässt sich die Textentwicklung auf der Makroebene anschaulich verfolgen. Die einzelnen Verbindungslinien dienen dabei zugleich als Links, über die sich die beiden ausgewählten Blätter wiederum in der synoptischen Ansicht laden lassen (Dängeli, Theisen, Wieland, Zumsteg 2016).
                
            Editoriale Expertise zur Textgenese wird zusätzlich durch einen erläuternden Überblickskommentar und Stellenkommentare zum Romantext sowie durch Verweise auf editionsinterne und -externe Ressourcen befördert.
            Durch die Auszeichnung von Personen (421), Orten (378) und Werken (191), die im Roman bzw. im Korpus vorkommen oder einen wichtigen Bezug dazu haben, ist das Korpus überdies auch semantisch erschlossen. Diese wo immer möglich auf Normdatensätze (VIAF, GND, GeoNames) referierenden Einheiten sind über Register zugänglich, sie lassen sich aber auch in der Transkription und im Lesetext hervorheben.
            Die Volltextsuche mit flexibel kombinierbaren Filtern (z.B. nach Textkategorie) bietet dem Benutzer einen weiteren Einstiegspunkt in die vielfältigen und spannenden Materialien der digitalen Edition.
         
         
            Aspekte digitaler Nachhaltigkeit
            Weil von Anfang an die Perspektive bestand, die digitale Edition nach der Entwicklung am Cologne Center for eHumanities an das Schweizerische Literaturarchiv bzw. die Schweizerische Nationalbibliothek zu übergeben –, galt ab Projektbeginn die Prämisse, eine bewusst einfache und leichtgewichtige technische Lösung anzustreben, die nur einen geringen Anteil an serverseitiger Progammierung erfordert und die sich mittel- und langfristig leicht warten lässt. Diese Kriterien legten es nahe, aus den TEI-Encodings statisches HTML zu erzeugen, das nur punktuell durch dynamisch erzeugten Code ergänzt werden muss (z.B. freie Volltextsuche). Dass eine solche datenbanklose Lösung durchaus zeitgemäß sein kann, zeigen die zahlreichen Generatoren für statische Webseiten, die in jüngerer Zeit entwickelt wurden und die mitunter große Akzeptanz fanden.
                    1
            
            Für die digitale Lokalbericht-Edition fiel die Wahl mit Apache Cocoon
                    2 auf eine vom Ansatz her in gewissem Grad vergleichbare, jedoch besser zu den vorliegenden XML-Daten passende und insbesondere auch sehr ausgereifte Anwendung. Dabei profitierten wir von der soliden Grundlage des im Produktiveinsatz bewährten Werkzeugs 
                    Kiln (vormals 
                    xMod) von Monteiro Viera und Norrish (2012), das Cocoon mit SOLR und Sesame bündelt und dank guter Dokumentation schnell einsatzbereit ist.
                    3 Ergänzt um eigene Pipeline-Definitionen und XSL-Transformationen ließ sich auf der Grundlage von Kiln eine monolithische Webanwendung erstellen, die abgesehen vom Bildserver alle Funktionalitäten umschließt und die mit einem einzigen Befehl auf einem Standardwebserver lauffähig ist. Im Bedarfsfall lässt sich die Seite auch als komplett statisches HTML abspeichern, wodurch ein wesentlicher Schritt zur langfristigen Konservierung und Verfügbarmachung erfüllt sein sollte.
                
            Um die Hürde der Applikations-Präservierung auch hinsichtlich der permanenten Referenzierung tief zu halten, verweisen die Permalinks lediglich auf – irgendwie geartete – digitale Repräsentationen real existierender Dokumente. Bestimmte Ansichten oder Funktionalitätszustände sind damit explizit nicht permanent referenzierbar, was die Verantwortung der übernehmenden Institution reduziert und ihr mehr Flexibilität für künftige konzeptuelle oder technische Veränderungen zubilligt. Im Bedarfsfall sind die Benutzer gehalten, bestimmte Ansichten selbständig zu persistieren, beispielsweise durch Übergabe der URL an die Wayback Machine.
                    4
            
            Ein weiterer Mosaikstein zur Sicherung der Nachhaltigkeit betrifft die (derzeit laufende) Aufnahme der Ressource durch das Data Center for the Humanities (DCH)
                    5 der Universität zu Köln, in deren Rahmen neben der Klärung technischer und rechtlicher Fragen auch die periodische Prüfung der Ressource nach festgelegten Kriterien geregelt wird. Möge dies gewährleisten, dass der zu Lebzeiten unpubliziert gebliebene Lokalbericht nach seiner Erstveröffentlichung nicht abermals ins archivalische Dunkel versinkt.
                
         
      
      
         
            Die ihrerseits mit DocPad erstellte Liste unter https://staticsitegenerators.net führt per November 2016 445 derartige Tools auf. Zur Beliebtheit vgl. auch https://www.staticgen.com. Die Vorteile dieses Ansatzes liegen auf der Inputseite vorab in den einfachen Quellformaten, die zumeist zur Verwendung kommen (z.B. Markdown, Textile, YAML), auf der Outputseite in der durch die direkte HTML-Auslieferung bedingten hervorragenden Performanz (Biilmann Christensen 2015, Kraetke/Imsiek 2016, Rinaldi 2015).
            Vgl. https://cocoon.apache.org/2.1/.
            Vgl. zu Kiln auch Turska 2014.
            Die Umsetzung einer technischen Adressierbarkeit granulärer Dateneinheiten war nicht Bestandteil des Projekts, sie könnte auf der Bestehenden Grundlage aber nachgerüstet werden.
            Vgl. http://dch.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bernhart, Toni / Hahn, Carolin (2014): 
                        „Datenmodellierung in digitalen Briefeditionen und ihre interpretatorische Leistung. Ontologien, Textgenetik und Visualisierungsstrategien. Workshop im Jacob-und-Wilhelm-Grimm-Zentrum der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 15./16. Mai 2014“,
                        in: 
                        editio 28: 225-229.
                    
               
                  Biilmann Christensen, Mathias (2015): 
                        „Why Static Website Generators Are The Next Big Thing“,
                        in:
                        Smashing Magazine 2. November 2015
                        https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2015/11/modern-static-website-generators-next-big-thing/ [letzter Zugriff 24. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Bohnenkamp, Anne / Henke, Silke / Jannidis, Fotis (2016): 
                        Historisch-kritische Faustedition. Unter Mitarbeit von Gerrit Brüning, Katrin Henzel, Christoph Leijser, Gregor Middell, Dietmar Pravida, Thorsten Vitt und Moritz Wissenbach. Beta-Version 2. http://beta.faustedition.net [letzter Zugriff 28. Oktober 2016].
                    
               
                  Daengeli, Peter / Theisen, Christian / Wieland, Magnus / Zumsteg, Simon (2016): 
                        „Visualizing the Gradual Production of a Text“, in: 
                        DH2016: Conference Abstracts 767–769.
                    
               
                  Graepler, Daniel (o. J.):
                        Christian Gottlob Heyne – Vorlesungen über die Archäologie. 
                        http://heyne-digital.de [letzter Zugriff 20. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Hanrahan, Elise (2015): 
                        „‚Over-tagging‘ with XML in Digital Scholarly Editions“, 
                        in: 
                        DHd 2015: Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen 193–196.
                    
               
                  Kraetke, Martin / Imsieke, Gerrit (2016): 
                        „XSLT as a powerful static website generator. Hogrefe's Clinical Handbook of Psychotropic Drugs“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of XML In, Web Out: International Symposium on sub rosa XML. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies 18 
                        http://www.balisage.net/Proceedings/vol18/html/Kraetke02/BalisageVol18-Kraetke02.html [letzter Zugriff 24. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Krüger, Katharina / Mengaldo, Elisabetta / Schumacher, Eckhard (2016): 
                        Wolfgang Koeppen. Jugend. 
                        http://www.koeppen-jugend.de/ [letzter Zugriff 24. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Monteiro Viera, Jose Miguel / Norrish, Jamie (2012): 
                        Kiln. 
                        https://github.com/kcl-ddh/kiln [letzter Zugriff 24. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Rinaldi, Brian (2015): 
                        Static Site Generators. Modern Tools for Static Website Development. 
                        Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
                    
               
                  Turska, Magdalena (2014): 
                        „What prevents people from firing their own Kiln?“,
                        in:
                         Nesting Instinct. Build in progress
                  http://blogs.it.ox.ac.uk/mturska/2014/07/30/what-prevents-people-from-firing-their-own-kiln [letzter Zugriff 24. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Zumsteg, Simon (2014): 
                        Hermann Burger: Werke in acht Bänden. 
                        Zürich: Nagel und Kimche.
                    
               
                  Zumsteg, Simon (2016a): 
                        Hermann Burger – Lokalbericht: Roman. Herausgegeben aus dem Nachlass. 
                        Zürich: Voldemeer.
                    
               
                  Zumsteg, Simon / Dängeli, Peter / Wieland, Magnus / Wirtz, Irmgard (2016b): 
                        Hermann Burger – Lokalbericht: Digitale Edition. 
                        http://www.lokalbericht.ch [Beta-Version vom 22. Oktober 2016].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Angesichts stetig wachsender Kapazitäten zur Speicherung großer Datenmengen nutzen Bibliotheken und Archive zunehmend die Möglichkeit, ihre Sammlungen zu digitalisieren und die Faksimiles online bereitzustellen. Rein konservatorischen Erwägungen folgend, belassen sie es dabei häufig bei der Erfassung der Metadaten und verzichten auf die weiterreichende inhaltliche Erschließung des Materials. So bleibt es oftmals allein dem Nutzer überlassen, sich einen Zugang zu den Inhalten der Sammlungen zu verschaffen. 
         Sofern es sich dabei um Druckwerke handelt, ist dieses Vorgehen durchaus hinreichend, zumal die Fähigkeit zur Lektüre von Antiqua- und Frakturdrucken zumindest im deutschsprachigen Raum allgemein vorausgesetzt werden kann. Da mit Hilfe der OCR-Technologie inzwischen selbst bei der automatischen Erkennung der Frakturschrift sehr gute Ergebnisse erzielt werden können, werden digitalisierte Druckwerke auch jenseits der genauen inhaltlichen Erfassung nutzbar, indem sie durch 
                distant reading und statistische Zugänge erschlossen werden können.
            
         Anders verhält es sich bei historischen Handschriften: Da heutzutage nur sehr wenige Personen über hinreichende paläographische Kenntnisse verfügen, stellen digitale Reproduktionen handgeschriebener Dokumente für den größten Teil des Publikums nicht viel mehr als bloße Abbildungen historischer Artefakte dar, die in ihrer Materialität zwar eine ganz bestimmte Oberflächenstruktur aufweisen, aber die darin transportierten Inhalte nur wenigen erfahrenen Lesern preisgeben. Zusätzlich erschwert wird die Lektüre im Fall von Tagebuchaufzeichnungen oder Notizbüchern, die nur selten auch für fremde Augen bestimmt waren. 
         Die Gewährleistung eines unbeschränkten und langfristigen Zugangs zu digitalisierten historischen Handschriftenarchiven ist also nicht 
                per se gleichbedeutend mit einer unbegrenzten Zugänglichkeit, Nutzbarkeit und Weiterverwertbarkeit ihrer Inhalte. Eine wichtige Aufgabe der 
                Digital Humanities bei der nachhaltigen Pflege des kulturellen Erbes ist deshalb eine über die bloß konservierende Ablichtung hinausgehende Erschließung der in diesen Textbeständen enthaltenen Informationen. Die Fragestellung ist also: Wie lassen sich diese Daten erfassen und für 
                close- wie auch für 
                distant reading-Prozesse aufbereiten? Lässt sich ein Zugang schaffen, ohne den gesamten Bestand manuell zu bearbeiten? Und inwieweit kann die klassische paläographische Hand- und Kopfarbeit durch automatisierte Prozesse ersetzt werden? Der Beitrag stellt diese Problemlage zunächst am Fallbeispiel der Senckenberg-Tagebücher exemplarisch dar und zeigt anschließend eine Lösungsstrategie auf, bei der manuelle und digitale Methoden kombiniert zum Einsatz kommen und bereits vorhandene, frei zugängliche Software verwendet wird. 
            
         Der Frankfurter Arzt Johann Christian Senckenberg (1707–1772) hinterließ handschriftliche Aufzeichnungen im Umfang von 53 Quartbänden mit je etwa 700 Seiten. Während die späteren Bände einesteils in ausführlichen ärztlichen Fallstudien und anderenteils in kritischen Bemerkungen über die sittlichen Missstände der Reichsstadt bestehen, befassen sich die mit 
                Observationes in me ipso factae übertitelten ersten dreizehn Jahrgänge hauptsächlich mit dem Schreiber selbst. Da Senckenberg dem radikalen Pietismus nahestand und sich ganz aus dem kirchlichen Gemeindeleben zurückgezogen hatte, erfüllten die frühen Tagebücher hauptsächlich die Funktion eines religiösen Gewissensspiegels. Darüber hinaus notierte er über Jahrzehnte hinweg täglich seinen Speiseplan, sein Bewegungspensum und seine Stoffwechselaktivität ebenso detailliert wie die jeweilige Wetterlage, die Umgebungstemperatur und den Luftdruck, die er mit den wechselnden Zustände seines Gemüts und mit äußeren Umwelteinflüssen in Beziehung setzte. Der Zweck dieser akribischen Beobachtungen war seine diätetische und moralische Selbstoptimierung, welche sowohl eine untadelige Lebensführung im Diesseits als auch seine Erlösung im Jenseits gewährleisten sollte. Zugleich dienten sie der Erfassung und Deutung von Korrelationen zwischen Vorgängen in Leib, Seele, Natur und Kosmos. 
            
         Diese Aufzeichnungen stellen sich nicht nur dem heutigen Publikum als Big Data dar, sondern wurden bereits von ihrem Autor als riesiger Datenpool konzipiert: Zeitweise brachte er täglich bis zu 5000 Wörter in deutscher und lateinischer Sprache zu Papier, so dass er in manchen der insgesamt 43 Jahrgänge ca. 2600 Seiten sehr eng mit jeweils etwa 900 Wörtern beschrieb. Zugleich pietistisches Selbstzeugnis und wissenschaftliche Aufzeichnungsform, ist dieser schriftlich fixierte und weltweit einzigartige Erfahrungsschatz eine Fundgrube für die Erforschung der frühneuzeitlichen Religions- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte. Darüber hinaus wirft er neue historische Schlaglichter auf die aktuell diskutierten Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Nutzung großer Datensammlungen und ihr Verhältnis zur Theorie (vgl. Anderson 2008; boyd et al. 2012, Rosenberg 2014).
         Mit Förderung durch die Dr. Senckenbergische Stiftung wurden die insgesamt ca. 40.000 Quartseiten in hochaufgelöster Form digitalisiert und von der Universitätsbibliothek Frankfurt unter Open Access-Bedingungen online zur Verfügung gestellt (UB Frankfurt 2013–2016). Am Frankfurter Institut für Deutsche Literatur und ihre Didaktik entsteht derzeit eine TEI/XML-basierte Online-Edition der Aufzeichnungen, welche gleichfalls von der durch den Autor selbst begründeten Stiftung finanziert wird. In Anbetracht ihres riesigen Umfangs und der schwer entzifferbaren Handschrift Senckenbergs ist eine zeitnah fertigstellbare Volltextedition des Gesamtbestandes schwerlich möglich und wäre aufgrund der bei dieser Aufzeichnungspraxis naturgemäß häufig auftretenden inhaltlichen Redundanzen auch nicht sinnvoll. Aus diesem Grund wurde im Vorfeld eine repräsentative Bandauswahl getroffen, welche nach den Maßgaben der historischen Signifikanz, der thematischen Vielfalt und der größtmöglichen Vermeidung von Redundanzen erfolgte. Die inhaltliche Komplexität und die auf schnelle Erfassung großer Datenmengen ausgerichtete Schreibroutine des Autors machen zudem eine Transkriptionsweise erforderlich, die weit über die diplomatisch-zeichengetreue Textwiedergabe hinausgeht: Abgesehen von der Tatsache, dass es sich um einen halb frühneuhochdeutschen und halb lateinischen Text handelt und der Schreiber oftmals mehrfach in einem Satz zwischen beiden Sprachen hin- und herwechselt, sind viele der Sätze so komplex, dass der Leser zum Verständnis auf alle verfügbaren grammatischen Merkmale angewiesen ist. Vor allem die morphologischen Merkmale sind aber im Deutschen wie auch im Lateinischen hauptsächlich in eben jenen Wortendungen enthalten, welche häufig durch Abkürzung entfallen. Ein ähnliches Problem besteht auch hinsichtlich der Symbole, die größtenteils dem alchemistischen Kontext entstammen: Sie können ein ganzes Wort oder auch nur einen Teil davon ersetzen, bis zu vier verschiedene Wortbedeutungen und noch viel mehr grammatische Formen repräsentieren und in völlig verschiedenen semantischen Umgebungen erscheinen. Um dem Leser einen hinreichenden Zugang zum Sprachgebrauch des Autors zu bieten und ein Textverständnis überhaupt erst zu ermöglichen, müssen Abkürzungen und Symbole ihrem kontextspezifischen Zusammenhang entsprechend aufgelöst und sowohl semantisch als auch grammatikalisch in den Text eingepasst werden. 
         Auf den ersten Blick scheinen digitale Methoden hier kaum weiterzuhelfen: Zu wenig deutlich ist die Schrift, zu komplex die Inhalte, zu spezifisch das Vokabular und zu mehrdeutig die einzelnen Zeichen. Hinzu kommt noch, dass sich sowohl Senckenbergs Handschrift als auch die Inhalte seiner Aufzeichnungen im Verlauf von vier Jahrzehnten stark veränderten und mithin ganz neue graphische Muster hervorbrachten. Wenngleich die Transkription der Texte nur händisch erfolgen kann, wird dadurch doch ihre Maschinenlesbarkeit überhaupt erst gewährleistet und damit die grundlegende Voraussetzung für automatisierte Prozesse sowie die Anwendung, Weiterentwicklung und Schulung der sie ermöglichenden Technologien geschaffen. So erfordert das Training des Tools Transkribus (Universität Innsbruck o.J.) zunächst einmal eine ausreichende Menge an manuell erzeugten und präzisen Texttranskriptionen und die anschließende händische Überarbeitung des Outputs (vgl. Transkribus Wiki o.J.). Aufgrund der wachsenden Nachlässigkeit der Handschrift und der inhaltlichen Heterogenität der drei Unterbestände muss der Lernprozess für jeden Teilbestand separat erfolgen. Nach Abschluss dieses Lernprozesses ist jedoch zumindest eine halbautomatische Texterfassung möglich. Der erkannte Text kann anschließend elektronisch durchsucht und wissenschaftlich ausgewertet werden. 
         Ein ähnliches Verhältnis zwischen manuellen und automatisierten Prozessen besteht hinsichtlich der inhaltlichen Erschließung der Texte. Da sie von einem einzigen Schreiber mit umfassender grammatischer Bildung stammen, liegt nur eine geringe orthographische Varianz bei der Schreibung ein- und desselben Wortes vor. Anders als in heterogenen Korpora, die Texte mehrerer Schreiber mit unterschiedlichem Bildungshintergrund und sprachgeografischer Herkunft versammeln, ist deshalb eine vorherige händische Normierung der Grafie nicht notwendig (vgl. demgegenüber Faßhauer et al. 2013, Faßhauer et al. 2014). Mit Hilfe der vorliegenden Transkriptionen kann deshalb ein effizientes Training des Tools TreeTagger (Schmid 1994-) für das Frühneuhochdeutsche und Neulateinische vorgenommen werden. Die halbautomatisch generierten Lemmata und Part-of-Speech-Tags, welche sowohl für die manuellen Transkriptionen als auch für die automatisch erfassten Texte erstellt wurden, werden anschließend in den Partitur-Editor der Software EXMARaLDA (Hedeland et al. o.J.) eingespielt. Mit dem zugehörigen Analysetool EXAKT werden per RegEx-Suche auf der Lemmaspur zunächst alle Nomina herausgefiltert und in einem manuellen Prozess Schlagwörter ausgewählt (ähnlich auch Biehl et al. 2015). Aus der Untermenge der großgeschriebenen Substantive, die sich mittels der automatischen Sortierfunktion der Trefferliste leicht ermitteln lassen, werden alle Personen- und Ortsnamen entnommen. Anhand dieser Recherchezugänge kann nun das gesamte Korpus systematisch recherchiert werden. Die von EXAKT angebotenen Anfragen über RegEx und Levenshtein-Distanzen ermöglichen dabei eine schreibweisentolerante Begriffsermittlung, wodurch mancher HTR-Lesefehler überwunden werden kann.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Anderson, Chris (2008): 
                        „The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete“, 
                        in: 
                        Wired Magazine
                  http://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-theory/
               
               
                  Biehl, Theresia / Lorenz, Anne / Osierenski, Dirk (2015): 
                        „Exilnetz33. Ein Forschungsportal als Such- und Visualisierungsinstrument“,
                        in: Baum, Constanze / Stäcker, Thomas (eds.): 
                        Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 1).
                    
               
                  Boyd, Danah / Crawford, Kate (2012): 
                        „Critical Questions for Big Data“,
                        in: 
                        Information, Communication & Society 15 (5): 662–679
                        10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878.
                    
               
                  Fasshauer, Vera / Lühr, Rosemarie / Prutscher, Daniela /Seidel, Henry (2013): 
                        Dokumentation der Annotationsrichtlinien für das Korpus Frühneuzeitliche Fürstinnenkorrespondenzen im mitteldeutschen Raum.
                        dwee.eu/Rosemarie_Luehr/userfiles/downloads/Projekte/Dokumentation.pdf.
                    
               
                  Fasshauer, Vera / Lühr, Rosemarie / Prutscher, Daniela /Seidel, Henry (2014): 
                        Fürstinnenkorrespondenz (version 1.1), Universität Jena, DFG. LAUDATIO Repository.
                        http://www.indogermanistik.uni-jena.de/Web/Projekte/Fuerstinnenkorr.htm.
                    
               
                  Hedeland, Hanna / Lehmberg, Timm / Schmidt, Thomas / Wörner, Kai (o.J.): 
                        EXMARaLDA. Werkzeuge für mündliche Korpora
                  http://www.exmaralda.org/ [letzter Zugriff 21. März 2016].
                    
               
                  Rosenberg, Daniel (2014): 
                        „Daten vor Fakten“,
                        in: Reichert, Ramón (ed.): 
                        Big Data: Analysen zum digitalen Wandel von Wissen, Macht und Ökonomie. 
                        Bielefeld: transcript Verlag 133–156.
                    
               
                  Schmid, Helmut (1994-): 
                        TreeTagger. A part-of-speech tagger for many languages. 
                        http://www.cis.unimuenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger/ [letzter Zugriff 20. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Transkribus Wiki (o.J.): 
                        Transkribus-Benutzeranleitung. 
                        https://transkribus.eu/wikiDe/index.php/Hauptseite [letzter Zugriff 20. August 2016].
                    
               
                  UB Frankfurt =Universitätsbibliothek Frankfurt am Main (2013-2016): 
                        Nachlass Johann Christian Senckenberg. 
                        http://sammlungen.ub.uni-frankfurt.de/senckenberg/nav/index/all [letzter Zugriff 20. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Universität Innsbruck (o.J.): 
                        Transkribus. 
                        https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/ [letzter Zugriff 20. August 2016].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            
            Der hier vorgestellte Workflow für die Digitalisierung und Integration bibliographischer Informationen ist Teil des Forschungsprojektes 
            Niklas Luhmann - Theorie als Passion. Wissenschaftliche Erschließung und Edition des Nachlasses
            . Das Langzeitvorhaben (2015-2030) an der Fakultät für Soziologie der Universität Bielefeld in Kooperation mit dem Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH) wird im Akademienprogramm durch die Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaft und der Künste gefördert. Weitere Kooperationspartner sind das Archiv und die Bibliothek der Universität Bielefeld.
            
               1
            
         
         Ziel des Gesamtprojektes ist die Sicherung, Digitalisierung, Erschließung, werkgenetische Erforschung und teilweise Edition des wissenschaftlichen Nachlasses Niklas Luhmanns. Zu diesem Zweck werden die bewahrenswerten Teile des Nachlasses (Manuskripte, Zettelkasten, Korrespondenz, Bibliothek etc.) zunächst archivarisch gesichert und in den Teilen, die wissenschaftlich erschlossen werden sollen, digitalisiert, sowie für die weitere Bearbeitung bereitgestellt. Die daran anschließende Edition will den Luhmannschen Nachlass als geistesgeschichtliches Dokument der wissenschaftlichen Forschung sowie der interessierten Öffentlichkeit zugänglich machen. Sie bildet dadurch zugleich die Grundlage für die Entwicklung einer kritisch gesicherten infrastrukturellen Wissensressource, auf welche die interdisziplinäre und internationale Forschung zur und mit der Theorie Luhmanns zukünftig zurückgreifen kann.
         Bibliographische Informationen stellen ein besonders wichtiges verbindendes Element zwischen den zu erschließenden und ggf. zu edierenden Materialien aus dem Nachlass Niklas Luhmanns dar. Ihre Modellierung, Zusammenführung und Visualisierung verspricht einen vollständigen Überblick über Grundlagen, Rezeption und Verbreitung des Luhmannschen Werks aber auch detaillierte Einblicke in seine Arbeitsweise. 
         
            Quellen und Forschungsfragen
            
               In Hinblick auf den 
               Werkkosmos 
               Niklas Luhmanns
                
               wurde am Institut für Soziologie in Bielefeld eine Bibliographie aller Publikationen erstellt, die in digitaler Form finalisiert werden soll. Enthalten sind Monographien, Aufsätze, Rezensionen, Festschriften. Gelistet werden außerdem alle 
               bearbeiteten 
               Neu-Auflagen und Übersetzungen. Die insgesamt etwa 1.900 Datensätze sind stark miteinander vernetzt: Sowohl auf der Ebene von Monographien als auch bei Artikeln wird jeweils auf Nachdrucke, Übersetzungen und weitere Auflagen hingewiesen. Die Aufbereitung 
               dieser Informationen soll anschaulich machen, in welchen Medien Luhmann hauptsächlich publiziert hat und wie sich seine Schriften durch Übersetzungen und Nachdrucke international verbreitet haben. 
            
            
               
                  
                  Schematische Darstellung zur Vernetzung der Datensätze
               
            
            
               Den 
               Lesekosmos
                
               Niklas Luhmanns darstellbar und damit erforschbar zu machen, ist ein zweites zentrales Anliegen. Die folgenden Quellen bibliographischer Information liegen dazu vor: 
            
            
               die zitierte Literatur in den Zettelkästen
               eigenständige bibliographische Abteilungen je Zettelkasten (ca. 17.800 Einträge)
               die zitierte Literatur in seinen eigenen publizierten Werken
               die Literaturhinweise in seinen unpublizierten Manuskripten
               die private Arbeitsbibliothek (ca. 4.000)
            
            Nach Aufarbeitung dieser Materialien können wichtige werkhistorische Fragestellungen untersucht werden: Welche und wie viel Literatur (aus welchen wissenschaftlichen Disziplinen) hat Luhmann im Laufe seiner Forschung rezipiert bzw. verarbeitet? Gibt es bestimmte Werke / Autoren, die er wiederkehrend konsultiert bzw. zitiert hat? Gibt es bevorzugte Zeitschriften?
            Der Zettelkasten ist der zentrale Startpunkt für die Reise in den bibliographischen Kosmos. Er enthält durchgehend auf den Notizzetteln Hinweise auf benutzte Literatur und ab der Mitte der 70er Jahre auch eine eigenständige Bibliographie-Abteilung (insgesamt etwa 17.800 Einträge). 
            Eine Auswertung der Zitatnachweise in den gedruckten Bänden Luhmanns soll dann die Verbindung von Zettelkasten und Publikationen erleichtern. Wieviel der im Zettelkasten nachgewiesenen Lektürearbeit ist tatsächlich in die Publikationen eingegangen? Und gibt es Stellen in den Publikationen, die scheinbar keine Wurzeln im Zettelkasten haben? 
            In den unveröffentlichten Manuskripten finden sich neben bereits standardisierten Literaturnachweisen häufig auch handschriftliche Nennungen von Notizzetteln, die den Kreis über den Zettelkasten wieder schließen.
         
         
            Datenmodell
            Zu unseren Zielen gehört die Vernetzung der Datensätze zu visualisieren, um so den Werk- bzw. Lesekosmos erfahrbar zu machen. In Anlehnung an das FRBR-Modell
                    2 verstehen wir die hier zu modellierenden bibliografischen Datensätze als 
                    Manifestationen eines 
                    Werks
                (Wiesenmüller 2008: 350
                    ). Im Fall der Publikationen Niklas Luhmanns selbst, sind bereits Bezugsinformationen zu anderen 
                    Manifestationen (z.B. im Sinne von "ist Teil von") und 
                    Expressions (z.B. im Sinne von "ist Übersetzung von") enthalten. Perspektivisch werden hier noch übergeordnete Datensätze zu 
                    Werken und deren 
                    Expressions entstehen, mit denen die Fachwissenschaftler das Material weiter strukturieren und die Werkgenese genauer beschreiben können.
                    3 Vor allem im Fall der unterschiedlichen Manuskriptfassungen Luhmanns wird die Bestimmung übergreifender 
                    Werke
                eine explizit fachwissenschaftliche Aufgabe sein.
                
            
               Die Basiskodierung erfolgt zunächst ohne 
               weiterführende 
               ontologischen Differenzierungen und Deutungen in voneinander getrennten Datensätzen 
               auf 
               gleicher Ebene
               .
                
               Die TEI bietet 
               hier 
               mit  ein geeignetes standardisiertes Datenmodell
                um 
               Manifestationen
                zu beschreiben, aber auch bereits etablierte Wege wie Personen, Körperschaften, Werktitel und später auch Sachschlagwörter mit Normdatensätzen
               
                  4
               
                verbunden werden können.
               
                  5
               
                Beziehungen zu anderen Datensätzen 
               werden
                über  angereichert. 
               Alle Erwähnungen und Verweise auf das bibliograhierte Item werden über -Elemente
                
               aufgenommen
               . 
               Selbst weiterführende 
               inhaltliche 
               Informationen aus den unterschiedlichen Nachlasszusammenhängen können über  mitgeführt werden. 
            
            
               Die Offenheit einer TEI-Auszeichnung ermöglicht uns, im Gegensatz zu anderen bestehenden bibliografischen Formaten, die meist für Bibliothekszusammenhänge 
               zugespitzt wurden
               , alle vorliegenden Informationen im Datensatz selbst mitzuführen und 
               schwellenlos
                
               projektintern
                für die restlichen in TEI kodierten Materialien 
               nutzbar 
               vorzuhalten
               .
               
                  6
               
            
            Umsetzung im Detail
            
               Die Guidelines empfehlen für strukturierte bibliographische Informationen -Items in Listen ().
               
                  7
               
                
               Wir weichen in diesem Punkt ab und erzeugen für jede 
               Manifestation
                einen eigenständigen bibliographischen Datensatz in Form eines -Single-Files.
               
                
               Jeder Datensatz enthält nur ein  bzw. ein  und ein . Die Dateien erhalten
                
               einen eindeutigen Dateinamen (Name des Autors + Erscheinungsjahr + ggf. Erweiterung) und eine entsprechende xml:id. Jedes Vorkommen, etwa im Zettelkasten oder in einem Manuskript, wird in einem -Element dokumentiert. Hinweise auf Reprints, Übersetzungen und weiterführende Informationen werden in Form von  ergänzt. Da die Dateinamen und xml:ids auf Basis des bibliographierten Werks sprechend benannt wurden, ist eine direkte Verlinkung der Datensätze untereinander problemlos möglich. 
                
            Die Aufspaltung in -Single-Files lässt sich nun auch für die Vorhaltung von unselbstständigen Titeln nutzen. Die Titelinformation für einen Aufsatz wird in  erfasst, die Information zum Sammelband in einem anschließenden -Element. Um die Wiederholung dieser Information für jeden Aufsatz des Sammelbands zu umgehen, wird ein eigenes -Single-File für den Sammelband erzeugt. Über einen XInclude
                    8-basierten Weg wird das -Element des Sammelbands in die Datei des Artikels eingebunden. Damit ist die TEI-Datei des Artikels auch während der Bearbeitung vollständig (zusätzlich zu  wird das externe  des Sammelbands eingebunden).
                    9
            
            
               
                  
                  Gliederungsansicht eines -Elements, Typ  Sammelband
               
            
            
               ”
               
                  
                     
                     Gliederungsansicht eines -Elements, Typ “Artikel in Sammelband
                  
               
            
         
         
            Arbeitsumgebung
            
               Als Arbeitsumgebung zur Bearbeitung und Neuerfassung von bibliographischen Informationen kommt ein speziell für dieses Projekt entwickeltes oXygen-Framework
               
                  10
               
                
               zum Einsatz. Ein solches Framework ist eine Erweiterung für den oXygen XML-Editor, welches spezifische Vorgaben für die grafische Darstellung und Funktionsweise eines Eingabeformulars für das hier entwickelte Datenmodell in oXygen macht. Außerdem werden darin benutzerdefinierte Schaltflächen angelegt, die auf den Workflow des Bearbeiters ausgerichtet sind. Damit ist es für Laien ohne Vorkenntnisse in XML oder TEI auf einfache Weise möglich, bibliographische Informationen auf Grundlage des verwendeten Datenmodells zu erstellen, 
               zu 
               bearbeiten und auszuzeichnen.
                        Das Framework-Verzeichnis wird auf den Rechnern der Bearbeiter zur Verfügung gestellt, von oXygen als solches erkannt und ist damit vom Bearbeiter verwendbar.
                    
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                     oXygen-Framework (Author-Mode)
                  
               
            
         
         
            Veröffentlichung
            
               Nachdem die Daten in die Datenbank importiert wurden, werden sie automatisiert im Projektportal veröffentlicht. Dies geschieht mit einem modular aufgebauten Web-Präsentationssystem, bestehend aus etablierten Open-Source-Softwarelösungen wie eXist XML Database
               
                  11
               
               , NodeJS
               
                  12
               
               , ReactJS
               
                  13
               
               , sowie dem Design-Framework Material Design Lite
               
                  14
               
               . Die Datenbank verknüpft automatisch die verschiedenen Datensätze und gibt sie aus, sodass der Benutzer des Portals sofort sehen kann, in welchem Verhältnis ein Werk zu verwandten Werken steht. Eine Visualisierung mittels eines Netzwerk-Graphs soll diese Verknüpfungen zusätzlich veranschaulichen.
            
            Die hier dargestellten Workflows setzen ausschließlich auf Open-Source-Softwarelösungen, sowie offene Standards wie TEI. Die Weitergabe des Frameworks mit allen Templates, der ODD, des Schemas und einer Dokumentation wird angestrebt. Die generische Architektur ist nachhaltig und nachnutzbar von anderen Projekten mit ähnlichen Anforderungen.
            Das Luhmann-Projekt eignet sich aufgrund der Heterogenität des bibliographischen Materials sehr gut als Ausgangspunkt zur Entwicklung eines allgemeinen Modells, das vom konkreten Projekt abstrahiert werden kann und soll. Im CCeH wird der Workflow schon von weiteren Projekten eingesetzt und auf seine Tauglichkeit geprüft.
            Die für die Publikationen Luhmanns, ihre Reprints und Veröffentlichungen vergebenen Namen und IDs werden, neben den luhmann-basierten Zettelkennungen, als autoritative Identifikatoren für das Werk Luhmanns nachnutzbar sein.
         
      
      
         
            
               Website des Niklas Luhmann-Archivs 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 
               30
               . 
               November 
               2016] 
            
            
                
               “Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records” (FRBR)
               : 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 
               30
               . 
               November 
               2016] 
            
            
                Ein ähnliche Ansatz findet Anwendung im Projekt "Wome
               n
                Writer
               s
                in Review", vgl 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 
               30
               . 
               November 
               2016] 
            
            Gemeinsame Normdatei der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek (GND), 
                            
               [letzter Zugriff 
               30
               . 
               November 
               2016] 
            
            Nach dem FRBR-Modell betrifft das die Entitäten der Gruppe 2 und 3 (Tillet 2010: 3)
            
                
               Bei späteren Exporten in andere bibliographische Formate, wie etwa BibTeX, können Hauptfelder gemappt werden, wohingegen Zusatzinformationen - je nach inhaltlicher Zielsetzung des Ausgabeformat
               s
                - 
               schlicht 
               nicht exportiert werden. 
            
            
                
               Vgl. TEI-Guidelines, Abschnitt 3.11: Bibliographic Citations and References (
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 
               30
               . 
               November 
               2016] 
            
            
               
                
               Vgl. W3C Empfehlung: 
               
                
               und TEI Guidelines 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
             Für die Weitergabe der Daten nach außenwird das XInclude wieder aufgelöst und für die Verlinkung ergänzte IDs werden gelöscht, so dass die Ausgabe von standardkonformen und vollständigen -Files sichergestellt ist.
            
               
                
               Vgl. oXygen Visual (WYSIWYG) XML
                
               Editors:
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
            
               
                
               Vgl. 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
            
               
                
               Vgl. 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
            
               
                
               Vgl. 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
            
               
                
               Vgl. 
               
                
               [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (Hg.) (2009): 
                        Funktionale Anforderungen an bibliografische Datensätze. 
                        Abschlussbericht der IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records. Geänderte und korrigierte Fassung, Februar 2009 (Leipzig/Frankfurt am Main/Berlin, 2009), 
                        . 
                        [letzter Zugriff 30. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Tillett, Barbara (2003): 
                        „What is FRBR?“. Library of Congress Cataloging Distribution Service, 2004 , 
                        in: 
                        Technicalities 25 (5) 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 30. November 2016].
                    
               
                  Wiesenmüller, Heidrun / Horny, Silke (2015):
                        Basiswissen RDA: Eine Einführung für deutschsprachige Anwender.
                        De Gruyter Saur.
                    
               
                  Wiesenmüller, Heidrun (2008): 
                        „Zehn Jahre ‚Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records“: Vision, Theorie und praktische Anwendung“, 
                        in: 
                        Bibliothek, Forschung und Praxis 32 (3).
                    
               
                  Niklas-Luhmann-Archiv:
                        Webseite
                         [letzter Zugriff 30. November 2016].
                    
               
                  TEI:
                        Bibliographic Citations and References in den TEI-Guidelines
                   [letzter Zugriff 30. November 2016].
                    
               
                  IFLA:
                        Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR)
                   [letzter Zugriff 30. November 2016].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Vor dem Hintergrund des Akademievorhabens 
                PROPYLÄEN. Forschungsplattform zu Goethes Biographica werden zwei aktuelle Konzeptionsmethoden aus dem Bereich des Software-Engineering vorgestellt, die sich unserer Erfahrung nach als geeignete Grundlage für nachhaltige Konzeptionsprozesse in Digital Humanities Projekten erwiesen haben: 
                Domain Driven Design sowie 
                Behaviour Driven Development. Zunächst erfolgt ein Überblick über Aspekte digitaler Nachhaltigkeit bei der Beantragung geisteswissenschaftlicher Langzeitvorhaben im Akademienprogramm.
            
         Die PROPYLÄEN sindein 2015 im Akademienprogramm gestartetes Forschungsvorhaben der Klassik Stiftung Weimar, der Sächsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig und der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz (
                http://www.goethe-biographica.de). Geplant ist bei einer Gesamtlaufzeit von 25 Jahren Fortführung und Abschluss von vier (Print-)Publikationsreihen: Die Editionen der Briefe von sowie an Goethe, seine Tagebücher und die Zeugnisse seiner Begegnungen und Gespräche. Die gleichzeitig entstehende Forschungsplattform wird sukzessive alle Biographica in einer technisch und inhaltlich offenen Infrastruktur bereitstellen sowie Recherchezugänge und Visualisierungen auf den Datenbestand anbieten.
            
         Eine Voraussetzung für die Aufnahme eines Neuvorhabens in das Akademienprogramm ist ein ausgearbeitetes Digitalisierungskonzept, zu dem unter anderem eine Strategie zur Langzeitarchivierung und Langzeitverfügbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse gehört (Vgl. Herrmann 2016: 9). Häufig konzentriert sich dieses auf eine enge Definition von Forschungsdaten, die unter diesem Begriff lediglich edierten Text versteht. Im Falle einer Forschungsplattform wie der PROPYLÄEN sind nicht nur die in der Datenschicht – Faksimiles, Editionstext, kurz die Gesamtheit der digitalen Forschungsdaten – befindlichen Komponenten für eine nachhaltige und langfristige Bereitstellung vorzusehen (zu Archivierungsschicht und Präsentationsschicht vgl. Pempe 2012: 141). Daneben sollte auch die Auswahl geeigneter Technologien ein Teil der Antragsstrategie sein. Unter Technologie sei alles vom Datenformat über ein Content-Management-System bis zur virtuellen Forschungsumgebung verstanden.
                 Angesichts des Verhältnisses zwischen langfristiger Projektförderung – die Akademienvorhaben werden 12 bis 25 Jahre gefördert – und der technischen Entwicklung ist die Vorstellung der einmaligen Einrichtung einer digitalen Arbeitsumgebung und Publikationsplattform am Anfang der Projektlaufzeit, welche daraufhin für 25 Jahre verwendet würde, nur mit begleitender Wartung und Weiterentwicklung denkbar. Wird das gewählte Datenformat in 30 Jahren noch maschinenlesbar sein? Absolute Sicherheit gibt es in diesem Fall nicht, aber allgemein gilt die Verwendung von (semistrukturierten) Rein-Textformaten – wie XML nach TEI – gegenüber proprietären Formaten als nachhaltiger.
            
         Der 
                Mehrwert der elektronischen Fassung entsteht aber vornehmlich durch neue Verbindungs-, Gruppier-, Sortier-, Filter- und Suchmöglichkeiten, die auf dynamischen Verarbeitungsmechanismen, also auf der Geschäftslogik der Anwendung, basieren. Diese nicht-statischen Elemente, die sich insbesondere in der Präsentationsschicht einer geisteswissenschaftlichen Webanwendung konkretisieren, müssen in ihrer Funktionalität genauso nachvollziehbar und reproduzierbar über das Projektende hinaus zur Verfügung stehen.
            
         Komplexer als die Datenschicht ist demnach die dauerhafte Erhaltung der Applikationslogik und Präsentationsschicht: Wie kann die webbasierte Verarbeitung von Anfragen und die Wiedergabe von Ergebnissen auch 10 Jahre nach Projektende noch funktionsfähig gehalten werden? Eine aktuell diskutierte Strategie ist die virtuelle Kapselung sämtlicher Softwarekomponenten einer Applikation, die künftig ein Emulieren aller Komponenten auf aktuellen Betriebssystemen ermöglicht (siehe dazu bspw. 
                ). Vorhaben wie die PROPYLÄEN müssen dieser Herausforderung während der Projektlaufzeit begegnen, indem sie eine hohe Flexibilität sowie stete Aktualisierung und Anpassung der Technologien ihrer Infrastruktur in der Grundplanung vorsehen. Um diesen Prozess auf eine transparente Grundlage zu stellen, gilt es bei der informationstechnischen Gestaltung des Forschungsvorhabens eine möglichst 
                gegenstandsnahe Abstraktion zu wählen und die Anforderungen an die Software auf 
                formalisierte Weise zu dokumentieren. Folgende Annahmen und Schlüsse gehen dieser Überlegung voran:
            
         
            Es wird während der Projektlaufzeit intern wie extern neue Erkenntnisse zu Goethes Zeit und Wirken geben, die unseren Blick auf den Forschungsgegenstand verändern. Dennoch ist es möglich, übergreifende Wissensobjekte zu identifizieren und in Form von informatischen 
                    Entitäten abzubilden.
                
            
               Technologieunabhängige, anwendungsorientierte und
                     allgemeinverständliche Funktionsbeschreibungen der Forschungsplattform sind formulierbar. Neue Erkenntnisse im Bereich der Goethe-Forschung wie im Bereich der 
                    usability werden diese Anforderungen innerhalb der Projektlaufzeit höchstwahrscheinlich verändern.
                
         
         In der 
                Konzeptionsphase einer nachhaltigen digitalen Grundlage für den Daten-, Präsentations- und Applikationsteil der Forschungsplattform PROPYLÄEN sind daher zwei Fragen leitend, deren Beantwortung uns nicht nur für Langzeitvorhaben mit Digital-Humanities-Anteil zentral erscheint (vgl. zu Prozessphasen und zur Konzeption hier und folgend: Schrade 2016: Step 14–21, zur Konzeption Step 17):
            
         
            Wie lassen sich 
                    Biographica Goethes für technische und geisteswissenschaftliche Anforderungen nachhaltig modellieren bei gleichzeitiger Bewahrung der Flexibilität in der Anwendungsarchitektur für die Integration gegebenenfalls noch nicht bekannter digitaler Ressourcen?
                
            Wie lassen sich die funktionalen Anforderungen an eine digitale Rechercheumgebung aus der Fachcommunity
                     nachhaltig formulieren und dokumentieren?
                
         
         Zur Beantwortung können zwei Konzeptionsmethoden aus dem Bereich des Software-Engineering fruchtbar gemacht werden: 
                Domain Driven Design (DDD) (siehe Evans 2003, Vernon 2013)
                 und
                 Behavior Driven Development (BDD) (siehe North 2016)
                . Beiden ist gemein, dass sie unabhängig von Datenformaten, Programmiersprachen oder Präsentationstechnologien operieren.
            
         
            DDD nimmt an, dass einem Konzeptions- bzw. Entwicklungsprozess dann die größten Erfolgschancen und daraus resultierend die beste Nachhaltigkeit zukommen, wenn die 
                virtuellen Komponenten des informatischen Modells ausgehend von ihren 
                realen Entsprechungen gebildet werden. Damit kommt der fachwissenschaftlichen Logik, die sich aus dem Wissen von Domänen-Experten (im Anwendungsfall Goethe-Philologen) und deren Niederlegung in publizierten Editionsbänden ableitet, eine zentrale Rolle für die Modellierung zu. Die Ausmodellierung der Wissensdomäne entsteht iterativ in einem konstanten kommunikativen Prozess aller Projektbeteiligten. 
                DDD löst die gängige und nicht optimale Praxis einer ausschließlichen Bedarfsformulierung durch Geisteswissenschaftler und einer darauffolgenden Umsetzung durch Informatiker zugunsten eines gemeinsamen Modellierungsprozesses unter Verwendung einer für alle Beteiligten verständlichen (
                ubiquitären) Sprache auf. Dieser im Rahmen eines Projektes von allen Beteiligten zu entwickelnden Sprache liegen eine Reihe von Komponenten für ein Modell der Wissensdomäne (
                domain model) zugrunde, das in seiner Gesamtheit alle Eigenschaften, Beziehungen und „Geschäftsprozessen“ der zukünftigen Anwendung abbilden kann. Die wichtigsten Komponenten für die Fachdomäne „PROPYLÄEN“ sind:
            
         
            Objekte mit eigener Identität (
                    entities): Briefe, Faksimiles, Personen, Orte, Werke
                
            Objekte, die sich über die Gesamtheit ihrer Eigenschaften definieren (
                    value objects): Geokoordinaten (Länge-Breite), Datierungen (Anfangs-Enddatum), Korrespondenzvorgang (Sender-Empfänger) etc.
                
            Die Beziehungen dieser Objekte untereinander (
                    associations): Person → erwähnt in: Brief
                
            Zusammenfassungen von 
                    entities, value objects und 
                    associations zu
                     Aggregaten
                     (
                    aggregates); der Zugriff auf einzelne Komponenten eines Aggregates darf ausschließlich über die Entität an der Aggregat-Wurzel (
                    aggregate root) erfolgen. Aggregate gewährleisen logische Konsistenz und funktionale Integrität einer Anwendungs- bzw. Wissensdomäne: Brief (Brieftext, Kommentar, Faksimile, Datierung, im Brief erwähnte Orte und Personen)
                
            Dienste zwischen Objekten der Wissensdomäne (
                    services): Sortiere nach Datum etc.
                
         
         Die Fachdomäne kann grafisch dargestellt werden. Abbildung 1 dient der Illustration des DDD-Konzepts am Beispiel eines Teils der PROPYLÄEN-Domäne.
         
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Wissensdomäne Goethe PROPYLÄEN
            Dan Norths Idee des 
                BDD ist, Anforderungen an die geplante Applikation in Form von 
                user stories und verhaltensorientierten Testszenarien im Vorfeld der Realisierung unter Zuhilfenahme einer ubiquitären Sprache zu beschreiben. Durch die Verwendung von Schlüsselwörtern in formalisierter Notation lässt sich eine einheitliche und leicht verständliche Dokumentation erstellen. Aufgrund starker Nutzerorientierung wird 
                BDD im Qualitätsmanagement von Softwareanwendungen zu den 
                Akzeptanztests gerechnet (neben Unit-Tests, Funktionstests, Performance-Tests oder manuellen Tests). 
            
         Abbildung 2 zeigt ein BDD-Testszenario in den Goethe-PROPYLÄEN, das auf Gherkin-Notation basiert (Siehe 
                , Stand 26.08.2016). Die Schlüsselwörter 
                Funktionalität, Beschreibung 
            und 
            Details enthalten übergeordnete Informationen, während im Bereich der 
                Szenarios mit Hilfe der Operatoren 
                Szenario 
            bzw. Gege
            ben, Wenn, Dann, Und einzelne Anforderungen formuliert werden.
                 Die Ausführungen können dabei allgemein gehalten werden und lassen sich im späteren Verlauf auffächern.
            
         
            
               
               Abbildung 2: BDD-Testszenario in Gherkin-Notation
            Ein Vorteil ist, dass Szenarios durch den Einsatz einer verständlichen, formalisierten Sprache nicht nur gemeinsam zwischen Geisteswissenschaftlern und Informatikern während des Entwicklungsprozess formuliert werden, sondern dass bei syntaktisch korrekter Formulierung diese als Grundlage für automatisierte Testverfahren der Präsentationsschicht einer Webanwendung herangezogen werden können (bspw. mit dem BDD Testing-Framework behat; siehe 
                http://docs.behat.org (Stand 26.08.2016)). BDD ermöglicht somit eine zeit-ökonomische Überprüfung aller Bereiche und Funktionalitäten der Präsentationsschicht bei gleichzeitiger Dokumentation der Funktionalitäten in Reintext und natürlicher Sprache. Änderungen in der technischen Infrastruktur einer Plattform (Softwarewechsel der Datenbankschicht, Einführung neuer Programmroutinen) können mit deutlich gesteigerter Verlässlichkeit im Hinblick auf eine gleichbleibende, dauerhafte Funktion der Webanwendung durchgeführt werden.
            
         Die gemeinsame Modellierung einer Wissensdomäne mittels DDD und BDD führt notwendigerweise zu intensiver Auseinandersetzung mit allen geistes- wie informationstechnischen Aspekten des Projektes. Dadurch wird projektintern eine kommunikative Ebene entstehen, die eine gemeinsame und unmißverständliche Sprache verwendet und perspektivisch eine verbesserte Tiefenschärfe in Bezug auf funktionale Aspekte der zu realisierenden Forschungsanwendung ermöglicht.
         DDD und BDD helfen als Konzeptionsmethoden, alle gemeinsam getroffenen Entscheidungen über die gesamte Projektlaufzeit transparent und nachvollziehbar zu dokumentieren. Da es sich gleichzeitig im Bezug auf die BDD-Akzeptanztests um „ausführbares Wissen“ handelt, wird eine dauerhafte und gleichbleibende Funktionalität der Präsentationsschicht geisteswissenschaftlicher Webanwendungen gewährleistet. Dies trägt erheblich zu gesteigerter Nachhaltigkeit digitaler Komponenten eines geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschungsprojektes bei.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Evans, Eric (2003): 
                        Domain-Driven Design. Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software. 
                        Boston et al.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, Dieter (2016): 
                        „E-Humanties im Akademienprogramm“, 
                        in: Union der Deutschen Akademien der Wissenschaften (Hrsg.): 
                        Die Wissenschaftsakademien – Wissensspeicher für die Zukunft. Forschungsprojekte im Akademienprogramm. 
                        Berlin / Mainz 9–11.
                    
               
                  North, Dan (2016): 
                        Introducing BDD. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 26. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Pempe, Wolfgang (2012): 
                        „Geisteswissenschaften“, 
                        in: Neuroth, Heike et al. (eds.): 
                        Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten – Eine Bestandsaufnahme. 
                        Göttingen 137–159.
                    
               
                  Schrade, Torsten (2016): 
                        Nachhaltige Online-Applikationen in den Geisteswissenschaften – Modellierung und Implementierung. Vortrag vom 11. April 2016, Hochschule Mainz, 
                         [letzter Zugriff 26. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Vernon, Vaugh (2013): 
                        Implementing Domain-Driven Design. 
                        Boston et al.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Der vorgeschlagene Beitrag dokumentiert den Fortschritt beim Aufbau unseres digitalen Korpus der literarischen Moderne (KOLIMO), das im Herbst 2016 in der Beta-Version veröffentlicht werden soll (abrufbar unter https://kolimo.uni-goettingen.de/). Im Fokus des Beitrags stehen das Verfahren zur Aufbereitung der Texte (insb. Format und Metadaten in TEI) und das linguistische Tagging (POS).
         Als Teil des laufenden Projektes Q-LIMO (Quantitative Analyse der literarischen Moderne) ist KOLIMO ein repräsentatives und computerlinguistisch solide aufbereitetes Korpus von narrativen fiktionalen Erzähltexten der literarischen Epoche der Moderne. Um durch stratifiziertes Sampling Repräsentativität (verstanden als „extent to which a sample includes the full range of variability in a population“; vgl. Biber 1994) zu ermöglichen, umfasst das Korpus ein möglichst breites Spektrum der literarischen Moderne, verteilt über kanonische und nichtkanonische Texte. So wurden in das Korpus bislang ca. 596.000.000 Wörter aus frei zugänglichen Repositorien importiert (s. Abbildung 1).
         Abbildung 1
         Gesamtanzahl Wörter aus den drei Hauptressourcen (Zwischenstand August 2016)
         
            
         
         Die Datenbank umfasst so neben Texten aus TextGrid und Gutenberg-DE (s. Abbildung 2) und dem DTA auch eine wachsende Zahl von Retrodigitalisaten. Das Sampling ist nicht zuletzt dadurch beeinflusst, dass KOLIMO auch das Kafka/Referenzkorpus (KAREK) beinhaltet, welches zum Ziel hat, Kafkas Texte und Texte, die Kafkas Schreibprozess beeinflusst haben könnten, möglichst umfangreich abzubilden (vgl. Herrmann / Lauer 2016a,b).
         Abbildung 2
         Screenshot KOLIMO-WebApp: Anzahl Wörter, Autoren und Einträge aus TextGrid & Gutenberg-DE (ohne DTA und andere Quellen, Stand August 2016)
         
            
         
         Um philologischen Ansprüchen an den editorischen Status literarischer Texte und die Abbildung von Epochen sowie Gattungskonzepten zu genügen, war eine hohe Genauigkeit und Konsistenz bei der informatischen Vorverarbeitung Textmarkup (XML-TEI) inklusive der Metadaten (Autor, Entstehungszeitpunkt und Gattung) besonders wichtig. Gerade die Auszeichnung der genannten Metadaten stellt eine Schnittstelle zwischen den informatischen und philologischen Dimensionen unseres Projektes dar: so sind Metadaten (a) die unabhängigen Variablen unserer stilistischen Analyse und (b) variieren in den von uns importierten Korpus-Ressourcen stark in qualitativer und quantitativer Hinsicht (Fehler, missing entries, unterschiedliche Ontologien). Der vorgeschlagene Beitrag wird so erstens einen kurzen Einblick in unsere Vorgehensweise geben, wobei Kriterien der Nachhaltigkeit berücksichtigt werden:
         
            Strategien der Textextraktion nach Genre-Kriterien unter Nutzung bestehender Metadatenschemata (ausgeschlossen wurden z.B. alle Texte, deren Metadaten sie als dramatisch und lyrisch ausflaggten, sowie Texte, die keine Absätze [without (tei:p)] enthielten);
            ein transparenter Workflow zur Korpusauszeichnung (internes eXist Webinterface);
            Anwendung eines standardisierten Text-Markups (u.a. Transformation der TextGrid und Gutenberg Header in das DTA-Basisformat TEI);
            Strategien der konsistenten Implementierung und Verbesserung von Metadatenschemata (Ineinandergreifen von händischen und skriptgestützen Workflows, wie Recherche zu [Erst-]Erscheinungsdaten bei missing entries, Zusammenführung der unterschiedlichen Gattungschemata, Überprüfung und ggf. Zuweisung von GNDs für Autoren);
            die nachhaltige Veröffentlichung des Korpus auf einem eigenen Server mit standardisierten Datenschnittstellen;
            Datenbankabbild (nonpublic) zur Langzeitarchivierung.
         
         Zweitens wird der Beitrag unser Vorgehen bezüglich der linguistischen Anreicherung zusammenfassen: Unter der Annahme, dass Stil quantitativ beschreibbar ist (vgl. Herrmann / van Dalen-Oskam / Schöch 2015), und dass Wortarten verlässliche Indikatoren für Register und Genrevariation sind (vgl. z.B. Biber / Conrad 2009), haben wir uns für die linguistische Annotation auf POS (STTS Tagset; vgl. Schiller / Teufel / Thielen 1995) entschieden. POS sind im Vergleich mit anderen Variationsmarkern durch eine relativ akkurate automatische Annotation besonders praktikabel. Das Webinterface liefert variablen Zugriff auf die annotierten Daten, u.a. eine Volltextansicht (siehe Abbildung 3); geplant sind zur Veröffentlichung die Exportierbarkeit in .csv-Files und TCF-Format.
         Abbildung 3
         Screenshot KOLIMO WebApp Textview POS-Tagging
         
            
         
         Zwar liefern bereits trainierte Modelle von einigen Taggern (z.B. TreeTagger) eine gute Genauigkeit für das gegenwärtige Standarddeutsch, angewendet auf ältere Sprachstufen oder vom Standarddeutschen abweichende Register wie „Literatur“ sinkt die Genauigkeit jedoch. Ein bereits auf POS annotiertes Korpus ist das Deutsche Textarchiv (DTA, Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften 2016), ein Referenzkorpus für das Deutsche, das sowohl historische Sprachstufen als auch das Register „Literatur“ enthält. Die POS-Annotation baut hier auf fehlertoleranten linguistischen Analyse historischer Texte auf und verwendet ein Tool zur Morphologisierung (Jurish 2012), ist allerdings hinsichtlich ihrer Qualität noch nicht umfassend evaluiert worden. Ausgehend von diesem Datensatz haben wir zwei Strategien verfolgt: (1) Ein epochensensitives POS-Tagging, das verschiedene Tagger auf dem Datensatz des DTA, aber auf unterschiedlichen literarischen Epochen trainiert (vgl. Paluch et al. in Vorbereitung); (2) eine Überprüfung der Qualität der DTA-POS-Tags durch quantitative und qualitative Verfahren. 
         In Strategie (1) machen wir uns zunutze, dass Annotationsgenauigkeit erhöht werden kann, wenn Tagger auf verschiedene Register/Sprachstände trainiert und diese trainierten Modelle dann auf noch nicht trainierte Texte des gleichen Registers angewendet werden (vgl. Giesbrecht / Evert). Für KOLIMO haben wir u.a. den TreeTagger (vgl. Schmid 1994), Perceptron (vgl. Rosenblatt 1958) und MarMoT (vgl. Müller / Schmid / Schütze 2013) verwendet. Durch die Wahl unterschiedlicher Tagger soll gewährleistet werden, dass die Genauigkeit der POS-Annotation maximiert werden kann, indem nur derjenige Tagger mit den besten Ergebnissen pro Register verwendet wird. Die Auswahl der Tagger basierte einerseits darauf, dass sie unterschiedliche Prinzipien benutzen: So funktioniert der TreeTagger nach dem Hidden Markov Model (HMM, vgl. Baum / Petrie 1966), MarMot nach dem Prinzip der Conditional Random Fields (DRF, vgl. Hammersly / Clifford 1971) und Perceptron nach dem neuronaler Netzwerke. Der Grund für die Wahl des TreeTaggers war zudem seine Prävalenz in der Forschungsliteratur, die nicht zuletzt durch gute Ergebnisse begründet scheint (vgl. Dipper 2012; Giesbrecht / Evert 2009). In einem ersten Schritt (vgl. Paluch et al. in Vorbereitung) wurden hier bereits getaggte Texte aus dem DTA in fünf Epochen geordnet. Neben der Moderne umfassten diese zu Vergleichszwecken auch Barock, Aufklärung, Romantik, und Realismus. Für die Einteilung der Epochen in Zeitperioden sowie der Einteilung von Autoren zu bestimmten Epochen wurden einschlägige Literaturgeschichten zu Rate gezogen (u.a. Beutin 2001; Jørgensen / Bohnen / Øhrgaard 1990; Meid 2009; Schulz 2000; Sprengel 1998, 2004). Anschließend wurden die Tagger auf jeweils eine Epoche trainiert, indem die Texte randomisiert in Trainings- und Evaluationstexte getrennt wurden und eine k-fold cross validation (vgl. Witten / Elbe 2005) für jeden Tagger durchgeführt wurde. Die Ergebnisse (vgl. auch Paluch et al. in Vorbereitung) weisen auf eine gute Genauigkeit insbesondere von Perceptron hin, müssen aber unter dem Vorbehalt betrachtet werden, dass der Status des DTA als Goldstandard für POS-Tagging noch fraglich ist.
         Hier setzen wir mit Strategie (2) an, mit der wir zunächst für alle POS-Tags Übereinstimmung und Abweichung (Matches und Missmatches) des Outputs des Tree-Taggers und MarMots mit dem DTA-Datensatz vergleichen. Aufbauend auf diese quantitative Überprüfung der einzelnen Tag-Zuweisung evaluieren wir zudem händisch Stichproben der Nichtübereinstimmungen in der Annotation der einzelnen Tags. 
         Unsere quantitative Überprüfung ergibt eine generelle Übereinstimmung mit dem DTA-Datensatz in POS-Tags für den TreeTagger und den Marmot Tagger von jeweils 80%. Die generelle Übereinstimmung zwischen den Tags des TreeTaggers und denen des MarMot Taggers hingegen liegt bei 0.78%. 
         Tabelle 1 zeigt Ergebnisse aus der Analyse der Übereinstimmungen (Matches) und Abweichungen (Missmatches) bei der POS-Tagzuweisung von TreeTagger (TT) und MarMot (MM) im Vergleich mit den Tags des DTA. Abgebildet sind hier solche Fälle pro POS-Tag, in denen TT und MM übereinstimmen, aber vom DTA abweichen. Die Tabelle listet die elf POS-Tags, die (von TT und MM gemeinsam) die proportional den höchsten Anteil der Abweichung vom DTA ausmachen.
         Tabelle 1 Abweichung zu POS-Tags des DTA (Übereinstimmung MM und TT)
         
            
               POS-Tag*
               Häufigkeit
               Rel. Häufigkeit 
            
            
               NE
               1444048
               0.12
            
            
               NN
               1443795
               0.12
            
            
               VVFIN
               1326081
               0.11
            
            
               ADJA
               1309006
               0.11
            
            
               ADJD
               741903
               0.06
            
            
               ADV
               618465
               0.05
            
            
               VAFIN
               582791
               0.05
            
            
               FM.la
               404341
               0.03
            
            
               PPOSAT
               397465
               0.03
            
            
               APPR
               362774
               0.03
            
            
               PDAT
               255896
               0.02
            
         
         *STTS Tagset
         Aufbauend auf diesen Daten wird im nächsten Schritt die tatsächliche Qualität der bereits vorhandenen DTA-Tags für den Datensatz der literarischen Texte evaluiert. Auf der Grundlage von randomisiertem Sampling verbessern wir die POS-Annotationen bei tatsächlichen Fehlern händisch, um in der Folge u.a. eigene Sprachmodelle für unser spezifisches Korpus narrativer Texte zu trainieren. So soll schließlich unter Nutzung vorhandener Ressourcen ein Silber- oder sogar Goldstandard für das POS-Tagging historischer literarischer Texte des Deutschen erreicht werden. 
         KOLIMO wird in der Beta-Version zur Tagung veröffentlicht (s. 
                https://kolimo.uni-goettingen.de) und so der Forschungsgemeinschaft zur Verfügung gestellt. Es soll eine hypothesengetriebene, aber auch explorative, quantitative Stilistik ermöglichen (vgl. Herrmann eingereicht); zum Zeitpunkt der Tagung sind erste Ergebnisse zur stilistischen Variation der literarischen Moderne zu erwarten (vgl. schon Herrmann / Lauer / Mattner 2016).
            
         Gleichzeitig planen wir eine detaillierte Dokumentation der Arbeitsschritte zu veröffentlichen, die ähnlichen Projekten als Leitfaden zur Verfügung zu stehen soll. Unser Projekt dokumentiert in seinem gegenwärtigen Status Entscheidungen auf verschiedenen konzeptionellen, analytischen und prozeduralen Ebenen. Es zeigt, dass der Aufbau eines digitalen literarischen Korpus, das den synchronen und diachronen quantitativen Vergleich einer Schwerpunktepoche erlauben soll, bei Weitem keine triviale Aufgabe darstellt. So wurde zum Beispiel deutlich, wie Hypothesen zur Konstitution von Epochen, Autorschaft und Gattungen die Korpuskompilation steuern – und deshalb auf einer möglichst präzisen Modellierung der zugrundeliegenden textwissenschaftlichen Theorien fußen sollten. Gleichzeitig sind Metadaten (u. a. Autor, Titel, Publikationsdatum, Publikationsort, Gattung) und linguistische Parameter (wie POS) gerade die Ansatzpunkte, an denen philologische Fragestellungen in präzise und praktikable Kategorien umgewandelt werden können. Nicht zuletzt deshalb sollten literarische Daten in flexiblen Architekturen gespeichert werden, die zusätzliche Annotationsebenen zulassen – denn hermeneutische Erkenntnisprozesse stellen eine erwachsene Stärke der Geisteswissenschaften dar, die auch im digitalen Zeitalter einen explizit modellierten Platz einnehmen muss.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Baum, Leonard E. / Petrie, Ted (1966): 
                        „Statistical inference for probabilistic functions of finite state markov chains“, 
                        in: 
                        The annals of mathematical statistics 37 (6) :1554–1563.  
                    
               
                  Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften (2016): 
                        Deutsches Textarchiv. 
                        http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/ [letzer Zugriff 24. Mai 2016].
                    
               
                  Beutin, Wolfgang (2001): 
                        Deutsche Literaturgeschichte: von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart. 
                        Stuttgart: Metzler.
                    
               
                  Biber, Douglas / Conrad, Susan (2009): 
                        Register, Genre, and Style. 
                        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie (2012): 
                        „Morphological and part-of-speech tagging of historical language data: A comparison“,
                        in: 
                        Workshop on Annotation of Corpora.
                        http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/conf/ACRH10/slides/dipper.pdf.
                    
               
                  Gaede, Friedrich (1971): 
                        Humanismus, Barock, Aufklärung: Geschichte der deutschen Literatur vom 16. bis zum 18. Jahrhundert. 
                        Bern: Francke Verlag.
                    
               
                  Giesbrecht, Eugenie / Evert, Stefan (2009): 
                        „Is part-of-speech tagging a solved task? An evaluation of pos taggers for the German web as corpus“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the fifth Web as Corpus Workshop 27–35. 
                    
               
                  Hammersley, John M. / Clifford, Peter (1971): 
                        Markov fields on finite graphs and lattices.
                         http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~grg/books/hammfest/hamm-cliff.pdf.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike (eingereicht): 
                        „In test bed with Kafka. Introducing a mixed-method approach to digital stylistics“,
                        in: Chambers, Sally / Jones, Catherine / Kestemont, Mike / Koolen, Marijn / Zundert, Joris van (Eds.). 
                        Special Issue DHBenelux 2015, Digital Humanities Quarterly.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike / Lauer, Gerhard (2016a): 
                        „KAREK: Building and Annotating a Kafka/Reference Corpus“,
                        in:
                        DH2016: Conference Abstracts.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike / Lauer, Gerhard (2016b): 
                        „Aufbau und Annotation des Kafka/Referenzkorpus“,
                        in:
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike / Lauer, Gerhard / Mattner, Cosima (2016): 
                        Measuring Kafka's Diaries. A Psychostylistic Approach International Society for the Empirical Study of Literature and Media (IGEL), Chicago, USA.
                    
               
                  Herrmann, J. Berenike / van Dalen-Oskam, Karina / Schöch, Christof (2015): 
                        „Revisiting Style, a Key Concept in Literary Studies“,
                        in:
                        Journal of Literary Theory 9 (1): 25–52.
                    
               
                  Jørgensen, Sven Aaage / Bohnen, Klaus / Øhrgaard, Per (1990): 
                        Aufklärung, Sturm und Drang, frühe Klassik: 1740 - 1789. (Boor, Helmut de / Newald, Richard, eds.). 
                        München: Beck.
                    
               
                  Jurish, Bryan (2012): 
                        Finite-state Canonicalization Techniques for Historical German. 
                        PhD, Universität Potsdam.
                    
               
                  Manning, Christopher D. / Raghavan, Prabhakar / Schütze, Heinrich (2008): 
                        Introduction to information retrieval 1. 
                        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
                    
               
                  Meid, Volker (2009):
                        Die deutsche Literatur im Zeitalter des Barock: vom Späthumanismus zur Frühaufklärung: 1570 - 1740. (Boor, Helmut de / R. Newald, Richard, eds.) ([Neuausg.].). 
                        München: Beck.
                    
               
                  Müller, Thomas / Schmid, Helmut / Schütze, Hinrich (2013): 
                        „Efficient higher-order CRFs for morphological tagging“,
                        in:
                        Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
                    
               
                  Nekula, Marek (2003): 
                        „Franz Kafkas Deutsch“, 
                        in: 
                        Linguistik online 13 (1)
                        https://bop.unibe.ch/linguistik- online/article/view/879/1533.
                    
               
                  Paluch, Markus / Rotari, Gabriela / Steding, David / Weß, Maximilian / Moritz, Maria (in Vorbereitung): 
                        Non-static analysis of part-of-speech tagging of historical German texts.
                    
               
                  Rosenblatt, Frank (1958): 
                        „The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain“, 
                        in:
                        Psychological Review 65 (6): 386. 
                    
               
                  Schiller, Anne / Teufel, Simone / Thielen, Christine (1995): 
                        „Guidelines für das Tagging deutscher Textcorpora mit STTS“,
                        in:
                        Manuscript, Universities of Stuttgart and Tübingen.
                        http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/resources/stts-1999.pdf.
                    
               
                  Schmid, Helmut (1994):
                        „Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees“, 
                        in: 
                        Proceedings of the international conference on new methods in language processing 12: 44–49. 
                    
               
                  Schulz, Gerhard (2000): 
                        Das Zeitalter der Französischen Revolution: 1789 - 1806. (Boor, Helmut de / Newald, Richard, eds.) (2., neubearb. Aufl.). 
                        München: Beck.
                    
               
                  Sprengel, Peter (1998):
                        Geschichte der deutschsprachigen Literatur 1870 - 1900: von der Reichsgründung bis zur Jahrhundertwende. (Boor, Helmut de / Newald, Richard, eds.). 
                        München: Beck.
                    
               
                  Sprengel, Peter (2004): 
                        Geschichte der deutschsprachigen Literatur 1900 - 1918: von der Jahrhundertwende bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkriegs. (Boor, Helmut de / Newald, Richard, eds.). 
                        München: Beck.
                    
               
                  Witten, Ian H. / Elbe, Frank (2005): 
                        Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques. 
                        San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Zusammenfassung: Digitale Daten stellen den zentralen Forschungsfokus der Digital Humanities dar. Fragen der Modellierung, Repräsentations-, Analyse- und Annotationsmöglichkeiten sind dabei wichtige Forschungsdimensionen, ebenso wie etwa die Weiterverarbeitung und Nachnutzbarkeit. Die digitalen Daten sowie die beschrieben Prozeduren werden jedoch auch von EditorInnen bearbeitet und wirken sich auf deren wissenschaftliche Arbeit aus. In diesem Beitrag wird aus qualitativ empirischer Sicht die Perspektive der EditorInnen als besondere Nutzer- und Produzentengruppen im Prozess der Digitalisierung von Musikeditionen vorgestellt. Dabei gilt es weder WissenschaftlerInnen noch Daten singulär zu betrachten, sondern im Akt der Bearbeitung, Analyse, Repräsentation und Annotation eine besondere Perspektive in der Auseinandersetzung von Medien, Materialien und Subjekten zu erschließen und zu reflektieren. In diesem Sinne werden in diesem Abstract zuerst theoretische Verortungen für die Relevanz des Nutzers diskutiert. Darauf aufbauend werden die methodischen Grundlagen der Interviewstudie vorgestellt, um anschließend einen Ausblick auf die Ergebnisse zu geben, der im Vortrag vertieft wird. Dabei stehen die Veränderungen des wissenschaftlichen Arbeitsprozesses von analog zu digital im Vordergrund. Darauf aufbauend stehen die Chancen und Herausforderungen dieses Paradigmenwechsels im Zentrum des Interesses, die sicherlich nicht nur für die Arbeitskontexte der digitalen Musikeditionen zutreffen. Abschließend werden Kristallisationspunkte und Konsequenzen zukünftiger Fragestellungen hinsichtlich der Digitalisierung von Musikeditionen, Veränderungen von Arbeitsstrukturen sowie der Bildungs- und Wissensarbeit resultierend aus diesen Ergebnissen thematisiert. 
            
         Einleitung
         Digitale Musikeditionen bieten potentiell vielerlei Optionen für EditorInnen, WissenschaftlerInnen und geneigte RezipientInnen (vgl. etwa Veit 2010). So beschleunigt und ordnet etwa die Verfügbarkeit digitaler Quellen den editorischen Prozess, die Ansichten des Digitalen ermöglichen größtmögliche Transparenz und Nachvollzieharkeit. Umbestritten sind also die Errungenschaften, die mit den digitalen Musikeditionen einhergehen eine Bereicherung der wissenschaftlichen Arbeit (vgl. ebd.). Vieles was im Kontext der Digital Humanities diskutiert wird, bezieht sich auf die digitale Repräsentation oder aber Transformation der kulturellen Artefakte, deren weitergehenden Analyse bzw. Prozessierbarkeit sowie deren Nachnutzbarkeit. Diese Ebenen werden aus dem Fokus auf die Daten heraus diskutiert. Was hingegen weniger betrachtet wird ist die Forschung im Digitalen als Wissensgenerierungsprozess: Was bedeutet es, sich digitale Techniken anzueignen, digital Quellen zu bearbeiten, zu repräsentieren, zu analysieren? Die Auseinandersetzung mit diesen Praktiken der Aneignung ermöglicht es ein tieferes Verständnis für die Optionen der digitalen Daten und deren wissenschaftliche Relevanz im Arbeitsprozess zu eröffnen. Ebenso lassen sich die zuvor skizzierten Forschungsthemen von Repräsentation, Transformation, Nachnutzbarkeit etc. ebenso aus der Sicht der Subjekte erschließen.
         Theoretische Rahmung
         Neben Fragen der Daten werden somit zunehmend die Arbeitsprozesse interessant, die durch die Digitalisierung der wissenschaftlichen Arbeit beeinflusst werden. An dieser Stelle bietet sich die seltene Gelegenheit die Veränderungsprozesse dieses medialen Paradigmenwechsel und dessen Einfluss auf Forschung und Wissenschaft zu beobachten und zu begleiten. Damit gilt es die NutzerInnen in den Blick zu nehmen (vgl. auch Stone 1982, Edwards 2012, Warwick 2012; Brockman 2001) und vom forensic zum formal layer (vgl. Kirschenbaum 2008) zu wechseln. Aber auch Kirschenbaums formal layer bringt nicht ganz zum Ausdruck, was Drucker (2013) mit der performativen Ebene von Materialität als Nutzungsakt beschreibt: Handeln, der Umgang von NutzerInnen mit kulturellen, auch immateriellen Artefakten, prägen die Wahrnehmung, Beurteilung und die kulturelle Bedeutung dieser Artefakte. Um die Bedeutung von Medien, konkreter von musikeditorischen Ergebnissen unter digitalen Bedingungen, erschließen zu können, ist es notwendig, die vielschichtigen Auseinandersetzungsprozesse der Nutzer mit der Software bzw. der Auszeichnungssprachen und Metadaten zu erforschen. Damit verbunden ist die sogenannte radikale Kontextualisierung in den Cultural Studies, bei der davon ausgegangen wird, dass »Objekt und Subjekt, Medientechnologie und Kontext« (vgl. Winter 2010): sich stetig beeinflussen und miteinander verwoben sind. Erst in der Analyse dieser komplexen Verbindungen kann letztlich das Phänomen konturiert und erforscht werden. Medientechnologien und ihre Nutzer gehen demnach in zahlreichen Auseinandersetzungsprozessen eine Allianz ein, die in dieser Perspektive eine besondere Qualität hervorbringt. Einen Schritt weiter geht Rainer Winter, indem er mit Rekurs auf Heidegger darauf hinweist, dass Medien nicht nur technische Artefakte sind, sondern gerade in ihrer Einbettung in soziale und kulturelle Prozesse, Optionen und Zugänge zur Welt umgestalten (vgl. ebd.). In dieser Hinsicht gilt es weitergehend Wissensgenerierungsprozesse in den Blick zu nehmen. In diesem Beitrag stehen die EditorInnen als besondere Nutzergruppe im Zentrum des Interesses. Diese arbeiten an der Schnittstelle vom computer und cultural layer (Manovich 2001). Sie arbeiten mit Metadaten und Auszeichnungssprachen und müssen somit die Logiken des Prozessierens des Computers verstehen, gleichzeitig arbeiten sie mit den Transformationen an der Oberfläche, lassen sich Teile oder Überblick bestimmte Werkaspekte anzeigen, um editorische Entscheidungen zu treffen und bilden damit einen ganz versierten Nutzer- und Produzententypus ab.
         Methode
         Im Projekt wurde auf die Prinzipien der qualitativen, empirischen Sozialforschung zurückgegriffen, um diesen Prozess möglichst offen und gegenstandsangemessen erforschen zu können (vgl. etwa Flick et al. 2000). Qualitative Sozialforschung birgt zunächst den Vorteil in einem unbekannten Forschungsfeld einsetzbar zu sein. Ergänzend zur quantitativen Forschung wird somit im Projekt ein hypothesengenerierendes und exploratives Verfahren verfolgt. Um die Sicht der EditorInnen in der Annäherung zu erschließen, können die Befragten durch unterschiedliche Methoden beforscht werden (Beobachtung, unterschiedliche Arten von Interviews, Einzel- bzw. Gruppeninterviews etc. vgl. ebd.). Die Auswahl der Erhebungsmethode erfolgt dem Forschungsphänomen entsprechend angemessen. Erhebt also die quantitative Forschung Daten zu vielen Nutzern, um Überblicke zu generieren und Themenfelder zu identifizieren ist die qualitative Forschung mit diesen Erhebungsmethoden dazu in der Lage in die Tiefe zu gehen und bspw. Bedeutungskontexte, implizites Wissen und unbewusste Routinen zu eruieren. Hierbei werden nicht nur Stichworte, sondern Kontextinformationen aus der Sicht der Subjekte aus den Daten herauszuarbeiten (vgl. Flick 2002). Die Erforschung impliziten Wissens, von Arbeitsroutinen, Expertisen und Gewissheiten lässt sich dabei kaum über einzelne direkte Fragen realisieren. Um solchen Phänomenen auszuspüren ist zunächst der Gesamtkontext wichtig. In diesem Sinne nutzt die qualitative Forschung verschiedene Formen von Befragungstechniken, um unterschiedliche Arten von Narrationen zu erhalten, die im Anschluss verschriftlicht und analysiert werden können. Im Auswertungsprozess wird dann über Interpretationen der Gesamtkontext erarbeitet und erschlossen. Dies geschieht indem einzelne Wissensbestände mit anderen Aussagen verbunden werden, die im Gesamtkontext Einblicke in das Zusammenwirken expliziter und impliziter Wissensbestände erlauben. Als Erhebungsform für diese qualitative Studie wurde das teilstandardisierte, narrative Interview gewählt, das zwar einem Leitfaden folgt, in der Interviewsituation allerdings größtmögliche Spielräume hinsichtlich der Frageformulierungen, Nachfragestrategien und der Reihenfolge der Fragen zulässt (vgl. Keuneke 2000) und der Narration der EditorInnen viel Raum gestattet. Der Leitfaden fokussierte besonders Regelstrukturen der Handlungs- und Nutzungsweisen, indem die Befragten nach bestimmten Nutzungssituationen und den damit verbundenen Bedeutungen und Relevanzen befragt wurden. Diese Nutzungssituationen und Bedeutungen wurden allen interviewten Personen gleichermaßen vorgegeben. Die von den Befragten formulierten Antworten konnten anschließend aufeinander bezogen werden. Zur Auswahl der Interviewpartner/innen wurden im Sinne des Theoretical Sampling (vgl. Przyborski/ Wohlrab-Sahr 2009) Expertinnen und Experten, die mit Edirom arbeiten befragt. Die Software Edirom erlaubt es Faksimiles, Digitalisate und digitale Daten von Notentexten oder anderen Quellen einzuarbeiten, zu speichern, zu organisieren, zu kollationieren, zu annotieren und zu analysieren. Dabei handelt es sich nicht um eine Forschungsoberfläche, die Voraussetzungslos für die EditorInnen ist, sondern hier sind Auseinandersetzungen und Erfahrungen mit XML, TEI und MEI erforderlich. Entscheidend war, dass sowohl weibliche als männliche Nutzer/innen befragt wurden. Insgesamt wurden acht Interviews mit sechs Editorinnen und zwei Editoren geführt. Diese dauerten zwischen 90 Min. und 180 Min. Die erhobenen qualitativen Daten wurden durch eine Variante des Kodierens
                1 nach Strauss und Corbin, wie es Przyborski und Wohlrab-Sahr vorschlagen, ausgewertet (vgl. ebd.). Die Auswertung wurde zunächst nicht mittels Auswertungsprogrammen strukturiert, sondern durch Textverarbeitungsprogramme. So konnten die sich herausbildenden Phänomene einer exemplarischen, interdisziplinären Sichtung unterzogen werden. In der Synthese der exemplarischen Auswertung konnte das selektive Kodieren vorangetrieben werden, woraus eine Phänomen- und Kategorienliste resultierte. Diese liefert einerseits konkrete Hinweise für Optimierungen der Software, aber auch Kontextinformationen zu den Arbeitsbedingungen, Routinen und Erfahrungen der EditorInnen. Darüber hinaus liefern die Interviews sehr gute Einblicke in die Änderungsprozesse der Wissensarbeit, des Wissensmanagements als auch des erarbeiteten Wissens als solches.
            
         
            Ausblick auf die Ergebnisse
         
         Wie die empirischen Daten belegen, ist der Wechsel der Arbeit und der beforschten Gegenstände von analog zu digital nicht nur eine technische Änderung, vielmehr gehen damit auch editorische, rechtliche, organisatorische, soziale und nicht zuletzt auch bildungswissenschaftliche Prozesse einher, die betrachtet, reflektiert und weiterentwickelt werden müssen. Sie verändern die wissenschaftliche Arbeitsorganisation, die editorische Tätigkeit und nicht zuletzt die Sicht auf Editionen und die damit verbundenen Erkenntnissen selbst. EditorInnen recherchieren bei ihrer analogen Forschungsroutinen zunächst Quellen, analysieren diese und wählen Haupt- und Nebenquellen aus, um die weitere Editionsarbeit zu gestalten. Im Anschluss daran wurden diese Quellen stetig miteinander verglichen. Dazu musste sehr viel Quellenmaterial physisch verwaltet werden, um die einzelnen Änderungen in der jeweiligen Quelle mit anderen vergleichen und analysieren zu können. Die Arbeit an den digitalen Editionen ist indes ein Konglomerat aus analogen und digitalen Techniken. Zuerst werden die Quellen ebenso recherchiert, analysiert und ausgewertet und ausgewählt. Die ausgewählten Quellen werden von den Hilfskräften im Anschluss digitalisiert, vertaktet und die Konkordanzen festgelegt. Es findet also eine Arbeitsteilung statt, da die Vertaktung delegiert wird. Die Interviews belegen die hohen Vorteile und Freiheitsgrade der digitalen Editionen, den Rezipienten solcher Editionen kann nun erstmals das gesamte Quellenmaterial zur Verfügung gestellt werden. Diese können nun editorische Entscheidungen transparent nachvollziehen und eine eigene Meinung dazu entwickeln. Damit einhergehend sind aber auch ein zunehmendes Maß an Komplexitätssteigerung und wachsenden Aufgaben zu verzeichnen. Bei Printeditionen steht die editorische Tätigkeit im Fokus. Der Wechsel zu digitalen Editionen bedeutet für die Editoren einen weiteren Komplexitätsschub: Nicht nur die musikwissenschaftliche Expertise ist gefragt, sondern auch Kenntnisse verschiedenster Auszeichnungssprachen, wie XML, TEI und MEI. Durch die Arbeitsteilung muss darüber hinaus den Hilfskräften Wissen für die Vertaktung vermittelt, diese angeleitet und kontrolliert werden. Zudem nutzen die EditorInnen notwendigerweise mehr Programme. Um nur einige zu nennen sind dies: Sibelius, Score, Finale, QuarkX, Indesign, OxygenXML, Lillypond, Word, Filemaker, oder aber Verovio. Wie die aufgeführten Notensatzprogramme verdeutlichen, sind EditorInnen nun teilweise auch mit Aufgaben beschäftigt, die vorher von Verlagen erledigt wurden. Durch diese Tätigkeit kann auch das Rechtemanagement von Originalquellen zu einem weiteren Aufgabengebiet werden. Die Ergebnisse abstrahierend betrachtet sind im neuen Medium neue Forschungsfragen entstanden und bilden sich täglich neu aus: Wo sind die Anfangs- und Endpunkte von Editionen, welche Nachnutzbarkeit kann gewährleistet werden, wie kann die Praxis von dem Wissen profitieren und dieses einsehen, wo ist Wissen gesichert erschlossen? Zudem gibt es kaum verbindliche Standards im digitalen Editionsprozess, was nun, bei steigender Editionszahl und entsprechender Annotationsmenge immer offensichtlicher und wichtiger wird. Ein systematischer Wissensaufbau informatischer Grundkenntnisse wird ebenso implizit evident, um die Potenziale der digitalen Repräsentations- und Verarbeitungsoptionen besser erschließen zu können.
      
      
         
             Das Kodieren bezeichnet im Gegensatz zu Semantiken aus der Informatik im Kontext der qualitativen Forschung eine Auswertungstechnik.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                        Brockman, William S. / Neumann, Laura / Palmer, Carole L. / Tidline, Tonyia J. (2001): 
                        Scholarly Work in the Humanities and the Evolving Information Environment. portal: Libraries and the Academy (Vol. 3). 
                        Digital Library Federation. 
                        10.1353/pla.2003.0012.
                    
               
                  Drucker, Johanna (2013): 
                        „Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface“, 
                        in: 
                        DHQ: Digital Humanities Quartely 7 (1). 
                        http://www.Digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html.
                    
               
                  Edwards, Charlie (2012): 
                        „The Digital Humanities and Its Users“, 
                        in: Gold, Matthew K. (ed.):
                        Debates in the Humanities.  
                        http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/31 [letzter Zugriff 3. September 2015].
                    
               
                  Flick, Uwe / Kardorff, Ernst von / Steinke Ines (eds.). (2000): 
                        Qualitative Forschung: Ein Handbuch. 
                        Reinbeck: Rowohlt. 
                    
               
                  Flick, Uwe (2002): 
                        Qualitative Sozialforschung: Eine Einführung. 6. überarb. und erweiterte Aufl. 
                        Hamburg: Rowohlt. 
                    
               
                  Giesecke, Michael (1991): 
                        Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit: eine historische Fallstudie über die Durchsetzung neuer Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologien. 
                        Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp.
                    
               
                  Keuneke, Susanne (2005): 
                        „Qualitatives Interview“, 
                        in: Mikos, Lothar / Wegener, Claudia (eds.): 
                        Qualitative Medienforschung: Ein Handbuch.
                        Konstanz: UVK 254–267.
                    
               
                  Kirschenbaum, Matthew (2008): 
                        Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. 
                        Cambridge: MIT University Press.
                    
               
                  Manovich, Lev (2001): 
                        Language of New Media.
                        Cambridge: MIT Press.
                    
               
                  Polanyi, Michael (1985): 
                        Implizites Wissen. 
                        Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
                    
               
                  Przyborski, A. / Wohlrab-Sahr, M. (2009): 
                        Qualitative Sozialforschung. Ein Arbeitsbuch.
                        München, Oldenbourg.
                    
               
                  Stone, Sue (1982):
                        „Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses“,  
                        in:
                        Journal of Documentation 38 (4): 292–313. 
                        http://www.emeraldinsight.com/journals.htm?articleid=1649976.
                    
               
                  Veit, Joachim (2010):
                        „Es bleibt nichts, wie es war – Wechselwirkungen zwischen digitalen und ,analogen‘ Editionen“,  
                        in: 
                        editio 24: 37–52 
                        10.1515/9783110223163.0.37.
                    
               
                  Warwick, Claire (2012): 
                        „Studying users in digital humanities“, 
                        in; Warwick, Claire / Terras, Melissa / Nyhan, Julianne (eds.), 
                        Digital Humanities in Practice.
                        London: Facet Publishing 1–21.
                    
               
                  Winter, Rainer (2010): 
                        „Handlungsmächtigkeit und technologische Lebensformen: Cultural Studies, digitale Medien und die Demokratisierung der Lebensverhältnisse“, 
                        in: Pietraß, Manuela / Funiok, Rüdiger (eds.) 
                        Mensch und Medien. Philosophische und sozialwissenschaftliche Perspektiven. 
                        Wiesbaden: VS 139–157.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         In meinem Vortrag setze ich mich mit der Frage auseinander, welchen Beitrag die Datenbank TInCAP („Tübingen Interdisciplinary Corpus of Ambiguity Phenomena“), die bei der Tagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum 2016 in Leipzig vorgestellt wurde und die der Sammlung und Annotation von Ambiguitätsbelegen dient, zur Erforschung des Phänomens „Ambiguität“ leisten kann. Den Mehrwert, den TInCAP durch die innovative interdisziplinäre Annotation und die Zusammenführung von Belegen in einer durchsuchbaren Datenbank liefert, werde ich am Beispiel ambiger idiomatischer Ausdrücke in kinderliterarischen Texten illustrieren. 
         Die Datenbank TInCAP entsteht im Rahmen des interdisziplinären Graduiertenkollegs 
                GRK 1808 Ambiguität – Produktion und Rezeption (
                www.ambiguitaet.uni-tuebingen.de; Arbeitsgruppe TInCAP: Wiltrud Wagner, Lisa Ebert, Jutta Hartmann, Gesa Schole, Susanne Winkler) mit dem Zweck, Ambiguitätsbelege aus allen beteiligten Disziplinen zu sammeln und zu annotieren. Hauptziele sind dabei die interdisziplinäre Auseinandersetzung mit dem Phänomen Ambiguität durch die Erstellung eines gemeinsamen Annotationsschemas sowie die nachhaltige Speicherung und Zugänglichmachung der Datensammlung für die nationale und internationale Forschungsgemeinschaft (in Kürze über die Homepage des GRK 1808).
            
         Auch wenn alle an diesem Projekt beteiligten WissenschaftlerInnen das Interesse am Phänomen der Ambiguität verbindet, das hier als Doppel- oder Mehrdeutigkeit in ihren verschiedensten Formen verstanden wird, so sind die zu annotierenden Belege doch sehr divers: Durch die Vielzahl der beteiligten Disziplinen unterscheiden sich die Belege hinsichtlich Medium (aktuell: Schrift, Audio, Bild, Video) und Sprache (aktuell: Deutsch, Englisch, Französisch, Hebräisch, Italienisch, Latein, Spanisch, Griechisch), aber auch Umfang. Im Bestreben, eine gemeinsame Datenbank aufzubauen, sahen wir uns demnach zwei großen Herausforderungen gegenüber gestellt: (1) Der Erarbeitung einer disziplinenübergreifenden Terminologie, die einerseits präzise, andererseits aber nicht an das Vokabular einer der Disziplinen gebunden ist, und (2) der Entwicklung eines interdisziplinären Annotationsschemas, das – trotz der notwendigen Komplexitätsreduktion – den Anforderungen der einzelnen Disziplinen genügt und für alle Beteiligten profitabel ist. 
         Das Ergebnis ist ein Annotationsschema, das die folgenden fünf Punkte fokussiert:
         
            
               Communication level: Auf welcher Ebene der Kommunikation wird die Ambiguität annotiert? Für literarische Texte wird zum Beispiel zwischen der Ebene der fiktiven Charaktere, der Ebene des/der Erzähler(s) und der Ebene des Autors und Lesers unterschieden.
                
            
               Strategic or non-strategic production and/or perception: Wird die Ambiguität strategisch produziert? Wird die Ambiguität strategisch rezipiert?
                
            
               Level of Trigger and Range: Zu annotieren ist, auf welcher Ebene die Ambiguität ausgelöst wird und bis zu welcher Ebene sie relevant ist. Die Ebenen für Auslöser und Wirkung der Ambiguität bilden dabei ein Größenverhältnis ab, analog zum menschlichen Körper, bei dem sich größere Elemente aus kleineren zusammensetzen (z.B. die Ebene 
                    Subelement, die u.a. Phoneme, Grapheme und Morpheme umfasst; die Ebene 
                    Element, die u.a. Worte umfasst; usw.). 
                
            
               Type of Paraphrase Relation: In welchem Verhältnis stehen die möglichen Lesarten zueinander? Sind sie voneinander abgeleitet oder völlig unabhängig voneinander?
                
            
               Phenomenon: Welches Phänomen steht mit der vorliegenden Ambiguität im Zusammenhang? Hier kann und soll disziplininternes Vokabular zur Anwendung kommen, um die Einbindung in den jeweiligen Forschungskontext zu gewährleisten.
                
         
         Zusätzlich ist die Verknüpfung von Annotationen möglich, zum Beispiel, wenn ein Beleg auf verschiedenen Kommunikationsebenen (unterschiedlich) annotiert wird.
         Die Nachhaltigkeit der gesammelten Daten wird durch eine Kombination verschiedener Faktoren gewährleistet: Das von uns entwickelte XML-Schema ist soweit möglich TEI-konform, es wurde für die inhaltliche Annotation der Daten um ein eigenes Schema erweitert. Der gesamte Korpus bzw. Subkorpora können im XML-Format im- und exportiert werden. Diese XML-Dateien werden in Kooperation mit Clarin-D Tübingen im Rahmen der universitären Infrastruktur langfristig gespeichert, katalogisiert und mit PIDs zugänglich gemacht. Teilkorpora können dabei ebenso exportiert werden wie das Gesamtkorpus. Bei Video-, Audio- und Bilddateien halten wir uns an die üblichen Standards für nachhaltige Datenformate (nicht-proprietäre Formate, Formate mit gutem Nachnutzungswert).
         Nach der allgemeinen Vorstellung der Datenbank wende ich mich im zweiten Teil des Vortrags der Frage zu, was die Datenbank im Hinblick auf konkrete Fragestellungen leistet. Die von mir in die Datenbank eingebrachten Ambiguitätsbelege entstammen zum größten Teil meiner Dissertation, die einen interdisziplinären Beitrag zur Ambiguitätsforschung leistet: Der linguistische Teil der Arbeit untersucht, wie idiomatischen Ausdrücken das Potential zur Ambiguität inhärent sein kann. An der Schnittstelle zur Literaturwissenschaft zeigt die Arbeit, wann und wie idiomatische Ausdrücke in Interaktion mit unterschiedlichen Kotexten ihr Ambiguitätspotential entfalten. Am Beispiel von kinderliterarischen Texten wird schließlich dargestellt, wie die aus dieser Interaktion resultierende Bewusstmachung von Ambiguität als sprachspielerisches Potential für literarische Texte produktiv gemacht werden kann. (a)-(c) stellen typische Beispiele aus meinem Korpus dar, die jeweils annotierten Stellen sind fett markiert:
         (a)
         
            One day he went to King Big-Twytt, who was eating a bathtub of roast chicken, custard and chips, and said: 'King - I want a licence to catch ye dragons.'
            
         'What?' said King Twytt. 'But ye dragons are dangerous! They eat ye farm animals.'
         'So do we,' said Sir Nobonk, 'and no one says we're dangerous.'
         'Yea, very well,' said King Twytt, 'I will give you a licence, but 
                be it on your own head.'
            
         So Sir Nobonk strapped the licence to his head.
         Sir Nobonk had been in many wars. Usually […]
         (Spike Milligan: 
                Sir Nobonk and the terrible, awful, dreadful, naughty, nasty Dragon, 1982)
            
         
            
            (b)
            
         
            Draw the drapes
             when the sun comes in.
            
         read Amelia Bedelia. She looked up. The sun was coming in. Amelia Bedelia looked at the list again. "Draw the drapes? That's what it says. I'm not much of a hand at drawing, but I'll try."
         So Amelia Bedelia sat right down and she drew those drapes.
         (Peggy Parish: 
                Amelia Bedelia,1963.)
            
         (c)
         Tom ging auf den frierenden König zu. „Ich bin gekommen, um mein Versprechen einzulösen“, sagte er und warf die Satteltasche auf den Tisch.
         König Knöterich schaute ungläubig auf die Tasche. „Hast du mir etwa ein Paar warme Handschuhe mitgebracht?“
         „Nein, Herr König“, antwortete Tom. „Etwas viel Kostbareres. Ich habe für Euch den goldenen Dings, äh, Kelch erobert.“
         „Aahhh! Oohhh!“, hallte es durch den Saal.
         „Ihr wollt wohl den König 
                auf den Arm nehmen“, sagte Friedrich von Edelstein.
            
         „Ich fürchte, mit den vielen Umhängen und Mützen ist mir der König zu schwer“, grinste Tom.
         (Bernd Schreiber: Ritter Tollkühn und der goldene Dings, 2010.)
         Die Annotation meiner Beispiele mit TInCAP ermöglicht die Sichtbarmachung von Aspekten, die bei der reinen linguistischen oder literaturwissenschaftlichen Analyse möglicherweise verborgen bleiben. Besonderes Gewicht kommt dabei der Möglichkeit zu, Ambiguitäten auf mehreren Kommunikationsebenen zu annotieren und die resultierenden Annotationen zu verknüpfen. Dies möchte ich anhand von Beispielen wie (a)-(c) illustrieren und mich dabei auf folgende Phänomene konzentrieren:
         
            
               strategische vs. nicht-strategische Produktion/Rezeption: In den untersuchten kinderliterarischen Texten erfolgt meist die Produktion auf der innersten Ebene (Ebene der Figuren) nicht strategisch, auf der äußersten Ebene (Ebene des Autors) jedoch strategisch. 
                
            
               Typ der Ambiguitätsverwendung: Sehr häufig wird in den untersuchten kinderliterarischen Texten die Ambiguität auf der innersten Ebene nicht erkannt, auf der äußersten Ebene muss jedoch eine semantische Reanalyse erfolgen, wodurch die Ambiguität sichtbar gemacht wird.
                
            
               Erste Lesart (phrasal vs. kompositional): Die erste (und damit oftmals einzige) Lesart auf der innersten Ebene ist sehr häufig die kompositionale. Auf der äußersten Ebene ist es jedoch die phrasale Lesart, die primär verarbeitet wird, woraus die Notwendigkeit der semantischen Reanalyse resultiert.
                
         
         Diese Phänomene, die erst durch die Annotation mit TInCAP und durch entsprechende Suchabfragen sichtbar werden, zeigen das Potential, das diese Datenbank innerhalb eines Projekts entfaltet. In einem abschließenden Ausblick möchte ich darüber hinaus auf den interdisziplinären Nutzen der Datenbank verweisen, der im Rahmen des GRK 1808 bereits zum Tragen kommt, insbesondere in der Vergleichbarkeit, die über Medien hinweg geschaffen wird.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Hartmann, Jutta / Sauter, Corinna / Schole, Gesa / Wagner, Wiltrud / Gietz, Peter / Winkler, Susanne (2016): 
                        TInCAP – ein interdisziplinäres Korpus zu Ambiguitätsphänomenen. Posterpräsentation,
                        in:
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung.
                    
               
                  Hartmann, Jutta / Ebert, Lisa / Schole, Gesa / Wagner, Wiltrud / Winkler, Susanne (eingereicht): 
                        „Annotating Ambiguity Across Disciplines: The Tübingen Interdisciplinary Corpus of Ambiguity Phenomena“, 
                        in: Bauer, Matthias / Zirker, Angelika (eds.): 
                        Strategies of Ambiguity.
                    
               
                  Hartmann, Jutta / Ebert, Lisa / Schole, Gesa / Wagner, Wiltrud / Winkler, Susanne (in Vorbereitung): 
                        TInCAP User Manual.
                    
               
                  Klein, Wolfgang / Winkler, Susanne (eds.) (2010): 
                        Ambiguität. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 40 (158). 
                        Stuttgart: Metzler.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.): 
                        Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. [6.4.2015]. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/P5/.
                    
               
                  Wagner, Wiltrud (in Vorbereitung): 
                        Idioms and Ambiguity in Context: Compositional and Phrasal Readings of Idiomatic Expressions. 
                        Dissertation. Tübingen.
                    
               
                  Winkler, Susanne (eds.) (2015): 
                        Ambiguity: Language and Communication. 
                        Berlin: de Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Winter-Froemel, Esme / Zirker, Angelika (2010): 
                        „Ambiguität in der Sprecher-Hörer-Interaktion. Linguistische und literaturwissenschaftliche Perspektiven“, 
                        in: Klein, Wolfgang / Winkler, Susanne (eds.): 
                        Ambiguität. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 40 (158). 
                        Stuttgart: Metzler 76–97.
                    
               
                  Winter-Froemel, Esme / Zirker, Angelika (2015): 
                        „Ambiguity in Speaker-Hearer-Interaction: A Parameter-Based Model of Analysis“, 
                        in: Winkler, Susanne (eds.): 
                        Ambiguity: Language and communication. 
                        Berlin: de Gruyter 283–339.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ausgangslage
            Die 
                    Historisch-kritische Gesamtausgabe der Werke und Briefe von Jeremias Gotthelf (
                    HKG), begründet von Prof. Dr. Barbara Mahlmann-Bauer und PD Dr. Christian von Zimmermann im Jahr 2003, ist auf 67 Text- und Kommentarbände angelegt und damit eines der grösseren Editionsvorhaben im deutschsprachigen Raum.
                    1
            
            Nach der Publikation der ersten Bände (2012) wurden die Arbeitsprozesse evaluiert, um die Edition adäquat auf digitale Arbeitsverfahren und Publikationsformen ausrichten zu können. Texte und Kommentare sollten nun 
                    TEI-konform erfasst werden, zumal sich inzwischen die erweiterten 
                    TEI-Guidelines als internationaler editionsphilologischer Standard durchsetzen konnten. Die Umstellung sollte aber umfassender sämtliche editorischen Arbeiten von der Transkription und textgenetischen Analyse über die Dokument- und Datenverwaltung, die Registeranbindung oder Kontrollroutinen bis hin zur Publikation in Print und Web berücksichtigen. Ein wichtiges Anliegen war es, aus einem Datensatz mehrere Ausgabenformate erzeugen zu können (d.h.: unterschiedliche Printformate und digitale Präsentationsformen). Schliesslich sollten die ‘endgültigen’ Daten, die bisher allein in der historisch-kritischen Buchedition gedruckt vorlagen, in einem einheitlichen Datenformat in der 
                    Forschungsstelle zentral verfügbar, gesichert und anderweitig verwertbar sein. (Zuvor lagerten die durch Fahnenkorrekturen aktualisierten und in unterschiedlichen Satzprogrammen codierten Satzdaten bei mehreren beauftragten Satzbüros.)
                
            Diese unterschiedlichen Aspekte machen das Umstellungsprojekt aussergewöhnlich komplex; einige der Etappenziele sind bereits erreicht worden. Unser Beitrag handelt von den Erfahrungen der vergangenen vier Jahre und gibt Aufschluss über Chancen und Schwierigkeiten des Umstiegs eines editorischen Grossprojekts auf ein exaktes, weitestgehend inhaltsorientiertes Markup und auf computerphilologische Arbeitsweisen. Von besonderem Interesse ist für uns die Vermittlung zwischen übergreifenden editorischen und digitalen Standards einerseits und individuellen Projektbedürfnissen andererseits. In unserem Vortrag möchten wir zudem den Einfluss institutioneller Rahmenbedingungen (
                    DaSCH/DDZ, SAGW, 
                    SNF, metagrid
               2) auf die Durchführung computerphilologischer Reformen thematisieren.
                
         
         
            Kooperation mit der BBAW und Pagina
            Der Weg zu einer Arbeitslösung für die Edition erfolgt nicht durch eine eigene Programmentwicklung, deren Kosten auch bei einem nationalen Zusammenschluss mehrerer Projekte so nicht tragbar wären. Mittlerweile haben sich unterschiedliche modulare Lösungen etabliert (etwa auch 
                    textgrid etc.). Nach längerer Prüfung entschied sich die Projektgruppe dazu, die Arbeitsumgebung 
                    Ediarum der 
                    BBAW für das eigene Projekt weiterzuentwickeln, zumal 
                    Ediarum bereits für die 
                    Schleiermacher-Edition als digitale Arbeitsumgebung angewendet und auch für andere Projekte angepasst worden war. 
                    Ediarum basiert auf einer 
                    eXist-Datenbank, nutzt den 
                    Oxygen Author und umfasst Module für den Satzprozess sowie die digitale Datenpräsentation (Dumont/Fechner 2012; Arbeitsgruppe Telota o.J.).
                
            Inzwischen sind erste Module unserer Arbeitsumgebung, die Schemata für Handschriften und Drucktexte nebst entsprechenden Anpassungen im 
                    Oxygen Author abgeschlossen. Für die Satzvorbereitung besteht eine Kooperation mit der Firma 
                    Pagina, welche das Satzmodul mit 
                    Tustep für die Druckvorstufe programmiert und in ersten Versionen für Drucktexte und Manuskripte bereits erfolgreich zur Verfügung gestellt hat (drucknaher Satzpreview für den Editionstext und Apparat).
                
         
         
            Schema und Ausgabeformate
            Die Entwicklung (insbesondere des Handschriftenschemas) war vor allem deshalb anspruchsvoll, da die Codierung nicht nur die Einrichtung der historisch-kritischen Ausgabe nach der bisherigen Gestalt sicherstellen musste, sondern auch davon abweichende gedruckte und digitale Präsentationsformen ermöglichen sollte. Dabei sollten etwa an die Stelle der Apparate der Drucktexte in der Webedition medienspezifische Annotationsformen treten können.
            Die kritische Edition stellt einen Editionstext bereit und verzeichnet sämtliche textgenetischen Prozesse in der Handschrift, Emendationen bei Drucktexten und allfällige Varianten zwischen Drucktexten und Handschriften am Seitenende in unterschiedlichen Apparaten (textgenetischer Apparat, Emendationsapparat, Variantenapparat, Textstufenapparat; häufig Kombinationen). 
            Um die Apparate der kritischen Edition in der Printausgabe zu erzeugen, hätte ein Freitextelement wie 
                     völlig ausgereicht. Doch hätte eine solche Lösung, welche die analytischen Stärken der Codierung für die editionsphilologische Arbeit nicht nutzt, den Aufwand für einen Umstieg auf 
                    XML/TEI nicht gerechtfertigt. Gerade die Möglichkeit zur präzisen Erfassung textgenetischer Prozesse einerseits und andererseits der Anspruch, einen Datensatz für unterschiedliche Ausgabeformate zu nutzen, legte den Umstieg nahe. 
                
         
         
            Digitale Präsentation und Korrespondenzedition
            Die digitale Präsentation soll im Wesentlichen im Rahmen der Edition von Gotthelfs Korrespondenzen entwickelt werden (Zihlmann-Märki 2017). Dabei sind drei Ansichten für unterschiedliche Nutzungsszenarien vorgesehen. Neben der historisch-kritischen Ansicht, welche die 
                    Tustep-Routine einbindet, und einer diplomatischen Ansicht stellt eine Inhaltsansicht den finalen Text samt ausgezeichneten Entitäten und Stellenkommentaren bereit. Die Codierung wird die Vorschläge der 
                    TEI Special Interest Group Correspondence berücksichtigen, und die Verwendung standardisierter Daten ist Voraussetzung für eine Integration in externe Suchumgebungen wie 
                    CorrespSearch.
                    3 Ebenso können Informationen aus anderen digitalen Ressourcen dank dem Einsatz von Normdateien und dem BEACON-Format in der digitalen Umgebung angezeigt werden (Stadler 2012; Stadler 2014). 
                
         
         
            Vorzüge und Schwierigkeiten der Reform
            Überblickt man die bisherige Reform, haben sich folgende Vorteile für die Arbeitsprozesse ergeben:
            
               Durch neue Arbeitsabläufe der Texterfassung (angepasste Scann- und OCR-Verfahren bei Drucktexten) konnte eine nicht unerhebliche Zeitersparnis erzielt werden. 
               Unterschiedliche Previewansichten des Editionstextes erlauben die Hervorhebung spezifischer Besonderheiten, die für einzelne Korrekturschritte notwendig sind (etwa Hervorhebung des Zeilenfalles oder Hervorhebung von Stellen, die differenzierter codiert sind, als dies für die Druckedition im Apparat ausgegeben wird etc.). 
               Die Dokumentation der Codierungsrichtlinien ermöglichte es, unterschiedliche Aspekte zu verknüpfen: 1) editorische Prinzipien konnten verbessert und verbindlicher gestaltet werden, 2) Probleme im Übergang von Transkription und Apparatgestaltung entfallen durch die Verbindung beider Prozesse, 3) die Verbindung von Codeerläuterung, Transkriptionsbeispiel und Präsentationsbeispiel hat der Satzfirma die Programmierung der Satzroutinen erleichtert.
               Die Satzfirma 
                        Pagina investiert vor allem in die Konzeption von Satzroutinen und kommt dann nur noch für den Feinsatz der Buchausgabe zum Einsatz. Dank Roundtripping können die Satzinformationen (Seiten- und Zeilenzahlen) in die originalen 
                        XML-Daten zurückgespielt werden; so verfügt die 
                        Forschungsstelle über aktuelle Daten, die alle Informationen zur Druckausgabe enthalten und leicht auch für andere Präsentationsformen oder – in weiteren Reformetappen – für digitale Querverweise und Kommentarverankerungen genutzt werden können.
                    
            
            Zugleich erwies sich der Reformprozess als überaus anspruchsvoll sowie als zeit- und kostenintensiv. 
            
               Als Illusion erweist sich die Vorstellung, es sei möglich, eine Codierung unabhängig von späteren Ausgabeformaten zu entwickeln. Editionen, welche die Daten tatsächlich für mehrere Formate bereit halten wollen und nicht nur auf eine spezifische Ausgabe zielen, stehen hier vor bedeutenden Problemen, da sie die Dateninterpretation durch Webapplikationen ebenso berücksichtigen müssen wie die Eigenheiten von Satzroutinen oder den Wunsch nach einer mediumsspezifischen Apparatgestaltung. Dies gilt umso mehr für Projekte, welche die Umstellung im laufenden Arbeitsprozess bei bereits etablierten Editionsrichtlinien durchführen.
               Innerhalb der modularen Arbeitsumgebung konnte aufgrund der projektspezifischen Bedürfnisse letztlich kein einziges Modul unverändert übernommen werden. Da die Module jeweils spezifischen Projektinteressen der an der Modulentwicklung beteiligten Projektpartner folgen (müssen), sind sie – auch nach Erfahrung von 
                        Telota – in keinem Fall ohne Anpassung nutzbar. Andere Module (Druckvorstufe) konnten dagegen problemlos ausgetauscht werden, und dies wäre wohl eine Grundanforderung überhaupt an modulare Editionsumgebungen.
                    
               Die graphische Oberfläche in 
                        Ediarum können wir für unsere Edition nicht nutzen, weil in ihr komplexe Textphänomene und sich überlagernde Korrekturen nicht übersichtlich darstellbar sind. Allerdings hat sich auch gezeigt, dass die Arbeit in der Code-Ansicht für die meisten Mitarbeitenden unproblematisch ist. Für einzelne Arbeitsschritte wie die Lemmatisierung wäre die Arbeit in der graphischen Oberfläche möglich.
                    
            
            Allein von der Kostenseite aus betrachtet, lohnt sich bei begonnenen Buchausgaben die Umstellung auf eine differenzierte Codierungspraxis nur bei einem bedeutenden Projektvolumen. Erst dann stehen die Entwicklungs- und Anpassungskosten einer digitalen Arbeitsweise in einem Verhältnis zur Einsparung von Satzkosten. Das gilt auch dann, wenn auf eine Buchedition gänzlich verzichtet wird.
         
         
            Standardisierung und heterogene Editionslandschaft
            Freilich wäre es zwecks Ressourcenschonung wünschenswert, dass andere Projekte von Schemata, von Satzroutinen, von der Arbeitsumgebung und der digitalen Präsentation profitieren könnten, die in unserem oder einem anderen Projekt entwickelt wurden. Tatsächlich sehen wir ein gewisses Potential im Erfahrungsaustausch. Dass eigentliche Übernahmen von Projektstrukturen hingegen schwierig sind, liegt weniger an den Codierungsstandards als an heterogenen Editionstypen und -prinzipien. Verbindliche Prinzipien der Textwiedergabe und Apparatierung könnten die Digitalisierungsprozesse wie auch die langfristige Sicherung vereinfachen (
                    ein Prozedere, 
                    ein Umwandlungsschema für alle Daten) und möglicherweise kostensenkend wirken. Die Diversität von Editionen entspringt aber nicht zufälligen Entwicklungen, sondern ist tief in heterogenen Forschungstraditionen verankert, und die Entscheidung für einen Editionstyp geht in der Regel mit einer intensiven Auseinandersetzung mit dem Editionsgegenstand einher. So rechtfertigt die Berner Parzival-Edition ihr Projekt nicht zuletzt durch Annahmen über den mittelalterlichen Textbegriff (Stolz 2002), und die Berner Gotthelf-Edition hebt auf den politisch-publizistischen wie diskursiven Charakter der Texte ab, der nur durch eine umfassende Kommentierung adäquat dargestellt werden kann (von Zimmermann 2014).
                
            Auch die 
                    TEI trägt der Diversität prinzipiell Rechnung, stellt sie doch einen Pool möglicher Codes zur Verfügung, aus denen die Einzelprojekte ihre eigenen Schemata erarbeiten müssen. Ein über das Bekenntnis zu 
                    TEI/XML (oder einer anderen Auszeichnungssprache) hinausgehender, projektübergreifender Standard, der die textphilologische Kernarbeit (Transkription und Apparatierung) betrifft, kann deshalb vermutlich eher nicht entwickelt werden. 
                
         
      
      
         
             Allgemeine Projektinformationen: 
                            http://www.gotthelf.unibe.ch
            
            
               http://www.metagrid.ch
            
            
               http://correspsearch.net/index.xql
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Dumont, Stefan / Fechner, Martin (2012): 
                        Digitale Arbeitsumgebung für das Editionsvorhaben „Schleiermacher in Berlin 1808–1834“.
                        http://digiversity.net/2012/digitale-arbeitsumgebung-fur-das-editionsvorhaben-schleiermacher-in-berlin-1808-1834 [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016]. 
                    
               [
                        Arbeitsgruppe Telota]: 
                        Ediarum – Digitale Arbeitsumgebung für Editionsvorhaben.
                        http://www.bbaw.de/telota/software/ediarum [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Schweizerische Akademie der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften (2015): 
                        Final report for the pilot project „Data and Service Center for the Humanities“ (DaSCH). Swiss Academies Reports 10 (1).
                    
               
                  Stadler, Peter (2012): 
                        „Normdateien in der Edition“,
                        in: 
                        editio 26: 174–183.
                    
               
                  Stadler, Peter (2014): 
                        „Interoperabilität von digitalen Briefeditionen“,
                        in: Delf von Wolzogen, Hanna / Falk, Rainer (Hg.): 
                        Fontanes Briefe editiert. Internationale wissenschaftliche Tagung des Theodor-Fontane-Archivs Potsdam, 18. bis 20. September 2013 (= Fontaneana 12). 
                        Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann 278–287.
                    
               
                  Stolz, Michael (2002): 
                        „Wolframs ‚Parzival‘ als unfester Text. Möglichkeiten einer überlieferungsgeschichtlichen Edition im Spannungsfeld traditioneller Textkritik und elektronischer Darstellung“,
                        in: Haubrichs, Wolfgang / Lutz, Eckart C. / Ridder, Klaus (Hg.): 
                        Wolfram von Eschenbach – Bilanzen und Perspektiven.Eichstätter Colloquium 2000 (= Wolfram-Studien 17). 
                        Berlin: Schmidt 294–321.
                    
               
                  Zihlmann-Märki, Patricia (2017): 
                        „Kommentierung in gedruckten und digitalen Briefausgaben“, 
                        in: Lukas, Wolfgang / Richter, Elke (Hg.): 
                        Kommentieren und Erläutern im digitalen Kontext (= Beihefte zu editio) [erscheint 2017].
                    
               
                  von Zimmermann, Christian (2014): „Geschichte, Ziele und Perspektiven der Historisch-kritischen Gesamtausgabe der Werke und Briefe von Jeremias Gotthelf (HKG)“, in: Marianne Derron / Christian von Zimmermann (Hg.): 
                        Jeremias Gotthelf. Neue Studien. 
                        Hildesheim / Zürich / New York: Olms 13–37.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In Diskussionen über digitale Nachhaltigkeit sind rechtliche Fragen von zunehmender Bedeutung. Häufig entscheiden die rechtlichen Rahmenbedingungen, ob, wie und wie lange Daten und Programme, die im Rahmen von digitalen geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschungsprojekten entwickelt werden, verfügbar sind. Gerade im digitalen Raum, der nationale Grenzen überschreitet, ergibt sich - auch aufgrund der territorialen Beschränkung des jeweiligen Urheberrechts - die Notwendigkeit neuer rechtlicher Regelungen, die einerseits das Urheberrecht des Forschenden schützen, andererseits die Wiederverwendbarkeit ihrer Arbeiten sicherstellen sollen. Offene Lizenzierungsmodelle bieten hier Lösungen, die internationale Forschung an lokal erzeugten Daten und mit individuell entwickelten Softwares ermöglichen.
            In den Geisteswissenschaften, in denen die Publikation von und die Arbeit mit “Rohdaten” im Rahmen der digitalen Wende substantiell an Bedeutung gewonnen haben, beginnt die Forschungscommunity zunehmend, sich diesem Thema im Kontext von Open Access-Diskussionen zu widmen. Obwohl das Bewusstsein für die Notwendigkeit der Auseinandersetzung mit diesen rechtlichen Aspekten zunimmt, fehlt den Forschenden oft der Überblick über die unterschiedlichen Möglichkeiten der Lizenzierung ihrer Daten. Creative Commons-Lizenzen sind weltweit das etablierteste Modell. Während sie in vielen Fällen eine gute Lösung sind, kommen sie häufig auch nur deshalb zum Einsatz, weil den Forschenden Informationen über andere Lizenzierungsmodelle fehlen. Auch wenn Creative Commons-Lizenzen angemessen sind, herrscht in vielen Fällen oft Unklarheit und Unsicherheit über die Wahl der konkret geeigneten Lizenz. Noch komplexer ist die Landschaft an verfügbaren Software-Lizenzen.
            Dieser Workshop möchte zur Information und Aufklärung der Community beitragen, indem zuerst ein allgemeiner Überblick über die unterschiedlichen nationalen rechtlichen Rahmenbedingungen und über verfügbare Daten- und Software-Lizenzen gegeben wird, bevor im zweiten Teil lizenzierte Beispielprojekte vorgestellt werden. Eingegangen wird auch auf die unterschiedlichen Materialtypen (z.B. Manuskript-, Photodigitalisate) und den umgang mit “verwaisten Werken”.  Erwartet wird ein Publikum, das sich einen Überblick über die Lizenz-Möglichkeiten, die sich für einzelne Projekte bieten, verschaffen und die passende Lizenz für das jeweils eigene Projekt finden möchte. Dazu dient der dritte Abschnitt des Workshops, der in der Art einer offenen Sitzung gestaltet ist, in der nach einer Einführung zu Lizenzierungstools Projekte aus dem Publikum diskutiert werden. Die Beitragenden sind Expert/innen für Lizenzierungs- und Rechtsfragen und wünschen sich den Austausch mit Forschenden, die sich ebenfalls mit diesen Themen beschäftigen.
         
         
            Daten-Lizenzen
            
               Creative Commons (CC)
               Creative Commons (CC) ist eine Non-Profit-Organisation, die eine Auswahl an Standard-Lizenzverträgen zur öffentlichen Nutzung von Werken für juristische Laien entwickelt hat. Der Ausgangspunkt dafür war, dass “[t]he idea of universal access to research, education, and culture is made possible by the Internet, but our legal and social systems don’t always allow that idea to be realized.” (
                        
                     https://creativecommons.org/about/
                  ) CC-Lizenzen sind standardisierte Lizenzen, die durch die Creative-Commons-Stiftung entwickelt und ausformuliert wurden und Rechteinhabenden zur freien Verwendung zur Verfügung stehen. Sie sind vorrangig für den Einsatz bei digitalen Werken und der Verbreitung im Internet geschaffen worden, lizenzieren aber gleichzeitig auch die Verwendung im nicht-digitalen Bereich (Druckwerke); sie umfassen alle (wesentlichen) urheberrechtlichen und leistungsschutzrechtlichen Aspekte.
                    
               CC-Lizenzen der Versionen 1.0 bis 3.0 wurden vielfach mit nationalen Recht akkordiert (d.h. “portiert”) und so in spezifischen nationalen Varianten zur Verfügung gestellt. Ab Einführung der aktuellen Version 4.0 erfolgten keine spezifischen nationalen Adaptierungen mehr, um eine einheitliche, international gültige Lizenzierung und Rechtssicherheit zu gewährleisten. In jedem Fall sind aber - wie bei allen Einzel- und Massenlizenzen - die jeweils geltenden nationalen urheberrechtlichen bzw. internationalen Regelungen vorrangig und deshalb zu beachten.
               Alle nach geltendem Recht urheberrechtlich schutzwürdigen Werke können durch die Rechteinhabenden zu jeder Zeit mit Creative Commons (neu) lizenziert werden. Eine einmal erteilte CC-Lizenz kann grundsätzlich nicht widerrufen und damit erteilte Nutzungsrechte können grundsätzlich nicht eingeschränkt werden, jedoch kann die Lizenz in eine weniger einschränkende Lizenz umgewandelt werden. Davon sollte jedoch nur in einzelnen Ausnahmefällen Gebrauch gemacht werden.
               CC-Lizenzen bestehen aus mehreren Modulen, wobei die Zusammensetzung nicht von den Lizenzgebenden gewählt werden kann, sondern vorgegeben ist.
               In den Digital Humanities hat es sich zum de-facto-Standard entwickelt, Projekte, Daten und Ergebnisse unter CC-Lizenzen zur Verfügung zu stellen, wobei die Unterschiede zwischen den verschiedenen Versionen, portierten und nicht portierten Fassungen und unterschiedlichen Lizenz-Inhalten oft zu Unklarheiten führen. In diesem Workshop werden daher die Grundlagen des CC-Modells erklärt und zahlreiche weitergehende Aspekte erläutert.
            
            
               Digital Peer Publishing (DiPP/DPPL)
               Das Hochschulbibliothekszentrum des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen (hbz) stellt zur Erleichterung der Publikation von Open Access-Journals das System Digital Peer Publishing (DiPP) zur Verfügung, in dessen Rahmen auch die Digital Peer Publishing Lizenzen (DPPL) entwickelt wurden. Aktuell ist die Version 3.0. Die Grundlage dieser Lizenzen bildet das deutsche Recht, was - anders als CC - im internationalen Bereich häufiger zu Problemen führen kann. Um den Teilnehmenden eine breitere Perspektive zu ermöglichen, werden als eine mögliche Alternative zu Creative Commons die DPP-Lizenzen  vorgestellt.
            
         
         
            Software-Lizenzen
            Es ist zu beachten, dass die oben beschriebenen Datenlizenzen nicht zur Lizenzierung von Software geeignet sind, da sie diverse Software-spezifische Aspekte nicht berücksichtigen. Es müssen für diesen Zweck daher spezifische Software-Lizenzen verwendet werden, die in einem weiteren Teil des Workshops vorgestellt werden.
            
               Freie Lizenzen haben im Bereich der Software bereits eine längere Tradition, als dies bei Daten und anderen Inhalten der Fall ist: Die ersten öffentlichen Software-Lizenzen gab es in den 1980er Jahren. Heute ist eine Fülle an freien Softwarelizenzen in Gebrauch. Nach gegenwärtigen Standards gilt eine Lizenz dann als Open Source, wenn sie den von der Open Source Initiative entwickelten Kriterien entspricht (
               
                  https://opensource.org/osd-annotated
               
               ). Die Wichtigsten davon sind: Die Möglichkeiten des Zugangs, der Verbreitung und der Adaptierung von Quellcode.
            
            Des Weiteren können Open Source Lizenzen in drei Kategorien eingeteilt werden:
            
               
                  Freizügig (
                  permissive
                  ): erlaubt breite Verwendung der lizenzierten Software (z.B. BSD, MIT oder Apache Lizenzen)
               
               Starkes Copyleft: “virale” Lizenzen, die den Benutzenden auferlegt, modifizierten Code unter einer kompatiblen Copyleft-Lizenz zu veröffentlichen (GNU GPLs sind die wichtigsten Lizenzen dieser Gruppe)
               Schwaches Copyleft: Lizenzen, die die Benutzenden verpflichten, modifizierte Software unter einer kompatiblen Copyleft-Lizenz zu veröffentlichen, aber die Verbindung mit Bibliotheken erlauben, die andere Lizenzen verwenden (z.B. GNU LGPL)
            
            Aufgrund dieser breiten Auswahl an Möglichkeiten, von denen sich einige nur durch Formalitäten unterscheiden, variiert die Lizenzierungspraxis zwischen Communities und Projekten stark. Das ist insofern problematisch, als dadurch in großen, verteilten Projekten oft komplexe Kompatibilitätsprobleme entstehen. Es ist daher notwendig, gemeinsame “best practices” zu entwickeln, um die Bestrebungen innerhalb der Digital Humanities Community zu harmonisieren.
         
         
            Lizenzierungstools
            Um den Teilnehmenden im praktischen Teil des Workshops nicht nur konkrete Beratung für aktuelle Projekte anbieten zu können, sondern ihnen auch Unterstützung für die Entscheidung von Lizenzierungsfragen im Rahmen zukünftiger Projekte und Kontexte zur Verfügung zu stellen, werden ausgewählte Lizenzierungstools präsentiert und unmittelbar unter Anleitung der Beitragenden getestet. Zu den wesentlichsten Hilfsmitteln gehören:
            
               
                  Europeana Available Rights Statement 
                  
                  
                     http://pro.europeana.eu/share-your-data/rights-statement-guidelines
                  
                  >
               
               
                  CLARIN License Category Calculator 
                  
                  
                     https://www.clarin.eu/content/license-categories
                  
                  >
               
               
                  Licentia License Tool 
                  
                  
                     http://licentia.inria.fr/
                  
                  >
               
               
                  ELRA License Wizard 
                  
                  
                     http://wizard.elda.org/
                  >
                    
               Public License Selector 
                     https://ufal.github.io/public-license-selector/
                  >
                    
            
         
         
            Ablauf
            10.00 Uhr: Einleitung 
            10.15 Uhr: Vorstellung der Lizenzmodelle
            
               Lizenzen für geisteswissenschaftliche Inhalte (Joachim Losehand/Seyavash Amini)
               Free/Open Source Software Licensing (Paweł Kamocki)
               Diskussion
            
            11.45 Uhr: Pause
            13.00 Uhr: Beispielprojekte
            
               Lizenzierungsmodelle in CLARIN (Andreas Witt)
               Das Geisteswissenschaftliche Asset Management-System GAMS: Objekte, Digitalisate und Vervielfältigung (Walter Scholger)  
                         
               
               Internationale Werke: Lizenzierung des Abstractbands der TEI-Konferenz 2016 (Vanessa Hannesschläger)
               Diskussion
            
            14.30 Uhr: Pause
            15.00 Uhr: hands-on: select your license
            
               Einführung: Lizenzierungstools (Walter Scholger)
               Offene Diskussion & Beratungsrunde: Konkrete Beispiele aus dem Publikum
            
            17.00 Uhr: Ende
         
         
            Benötigte Infrastruktur, Teilnehmende
            Erwartet wird ein großes Publikum, da der Workshop konkrete Beratung für individuelle Projekte vorsieht. Um jedoch einen lebendigen Austausch garantieren zu können, möchten wir die Zahl der Teilnehmenden auf 40 Personen beschränken.
            Teilnehmende werden gebeten, ihre eigenen Laptops mitzubringen.
            Benötigt wird ein Raum für 40 Personen mit WLAN und einem Beamer; ein zusätzlicher Computer mit Bildschirm & installiertem Skype (für die Zuschaltung von Seyavash Amini) wäre wünschenswert.
            Eine Mittagspause von 11.45-13.00 Uhr und eine Kaffeepause von 14.30-15.00 Uhr ist geplant. Sollte für die Mittagspause keine Verpflegung verfügbar sein, werden die Teilnehmenden gebeten, sich selbst zu versorgen. Kaffee und Getränke in der Kaffeepause wären wünschenswert.
         
         
            Beitragende
            Vanessa Hannesschläger vanessa.hannesschlaeger@oeaw.ac.at>
                
            studierte Germanistik in Wien. Sie ist wissenschaftliche Mitarbeiterin des Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ACDH-ÖAW) und dort für Rechts- und Lizenzierungsfragen zuständig. Schon im Rahmen eines vorangegangenen Forschungsprojekts am Literaturarchiv der Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek beschäftigte sie sich mit praktischen Fragen des Urheberrechts. Mitarbeit in CLARIN (CLARIN PLUS) und DARIAH (WG Thesaurus Maintenance). Zu ihren Forschungsinteressen gehören digitales Edieren, Text- und Datenmodellierung, das Archiv im digitalen Kontext, Vermittlungsstrategien in den DH sowie digitale Infrastrukturen.
            Joachim Losehand joachim@losehand.at>
                
            ist Kulturhistoriker und studierte u.a. Klassische Archäologie, Alte Geschichte und Altertumswissenschaften in Tübingen, München und Wien. Zwischen 2003 und 2006 war er wissenschaftlicher Lektor und Redakteur, seit 2006 ist er Lehrbeauftragter und Lektor an Universitäten in Bremen, Oldenburg und Wien. 2009/10 war er Mitglied der Lenkungsgruppe im Aktionsbündnis „Urheberrecht für Bildung und Wissenschaft“, seit 2013 ist er Projektkoordinator und Referent für Urheberrecht u.a. im Verband Freier Radios Österreich (VFRÖ) sowie Projektleiter Science Commons bei creative commons Austria.
            Paweł Kamocki kamocki@ids-mannheim.de>
                
            verfügt sowohl im Bereich des Rechts als auch im Bereich der Sprachwissenschaften über breites Fachwissen; derzeit ist er wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter am Institut für Deutsche Sprache in Mannheim und Lehr- und Forschungsassistent an der Descartes Universität in Paris und promoviert zu den rechtlichen Fragestellungen der Open Science. Er ist Mitglied des CLARIN Legal Issues Committee und arbeitete als rechtlicher Berater in zahlreichen anderen Projekten und Arbeitsgruppen (z.B. EUDAT, RDA, OpenMinTeD). Neben Urheberrecht und Datenschutz gilt sein Interesse auch den Sprachwissenschaften (insb. rechtliche Fachsprache).
            Walter Scholger walter.scholger@uni-graz.at>
                
            studierte Geschichte und Angewandte Kulturwissenschaften in Graz und Maynooth und ist administrativer Leiter des Zentrums für Informationsmodellierung - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities an der Universität Graz. In Projekten, internationalen Workshops und universitärer Lehre widmet er sich rechtlichen Aspekten des digitalen Kulturerbes und Fragen offener digitaler Publikationsformen.
            Er ist Mitglied in facheinschlägigen Arbeitsgruppen der Digital Humanities Dachverbände und internationaler Projekte (ADHO, DHd, ICARUS, DARIAH) zu rechtlichen Aspekten, digitalen Publikationen und Lehre im Bereich der Digital Humanities.
            Andreas Witt witt@ids-mannheim.de>
                
            leitet den Programmbereich Forschungsinfrastrukturen am Institut für Deutsche Sprache in Mannheim und ist Honorarprofessor für Digital Humanities an der Universität Heidelberg. Seine Forschungsinteressen konzentrieren sich auf die Texttechnologie, die Digital Humanities, die Informationsmodellierung und Auszeichnungssprachen. Bei CLARIN-D ist er für die Arbeitsgruppe zu juristischen und ethischen Fragen beim Umgang mit digitalen Sprachressourcen verantwortlich.
            Seyavash Amini amini@ivocat.de>
                
            ist Rechtsberater der Universitätsbibliothek Wien, Teamleiter des Clusters E - “Legal and Ethical Issues” im Projekt 
                    e-Infrastructures Austria, Berater der Geschäftsleitung einer Gruppe von Medienunternehmen in Hannover sowie Lehrbeauftragter an den Universitäten Wien und Hannover. Er beschäftigt sich mit Fragen des Informations-, Immaterialgüter-, Medien- und Datenschutzrechts. Im Rahmen der jüngsten Novelle des österreichischen Urheberrechts hat der Gesetzgeber einen von Seyavash Amini mitgestalteten Formulierungsvorschlag aufgegriffen und umgesetzt. Er wird sich per Skype zum Workshop zuschalten.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Amini, Seyavash / Blechl, Guido / Losehand, Joachim (2015): 
                        FAQs zu Creative-Commons-Lizenzen unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Wissenschaft
                  https://phaidra.univie.ac.at/view/o:408042 [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Creative Commons.
                        https://creativecommons.org/ [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  DiPP - Digital Peer Publishing.
                        http://www.dipp.nrw.de/ [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Kamocki, Paweł / Ketzan, Erik (2014): 
                        Creative Commons and Language Resources: General Issues and What’s New in CC 4.0.
                        CLARIN Legal Issues Committee: White Paper Series
                        http://clarin-d.de/images/legal/CLIC_white_paper_1.pdf [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Kamocki, Paweł / Ketzan, Erik / Witt, Andreas (2016):
                        „Lizenzauswahlwerkzeuge für die digitalen Geisteswissenschaften“,
                        in:
                        DHd 2016: Modellierung - Vernetzung - Visualisierung 336–337 
                        http://dhd2016.de/boa.pdf [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Klimpel, Paul (2013): 
                        Free knowledge thanks to creative commons licenses: Why a non-commercial clause often won’t serve your needs.
                        Wikimedia Deutschland / iRights.info / CC DE.
                        https://www.wikimedia.de/w/images.homepage/1/15/CC-NC_Leitfaden_2013_engl.pdf [letzter Zugriff 25. August 2016].
                    
               
                  Klimpel, Paul / Weitzmann, John H. (2015): 
                        Forschen in der digitalen Welt. Juristische Handreichung für die Geisteswissenschaften.
                        DARIAH-DE Working papers 12
                        https://irights.info/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Forschen-in-der-digitalen-Welt-Juristische-Handreichung-Geisteswissenschaften-dwp-2015-12.pdf.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Die Aufbereitung und Erkennung von handschriftlichen Dokumenten ist sowohl für Menschen als auch für Computeralgorithmen eine technische Herausforderung. Die Bearbeitung von handschriftlichem Material wird bislang von spezialisierten Experten durchgeführt, um technisch und qualitativ hochstehende Resultate aus historischen Dokumenten zu erhalten. Zur Erstellung hochwertiger Editionen ist dafür hilfswissenschaftliches Wissen (Paläographie, Editorik), historisches Hintergrundwissen und technisches Know-how gefragt.
         Im Rahmen des Projekts READ (Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Data) werden unterschiedliche Aufgaben der Automatisierung (weiter-)entwickelt, um qualitativ gute Ergebnisse mit optimalem Ressourceneinsatz zu erhalten. Ein speziell dafür entwickeltes Tool ist die Software Transkribus, die die Arbeit von Experten und maschineller Erkennleistung verkoppelt. Die Software ist frei verfügbar unter www.transkribus.eu. Im Workshop wird Transkribus vorgestellt und kann durch die Teilnehmenden mit eigenen oder zur Verfügung gestellten Dokumenten getestet werden.
         Transkribus unterstützt alle Prozesse vom Import der Bilder über die Identifikation der Textblöcke und Zeilen, die zu einer detaillierten Verlinkung zwischen Text und Bild führt sowie die Transkription und Annotation der Handschrift bis zum Export der gewonnen Daten in standardisierten Formaten.
         Workflow in Transkribus
         Um Texte zu transkribieren oder zu edieren, müssen digitale Bilder hochgeladen und danach mit Layouterkennungswerkzeugen bearbeitet werden. Die Analyse des Layouts kann automatisiert geschehen, wobei die manuelle Kontrolle und falls nötig die Nachbearbeitung im Moment noch sinnvoll ist.
         Texte aus in Transkribus aufbereiteten Dokumenten können entweder mit bereits bestehenden HTR-Modellen (Handwritten Text Recognition) erkannt oder händisch erstellt werden und danach zum Training neuer Modelle genutzt werden. Insbesondere für die Bearbeitung grosser Dokumentenkorpora, die in ähnlichen Handschriften verfasst wurden, lassen sich bereits heute Effizienzgewinne und Vereinfachungen erzielen.
         Aufbauend auf den Transkriptionen ist es möglich eine Vielzahl von Auszeichnungen und Annotationen innerhalb des Textes, aber auch darüber hinaus für Einzeldokumente und ganze Dokumentenbestände anzulegen. Neben der Anreicherung der Dokumente mit der Identifikation von Personen, Orten und Sachwörtern ist somit auch die Möglichkeit der Herstellung von Bestandsbeschreibungen und der Hinterlegung von Transkriptions- und Editionsvorschriften gegeben.
         Ausgabeformate
         Für den Export stehen unterschiedliche Formate und Ausgabeformen zur Verfügung. So ist es möglich XML-Dateien zu exportieren, die den Vorgaben der TEI entsprechen. Ausgehend davon können komplexe digitale Editionen erstellt werden, die jedoch im Unterschied zu herkömmlichen Editionen eine enge Verzahnung mit den verwendeten Bilddateien aufweisen. Dadurch werden Editionen ermöglicht, die den transkribierten Text in der Zusammenschau mit der faksimilierten Vorlage sichtbar machen (analog zu state-of-the-art Editionen, wie beispielsweise die Edition der Briefe Alfred Eschers: https://www.briefedition.alfred-escher.ch/). Daneben sind auch Ausgaben als Druckdaten (PDF) oder zur Weiterbearbeitung für Textverarbeitungsprogramme (DOCX) implementiert. Schliesslich ist auch ein Export im PAGE-Format (zur Anzeige in Viewern für OCR gelesene Dokumente, Pletschacher, 2010) sowie als METS (Metadata Encoding and Transmission) möglich.
         Die Speicherung der Dokumente erfolgt in der Cloud (gehostet auf Servern der Universität Innsbruck). Die importierten Daten bleiben auch während der Bearbeitung unverändert im Dateisystem liegen und werden ergänzt durch METS und PAGE XML, letztere in eigenem Unterordner. Alle bearbeiteten Dokumente und Daten bleiben somit in den unterschiedlichen Bearbeitungsstadien nicht nur lokal verfügbar, sondern können für Projektmitarbeitende geteilt werden. Dank elaboriertem 
                user-management ist die Zuteilung von Rollen möglich. Die Erkennprozesse werden serverseitig durchgeführt, sodass die Ressourcen auf den lokalen Rechnern nicht strapaziert werden. Transkribus ist mit JAVA und SWT programmiert und kann daher plattformunabhängig (Windows, Mac, Linux) genutzt werden.
            
         Zielpublikum
         Die Plattform ist für unterschiedliche Gruppen konzipiert. Einerseits für GeisteswissenschaftlerInnen, die selbst Transkriptionen und Editionen historischer Dokumente erstellen möchten. Andererseits richtet sich die Plattform an Archive, Bibliotheken und andere Erinnerungsinstitutionen, die handschriftliche Dokumente in ihren Sammlungen aufbewahren und ein Interesse an der Aufbereitung des Materials haben. Angesprochen werden sollen auch Studierende der Geistes-, Archiv- und Bibliothekswissenschaften mit einem Interesse an der Transkription historischer Handschriften.
         Das Ziel, eine robuste und technisch hochstehende Automatisierung von Layout und Handschrift, lässt sich nur durch die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen Geisteswissenschaftlern und Computerspezialisten erreichen, die bezüglich Datenqualität und Herstellung von Transkriptionen von unterschiedlichen Voraussetzungen und Ansprüchen ausgehen. Die Algorithmen werden daher nicht nur bis zu einem Status als 
                proof-of-concept erarbeitet, sondern bis zur Praxistauglichkeit verfeinert und in grösseren Forschungs- und Aufbewahrungsumgebungen getestet und verbessert. Die Computerwissenschaftler sind entsprechend ebenfalls ein wichtiges Zielpublikum, wobei bei ihnen weniger die Nutzung der Plattform als das Beisteuern von Software(teilen) anvisiert wird. Die eingespeisten Dokumente und Daten bleiben privat und vor dem Zugriff Dritter geschützt. Von Projektseite können vorgenommene Arbeitsschritte zwecks besserem Verständnis der ausgeführten Arbeiten und letztlich der Verbesserung der Produkte ausgewertet werden.
            
         Layout- und Texterkennung
         Die zwei zentralen Automatisierungsprozesse basieren auf Algorithmen, die in laufenden Forschungsprojekten entwickelt und verbessert werden. Die 
                document image analysis (DIA) versucht Textblöcke zu identifizieren und von Dreck, Scanfehlern und anderen Störsignalen zu unterscheiden, wobei zwischen handschriftlichen und gedruckten Textblöcken differenziert wird (Zagoris 2012; Stamatopoulos 2015).
            
         In Transkribus werden auf der Layouterkennung aufbauend zwei 
                handwritten text recognition-Engines (HTR) angeboten, die auf unterschiedlichen technischen Grundlagen basieren: Erstens kann eine nach dem Hidden Markov Model (HMM) operierende HTR der Technischen Universität Valencia angewählt werden (Toselli 2015, Puigcerver 2015). Zweitens kann ein Model basierend auf rekurrierenden neuronalen Netzwerken der Universität Rostock genutzt werden (Leifert 2016).
            
         Transkribus und das gesamte Forschungsnetzwerk will die verfügbaren technischen Möglichkeiten den Endnutzern nach möglichst gängigen Workflows aufbereiten, so dass dem schnellen Praxiseinsatz keine Hindernisse im Weg stehen. Im Gegenzug wird die Nutzung im grossen Umfang erhofft, die den Subprojekten wichtige Trainingsdaten und Aufschlüsse bezüglich der Nutzung und den Problemen mit den Algorithmen sowie dem Graphical User Interface geben. Tests zum Einsatz der Technik in Archiven und Bibliotheken und unter unterschiedlichen Bedingungen werden momentan getestet und evaluiert.
         Als Businessmodel ist eine Überführung des Forschungsprojekts in eine Kooperative geplant, die den Stakeholdern möglichst niederschwellige und kostengünstige Angebote unterbreiten soll (Mühlberger, Preprint). Somit vereint das Projekt READ die unterschiedlichsten Ansprüche an Automatisierungs- und Erkennungsroutinen und orientiert sich dabei an gängigen Arbeitsformen im Kontext mit handschriftlichen Dokumenten (siehe auch die Projekthomepage: http://read.transkribus.eu).
         Aus- und Seitenblicke im Workshop
         Zwei unterschiedliche Forschungsaspekte aus READ werden im Rahmen des Workshops als Inputs demonstriert:
         Einerseits der Umgang mit einer speziellen Dokumentenform, Kirchenbüchern, in denen stark strukturierte Daten aus Pfarreien gesammelt wurden (Wurster, 2014 / 2015). Aufgrund der Strukturerkennung und der HTR wird es möglich, spezialisierte Suchroutinen zu produzieren. 
         Andererseits können aufgrund der erhobenen Daten und durch c
                omputer vision Profile der Schreibenden erstellt werden, die die Identifikation der Personen als Schreibende weiterer Dokumente naheliegend macht (Fiel, 2012). Beide Anwendungen versprechen für die Geisteswissenschaften neue Zugänge zu grossen Datenschätzen, die in den handschriftlichen Beständen gehoben werden können.
            
         Programm/Ablauf des Workshops
         
            Einführung in Transkribus (
                Tobias Hodel, Zürich): 30‘
                Aufbau und Funktionieren des Programms, Demonstration des Gebrauchs anhand von Beispielen. Aufzeigen der Möglichkeiten zum Einsatz der Automatisierungen.
            
         
            Strukturierte Daten in Kirchenbüchern (
                Eva-Maria Lang, Passau): 30‘
                Demonstration vom Umgang mit Kirchenbüchern, einer spezifischen und stark standardisierten Dokumentform, die mit Transkribus aufbereitet werden. Eine Suche in den Dokumenten wird über eigene Routinen und Abfragemöglichkeiten gewährleistet.
            
         
            Selbstständiges Arbeiten der Teilnehmenden mit Transkribus: 90‘
                Die Möglichkeiten und Grenzen von Transkribus sollen von den Teilnehmenden (wenn möglich mit eigenen Dokumenten) selbst ausgetestet werden. 
            
         
            Schreiberidentifizierung (
                Stefan Fiel, Wien): 30‘
                Ein über Transkribus hinausgehender Teil des Projekts beschäftigt sich mit 
                computer vision. Ziel ist die Identifizierung unterschiedlicher Personen als Schreibende. Stefan Fiel berichtet über den Stand der Forschung und wie Teilnehmende die Hände wichtiger Schreibender zur Verfügung stellen können.
            
         
            Diskussion über Vor- und Nachteile der Software: 45‘
                Inklusive Evaluation des Tools und der Veranstaltung. Feedbacks werden eingeholt, zur Verbesserung der Software (usability, Umfang und Leistung der Automatisierungen etc.).
            
         Das Projekt READ und somit die Weiterentwicklung von Transkribus werden finanziert durch einen Grant der Europäischen Union im Rahmen des Horizon 2020 Forschungs- und Innovationsprogramms (grant agreement No 674943).
         Kontaktdaten aller Beitragenden (inkl. Forschungsinteressen)
         Tobias Hodel, Staatsarchiv des Kantons Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 170, CH-8057 Zürich, Schweiz; 
                tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch (Digital Humanities; Handwritten Textrecognition; eArchiving; Information Retrieval).
            
         Eva-Maria Lang, Archiv des Bistums Passau, Luragogasse 4, DE-94032 Passau, 
                Eva.Lang@bistum-passau.de (Automatic Text Recognition, Digital Archives, Image Recognition and Information Retrieval, Software Architecture).
            
         Stefan Fiel, Technische Universität Wien, Faculty of Informatics
                Institute of Computer Aided Automation, Computer Vision Lab, Favoritenstr. 9/183-2, A-1040 Vienna, Austria; 
                fiel@caa.tuwien.ac.at (Bilderverarbeitung und Dokumentenanalyse).
            
         Zahl der möglichen Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer
         30-40 Personen (auch abhängig von der Raumgrösse)
         Benötigte technische Ausstattung:
                Allgemein: Beamer, evtl. Whiteboard.
                Teilnehmende: Eigener Rechner (wenn möglich Installation von Transkribus; Hilfe zur Installation von Transkribus wird 30 Minuten vor der Veranstaltung angeboten)
            
         Anmeldungen und Rückfragen bitte an tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Fiel, Stefan / Sablatnig, Robert (2012):
                        „Writer Retrieval and Writer Identification using Local Features“,
                        in: 
                        10th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems
                  http://www.ict.griffith.edu.au/das2012/attachments/FullPaperProceedings/4661a145.pdf.
                    
               
                  Leifert, Gundram / Strauß, Tobias / Grüning, Tobias / Labahn, Roger (2016):
                        Cells in Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks
                  https://arXiv.org/abs/1412.2620v02.
                    
               
                  Mühlberger, Günter / Colutto, Sebastian / Kahle, Philip (Preprint): 
                        Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) of Historical Documents as a Shared Task for Archivists, Computer Scientists and Humanities Scholars: The Model of a Transcription & Recognition Platform (TRP).
                    
               
                  Pletschacher, Stefan / Antonacopoulos, Apostolos (2010):
                        „The PAGE (page analysis and ground-truth elements) format framework“,
                        in: 
                        Proc. ICPR 257–260.
                    
               
                  Puigcerver, Joan / Toselli, Alejandro Héctor / Vidal, Enrique (2015):
                        „Probabilistic interpretation and improvements to the hmm-filler for handwritten keyword spotting“,
                        in: 
                        13th international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR).
                    
               
                  Stamatopoulos, Nikolaos / Gatos, Basilis (2015):
                        „Goal-oriented performance evaluation methodology for page segmentation techniques“,
                        in: 
                        13th international conference on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR) 281–285.
                    
               
                  Toselli, Alejandro Héctor / Vidal, Enrique (2015):
                        „Handwritten text recognition results on the Bentham collection with improved classical n-gram-HMM methods“,
                        in: 
                        International workshop on historical document imaging and processing (HIP). 
                    
               
                  Wurster, Herbert W. (2015):
                        „Schritt für Schritt ins Internet – Europas Matriken online“,
                        in: 
                        insights: Archives and people in the digital age 2: 16–17.
                    
               
                  Wurster, Herbert W. (2014): 
                        „Matrikeln - Ein kulturhistorischer Blick auf die Kirchenbücher“,
                        in: 
                        Zeitschrift für bayerische Kirchengeschichte 83: 87–93.
                    
               
                  Zagoris, Konstantinos / Pratikakis, Ioannis / Antonacopoulos, Apostolos / Gatos, Basilis / Papamarkos, Nikos (2012):
                        „Handwritten and Machine Printed Text Separation in Document Images Using the Bag of Visual Words Paradigm“,
                        in: 
                        Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), 2012 International Conference 103–108 10.1109/ICFHR.2012.207.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Motivation
            Aufgrund zahlreicher Sommer-Schulen, Workshops, DH-Studiengänge und vielfältiger online-Tutorials ist die Kodierung eines Textes in XML nach dem de-facto-Standard TEI ein oft anzutreffender Projektbestandteil. Was jedoch häufig fehlt sind einstiegsfreundliche Anleitungen, Tutorials, HowTos zu dem sich an die Kodierung anschließenden Themenkomplex der Publikation einer digitalen Edition. Die Frage nach dem »Wohin?« der oftmals in langer und mühsamer Arbeit erstellten Editionen betrifft vor allem jene Forschende, welche nicht Teil eines größer angelegten Projektes sind oder auch sonst über keine allzu starke Anbindung an eine gut institutionalisierte Forschungsinfrastruktur verfügen. Zwar entwickeln zunehmend mehr Institutionen, vielfach in Verbindung mit konkreten Projekten, Kompetenzen, Workflows und (technische) Infrastrukturen zur Veröffentlichung Digitaler Editionen, aufgrund chronisch knapper Finanzierung können oftmals aber nur wenige und in erster Linie nur eigene/interne Projekte hinreichend betreut werden. 
            Gleichzeitig kann in vielen Digitalen Editionsprojekten eine sehr starre Arbeitsteilung zwischen so genannten FachwissenschlafterInnen und TechnikerInnen beobachtet werden. Obwohl es sicherlich nicht als Nachteil bewertet werden kann, wenn jeder das tut, wofür er ausgebildet wurde und was sie bzw. er demzufolge auch gut kann, so besteht in einem stark arbeitsteiligen Umfeld die Gefahr asymmetrischer Kompetenzverhältnisse und daraus resultierender Abhängigkeiten. Sei es durch unrealistische Wünsche seitens der Fachwissenschaft, die aufgrund mangelnder technischer Kenntnisse an die Technik herangetragen werden. Oder sei es die Verzögerung des Arbeitsfortschritts aufgrund schleppender Implementierung basaler Technologien oder von editorischer Seite dringend benötigter Funktionalitäten. 
            Der hier vorgeschlagene Workshop versucht, beide Problembereiche aufzugreifen, indem gemeinsam mit den Teilnehmern, welche vorzugsweise ihre eigenen XML/TEI Daten mitbringen, eine auf der XML-Datenbank eXist basierte Web-Applikation zur Publikation eigener Editionen entwickelt wird. 
         
         
            Die Applikation
            Die Anforderungen für eine solche Applikation stehen in engem Zusammenhang mit der im Kontext dieses Workshops verwendeten Vorstellung über die Eigenschaften und über potentielle Verwendungszwecke einer Digitalen Edition. Zur Erläuterung: Unter dem Begriff »Digitale Edition« sollen ein kohärenter Text oder mehrere kohärente Texte verstanden werden, die mittels XML/TEI kodiert wurden und worin in der Regel verschiedene Entitäten wie z.B. Personen, Orte, Werke oder ähnliches erfasst, deren Form und Textgenese beschrieben und die um weiterführende Erläuterungen, Annotationen und Anmerkungen ergänzt wurden. Eine solche Digitale Edition wird vorwiegend im ›close reading‹ rezipiert mit dem Zweck, ein tieferes Verständnis über den Text, dessen Inhalt sowie dessen Kontext und Entstehung zu erhalten. Abgesehen von einer solchen eher traditionellen Auseinandersetzung mit einer Digitalen Edition verfügt diese aber auch über den Mehrwert, systematisch und vor allem maschinell gelesen werden zu können.
            Eine ›Digital Edition Web-App‹ sollte ganz generell die kodierten Texte in einer möglichst benutzerfreundlichen Art und Weise präsentieren und den »technischen Unterbau« dem Benutzer nicht aufbürden, wohl aber die computergestützte Weiterverarbeitung der Texte jederzeit ermöglichen. Konkreter formuliert heißt das, dass eine solche Anwendung folgende Anforderungen zu erfüllen hat.
            
               Einstiegsseite
               NutzerInnen sollen auf einer zentralen Einstiegsseite einen möglichst vollständigen Überblick über den kompletten Umfang der Edition erhalten. Dies ist insbesondere dann von großer Bedeutung, wenn die Edition aus mehreren Editionseinheiten besteht, wie zum Beispiel im Falle eines Briefwechsels. 
               In der im Zuge des Workshops zu entwickelnden Applikation wird das in Form einer ListView gelöst, welche sämtliche XML/TEI Dokumente bzw. ausgewählte Informationen aus dem teiHeader in einer von den NutzerInnen such-, filter- und sortierbaren Ansicht präsentiert. Von diesem Inhaltsverzeichnis gelangen die NutzerInnen dann über Verlinkung zu den einzelnen Dokumenten. 
            
            
               Responsive Design
               Da Digitale Editionen im www verfügbar sind, muss davon ausgegangen werden, dass diese generell in digitaler Form, sprich auf einem PC, Notebook, Tablet, eventuell auch auf einem Smartphone gelesen werden. Insofern gilt es, den kodierten Text in einer leserfreundlichen Darstellung anzuzeigen, die die verschiedenen Formate der Anzeigegeräte berücksichtigt (womit einige der Grundlagen des sog. ›responsive design‹ berücksichtigt werden müssen). Andererseits darf aber der Wunsch vieler Nutzer, die Inhalte »klassisch« auf Papier zu nutzen, nicht vergessen werden.
               Die digitale Darstellung im Web eröffnet indes auch die Möglichkeit für dynamische, sprich von den Nutzer/innen frei konfigurierbare, Darstellungsweisen. Abhängig vom konkreten Mark-Up können, um nur ein paar Beispiele zu nennen, etwa Anmerkungen ein- oder ausgeblendet, Abkürzungen aufgelöst, oder Korrekturschritte ausgeblendet werden. 
               In der ›Digital Edition Web-App‹ wird mittels XSLT Transformation aus den XML Dateien eine HTML Dokument ›on the fly‹ generiert. Diese ›DetailView‹ verfügt, sofern aufgrund des Markups des Ausgangsdokumentes möglich, über ein Navigationsmenü, welches eine rasche Orientierung im Text ermöglicht. Über ein weiteres Menü können außerdem verschiedene Darstellungsoptionen (de)aktiviert werden. 
            
            
               Suche
               Die Möglichkeit, eine digitale Edition in ihrer Gesamtheit im Volltext durchsuchen zu können, wird häufig als einer der größten Vorzüge einer digitalen Edition beschrieben. Zusätzlich zu einer so genannten »einfachen Suche« wird darüber hinaus auch gerne eine »erweiterte Suche« angeboten, welche eine spezifizierte Suche wie zum Beispiel nur in Anmerkungen oder über Metadaten ermöglicht. 
               Aufgrund der Integration der Volltext-Suchengine Lucene in die Datenbanksoftware eXist-db ist die Realisierung sowohl einer »einfachen« wie auch einer »erweiterten« Suche im Rahmen der ›Digital Edition Web-App‹ einfach zu bewerkstelligen, wobei die Spezifika der »erweiterten« Suche vom konkreten Markup der einzelnen Editionen abhängt.
               Einige grundlegende Überlegungen zum Erstellen einer Suche werden hierbei anhand konkreter Beispiele mit den Teilnehmern diskutiert und demonstriert werden.
            
            
               Register
               Neben einer Volltextsuche bieten viele digitale Editionen auch eine registerbasierte Suche an, mit deren Hilfe etwa gezielt Personen oder Orte in der Edition identifiziert werden können.
               Je nach Art der Daten wird ein solches Register auf verschiedene Weisen demonstriert werden.
            
            
               PDF-Erzeugung
               Als Nachteil einer digitalen Edition wird oft angesehen, dass ihr die Möglichkeit, einfache Anmerkungen – ähnlich einem eigenen Studienexemplar – anzubringen, fehlt. Aus diesem und anderen Gründen wird häufig die HTML-Seite ausgedruckt.
               Im Rahmen des Workshops werden hierzu zwei verschiedene Lösungswege kurz umrissen, ohne jedoch weiter ins Detail gehen zu können: Einerseits handelt es sich um ein für den Druck spezifisch erarbeitetes CSS-Stylesheet (»print-CSS«), andererseits die Generierung einer Datei für das Satzprogramm LaTeX.
            
            
               Schnittstellen
               Da die Texte in einer (einigermaßen) standardisierten Art und Weise kodiert sind, können diese auch maschinell prozessiert werden. Dafür ist es notwendig, dass nicht nur eine HTML Darstellung der Daten veröffentlicht wird, sondern auch die eigentlichen XML/TEI-Daten.
               Die ›Digital Edition Web-App‹ wird ihre Daten über die in der eXist-db integrierte ›REST-Style Web API‹ veröffentlichen.
            
         
         
            Ziel und Zielgruppe des Workshops
            Ziel des Workshops ist es, den TeilnehmerInnen einen ersten Einblick in weit verbreitete Workflows, Technologien und Terminologien sowie Konzepte zur Umsetzung der genannten Funktionalitäten zu vermitteln. Sie erhalten somit Grundlagen zur Weiterentwicklung oder auch Beurteilung anderer Plattformen und Tools.
            Die von den TeilnehmerInnen im Zuge des Workshops erarbeitete Web-App wird – auch aufgrund der Heterogenität der von den TeilnehmerInnen gestellten Daten – keine produktionsreife Applikation sein, die alle Aspekte einer digitalen Edition umsetzt. Allerdings bildet die im Workshop teilweise selbst geschriebene Software eine solide Basis für weiteres Selbststudium, woraus sich später für die einzelnen Teilnehmer oder Institutionen einfache, aber auf die spezifischen Bedürfnisse zugeschnittene Plattformen entwickeln können.
            Die TeilnehmerInnen des Workshops sollten über Erfahrung in der Kodierung in XML/TEI verfügen und im besten Fall an einem konkreten Projekt arbeiten und über XML/TEI Dateien verfügen, auf deren Grundlage sie im Workshop ihre eigene ›Digital Edition Web-App‹ entwickeln können.
         
         
            Ablauf und Teilnehmeranzahl
            Die TeilnehmerInnen erhalten vorab eine detaillierte Anleitung zur Installation der notwendige Software (eXist-db).
            Im eigentlichen Workshop werden die jeweiligen Arbeitsschritte von einem der Organisatoren live vorgeführt (dafür wird ein Beamer benötigt). Die konkreten Inhalte orientieren sich dabei an dem gleichnamigen Blog (Andorfer/Kampkaspar 2016), welcher von den Organisatoren im Rahmen der TEI-Konferenz 2016 offiziell präsentiert wurde.
            Während des Workshops werden wir bei auftretenden Fragen und Problemen den Teilnehmenden helfend zur Seite stehen. Um eine möglichst gute Betreuung der TeilnehmerInnen gewährleisten zu können, sollte die Teilnehmerzahl 25 nicht überschreiten.
         
         
            Organsiatoren
            Peter Andorfer
            hat im Zuge seiner Dissertation eine digitale Edition erstellt und war im Editionsprojekt »Die Korrespondenz von Leo von Thun-Hohenstein« für die technische Umsetzung des Projektes (Entwicklung der Web-Applikation) verantwortlich. Gemeinsam mit Dario Kampkaspar schreibt er außerdem für den Blog »HowTo build a digital edition web app«.
            Dario Kampkaspar 
            erstellt im Rahmen seines Dissertationsprojektes eine Edition einer frühneuzeitlichen Handschrift. An der HAB ist er im Rahmen zweier Projekte (Andreas Bodenstein von Karlstadt; Johannes Rist) intensiv mit Edition und Entwicklung beschäftigt. Gemeinsam mit Peter Andorfer schreibt er außerdem für den Blog »HowTo build a digital edition web app«. 
            Marcus Baumgarten 
            ist langjähriger Mitarbeiter an der HAB und betreut unterschiedliche Editionsprojekte. Zur Zeit arbeitet er in einem Kooperationsprojekt mit dem historischen Seminar der Universität Freiburg (die »Tagebücher des Fürsten Christian II. von Anhalt-Bernburg«) und gemeinsam mit dem Leibniz-Institut für europäische Geschichte in Mainz (»Digitale Edition europäischer Religionsfrieden zwischen 1500 - 1800«). 
            Gemeinsam mit Timo Steyer und Studierenden der TU Braunschweig betreibt er das Weblog www.digital-ist-besser.net
            Timo Steyer 
            ist aktuell in den Bereichen Metadaten und Datenmodellierung im Forschungsverbund Marbach Weimar Wolfenbüttel am Standort Wolfenbüttel tätig. In diesem Kontext beschäftigt er sich mit Fragen und Methoden zu den Themen der Interoperabilität von digitalen Editionen und der Retrodigitalisierung von bereits im Druck vorliegenden Editionen (z. B. »Controversia et Confessio« und »Die Briefe der Fruchtbringenden Gesellschaft«).
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andorfer, Peter / Kampkaspar, Dario (2016):
                        How to build a Digital Edition Web-App
                  http://www.digital-archiv.at/howto-build-a-digital-edition-web-app/.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Die Forschungstätigkeiten Georeferencing und Entity Linking sind wichtiger Bestandteil vieler DH-Projekte. Webservices/APIs und Tools versuchen diese Tätigkeiten zu vereinfachen und zu beschleunigen. Eines der bekannteren Tools, wenigstens im deutschsprachigen Raum ist dabei vermutlich der ‘DARIAH-DE Datasheet Editor’. Dieser zeichnet sich durch seine einfache Benutzung aus, sei es was den Datenimport (ausfüllen einer Tabelle oder Hochladen einer CSV-Tabelle) betrifft oder die anschließende Disambiguierung/Verifizierung der vom ‘Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names’ zurückgelieferten Treffer über ein Graphical User Interface. 
         Das Projekt TEIHencer greift diese Vorzüge des ‘DARIAH-DE Datasheet Editors’ auf und versucht diese einerseits mit der ‘TEI-Welt’ zu verknüpfen sowie mit GeoNames und der GND zwei alternative Normdaten Ressourcen einzubinden.
         Konkret handelt es sich bei TEIHencer um ein Plug-In zu dem Python/Django basierten prosopographisch-geographischen Informationssystem APIS. Mit Hilfe des TEIHencers ist es möglich, XML/TEI kodierte Texte in denen Lokalitäten, Orte ausgezeichnet sind, über eine Webformular in APIS zu importieren. Während des Imports werden die Orts-Entitäten entsprechend eines vom Benutzer wählbaren X-Path Ausdruckes geparst, gegen GeoNames und GND abgeglichen und im Falle von Übereinstimmung angereichert und in einer relationalen Datenbank gespeichert. Die gespeicherten Entitäten können anschließend über das APIS-Web-Interface im Falle mehrerer Treffer disambiguiert werden. Dies erfolgt über eine Kartendarstellung, in welcher die verschiedenen Treffer zu einer Entität aufscheinen. Darüber hinaus können über das APIS-Web-Interface noch weitere Informationen zu den Entitäten ergänzt (z.B. alternative Schreibweisen, Datierungen) sowie die einzelnen Entitäten miteinander in typisierte Beziehungen gesetzt werden (z.B. Ort A ist Nachfolger von Ort B.; Ort A ist Teil von Ort B).
         Die mit Hilfe von TEIHencer angereicherten Daten können dann wieder als XML/TEI Dokument (kodiert als  Element) exportiert bzw. über HTTP GET request abgerufen und so etwa in andere Applikationen eingebunden werden.
         Im Zuge der Posterpräsentation soll der TEIHencer der einschlägigen DH-Comunity vorgestellt werden und zwar an dem konkreten Fallbeispiel der “Andreas Okopenko: Tagebücher aus dem Nachlass (Hybridedition)”. Dabei handelt es sich um ein digitales Editionsprojekt, das eine Auswahl der Tagebücher Andreas Okopenkos im Zeitraum von 1949 bis 1955 inhaltlich erschließen und einem breiteren Publikum zugänglich machen möchte. Einer der Schwerpunkte des Projekts liegt hierbei auf der inhaltlichen Erschließung des örtlichen Wirkungs- und Schaffensraums des Nachkriegsavantgardisten, indem nicht nur erwähnte Orte (), sondern nach Maßgabe auch Werke und Organisationen ( und ) mit geographischen Normdaten verknüpft werden, um so ein umfassenderes Bild von Okopenkos kulturellem Kontext vermitteln zu können.
         Neben der eigentlich Applikation und des konkreten Use-Cases wird am Poster auch das Konferenzthema “Kritik der Digitalen Vernunft” bzw. das Subthema “Kritik digitaler Angebote, Projekte und Werkzeuge” in Form der Frage nach der Nachhaltigkeit des vorgestellten Tools reflektiert. Eine solche glauben wir nämlich insofern gewährleisten zu können, als das Tool a) in ein konkretes Projekt (Okopenko) eingebettet ist, b) einen weit verbreiteten Standard (TEI) unterstützt, c) auf bestehende Eigenentwicklungen (APIS) aufbaut und d) Teile des Codes als selbstständige Module (TEI-Modul als python-package) konzipiert sind, die auch jenseits der konkreten Applikation Anwendung finden können. Darüber hinaus, e) ist der gesamte Code auf GitHub publiziert [3].  
      
      
         
            
               
                    http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/index.html
                
            
            
               
                    https://geobrowser.de.dariah.eu/edit/index.html
                
            
            
               
                    https://github.com/acdh-oeaw/teihencer
                
            
            
               
                    https://github.com/acdh-oeaw/apis-core
                
            
            
               
                    https://www.onb.ac.at/bibliothek/sammlungen/literatur/forschung/projekte/andreas-okopenko-tagebuecher-aus-dem-nachlass-hybridedition/
                
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Durch die wachsende Menge an digitalen Daten im Bereich Digital Humanities bedarf es zunehmend der Arbeit von Datenkuratoren. Aufgrund der ständigen Steigerung der Zahl und des Umfangs der zu verarbeitenden Quellen ist jedoch der übliche Modus Operandi der Datenkuratoren (manuelle Konversionen und konsekutive Anpassungen) untragbar geworden.
            Dieser Vortrag stellt eine neue Methode für die Kuration digitaler Daten vor, die auf den Prinzipien der funktionalen Programmierung, der unix-Tools und der XML-Technologien basiert. Diese Methode wurde vom Cologne Center for eHumanities der Universität zu Köln seit 2014 im Rahmen des Lazarus-Projekts (CCeH 2014) und danach in verschiedenen anderen DH-Projekten angewendet.
            Die Besonderheit dieser Methode besteht in der Aufgliederung des Kurationsprozesses in eine Pipeline von Miniprogrammen, von denen jedes einzelne einen präzisen Schritt des Kurationsprozesses darstellt. Wird ein Fehler in den resultierenden Dateien bemerkt, kann ein neuer Schritt geschrieben werden und in die Kette eingebaut werden, oder die existierenden Schritte korrigiert werden. Anschließend wird die Kurationspipeline neu laufen gelassen.
                
            Der Hauptgrundsatz lautet: Keine Datei wird „manuell“ modifiziert, jede Operation muss von einem Miniprogramm ausgeführt werden.
            Konsequenz dieses Grundsatzes und Hauptvorteil der vorgestellten Methode ist, dass die ganze Arbeit des Kurators — mitsamt seiner Entscheidungen und seiner bevorzugten Arbeitsweisen — in dieser Pipeline von Miniprogrammen dokumentiert ist und in sie eingebettet ist. Des weiteren sind der Kurationsprozess und seine Ergebnisse einfach zu reproduzieren und zu verifizieren. Das führt zu einer besseren Nachvollziehbarkeit der Kurationsarbeit, auch wenn die Kuration von einem Team durchgeführt wird.
         
         
            Kuration von Digitalen Daten
            Eine der Aufgaben der Datenkuration und der Datenkuratoren ist: »[to] intervene in the research process in order to translate or migrate data into new formats, to enhance it through additional layers of context or markup, to create connections between data sets, and to otherwise ensure that data is maintained in as highly-functional a form as possible.« (Flanders & Muñoz 2017).
            Praktisch können wir die Arbeit der Datenkuratoren auf folgende Art und Weise grob zusammenfassen:
            
               Die Daten werden von den Forschern zu den Kuratoren übertragen.
               Die Kuratoren studieren die Daten, sowohl ihren Inhalt als auch ihr Format.
               Die Kuratoren reichern die Daten mit den nötigen Metadaten an und sie sorgen dafür, dass eventuelle Inkohärenzen zwischen den originalen Formaten und den Zielformaten ausgeglichen werden.
               Die so verarbeiteten Daten werden archiviert, publiziert oder in anderen Projekten verwendet.
            
         
         
            Datenkuration am CCeH: Das Cologne-Sanskrit-Lexicon-Projekt
            Ein praktisches Beispiel von Datenkuration sind die Wörterbücher des Cologne Sanskrit Lexikons. Diese wurden von verschiedenen Wissenschaftlern der Universität zu Köln seit den 90er Jahren (pre XML und pre Unicode) erarbeitet, innerhalb des Lazarus-Projektes vom CCeH kuratiert (d.h. in TEI/Unicode umgewandelt) und 2015 zugänglich gemacht.
            Die anfängliche Arbeitshypothese, welche im Verlauf jedoch fallen gelassen wurde, sah einen eher klassischen Workflow vor: Die originalen Dateien in XML umwandeln, danach eine XSLT-Transformation nutzen, um diese in TEI umzuwandeln und schließlich die durch die Transformation entstandenen kleinen Fehler per Hand verbessern.
            Wir haben es vorgezogen, diesen Weg aus zwei Gründen nicht einzuschlagen.
            Erstens: Von Beginn an sind verschiedene Versionen der zu kuratierenden Dateien aufgetaucht. Hätten wir in der Zwischenzeit neue Versionen der Dateien entdeckt, wäre die bis dahin geleistete Arbeit vergebens gewesen.
            Zweitens: Die Arbeitsgruppe bestand aus drei Personen aus unterschiedlichen Fächern und mit unterschiedlichen Herangehensweisen an das Thema Kuration. Einen einheitlichen Stil bei zu behalten wäre nicht einfach — wahrscheinlich unmöglich — gewesen.
            Die Arbeitsgruppe hat sich dann für eine andere Arbeitsweise entschieden: Eine „wiederholbare Pipeline“-Methode, die auf der funktionalen Programmierung basiert, statt manueller Konversionen und Anpassungen.
            In dieser Methode ist jeder Arbeitsschritt formell durch ein sehr kleines Programm beschrieben, das in einer funktionalen und deklarativen Programmiersprache implementiert ist und im Durchschnitt aus weniger als 15 Instruktionen besteht. In dieser Art sind sehr unterschiedliche Schritte implementiert, z.B. die Normalisierung der Lemmata, die Behebung von technischen Fehlern, die Integration von externen Quellen.
            Diese Programme, die die Schritte der Kurationsarbeit darstellen, sind im Sinne einer Pipeline organisiert, d.h. der Output des einen ist der Input eines anderen. Die Kuratoren erklären, welches die kommenden Schritte sind und welche Abhängigkeiten zwischen den einzelnen Schritten bestehen (z.B. dass die Umwandlungsschritte dem Abrufschritt folgen sollen). Der folgende Abschnitt enthält verschiedene konkrete Beispiele von Kurationspipelines und Schritten/Miniprogrammen.
            Alle diese Schritte sind reine 
                    idempotente Funktionen, d.h. dass ihr Ergebnis nur von den Input-Daten anhängig ist. Konkret bedeutet das, dass man die Kurationspipelinemehrmals durchlaufen kann, und immer das gleiche Ergebnis erhält. Dies steht im Gegensatz zu den klassischen Skript-basierten Methoden.
                
         
         
            Lazarus-Kurationsworkflow: XML-Pipelines, Makefiles und Schematron
            In der Essenz bedeutet das konkret, dass der Kurationworkflow, der im Lazaruz-Projekt und in anderen folgenden CCeH-Projekten benutzt wurde, aus drei großen Komponenten besteht:
            
               Die Makefiles. Ein Makefile ist eine Datei, die den gesamten Kurationsprozess mittels des unix-Tools make steuert. Der Makefile erklärt, wie man eine Datei X (genannt 
                        Target) durch die Dateien A, B und C (genannt Abhängigkeiten von X) herstellen kann. Im Fall des Cologne-Sanskrit-Lexicon-Projekts erklären die Makefiles wie man die target TEI-Deteien herstellen und testen kann, d.h. wo man die originalen Dateien mit den Sanskrit-Wörterbüchern finden kann, wie man sie herunterladen kann, wie man den Konversionprozess durch die Konversionspipelines durchführen kann usw.
                    
               Die Konversionspipelines. Jede Pipeline ist für die Konversion bestimmter Dateien verantwortlich und besteht aus verschieden Schritten. Jeder Schritt ist implementiert durch eine XSLT-Transformation (die funktionalen Miniprogramme, wie oben erwähnt). Die Pipelines selbst sind XProc-basierte XML-Pipelines (Walsh 2007).
               DieTests. Verschiedeneautomatisierte Schematron-basierte Tests kontrollieren, dass die hergestelltenDateien valide sind, dass keine altenschon behobenen Fehler erneut eingepflegt werden, sowie dass keine Informationen verloren gehen.
            
            Um die Methode und die Beziehungen zwischen den verschieden Komponenten besser zu verstehen, stellen wir hier ein konkretes Beispiel vor: Das Monier Sanskrit-English Wörterbuch, Teil des Cologne-Sanskrit-Lexicon-Projekts.
            Die ursprünglichenDateien mit den Digitalisatenund den Transkriptionen des Monier-Wörterbuches, Nachlass der Arbeit von Thomas Malten et al., sind auf einem Server der Universität zu Köln gespeichert und archiviert. Um dieses Wörterbuch in dasneue Cologne Sanskrit-Lexicon zu integrieren, müssen die Kuratoren folgenden Operationen durchführen:
            
               Die Originaldateien vom Server abrufen;
               Kleine Markup-Fehler beheben;
               Die Daten in TEI/XML umwandeln;
               Verweise zu externen Datenbanken/Quellen integrieren;
               Prüfen, ob Fehler unterlaufen sind, bzw. dass kein Lemma verloren wurde;
               Die kuratiertenDaten zur Verfügung stellen, sodass sie auf den Produktionsserver hochgeladen werden können.
            
            Diese Operationen, die denKurationsprozess grob zusammenfassen, sind imMakefile monier.mkbeschrieben. Die Operationensind im Makefile in der folgenden Form ausgedrückt: „1) Datei X wird ausgehend von Datei Y hergestellt. 2) Wenn X fehlt oder älter als Y ist, wird X hergestellt, indem man Y anProgramm K mit bestimmten Parametern übergibt“. Abbildung 1 zeigt einige Regeln, die im Vergleich zum Original vereinfacht dargestellt sind.
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 1: Makefile für die Kuration des Monier Wörterbuches. In den ersten Zeilen werden verschiedene Parameter eingerichtet. Dann werden die Abhängigkeiten der target-Datei monier.tei beschrieben. Schließlich wird das Kommando eingerichtet, das man benötigt, um die target-Datei herzustellen.
                        
               
            
            Die Makefiles geben in 
                    imperativerWeise vor, welche Daten die 
                    funktionalePipeline durchlaufen sollen und wo das finale Ergebnis gespeichert werden soll. Dies macht unter anderem das Testen der Kurationspipeline anhand eines Auszugesdes Wörterbuches möglich, ohne die Pipeline an sich zu verändern; es werden lediglich Änderungen einiger Parameter in den Makefiles vorgenommen.
                
            Operationen 2, 3 und 4 (die Behebung von Fehlern, die Umwandlung der originalen Daten in TEI/XML und deren Verlinkung mit externen Datenbanken) sind das Herzstück des Kurationsprozesses und wird durch verschiedeneXProcPipelines durchgeführt. Diese Pipelinesbestehen insgesamt aus 35 verschiedenen XSLT-Transformationen, von denen jede einzelne einen spezifischen Schritt des Kurationsprozesses darstellt. Beispiele für diese Schritte sind:fehlplatziertes Markup verschieben, falsch kodierte Devanagari-Buchstaben richtig stellen, bibliographische Referenzen hinzufügen. Abbildungen2 und 3 zeigen Ausschnitte von zwei XSLT-Transformationen.
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 2: Ein Miniprogramm. Dieser Schritt korrigiert nur einen bestimmten Fehler.
                        
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 3: Auszug aus der Haupt-TEI-Transformation. Da die vorherigen Schritte die kleinen Fehler schon behoben haben, kann diese Transformation kurz und bündig sein.
                        
               
            
            Diese Miniprogramme lesen oderschreiben keine Datei. Sie fungieren als rein funktionale Filter, die die Daten empfangen, einige Anteile modifizieren, und die modifizierten Daten zurückgeben. Wie bereits erwähnt ist die Aufgabe des Makefiles zu entscheiden, welche Daten in die Pipeline eingespeist werden sollen und wo die Ergebnisse gespeichert werden sollen. Die Pipeline kümmert sich nicht um diese Details. Dies verringert den Aufwand für die Entwicklung der Miniprogramme erheblich.
            Die Miniprogramme, aus denen die Pipeline besteht, spiegeln die Entscheidungen des Teams wider, das diese Daten kuratiert hat (Peter Dängeli, Martina Gödel und Gioele Barabucci, mit der wissenschaftlichen Kollaborationvon Felix Rau). Weil die Entwicklung des Codes der Pipeline und der Miniprogramme mittels eines Repositorium auf GitHub stattgefunden hat,ist es möglich, den Entwicklungsprozessder Kurationsarbeit nachzuvollziehen. Insbesondere ist es möglich, zu sehen, wie einzelneSchritte,die sich alsirrtümlich herausgestellt haben, durch bessere Schritte ersetzt werden, ohne das die übrigen Teile der Pipeline verändert werden müssen.
            Schließlich Operation 5 (testen, dass kein Fehler untergelaufen ist)ist durch Schematron-basierte Testsimplementiert. Während dieser Operation wird getestet, 1) dass der Umwandlungsprozess keine Daten unabsichtlich entfernthat und, 2) dass alte Fehler, die schon korrigiert worden sind, wiedereingeführt wurden. Die Wiedereinfürung von alten Fehlernist ein Ereignis, das in über Jahre andauerndenProjekten leider häufig vorkommt. Diese Art von Test ist von den Best Practices der Continous Integration in der Softwareentwicklung inspiriert.
         
         
            Vorzüge der vorgestelltenMethode
            Der Gebrauch dieser Methode hat viele Vorteile, sowohl im Hinblick auf die methodologische Stringenz als auch die Technik an sich:
            
               Jede einzelne Handlung der Kuratoren ist formalisiert und dokumentiert (durch XSLT-Code und Code-Kommentare). Die geringe Größe der Miniprogramme macht deren Code praktisch selbst dokumentierend.
               Jeder Wissenschaftler kann unabhängig nachvollziehen, wie die Ergebnisse entstanden sind.
               Jeder Schritt kann einzeln getestet werden.
               Man kann zurückverfolgen, welcher Schritt ein bestimmtes Konstrukt in den Ergebnissen generiert hat.
               Die Wiederverwendung von Schritten ist möglich und leicht nachzuvollziehen.
               Eine methodologische Kohärenz kann über Jahre hinweg beibehalten werden, auch wenn neue Kuratoren diese Daten verwalten werden.
               Dank der Speicherung verschiedener Schritte in Versioning-Systemen wie Git, kann man sehen, wie der Kurationsprozess entwickelt worden ist.
            
            Die Hauptregel dieser Methode, dass keine Datei „manuell“ modifiziert wird und alles durch Miniprogramme ausgeführt wird, garantiert, dass jede Operation an den gegebenen Daten klar definiert und ausdrücklich formuliert ist.
                
         
         
            Die Rolle der Kuratoren
            Diese Methode ändert nicht die Rolle oder die Verantwortung der Kuratoren, aber sie verändert grundlegend ihre tägliche Arbeit. Die Arbeit der Kuratoren besteht nicht mehr in dem Modifizieren von Dateien in einem Editor, sondern in dem Schreiben von Arbeitsschritten und in der korrekten Verwaltung von den Abhängigkeiten zwischen Arbeitsschritten.
            Die Kurationsarbeit ist dann in zwei Teile aufgeteilt. Der erste Teil besteht im Schreiben und in der schrittweisen Präzisierung von Kurationsprogrammen, welches die Hauptaufgabe der Kuratoren darstellt. Hierin zeigt sich die Fähigkeit, die Erfahrung der Kuratoren sowie die von ihnen präferierten anwendbaren Richtlinien. Der zweite Teil ist die Generierung von kuratierten Daten, welche in sterilerArt und Wiese von einemKoordinationsprogramm vollzogen wird. Es führt die verschiedenen Schritte in der von Kuratoren bestimmten Reihenfolge innerhalbwenigerMinuten durch.
            Eine letzte wichtige Auswirkung dieser Methode ist, dass was registriert/gespeichert wird, nicht nur die Endergebnisse sind, sondern der ganze Kurationsprozess: Vom Abrufen der originalen Daten bis zu der Speicherung der kuratierten Daten. Es besteht die Möglichkeit diesen Prozess der Öffentlichkeit zugänglich zu machen, nicht nur um eine bessere Transparenz zu schaffen, sondern auch um die Zusammenarbeit mit externen Kuratoren zu erleichtern.
            Zusammenfassend ergibt sich das Besondere dieserMethode aus der Tatsache, dass nicht nur das Ergebnis der Kuration, sondern auch der Kurationsprozess dokumentiert wird.
         
         
            Verwandte Arbeiten
            Für die Kuration digitaler Daten wurde oft ein einfachererWorkflow vorgeschlagen: die Daten ändern und danach die Ergebnisse in einem Git-Repositorium speichern. (Reeve 2016, Crowley et at. 2017). Die Idee der Befürworter dieses Workflows ist, dass die Speichrung des Datenstatuses nach jedem Arbeitsschritt den Kurationsprozess adäquat widerspiegeln. Das greift jedoch zu kurz. Git speichert nur was geändert wurde, nicht mit welcher Absicht eine Änderung durchgeführt wurde. Natürlich könnten diese Absichten und die entsprechenden Begründungen in einer Commit-Nachricht beschrieben werden, aber oft sind sie es nicht und in jedem Fall können Commit-Nachrichten nicht so präzise wie ein Stück Code sein. Des weiteren löst die Änderungen mithilfe von Git nachzuvollziehen nicht die Probleme, welche entstehen, wenn die originalen Daten verändert werden: In diesem Fall muss die ganze Arbeit von vorne begonnen werden.
                
            Workflows wie der in diesem Beitrag beschriebene, in welchen die Hauptaufgabe der Kuratoren ist, Pipelines zu schreiben, finden sich häufig in der Informatik (Doltra & Löh 2008; Schoen & Perry 2014) und in der Physik (Peng 2009).
            Diese sind auch im Bereich Digital Scholarly Editing vorgeschlagen worden, z.B. von van Zundert (2016) oder Barabucci und Fischer (2017).
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Barabucci, Gioele / Fischer, Franz (2017): „The formalization of textual criticism: bridging the gap between automated collation and edited critical texts“, in: Advances in Digital Scholarly Editing: Papers presented at the DiXiT conferences in The Hague, Cologne, and Antwerp. Sidestone Press.
               
                  CCeH (2014). „sanskrit-dict-to-tei: TEI-fy existing Sanskrit dictionaries.“, https://github.com/cceh/sanskrit-dict-to-tei (Das Repository wird im Laufe des Jahres 2018 veröffentlicht werden).
               
                  Crowley, Ronan / Reeve, Jonathan / Schäuble, Johannes (2017). open-editions/corpus-joyce-ulysses-tei: Zenodo release (Version v0.1.1). Zenodo. 10.5281/zenodo.583139
               
                  Dolstra, Eelco / Löh, Andres (2008). „NixOS: A purely functional Linux distribution“, in: ACM Sigplan Notices, 43(9): 367-378.
               
                  Duvall, Paul M. / Matyas, Steve / Glover, Andrew (2007). „Continuous integration: improving software quality and reducing risk“. Pearson Education.
               
                  Flanders, Julia / Muñoz, Trevor (2017). „An Introduction to Humanities Data Curation“, http://guide.dhcuration.org/contents/intro/ [letzter Zugriff 2018-01-10].
               
                  Peng, Roger D (2009). „Reproducible research and biostatistics“, in: Biostatistics, 10(3): 405-408.
               
                  Reeve, Jonathan (2016). „Git-Lit: an Application of Distributed Version Control Technology toward the Creation of 50,000 Digital Scholarly Editions“, in: Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts. Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, Kraków, pp. 657-658.
               
                  Schoen, Seth / Perry, Mike (2014). „Why and how of reproducible builds: Distrusting our own infrastructure for safer software releases“, https://air.mozilla.org/why-and-how-of-reproducible-builds-distrusting-our-own-infrastructure-for-safer-software-releases/ [letzter Zugriff 2018-01-10].
               
                  Walsh, Norman (2007). „XProc: An XML pipeline language“ in: XML Prague 2007.
               
                  van Zundert, Joris J. (2016). „Close Reading and Slow Programming — Computer Code as Digital Scholarly Edition.“, in: ESTS 2016.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Im Nachlass des portugiesischen Dichters Fernando Pessoa (1888-1935) finden sich zahlreiche Listen geplanter Publikationen. Diesen stehen nur wenige zu Lebzeiten tatsächlich realisierte Veröffentlichungen gegenüber. Daraus ergibt sich ein Kontrast zwischen der Ebene des Möglichen und des Verwirklichten in der Literatur und Literaturproduktion. Vor diesem Hintergrund entsteht die digitale Edition “Fernando Pessoa. Projekte und Publikationen” und mit ihr die im Folgenden vorgestellte Netzwerkvisualisierung. Mit ihr wird ein Werkzeug zur Verfügung gestellt, das die Exploration des Personen- und Figurenkosmos in Pessoas Publikationsplänen über die Zeit ermöglicht.
            
         
            
               Pessoas Werk zwischen Planung und Publikation
                
            
               Die Dynamik der Schriften Pessoas ist im Spannungsverhältnis zwischen dem projizierten Werk, das der Dichter im Sinne eines vollkommen Ganzen konzipiert hat, und dem tatsächlich Geschriebenen und nur in geringem Maße Publizierten zu verstehen. Pessoa war bei der Veröffentlichung seiner Werke extrem selektiv und die Dynamik seines Schreibens weist auf eine ständige Bedeutungsverschiebung hin, die sowohl an fragmentarischen Schriften seines Nachlasses als auch an seinen Publikationsplänen zu erkennen ist (vgl. dazu Cunha 1987, Martins 2003, Gusmão 2003 und Sepúlveda 2013). Diese Bedeutungsverschiebung hängt stark mit dem Wahl der Autorennamen zusammen, die ebenfalls einem ständigen Wechsel unterlag und in den Plänen zur Edition und Publikation des Werkes eine hohe Bedeutung gewann. Zur Definition eines Publikationsvorhabens gehörte für Pessoa die Zuordnung einer bestimmten Autorfigur, deren fiktionale Persönlichkeit sowohl durch ein bestimmtes Werk konstruiert werden sollte als auch dieses Werk in seiner Besonderheit definieren würde.
                
            
               Die Spannung zwischen Planung und Publikation des Werkes wird daher noch dadurch verstärkt, dass Pessoa unter verschiedenen, insgesamt etwa 120 Autorennamen geschrieben hat - oder geplant hat zu schreiben (vgl. dazu Pessoa 2012). Eine besonders wichtige Rolle in Pessoas Werk und seinen Werkplänen spielen dabei die Namen Alberto Caeiro, Álvaro de Campos und Ricardo Reis, die er (in Abgrenzung zu den weiteren Pseudonymen) Heteronyme genannt hat.
                
         
         
            
               Digitale Edition “Projekte und Publikationen”
                
            
               Die Notizzettel, Seiten aus Notizbüchern und andere Papiere aus Pessoas Nachlass, auf denen er die Pläne für seine Werke handschriftlich oder mit Schreibmaschine geschrieben festgehalten hat, werden in einer Kooperation zwischen dem Institut für Literatur und Tradition (IELT) der Neuen Universität Lissabon und dem Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH) der Universität zu Köln digital ediert (Sepúlveda und Henny-Krahmer 2017).
                    
            
            
               Neben den Dokumenten aus dem Nachlass umfasst die digitale Edition auch die zu Lebzeiten von Pessoa publizierten Gedichte. Gegenstand des hier vorgestellten Netzwerkes sind jedoch ausschließlich die Dokumente, auf denen die Figuren und Personen genannt sind und deren Beziehungen ausgehend von ihrer gemeinsamen Erwähnung über die Zeit untersucht werden. Die Dokumente sind in der Edition in TEI codiert, wobei die Namensvorkommen erfasst werden und eine Identifikation der hinter den Namen stehenden Personen und Figuren in einem zentralen Index erfolgt. Transkriptionen und Index bilden zusammen mit den für jedes Dokument festgehaltenen Metadaten die Datengrundlage für das Figuren- und Personennetzwerk, wobei insbesondere die für die Chronologie relevante Datierung zu nennen ist.
                
         
         
            
               Netzwerkvisualisierung zu Personen und Figuren
                
            
               Die Vorkommen von Namen in Pessoas Publikationsplänen werden hier mit Hilfe einer interaktiven Netzwerkvisualisierung analysiert, um zu untersuchen, wie sich der von ihm in den Dokumenten entworfene Personen- und Figurenkosmos über die Zeit entwickelt. Für dynamische Netzwerkvisualisierungen gibt es in den DH bereits verschiedene Ansätze (vgl. u. a. Rigal et al. 2016, Xanthos et al. 2016). Für das Pessoa-Netzwerk ergibt sich die Dynamik aus der Möglichkeit, das Gesamtnetzwerk der Personen und Figuren über alle Dokumente hinweg auf Dokumente aus bestimmten Zeiträumen oder Jahren einzugrenzen. Es ist als heuristisches Instrument gedacht, um Hypothesen zur Chronologie von Personen- und Figurenkonstellationen zu generieren und im Ansatz überprüfen zu können.
                
            
               
                    Für das Netzwerk, das unter 
                    verfügbar ist, sind 249 Dokumente ausgewertet worden, die insgesamt 369 Namen enthalten. Es werden sowohl historische Personen als auch fiktive Figuren aus Pessoas Werkwelt gezeigt. Analysiert wird das Vorkommen der Namen auf Pessoas Publikationsplänen von 1913 bis zu seinem Tod im Jahr 1935. Die frühen Dokumente (vor 1913) werden hier nicht berücksichtigt, da sie noch in Bearbeitung sind.
                
            
               Die Netzwerkdaten sind mit Hilfe von XSLT aus den TEI-Dokumenten generiert worden und liegen im JSON-Format vor.
                     Die interaktive Visualisierung ist mit der Bibliothek D3 erstellt worden, wobei ein Netzwerklayout von Mike Bostock adaptiert und um weitere Funktionalitäten ergänzt wurde.
                     Erweiterungen, die für die vorliegende Anwendung vorgenommen wurden, sind u. a. die Möglichkeit, Teile des Netzwerks ein- und auszublenden (nach Chronologie; Teilnetzwerke für die Verbindungen, die von einzelnen Personen ausgehen; nur Knoten mit oder auch Knoten ohne Verbindungen) sowie Optionen für die Darstellung (Einblenden von Labels; Dichte bzw. Weite der Anzeige des Netzwerks).
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 1: Optionen für die Anzeige des Netzwerks
                        
               
               Die Größe der Knoten im Netzwerk zeigt an, wie häufig einzelne Namen auf den Dokumenten erwähnt werden. Zur Ermittlung der Knotengröße wurde die Formel 2 + log2(size) angewandt, wobei size für die tatsächliche Häufigkeit des Vorkommens steht. Um zwischen fiktiven Figuren und historischen Personen unterscheiden zu können, sind die Knoten unterschiedlich eingefärbt (türkis = fiktiv; dunkelbau = historisch). Bei den Netzwerkkanten verdeutlicht die Dicke, wie häufig Namen gemeinsam auf Dokumenten vorkommen: je häufiger das gemeinsame Auftreten, umso dicker die Linien in der Visualisierung. Dabei ist die minimale Kantendicke 1 Pixel (bei einer gemeinsamen Erwähnung). Pro weiterer gemeinsamer Erwähnung nimmt die Kantendicke um 1 Pixel zu.
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 2: Teilnetzwerk mit Fernando Pessoa als zentralem Knoten
                        
               
               Zentrale Funktionalitäten in der Netzwerkanwendung sind Auswahloptionen, welche die Chronologie der Namenserwähnungen betreffen. So kann das Netzwerk neben einer Gesamtdarstellung auch für Vorkommen in einzelnen Jahren angezeigt werden. Darüber hinaus ist eine Anzeige nach Perioden möglich (z. B. 1919-1927). Da es in der Pessoa-Forschung konkurrierende Vorschläge für eine Periodisierung des Werkes gibt, werden zwei verschiedene Einteilungen in Perioden zur Auswahl angeboten. Auf diese Weise wird es möglich, die Entwicklung von Pessoas Personen- und Figurenkosmos, wie er sich in den Publikationsplänen darstellt, kritisch zu untersuchen.
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 3: Gesamtnetzwerk mit Pessoa als häufigstem Namen
                        
               
               Wenn man das Vorkommen aller Namen im gesamten Netzwerk betrachtet, so ist zu erkennen, dass Fernando Pessoa als Name am häufigsten vorkommt, direkt gefolgt von den Namen der Heteronyme Alberto Caeiro, Ricardo Reis und Álvaro de Campos, was etabliertes Wissen zu der Bedeutung der Heteronyme in Pessoas Werk bestätigt (vgl. Abb. 2 und 3). An zweiter Stelle stehen dann William Shakespeare, José Almada-Negreiros, Edgar Allan Poe, Mário de Sá-Carneiro und António Mora. Dabei ist beispielsweise interessant zu sehen, dass die Heteronyme (und Mora, der zeitweise als starker Kandidat für die Rolle eines Heteronyms galt) auch zusammen mit Fernando Pessoa selbst, aber besonders unter sich verbunden sind, was auf eine gewisse Autonomie des heteronymischen Universums hindeutet. Die Namen von Shakespeare und Poe weisen auf die zwei wichtigsten Referenzen Pessoas aus der englischsprachigen Literatur hin, während Almada und Sá-Carneiro die zwei für ihn bedeutendsten zeitgenössischen portugiesischen Schriftsteller waren.
                
            
               Betrachtet man das Netzwerk chronologisch anhand ausgewählter Jahre und Perioden, innerhalb derer die Publikationspläne verfasst wurden, so sind Tendenzen zu erkennen, die historisch, editorisch und auch poetisch für das Werk von maßgeblicher Bedeutung sind. So kann man beispielsweise sehen, wie in den Jahren von 1913 bis 1919, und besonders zwischen 1914 und 1915, die Namen der Heteronyme zusammen mit dem von Fernando Pessoa am häufigsten vorkommen und vor allem untereinander verbunden sind (vgl. Abb. 4). 
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 4: Teilnetzwerk 1915
                        
               Namen anderer Schriftsteller und historischer Figuren kommen tendenziell in späteren Perioden, etwa ab den 20er Jahren, häufiger vor. Sie zeigen ein zunehmendes Interesse Pessoas an der Veröffentlichung eigener Übersetzungen von einigen für ihn entscheidenden Werke der Weltliteratur. Auch die wichtigsten Beziehungen Pessoas zu zeitgenössischen portugiesischen Schriftstellern und Kritikern sind im Netzwerk deutlich zu erkennen, besonders zwischen 1913 und 1918 (vgl. Abb. 5). Es handelt sich dabei vor allem um die modernistische Generation, die sich um die Zeitschrift Orpheu versammelt hat, und ab 1928 und bis zu Pessoas Tod 1935 dann die sogenannte zweite modernistische Generation um die Zeitschrift Presença.
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 5: Teilnetzwerk 1913-1918
                        
               
            
         
         
            Fazit
            
               Die aus der Netzwerkinterpretation gewonnenen literaturhistorischen Erkenntnisse bestätigen, dass für Pessoa die Edition und Publikation des Werkes und dessen Planung nicht von der Bedeutungsebene des Werkes selbst zu unterscheiden sind. Dass bestimmte Namen insgesamt oder zu bestimmten Zeiten besonders häufig auf den Publikationsplänen auftauchen, ist gleichbedeutend mit deren Wichtigkeit für das Werk in der entsprechenden Zeitperiode. Das gilt neben dem Vorkommen einzelner Namen auch für die gemeinsamen Vorkommen mehrerer Namen, wodurch die Bedeutung bestimmter Konstellationen zu bestimmten Zeiten sowohl in Pessoas Publikationsplänen als auch in seinem Werk deutlich wird. Diese grundlegende Erkenntnis für die Interpretation von Pessoas Werk bestätigt einige Intuitionen der Kritiker über den größeren Zusammenhang mehrerer Ebenen von Pessoas Werk (z. B. der Ebene der Edition des Werkes, vgl. dazu Sepúlveda und Uribe 2016), sowie die Vorstellung von Pessoas Werkganzem, die einer materiellen Fragmentarität seiner Schriften gegenübersteht (vgl. dazu Martins 2003, Gusmão 2003, Sepúlveda 2013, Feijó 2015).
                
            
               Methodisch eröffnet die Visualisierung durch das interaktive Element und den höheren Grad der Abstraktion gegenüber den edierten Dokumenten, die in der digitalen Edition studiert werden können, neue Interpretationsspielräume. Dabei ist es jedoch sehr wichtig, die Dokument-, Text- und Datengrundlage sowie die methodischen Wege zum Netzwerk und zur visuellen Darstellung stets im Blick zu behalten. Für diesen Beitrag bieten wir dafür eine Dokumentation an, die direkt mit dem interaktiven Netzwerk verbunden ist.
                     Der Zusammenhang zwischen Quellen und Analyse wird auch dadurch hergestellt, dass die interaktive Visualisierung an die digitale Edition angebunden ist.
                    
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                        Die digitale Edition ist in einer Beta-Version unter 
                        http://www.pessoadigital.pt
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018] verfügbar; die Entwicklung wird fortlaufend über GitHub organisiert: 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]. Zur editorischen Herangehensweise aus digitaler Perspektive vgl. Henny-Krahmer und Sepúlveda 2017.
                    
            
               
                        Die dem Netzwerk zugrunde liegenden Daten sind unter
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018] einsehbar.
                    
            
                Das Ausgangs-Layout von Bostock trägt den Titel “Force Layout with Mousover” (Bostock 2017).
                    
            
               
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
            
               
                        Derzeit über den Menüpunkt “Chronologie”, vgl. 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bostock, Mike (2017): “Force Layout with Mouseover Labels”, in: Mike Bostock’s Blocks.
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  
                  Cunha, Teresa Sobral (1987): "Planos e projectos editoriais de Fernando Pessoa: uma velha questão", in: Revista da Biblioteca Nacional, Série 2, Vol. 2, N. 1: 92-107.
                    
               
                  
                  Feijó, António M. (2015): “Uma admiração pastoril pelo diabo (Pessoa e Pascoaes)”, in: Pessoana. Ensaios. Lissabon: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda.
                    
               
                  
                  Gusmão, Manuel (2003): "O Fausto — um teatro em ruínas", in: Românica 12: 67-86.
                    
               
                  
                        Henny-Krahmer, Ulrike / Sepúlveda, Pedro (2017): “Pessoa’s editorial projects and publications: the digital edition as a multiple form of textual criticism”, in: Boot, Peter / Cappellotto, Anna / Dillen, Wout / Fischer, Franz / Kelly, Aodhán / Mertgens, Andreas / Sichani, Anna-Maria / Spadini, Elena / van Hulle, Dirk (eds.): Advances in Scholarly Editing. Papers presented at the DiXiT conferences in The Hague, Cologne, and Antwerp. Leiden: Sidestone Press, 125-133 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  
                  Martins, Fernando Cabral (2003): "Breves notas sobre a alta definição", in: Românica. N.º 12. 157-164.
                    
               
                  
                  Pessoa, Fernando (2012): Teoria da Heteronímia. Hsg. von Fernando Cabral Martins und Richard Zenith. Lissabon: Assírio & Alvim.
                    
               
                  
                  Rigal, Alexandre / Rodighiero, Dario / Cellard, Loup (2016): “The Trajectories Tool: Amplifying Network Visualization Complexity”, in: Digital Humanities 2016. Conference Abstracts. 
                        Kraków: Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, 328-330 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar].
                    
               
                  
                  Sepúlveda, Pedro (2013): Os livros de Fernando Pessoa. Lissabon: Ática.
                    
               
                  
                  Sepúlveda, Pedro / Henny-Krahmer, Ulrike (eds., 2017): Fernando Pessoa – Digitale Edition. Projekte und Publikationen. Editorische Leitung Pedro Sepúlveda, technische Leitung Ulrike Henny-Krahmer. Lissabon und Köln: IELT, Neue Universität Lissabon und CCeH, Universität zu Köln
                        http://www.pessoadigital.pt
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  
                  Sepúlveda, Pedro / Uribe, Jorge (2016): O Planeamento editorial de Fernando Pessoa. Lissabon: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda.
                    
               
                  
                  Xanthos, Aris / Pante, Isaak / Rochat, Yannick / Grandjean, Martin (2016): “Visualizing the Dynamics of Character Networks”, in: Digital Humanities 2016. Conference Abstracts. Kraków: Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, 417-419 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            I.
            Ausgangspunkt war eine reine Metadaten-Sammlung zu Werken und Quellen Johann Sebastian Bachs (1999-2008: „Göttinger Bach-Katalog“), die zum Abschluss der ‚Neuen Bach-Ausgabe‘ am Johann Sebastian Bach-Institut Göttingen erfolgte. Dieses Metadatensammlung war 2008 die Basis für den Projektstart von „Bach digital“. Seitdem erfolgte mittels kontinuierlicher Förderung durch die DFG ein mehrstufig angelegter Ausbau:
            Das erste Digitalisierungsprojekt umfasste die sogenannten Originalquellen zu Johann Sebastian Bachs Musik, also Autographen und originales Aufführungsmaterial Bachs, die sich zu etwa 90 % im Besitz der oben genannten Bibliotheken befinden. 2010 ging diese erste Stufe als www.bach-digital.de online.
            Daran schloss sich von 2013 bis 2016 die Digitalisierung von sogenannten Sekundärquellen Bachscher Musik aus der Generation der Bach-Söhne und -Schüler an, ein Bestand, der besonders viel Tastenmusik J. S. Bachs umfasst, die vielfach nicht autograph überliefert ist und damit Forschungen zu individuellen Fassungen ermöglicht sowie Bachs Arbeitsweise in der Klavier- und Orgelmusik zwischen Kunstwerk und Unterrichtspraxis transparent zu machen hilft.
            Mittlerweile wurde die dritte Stufe gezündet: die konsequente Ausweitung der Datenbank in Metadaten und Digitalisaten auf die Musik der Bach-Söhne im Projekt „Quellenkorpus Bach-Söhne – Erschließung und Digitalisierung der Primärüberlieferung zu Werken Wilhelm Friedemann, Carl Philipp Emanuel, Johann Christoph Friedrich und Johann Christian Bach sowie deren Einbindung in das zu erweiternde Portal Bach digital“.
            Daneben werden Schritt für Schritt auch Werkverzeichnisse der Publikationsreihe „Bach-Repertorium“ sowie das derzeit neu erarbeitete „Bach-Werke-Verzeichnis III“ integriert. Mittelfristig werden dazu auch musikalische Incipits implementiert bzw. suchbar gemacht.
            Diese stufenweise Bearbeitung eines Kernbestandes der Musik des 18. Jahrhunderts strukturiert und systematisiert das gesamte musikalische Quellenmaterial und bildet den soliden Ausgangspunkt für eine quellenbasierte Forschung zur Musik der Bach-Familie: nicht nur als wichtiges Hilfsmittel der Bach-Forschung, sondern auch z. B. als Vergleichsobjekt für Studien zu anderen Repertoires, als unterstützendes Material für Forschungen zu Mitteldeutschland, als Kernbestandteil zur Provenienzforschung wichtiger Sammlungen wie Poelchau, Breitkopf etc. etc. Die Nutzungsmöglichkeiten sind in den vergangenen zehn Jahren stark angewachsen; und damit auf die Verantwortung, ein möglichst den diversen Anforderungen gerecht werdendes Material bestmöglich aufzubereiten. 
            Das MyCoRe-basierte Projekt wurde dabei von Anfang an durch eine Dokumentation begleitet, die es problemlos nachnutzbar macht: https://www.bach-digital.de/content/documentation.xml?XSL.lastPage.SESSION=/content/documentation.xml.
            Abseits der Bach-Forschung bzw. Musikwissenschaft werden Daten und Digitalisate von „Bach digital“ auch von einer breitgefächerten Bach-Community gesucht: das sind die weltweit großen Nutzerkreise musikinteressierter Laien sowie auch Musiker, die z. T. direkt nach originalen Quellen-Digitalisaten musizieren. Das Spektrum der Nutzer weitet sich nach unserer Erfahrung mit statistischen Daten zur Datenbank: je divergenter das ins Netz gestellte Material, desto vielfältiger die Nutzung. Inwiefern eine ursprünglich für die Bach-Forschungscommunity entwickelte Datenbank dieser Entwicklung noch stärker Rechnung tragen soll, wäre zu diskutieren.
         
         
            II.
            Die Menge der Datensätze an sich (es sind Stand Januar 2018 immerhin 8230 Musik-Quellen zu 3870 Werken der Bach-Familie) sowie der Umfang der Metadaten innerhalb eines Datensatzes ist nur mit hohem personellem Aufwand auf dem neuesten Stand der Forschung zu halten. Digitalisate und Metadaten werden so gut es geht laufend überprüft, auch mithilfe von Nutzer-Feedbacks – besonders jenen für die Bach-Forschung so wichtigen Power-Usern aus aller Welt. Dies ist eine ständige Anforderung, die die Daten selbst stellen, sobald sie öffentlich sichtbar sind. An der Aktualisierung der Datensätze aufgrund von Neuerkenntnissen der Bach-Forschung sollen deshalb nun auch mehr Mitarbeiter in der Forschungsabteilung des Bach-Archivs beteiligt werden als es Projektmitarbeiter für „Bach digital“ gibt. Ziel ist es, der Veraltung von Forschungsdaten entgegenzuwirken. Das Bach-Archiv sieht sich hier in der Verantwortung, die einmal publizierten Forschungsdaten mit den „Bach digital“-Nutzern möglichst zu teilen. Hierzu gehört auch die Mehrsprachigkeit, die derzeit nur mit Hilfe von strukturierten Daten umgesetzt werden kann. Fließtexte zu übersetzen ist mangels dafür vorhandener Projektmittel nur sehr begrenzt möglich. Alle anderen Daten sind aber mittlerweile auch in Englisch, Japanisch, Französisch (und Anfang 2018 auch Italienisch und Spanisch) recherchierbar. Hierbei sind wiederum die Nutzer der Datenbank selbst behilflich. Geplant ist als nächstes eine Nutzerbefragung, die über die Interessen und Wünsche sowie Kritik oder weitere Formen der Common Science-Beteiligung Auskunft geben soll. Inwieweit dieses Ergebnis zu einer Umstrukturierung von Daten oder der Präsentation von Modulen führen wird oder muss, ist derzeit noch offen.
            Bei dieser prinzipiell optimistischen Sicht auf „Bach digital“ sollen weitere kritische Punkte nicht außer Acht gelassen werden, die aus dieser langjährigen Erfahrung mit den Metadaten resultieren:
            Die Datenbank-Struktur suggeriert Eindeutigkeit, suggeriert, dass die Daten dem - in letzter Zeit in den Polit-Medien - so beliebten Faktencheck standhalten. Die Herkunft der Daten, gerade auch bei Neuerkenntnissen, wird dabei oft nicht präzise offengelegt. Die Datenbankstruktur suggeriert indes meist, dass es hier um Fakten geht. Unsicherheiten können nur sehr begrenzt formuliert werden, gerade im Fall von strukturierten Daten. Gerade auch die gegenüber den Printmedien so einfach zu handhabende Datenänderung ist also ein Problem für die Transparenz von Forschungsdaten.
            Ein einfacher Daten-Austausch per Schnittstelle, sicher allgemein gewünscht und praktiziert, ist nur insofern dauerhaft praktikabel, so lange ermöglicht wird, dieses Procedere mehrfach zu wiederholen, gerade auch bei Richtigstellungen von Forschungsdaten. Ansonsten finden sich mehrere Versionen von Quellen- oder Werkdaten im Netz, die sicherlich unerwünscht sind, selbst wenn man mit Versionierungsangaben arbeitet.
         
         
            III.
            Immer mehr Datenbanken zu Musikern und musikalischen Quellen tummeln sich im Netz. Doch selbst wenn es inhaltliche Überschneidungen gibt, arbeiten sie zumeist aneinander vorbei. Dabei ist das größte Problem nicht einmal die Vergeudung von Ressourcen, sondern die prinzipielle Unmöglichkeit eines Datenaustauschs bzw. einer einfachen Nachnutzbarkeit der Metadaten – selbst wenn sie in den sogenannten „Quasi-Standards“ TEI oder MEI vorliegen. Bei öffentlich geförderten Projekten ist heutzutage Grundvoraussetzung, dass die „langfristige Sicherung von“ und der „grundsätzlich offene Zugang zu“ Forschungsdaten gewährleistet sein muss, es aber bislang unklar ist, was genau dies heißt. Ist der Zugang schon „offen“ wenn man die Informationen im Internet finden kann, oder erst dann, wenn sie über eine Schnittstelle bereitgestellt werden? Solange Forschungsprojekte nur „digitale Inseln“ errichten, bringt das „Digitale“ keinen wirklichen Mehrwehrt.
            Zwar existieren bereits verschiedene Formate, die speziell für den Datenaustausch gedacht sind, wie z. B. MARC21 und METS/MODS, doch sind diese nur sehr eingeschränkt für (musikwissenschaftliche) Forschungsprojekte und Datenbanken einsetzbar. Auch spezielle Ontologien stehen bereit, die vom W3C zu den „Good Ontologies“ gezählt werden, also Ontologien, die vollständig dokumentiert, dereferenzierbar, von unabhängigen Datenlieferanten verwendet und möglicherweise von bestehenden Tools unterstützt werden („ontologies that are fully documented, dereferenceable, used by independent data providers and possibly supported by existing tools“). Beispiele dafür sind „
                    
                  Dublin Core“
                und „
                    
                  The Music 
                  Ontology
                  “
               . Doch auch hier bleibt das Problem, dass diese Formate zu flexibel, zu schwammig gestaltet sind, um einen sinnvollen, nachvollziehbaren Datenaustausch zu gewährleisten, oder aber spezielle Forschungs-Erkenntnisse nicht hinreichend darin abgebildet werden können – ganz abgesehen davon, dass derlei Lösungen überhaupt erst einmal implementiert werden müssen. Das vielgepriesene RDF, das versucht, einige dieser Probleme zu lösen (oder zu umschiffen), kann dabei kein Selbstläufer sein.
                
            Auch können Projekte a-priori nicht immer vorhersehen, welche Daten genau anfallen werden, bzw. welche von anderen Forschern oder Projekten nachgenutzt werden könnten. Es ist also nicht unbedingt zielführend, Daten in allen möglichen Formaten anbieten zu wollen, selbst wenn die Ressourcen es gestatten verschiedene Daten-Export-Möglichkeiten bereitzustellen (und zu pflegen).
            Können RESTful APIs die Lösung aller Probleme sein? Diese ermöglichen es zwar, sehr spezielle Kombinationen aus Metadaten zusammen zu stellen. Dennoch bleibt das Problem der intern verwendeten Formate bestehen; beschreibt ein Feld „date“ ein Aufführungsdatum oder das Datum der Werkgenese?
            Um digitale Gräber zu verhindern, sind spezielle, klar definiert und strukturierte Datenformate vonnöten, die für klar definierte Anwendungsfälle einen echten Austausch ermöglichen und somit auch erstmals dezentrale Suchmaschinen ermöglichen. Solche Suchmaschinen können abseits von Google überhaupt erst wirkliche Interdisziplinarität herstellen, denn mit wachsender Zahl an digitalen Projekten – so begrüßenswert dies auch sein mag – steigt die Gefahr, dass man „den Wald vor lauter Bäumen nicht sieht“, also Ergebnisse anderer (vielleicht fachfremder) Projekte nicht wahrnimmt, und dadurch möglicherweise den eigenen Erkenntnisprozess behindert.
            Der aktuelle Umgang mit gesammelten Metadaten soll am Beispiel von „Bach digital“ gezeigt sowie mögliche Auswege skizziert und diskutiert werden. Vorgestellt werden dabei standardisierte Formate, die bereits heute den Informationsaustausch und -fluss ermöglichen und aufzeigen, was dadurch zukünftig möglich sein könnte, aber auch, wo die größten Lücken und dringendsten Desiderate bislang bestehen blieben.
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Die Verwendung von Referenzdaten für das Training und die Auswertung statistischer Annotations- und Analyseverfahren ist ein Kernmerkmal empirischer Forschung, zu der auch die Digital Humanities zählen möchten.
                   Die wichtigste Grundlage für den erfolgreichen Einsatz statistischer Verfahren liegt in der Verwendung geeigneter, den Algorithmen zugrunde liegender Modelle. Für deren Erstellung ist neben einem passenden Lernverfahren das Vorhandensein von Trainingsdaten eine wesentliche Voraussetzung. Werden Forschungsdaten, die mit quantitativen Methoden entstanden sind, mit Referenzdaten verifiziert und interpretiert, ist ein kritischer Blick auf Auswahl, Erstellung und Umgang mit selbigen ein häufig vernachlässigter Bereich.
                
            Vor diesem Hintergrund richtet der vorliegende Beitrag einen kritischen Blick auf die Rolle von und den Umgang mit Ground-Truth-Daten im Bereich der Digital Humanities. Drei Beobachtungen sollen zur Diskussion gestellt werden:
            
               Es fehlt den Digital Humanities an einheitlichen und etablierten Ground-Truth-Datensets für die Evaluierung von Forschungsergebnissen auf Basis quantitativer Methoden.
               Es fehlt den Digital Humanities an Richtlinien zur Erstellung und Verfahren zur Verifizierung von Ground Truth.
               Es fehlt den Digital Humanities an akzeptierten und operationalisierbaren Metriken zur Qualitätsbestimmung von Ground Truth und abgeleiteten Datenanalysen.
            
            Anhand der automatischen Texterfassung, die als Analogie für ein allgemeines Modell eines empirischen Forschungsprozesses gesetzt wird, sollen im Folgenden die Probleme diskutiert und Möglichkeiten gezeigt werden, wie diesen Defiziten begegnet werden kann.
                
            
               
               Abbildung : Gegenüberstellung eines Modells eines Forschungsprozesses aus der empirischen Sozialforschung und dessen Anwendung auf den Prozess der automatischen Texterfassung
                    
            
            Unter Ground Truth wird in diesem Kontext die Dokumentation ausgewählter Merkmale (Zeichen, Zeilen, Absätze, Spalten, Abbildungen, usw.) des Textes in Form einer digitalen Transkription verstanden. Dabei ist je nach Anwendung zwischen allgemeineren Referenz- und spezifischeren Trainingsdaten zu unterscheiden.
            Die Volltext-Digitalisierung von Archiv- und Bibliotheksbeständen, größeren Dokumentsammlungen oder Korpora wird heute von unterschiedlichen Seiten verfolgt: So werden beispielsweise seit 2005 massenhaft Bibliotheksbestände von Google im Rahmen von öffentlich-privaten Partnerschaften sowohl als Bild als auch als Text digitalisiert. Daneben unterstützen Stiftungen, Fördereinrichtungen wie die DFG sowie die Haushaltsmittel der Institutionen die Digitalisierungen im Rahmen spezifischer Projekte. Im Ergebnis dieser Digitalisierungsbemühungen stehen Volltextsammlungen höchst unterschiedlicher Qualität, Vollständigkeit, Interoperabilität und Nachnutzbarkeit.
            Mit der OCR-D-Initiative wird erstmals versucht, die technischen und organisatorischen Grundlagen dafür zu schaffen, einen breiten heterogenen Bestand von Drucken aus dem 16. – 18. Jahrhundert vollständig und einheitlich in elektronischen Volltext umzuwandeln und frei zur Verfügung zu stellen. Unter Einbeziehung einzelner Modulprojekte wird vom DFG-geförderten Koordinierungsprojekt die Transformation der Drucke in strukturierten Volltext konzeptuell und prototypisch vorbereitet. Dazu werden im Rahmen von OCR-D Anwendungen, Adaptionen und Weiterentwicklungen von Verfahren der Optical Character Recognition (OCR) für historische Drucke geprüft bzw. implementiert und in einer finalen, prototypischen Produktionsumgebung kombiniert. Eine zentrale Aufgabe von OCR-D besteht dabei in der Bereitstellung eines umfassenden Ground-Truth-Korpus, das sowohl Referenz- als auch Trainingsdaten sowie Richtlinien zur Transkription von Texten für deren Verwendung als Ground Truth umfasst. Damit können sowohl Texte bezüglich ihrer Zeichengenauigkeit transparent geprüft als auch spezielle statistische Modelle für die Text- und Strukturerkennung trainiert werden.
                
         
         
            Diskussion
            1. Gegenstand der Digital Humanities ist das digitale Objekt, beispielsweise digitaler Text. Vergleicht man den Bereich der automatischen Texterfassung mit einem in der empirischen Sozialforschung etablierten Modell des Forschungsprozesses, wird deutlich, dass die Referenzdaten in beiden Prozessen, im Besonderen in der Phase der Evaluation nach Abschluss der Datenanalyse, eine bedeutende Rolle spielen. In dieser Phase wird auf entsprechende Referenzdaten oder -systematiken zurückgegriffen, die in der Phase der Theoriebildung identifiziert und angesammelt wurden. Anzumerken ist, dass der Forschungsprozess nicht isoliert zu betrachten ist, da er schon zu Beginn bei Formulierung und Auswahl des Forschungsproblems auf vorhandene Forschungsdaten zurückgreift. Der traditionelle Forschungsprozess hat durch ein System von Referenzendaten (u. a. Wörterbücher, Editionen, Nachschlage- und Quellenwerke) ein System der 
                    referenzbasierten Evaluation geschaffen. Dieses System wird gestützt durch Konventionen der Zitierung, Dokumentation, Verzeichnung und Aufbewahrung in Institutionen sowie spezifischen Publikationsformen. Der Forschungsprozess in den Digital Humanities kann auf diesen Hintergrund nur teilweise bzw. gar nicht zurückgreifen, da bisher zu wenige digitale Daten vorliegen.
                
            Auf der anderen Seite haben die Digital Humanities bezüglich der Verfügbarmachung von Quellcode und Forschungsdaten einen großen Vorsprung gegenüber anderen datenbasiert arbeitenden Disziplinen (etwa der kognitiven Psychologie). 
                    Reproducible Science wird sowohl gefördert als auch propagiert. Problematisch sind aber die fehlende Vereinheitlichung und Transparenz bei der Datenerhebung sowie der Einsatz mangelhaft erfasster Daten bzw. deren ad-hoc Surrogaten bedingt durch die mangelnde Verfügbarkeit an (insbesondere annotierten) Forschungsdaten.
                
            Die Arbeitsweise mit Referenzdaten, wie sie in den Naturwissenschaften und Teilen der Geisteswissenschaft Anwendung findet, möchte neben der Evaluation, Verifikation gerade die Vergleichbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse stützen. Das setzt voraus, dass diese Daten in ihrer Qualität diesen Ansprüchen genügen müssen und durch entsprechende Normungen Interpretationsspielräume definiert sind.
            Trotz des wissenschaftlichen Anspruches der Digital Humanities auf Objektivität und dem Bemühen Referenzdaten zu schaffen, werden unterschiedliche Interpretationen, die auf Grundlage von mangelhaften Referenz- und Trainingsdaten entstehen, möglich. Solch ein „hinzunehmendes Übel“ wird erkannt und mit „Pragmatismus“, mit der „Flexibilität“ oder „Austauschbarkeit von Konzepten im Konkreten der Texte“ gerechtfertigt, eine Vergleichbarkeit der so entstandenen Texte bzw. Forschungsergebnisse damit aber wesentlich behindert. Um eine Vergleichbarkeit im Sinne von 
                    Reproducible Science zu erreichen, ist somit der Gegenstand der Digital Humanities um die Fragen der Objekterstellung zu erweitern.
                
            2. Mit dem Begriff OCR wird üblicherweise der Gesamtprozess der automatischen Texterfassung bestehend aus den Teilaufgaben Bildvorverarbeitung, Struktur- und Texterkennung sowie gegebenenfalls (automatisierter) Nachkorrektur bezeichnet. Damit eine OCR vorgenommen werden kann, sind entsprechende Erkennungsmodelle notwendig. Diese werden durch sogenanntes Training unter Nutzung von Ground Truth induziert. Generische Modelle werden vom Anbieter der OCR-Software zur Verfügung gestellt, domänenspezifische Modelle müssen trainiert werden. Das Training dient immer der Verbesserung der Endergebnisse des Erkennungsprozesses. Somit sollten bei einem universellen Anspruch Ground-Truth-Daten sowohl spezifische als auch allgemeine Normungen enthalten, damit sowohl generische als auch spezifische Modelle trainiert werden können. Ziel ist es, die unterschiedlichen Bedürfnisse und Schwerpunkte in den Digital Humanities zu bedienen.
            3. Um diesem sehr breiten Anspruch gerecht zu werden, reicht eine Akklamation, dass diese oder jene Sammlung von Daten als Ground Truth bezeichnet und genutzt werden kann, nicht aus. Es bedarf hingegen eines Ground-Truth-Konzepts. Dieses Konzept dokumentiert sowohl dessen inneren Aufbau als auch dessen Erstellung. Damit können im Bereich der Texterfassung beispielsweise folgende Punkte im Umgang mit Ground Truth erreicht werden:
            
               (weitere) Reduktion bzw. Standardisierung der Freiheitsgrade bei der Transkription (z. B. langes s, Ligaturen, Zeilenumbruch)
               weitergehende Operationalisierung der Überprüfbarkeit der Validität
                        der Transkription
                    
               Ergänzung von (weiteren) Anweisungen zum Umgang mit koordinatenbasierten Phänomenen
            
            Illustriert werden kann ein solches Konzept am Beispiel der 
                    OCR-D Ground-Truth-Guidelines. Um die Freiheitsgrade von Interpretationen (Punkt A) zu normieren werden drei Level von Erfassungsgraden angeboten. Die einzelnen Level sollen nachvollziehbare Interpretationsentscheidungen sowohl festlegen als auch dokumentieren und damit die Möglichkeit der maschinellen Überprüfbarkeit eröffnen.
                
            Tabelle : Beispiel der Anwendung der Level bei der Ligatur ct.
            
               
                  Zeichen
                  Level 1
                  Level 2
                  Level 3
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  ct
                            Die Ligatur wird in zwei einzelne Zeichen aufgespalten.
                        
                  ct
                            Die Ligatur wird aufgespalten und mit einer zusätzlichen Annotation, dass es sich um eine Ligatur handelt, im PAGE-Format versehen.
                            textStyle{offset:0; length:2;ligatur:true;}
                        
                  &#xEEC5;
                            Die Ligatur wird als 
                            ein Zeichen interpretiert und mit dem entsprechenden Unicode-Zeichen wiedergegeben.
                        
               
            
            Damit werden Anweisung und Richtlinien weitgehend operationalisiert und eine computergestützte Validierung umsetzbar (Punkt B). Das entsprechende Ground-Truth-Korpus liegt im XML-basierten PAGE-Format vor. 
                    Das PAGE-Format hat sich im Rahmen des EU-Projekts IMPACT sowie durch seine Verbreitung im Rahmen von Wettbewerben bei wissenschaftlichen Konferenzen (z.B. ICDAR, ICFHR, DAS) als de-facto Standard für XML-basierter Ground Truth etabliert. 
                    Mit Hilfe von Schematron-Regeln kann nun, wie das Beispiel zeigt, geprüft werden, nach welchem Level die „ct“-Ligatur kodiert ist:
                
            
               
            
            Die Wahl des PAGE-Formates ermöglicht im Unterschied zum TEI-basierten Basisformat des DTA (DTABf) eine unkomplizierte Lösung für die Repräsentation von koordinatenbasierten Phänomenen (Punkt C).
                
            
               
            
         
         
            Fazit
            Ground Truth stellt im Texterkennungsprozess und im dazu betrachteten Forschungsprozess in den Digital Humanities eine entscheidende Rolle dar. Ergebnis dieser beiden Prozesse sind immer Publikationen, die als Forschungsdaten in neuen Forschungszusammenhängen nachgenutzt werden. Gelingt es den Digital Humanities nicht, ein Referenzsystem mit Konventionen zur Prüfung, Dokumentation, Verzeichnung und Aufbewahrung ihrer Daten in Institutionen sowie spezifischen Publikationsformen aufzubauen, ist die Vergleichbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse nicht immer gegeben. Dabei bietet der Aufbau so genannter Forschungsdatenrepositorien erste positive Entwicklungen in Richtung dokumentierter Forschungsprozesse.
            
            Der Gegenstand der Digital Humanities ist nicht nur auf das digitale Objekt zu beschränken, sondern auch auf dessen Erstellung zu erweitern. Die Erstellung ist ein Prozess, der von den Digital Humanities zu dokumentieren ist, da nur so eine Referenzierbarkeit und Reproduzierbarkeit der Forschungsergebnisse möglich wird. Der kritische Umgang mit diesen Daten stellt eine Aufgabe der Wissenschaft dar. 
            Daher täten die Digital Humanities gut daran, in einen aktiven Dialog mit digitalisierenden Einrichtungen und Förderern einzutreten um gemeinsame Standards und Richtlinien zur Dokumentation zu etablieren, die transparent Auskunft über die Provenienz eines digitalen Objekts geben sowie klar über Möglichkeiten sowie Einschränkungen zu dessen Nachnutzbarkeit informieren. Entscheidungen, Kriterien, Daten und Ergebnisse sollten, im Unterschied zur bisherigen, in diesem Beitrag kritisierten Praxis, zukünftig möglichst transparent, operationalisierbar sowie validierbar digital zur Verfügung gestellt werden. 
         
      
      
         
             Vgl. dazu These 1.1: „Die Digital Humanities bereichern die traditionellen Geisteswissenschaften konzeptionell und methodisch - ihre Werkzeuge und Verfahren ergänzen das „Wie“ unserer Praxis um 
                            eine empirisch ausgerichtete Epistemologie.“ [Thesenpapier des Fachverbands „Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum“ 2014]
                        
             siehe [Schnell, Hill, Esser 2011: 4]
             siehe Fußnote 2
             OCR-D: Koordinierungsprojekt zur Weiterentwicklung von Verfahren der Optical Character Recognition (OCR), http://www.ocr-d.de/.
             „Es werden weitere korpusbasierte Analysen angestrebt. Diese erfordern aber eine Voraussetzung: Im Zuge der ‚digitale[n] Wende‘ [Schöch 2014: 130] ist es weiterhin wünschenswert und erforderlich, dass immer mehr literarische Texte digital zur Verfügung stehen oder diese durch leichte und praktikable Verfahren der Texterkennung (OCR, optical character recognition) digitalisierbar gemacht werden können.“ [Mihm 2016: 200]
             „Dass die von uns einbezogenen Online-Repositorien hinsichtlich der editionsphilologischen Textqualität variieren ist ein hinzunehmendes Übel, dem wir zum einen pragmatisch (Wahl der bestmöglichen verfügbaren Ausgabe; Ziel, die Fehlermarge unter 2% zu halten), zum anderen unter Hinweis auf die flexible Struktur des Korpus (Austausch durch eine qualitativ hochwertigere Version ist möglich) begegnen. Durch die nahtlose Dokumentation des Korpus wird zudem die nötige Transparenz gewährleistet um auch Nachnutzern flexible Kontrolle der Daten zu ermöglichen.“ [Herrmann-Wolf, Lauer 2016: 159]
             Page Analysis and Ground Truth Elements, siehe http://www.primaresearch.org/publications/ICPR2010_Pletschacher_PAGE und https://github.com/PRImA-Research-Lab/PAGE-XML.
             Vgl. https://www.digitisation.eu/tools-resources/image-and-ground-truth-resources/.
             ISO/IEC-Standard 19757-3:2006
             Deutsches Textarchiv, DTA-Basisformat, http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat/.
             Vgl. z.B. https://rdmorganiser.github.io/
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Herrmann-Wolf, J. Berenike / Lauer, Gerhard (2016): „Aufbau und Annotation des Kafka/Referenzkorpus“ in: Burr Elisabeth (ed): 
                        DHd 2016 : Modellierung, Vernetzung, Visualisierung : die Digital Humanities als fächerübergreifendes Forschungsparadigma : Konferenzabstracts : Universität Leipzig 7. bis 12. März 2016. [Duisburg]: nisaba 158-160.
                    
               
                  Mihm, Melanie (2016): „Weibliches Erzählen im Expressionismus? Eine Stilometrie von Mela Hartwigs Prosa“ in: Burr Elisabeth (ed): 
                        DHd 2016 : Modellierung, Vernetzung, Visualisierung : die Digital Humanities als fächerübergreifendes Forschungsparadigma : Konferenzabstracts : Universität Leipzig 7. bis 12. März 2016. [Duisburg]: nisaba 198-200.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof (2014): „Corneille, Molière et les autres. Stilometrische Analysen zu Autorschaft und Gattungszugehörigkeit im französischen Theater der Klassik“, in: Schöch, Christof / Schneider, Lars (eds.): 
                        Literaturwissenschaft im digitalen Medienwandel (=Philologie im Netz Beiheft 7) 130-157 http://web.fu-berlin.de/phin/beiheft7/b7t08.pdf [letzter Zugriff 25.September 2017].
                    
               
                  Schnell, Rainer / Hill, Paul B. / Esser, Elke (2011): Methoden der empirischen Sozialforschung. 9., aktualisierte Aufl. München: Oldenbourg
                    
               
                  Thesenpapier des Fachverbands „Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum“ (DHd) (2014): „Digital Humanities 2020“, vorgestellt im März 2014 auf der ersten Jahrestagung des Verbandes in Passau. http://dig-hum.de/digital-humanities-2020.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Vorhaben
            Cäsar Flaischlens „Graphische Litteratur-Tafel“ von 1890 stellt den Versuch dar, die Entwicklung der Deutschen Literatur mit ihren Einflüssen aus anderen Nationalliteraturen graphisch in der Form eines Flusses darzustellen. Gegenstand des Vortrags ist die digitale Edition und Bereitstellung des Vorwortes und der Karte sowie der entwickelte Workflow: Für die Edition wurde das graphische Karteninventar kodiert. Mithilfe computergestützter Bildanalyse können nicht-textuelle Informationen der Visualisierung erfasst und einer quantitativen Analyse zugeführt werden.
         
         
            Visualisierung von Literaturgeschichte
            In den letzten Jahren lässt sich ein Trend innerhalb der Literaturwissenschaft – u.a. der Literaturgeschichtsschreibung – ausmachen, Fragestellungen auf der Grundlage von großen Datenkorpora zu beantworten. Charakteristisch für diese Art von Literaturwissenschaft ist ein Methodenimport aus Natur- und Sozialwissenschaften, der sich nicht zuletzt in den Darstellungsformen deutlich zeigt.
            Auch wenn sich diese Zugänge gegenwärtig großer Beliebtheit erfreuen, sind Darstellungsweisen wie jene in Morettis einflussreichem Buch „Kurven, Karten, Stammbäume: Abstrakte Modelle für die Literaturgeschichte“ (Moretti 2007) keineswegs ein Phänomen der Gegenwart, denn Literaturgeschichtsschreibung bedient sich bereits seit der Antike Bildmedien und anderer – nicht rein textueller – Präsentationsformen. Darstellungen von AutorInnen, wie etwa jene auf Raffaels berühmtem Parnassfresko in den Vatikanischen Museen lassen sich aus heutiger Perspektive wie Diagramme lesen. Information zu Relevanz sowie Verbindungen einzelner AutorInnen sind hier im Bildmedium kodiert. (vgl. Hölter/Schmitz-Emans 2013, Hölter 2005)
            Das Parnassfresko ist nur eine Art, wie sich Kanonbildung, Rezeption und die Zugehörigkeit zu einer AutorInnengruppe darstellen lassen. Häufig gewählte Darstellungsformen sind (Stamm-)Baum (Lima 2014) und Fluss. Die Literaturwissenschaft greift damit Formen auf, die erst mit Fortschritten in der Buchproduktion durch die Entwicklung der Lithographie möglich geworden sind und zunächst in der Geschichtsschreibung Anwendung gefunden haben (vgl. Rosenberg/Grafton 2010).
         
         
            Cäsar Flaischlens „Graphische Litteratur-Tafel“
            Wie produktiv sich diese tradierten Denkbilder auf die Konzeptualisierung von (Literatur-)Karten auswirken können, zeigt die „Graphische Litteratur-Tafel” (1890) des deutschen Autors Cäsar Flaischlen (1864–1920). Flaischlens großformatige Karte (58x86,5 cm) visualisiert den – wie es im Untertitel heißt – „Einfluss fremder Literaturen” auf die deutsche Literatur und bedient dafür die Denkfigur geschichtlicher Prozesse als Fluss, bestehend aus einer Summe von Einflüssen. Er knüpft damit an eine Darstellungstradition von Weltgeschichte an, wie sie durch die Graphik „Strom der Zeiten“ (1804) des österreichischen Historiographen Friedrich Strass maßgeblich geprägt wurde (vgl. Rosenberg und Grafton, 2010). 
            In Cäsar Flaischlens Œuvre nimmt die aufwendig gestaltete Litteratur-Tafel eine Sonderstellung ein: Die für ihre Zeit ungewöhnliche literaturwissenschaftliche Arbeit erschien beinahe zeitgleich mit seiner Promotion 1899 und sollte Flaischlens einzige Publikation zur Literaturgeschichte bleiben. Flaischlen verließ die akademische Welt und war als Mitherausgeber und Redakteur von Literatur- und Kunstzeitschriften tätig. Heute ist der Autor hauptsächlich für seine Mundartgedichte und Erzählungen bekannt. 
            Auf der Karte wird die deutschsprachige Literatur von ihren Anfängen bis in Flaischlens Gegenwart dargestellt. Was in der Grafik zunächst als zwei sich schlängelnde Bäche der „Volks- und Kunstpoesie“ um 750 beginnt, entwickelt sich im Laufe der Jahrhunderte zu einem breiten Strom, in welchen über den gesamten (Zeit-)Verlauf Zuflüsse aus anderen (hauptsächlich) europäischen Nationalliteraturen einmünden. In der Legende der Karte führt Flaischlen folgende Einflüsse auf: Altes- und Neues Testament, Englisch, Französisch, Nordisch, Orientalisch, Klassisches Altertum, Spätlateinisch, Niederländisch, Italienisch, Spanisch, Schwedisch/Dänisch/Norwegisch, Russisch. 
            Als Vertreter positivistischer Denkrichtung unternimmt Cäsar Flaischlen also den Versuch, die Darstellung der Zeit als Fluss mit den exakten Wissenschaften zu verbinden. Die Tatsache, dass er keine Quellen für die Zusammenstellung seiner Tafel nennt, spricht dafür, dass er den gängigen Kanon abbildet. Im 8-spaltigen Vorwort zur Tafel spielt Flaischlen zwar den Zusammenhang von quantitativem Befund und Visualisierung herunter – so gibt er etwa zu bedenken, dass die Breite des Flusses „nicht mathematisch berechnet” sei, die Platzierung der Autoren folgt jedoch einem gewissen Prinzip: Die Autoren habe er am „Höhepunkt“ ihres Schaffens eingezeichnet.
            Der Informationsgehalt der „Litteraturtafel“ ist sehr hoch: Auswahl, Platzierung und Größe der beeinflussenden und beeinflussten Autoren ermöglichen die Rekonstruktion von Flaischlens Datengrundlage und lassen Rückschlüsse auf die hierfür verwendeten Quellen zu.
            So sind etwa in der Tafel Namen von Autoren, kanonischen Texten, literarischen Gruppierungen und literarischen Schulen enthalten. Ferner nutzt Cäsar Flaischlen typographische Gestaltungsmöglichkeiten wie Schriftart, Schriftgröße, Farbwahl und Unterstreichung), Symbole (Kreise in verschiedenen Größen, römische und lateinische Ziffern) und die farbliche Schraffur der (Zu-)Flüsse. Am unteren Rand der Karte ist zwar eine Legende angebracht, diese weist jedoch lediglich die Bedeutung der Schraffur aus (z.B. blau für Einflüsse aus der Englischen Literatur, rot für Einflüsse aus der Französischen Literatur, etc.). Weitere Angaben, insbesondere Erläuterungen zu verwendeten Schriftarten und -größen fehlen jedoch.
         
         
            Technische Umsetzung
            Das vorgestellte Projekt „Cäsar Flaischlens Graphische Litteratur-Tafel digital“ unternimmt den Versuch eines ‚reverse engineering‘ und erschließt dieses Dokument früher Visualisierung literaturgeschichtlicher Daten mit Methoden der Digital Humanities. 
            Dazu wurden die Koordinaten von angeführten Personen, Texten, literarischen Strömungen und Schulen unter Verwendung des GIMP ImageMap-Editors ermittelt und entsprechend den in den TEI P5 Guidelines (TEI Consortium 2017) definierten Transkriptionskonventionen („Advanced Uses of surface and zone“) erfasst, um die spatiale Dimension (Kodierung von Information über räumliche Anordnung) ebenfalls zugänglich machen zu können. Die Personen- und Werkreferenzen wurden mit den entsprechenden Normdaten (GND, VIAF, wikidata) verknüpft. Das kartographische Inventar der Karte wurde unter Rückgriff auf CSS innerhalb von @style erfasst. Dies ermöglicht nun, neben den textuellen Informationen zusätzlich die typographische Gestaltung des Textes auszuwerten.
            Die TEI-Daten werden über ein github-repository bereitgestellt und als Webseite aufbereitet. Das Interface fügt die drei separaten Abschnitte von Flaischlens Karte zusammen. In einer Print- Ausgabe wäre der zusammengefügte Fluss beinahe drei Meter lang und somit nur schwer lesbar. Die Web-Version erlaubt über das Scroll-Interface jedoch einen komfortablen Zugang. Die kodierten Informationen sind über Register erschlossen. Ein Prototyp der Edition ist unter http://litteratur-tafel.weltliteratur.net zugänglich.
         
         
            Computergestützte Analyse des kartographischen Inventars (Zwischenergebnisse)
            Durch eine Analyse des kartographischen Inventars lässt sich das Zeichensystem rekonstruieren, das zudem gängigen kartographischen Konventionen folgt. Beeinflusste und beeinflussende Autoren werden durch Unterstreichung unterschieden. Die Farbe der Unterstreichung entspricht der farblichen Kennzeichnung der Zuflüsse und ordnet somit die Autoren einer der beeinflussenden Nationalliteraturen zu. Durch die Verwendung unterschiedlicher Schriftgrößen wird die „Relevanz“ eines Autors bzw. Textes für die deutsche Literatur zum Ausdruck gebracht. Besonders wichtige deutsche Autoren sind in Konturschrift ausgeführt, vergleichbar der Beschriftung von Städten in Abhängigkeit von ihrer Einwohnerzahl (vgl. Kohlstock 2004: 100). EIne Analyse der Typografie erlaubt es somit, Flaischlens „Verständnis“ der deutschen Literatur zu rekonstruieren.
            Um die farblich kodierten Informationen der Karte ebenfalls berücksichtigen zu können, wurde ein Zugang über Verfahren aus dem Bereich computergestützter Bildanalyse gewählt. Mittels der Open Source Computer Vision Library (openCV) wurden die Pixel nach Farbbereichen klassifiziert und quantitativ ausgewertet, um die „Einflüsse“ zu messen und ihre Veränderungen im Laufe der Zeit visualisieren zu können. Abbildung 1 zeigt jene Pixel, der Kategorie „rot“ und somit dem französischen Einfluss zugeordnet wurden. 
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Original und klassifizierte Pixel
            
            Für Abbildung 2 wurde wurden die Pixel nach Jahren gruppiert und als Liniendiagramm visualisiert. Deutlich erkennbar sind Spitzen um 1620, 1665, 1715 und 1800, die sich verschiedenen Epochen der französischen Literaturgeschichte zuordnen lassen: Dem Französischen Klassizismus und der Aufklärung. Der Peak in den 1860er Jahren ist mit dem französischen Naturalismus verbunden.
            
               
               Abbildung 2: Französischer Einfluss auf Basis der Pixelklassifikation
            
         
         
            Ausblick
            Das Projekt erschließt nicht nur einen inspirierenden Vorläufer gegenwärtiger Versuche von Visualisierung literaturgeschichtlicher Daten mithilfe von ‘Graphen, Karten und Stammbäumen’, sondern erprobt auch auf einer methodologischen Ebene Möglichkeiten und Workflows zur Erschließung und Kodierung älterer graphischer Darstellungen von (Literatur-)geschichte. Darüber hinaus liefert es Impulse für die Arbeit mit der TEI für das Encoding von Bildmaterial, indem die Eignung von primär zur Kodierung von Manuskripten eingesetzten Tags für Grafiken und Diagramme überprüft werden. 
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Flaischlen, Cäsar (1890): 
                        Graphische Litteratur-Tafel. Die deutsche Litteratur und der Einfluß fremder Litteraturen auf ihren Verlauf vom Beginn der schriftlichen Ueberlieferung an bis heute in graphischer Darstellung. Berlin: Behr's Verlag.
                    
               
                  Hölter, Achim (2005): „Überlegungen zu Raffaels Parnass-Fresko als Kanonbild“ in: Heimböckel, Dieter / Werlein, Uwe (eds.): 
                        Der Bildhunger der Literatur. Festschrift für Gunter E. Grimm. Würzburg 51-68.
                    
               
                  Hölter, Achim / Schmitz-Emans, Monika (eds.) (2013): 
                        Literaturgeschichte und Bildmedien. Heidelberg: Synchron.
                    
               
                  Kohlstock, Manuel (2004): 
                        Kartographie. Eine Einführung. Stuttgart: UTB.
                    
               
                  Lima, Manuel (2014): 
                        The Book of Trees. Visualizing Branches of Knowledge. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
                    
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2007): 
                        Graphs, Maps, Trees. Abstract Models for Literary History. London, New York: Verso.
                    
               
                  openCV: 
                        Open Source Computer Vision Library. http://opencv.org [letzter Zugriff 24. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Rosenberg, Daniel / Grafton, Anthony (2010): 
                        Cartographies of Time. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
                    
               
                  Strass, Friedrich (1803): 
                        Der Strom Der Zeiten. http://www.davidrumsey.com/luna/servlet/detail/RUMSEY~8~1~281767~90054624 [letzter Zugriff 24. September 2017].
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium (2017). 
                        TEI P5 – Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.2.0. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html [letzter Zugriff 25. September 2017].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         In terms of longevity and collation of textual data in the humanities, digital data, notwithstanding its potential, still falls short the qualities of the traditionally printed book.
         To streamline the diverse and idiosyncratic Digital Editions of the time and to establish a cross- and re-usable, durable digital archive of textual cultural artifacts, in 1988 the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) was established with the goal to present a commonly shared standard for the transcription of literary, scientific and other forms of text.
         As data model, the extensible markup language XML was chosen to assure longevity and exchangeability of the data. However, it turns out that XML, and with it, the data model of the hierarchically ordered tree are questionable choices for the recording of complex texts – as they are commonly found in the humanities – by potentially rendering the data ambiguous on semantic level.
         The abstract idea behind the commonly shared tag set for the description of textual data is reflected in the 
                TEI abstract model (TEI Consortium 2016b) which uses XML as a serialisation format – but to which it is not bound:
            
         The rules and recommendations made in these Guidelines are expressed in terms of what is currently the most widely-used markup language for digital resources of all kinds: the Extensible Markup Language (XML) […]. However, the TEI encoding scheme itself does not depend on this language […], and may in future years be re-expressed in other ways as the field of markup develops and matures.
         In the following, fundamental limitations of the tree data model are highlighted in spotlight fashion and contrasted with a graph based model for the sustainable recording and long-term archiving of complex textual data.
         
            Limitations of the tree model
            Paradoxically, Digital Editions as well as digital archives, tools, platforms and data repositories are not as interoperable in practice as one would theoretically expect from standardised sources. To be able to cross- or re-use data or tools between projects, in practice, serious refactoring and rededication is necessary – e.g. existing web platforms cannot readily be re-used by another project, notwithstanding the fact that the data repositories are fully validating, validating TEI-P5 sources. How is this possible?
            As will be shown, this paradoxical situation of factually unattainable interoperability of editions and tools are a direct consequence of the choice of data model.
            The decision towards XML and the tree data model is based on the OHCO assumption of text as an Ordered Hierarchy of Content Objects (DeRose et al. (1990); revised in Renear, Mylonas, and Durand (1993)). Contrasting the original goals (TEI Consortium 2016c) of interoperable long-term archivable data repositories with the status quo, this decision towards XML as the serialisation format needs to be critically questioned – particularly since the TEI Guidelines themselves very early on make clear that the assumption of data model behind XML is an improper simplification (TEI Consortium 2016a):
            Surprisingly perhaps, this grossly simplified view of what text is […] turns out to be very effective for a large number of purposes. It is not, however, adequate for the full complexity of real textual structures, for which more complex mechanisms need to be employed.
            Already two most basic constellations can lead to a necessary departure from the tree paradigm which could be described as ‘Complex XML’.
            These situations are commonly resolved by using workarounds (TEI Consortium 2016d). Although 
                    syntactically permissible on the level of XML markup, these workarounds establish structures beyond the data model of the tree and can lead to misrepresentation of the data on 
                    semantic, modelling level, seriously harming effective re-use and long-term archiving.
                
            
               Data as well as tools inevitably become idiosyncratic, i.e. they irrevocably need to be handled on individual, project-specific basis; projects increasingly develop ‘private dialects’ and couple philologists and data scientists for actually accessing the data; data and tools are inaccessible to cross- and re-use between projects; finally, the possibility of a common digital archive is lost beyond recall.
            
            
               Complex textual structures demand additional annotation to help and guide downstream tooling to not misrepresent the data. The transcription – in spite of valid, conforming data w.r.t. to the XML Schema – cannot automatically, i.e. without human intervention, be unambiguously resolved into its textual variants. 
               The necessary supplementary annotation to one-unambiguously describe and model the source sets in motion a vicious circle of exponentially growing complexity in the data. Project-specific, idiosyncratic tools become necessary and must match this complexity. Moreover, such repositories typically suffer from overtagging (Hanrahan 2015), or, in the worst case need to be abandoned entirely (Schmidt et al. 2006).
            
            
               Any further annotation or commentary only ever increases the complexity: any further annotation must match the existing complexity of the amended tree structure to accordingly be integrated; data and tools suffer from a ‘Heisenberg-Effect’ in that any further, more precise description of the source makes the data only ever more imprecise.
            
         
         
            Complex XML
            In contrast to a simple edition, i.e. one of linear text without any further annotation, the need for ‘Complex XML’, on most fundamental, level arises through: 
            
               the edition of a non-linear text
               the edition of a linear text, open for annotation
            
            In essence, anything that is beyond linear text free of annotation cannot adequately be represented by a mono-hierarchical tree model and will need “more complex mechanisms” (TEI Consortium 2016a).
            
               Complex XML through non-linear text
               Non-linear text results from editorial operations such as insertions, deletions, substitutions. For instance, recording the genealogical writing process of two undecided variants within the same sentence, yields four different, non-linear potential readings.
               
                  
                     
                  
                  These four different readings derived from mechanical re-combination potentially are not intended and to be reduced to specific readings only.
               
               
                  
                     
                  
                  Constraining these combinatorial permutations cannot be done in general ways within the mono-hierarchical tree data model. The tree model exposes a general limitation – even without the prevalence of overlapping structures.
               
               
                  
                     
                  
                  While interconnecting nodes across the tree’s boundaries by (ab-)using attributes is syntactically possible it nevertheless makes the data idiosyncratic on semantic level, i.e. project-specific rules are introduced and must individually be followed when working with the data.
               
               
                  
                     
                  
                  These interconnections to constrain the combinatorics to specific readings cannot formally be made part of the tree structure itself. To build a tree, any node in the tree must have exactly one parent. A different data model and data structure is necessary to model more than one parent for one node, namely the data model of the graph.
               
               
                  
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Complex XML through meta-data
               Complex XML can also result from linear text, open for annotation. The following schematic example shows a linear text with overlapping annotation:
               
                  
                     
                  
               
               Corresponding serialisation using XML and the segmentation method (TEI Consortium 2016d):
               
                  
                     
                  
               
               The necessary interconnection and recombination of fragmented nodes cannot be modelled within the tree structure in general ways:
               
                  
                     
                  
               
               Another representation shows how one node in the tree is made the child of two parents:
               
                  
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            The relationship between graphs and trees
            Trees and graphs are closely related: An ordered tree is a special form of graph with the properties of 
                    a) it is a directed graph without cycles, 
                    b) has one designated root node and 
                    c) any node has exactly one parent node.
                
            As was shown in the previous basic examples, there is strictly no possibility to interconnect nodes of the tree across branches of the tree. By trying to associate two parents to one node, the tree paradigm is effectively abandoned, and results in a permanent need for case-specific handling to resolve potential ambiguities in the data.
         
         
            Conclusion
            Digital Editions wanting to model more than just simple structures can – notwithstanding the syntactical possibilities of XML – not be represented in interoperable ways within the paradigm of the tree data model, making longevity and uniformly re-usable digital archives impossible.
            Alternative, graph-theoretic attempts to solve this problem have been suggested and could implement the 
                    TEI abstract model through an adequate data structure (Huitfeldt 1994; Barnard et al. 1995; Sperberg-McQueen and Huitfeldt 2000; Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen 2001; Durusau and O'Donnell 2002; Tennison and Piez 2002; Dipper 2005; Dekhtyar and Iacob 2005; Banski and Przepiórkowski 2009; Di Iorio, Peroni, and Vitali 2010; Di Iorio, Peroni, and Vitali 2011; Schmidt and Colomb 2009; Schmidt 2014; Götze and Dipper 2006; Peroni, Vitali, and Di Iorio 2009; Witt 2007; Kuczera 2016).
                
            Yet, the question of an adequate serialisation and exchange format to any such data structure remains open. To be able to give guarantees of long term storage and archiving, any such serialisation format must be able to one-unambiguously represent the source as well as data structure. Ideally, any such serialisation format should be both machine readable as well as human intelligible and independent of existing computer hardware and software.
            Previous graph-based approaches for the recording of complex textual data either did not catch on or have been abandoned for reasons of complexity in implementation or usage.
            Because of the choice of data model, current repositories are idiosyncratic and tools and data must be handled on individual basis. In order to be able to build general digital archives fully interoperable data repositories are necessary. Interoperability is closely connected to the choice of data model. The TEI abstract model should be implemented as a graph structure, however, the graph structure is in need of a suitable exchange and serialisation format.
            The commonly shared property between former graph-based approaches is the use of embedded markup. It is conjectured that future research on suitable serialisation formats for graph-based approaches should re-evaluate standoff based markup for the durable recording of Digital Editions.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliography
               
                  Banski, Piotr, and Adam Przepiórkowski. 2009. “Stand-Off TEI Annotation: The Case of the National Corpus of P
                        olish.” In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, 64–67. Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    
               
                  Barnard, David T, Lou Burnard, Jean-Pierre Gaspart, Lynne A Price, CM Sperberg-McQueen, and Giovanni Battista Varile. 1995. “Hierarchical Encoding of Text: Technical Problems and SGML Solutions.” In 
                        Text Encoding Initiative, 211–31. Springer.
                    
               
                  Dekhtyar, Alex, and Ionut E Iacob. 2005. “A Framework for Management of Concurrent XML Markup.” 
                        Data & Knowledge Engineering 52 (2). Elsevier:185–208.
                    
               
                  DeRose, Steven J., David G. Durand, Elli Mylonas, and Allen H. Renear. 1990. “What is text, really.” 
                        Journal of Computing in Higher Education 1 (2). Springer Nature:3–26. 
                        .
                    
               
                  Di Iorio, Angelo, Silvio Peroni, and Fabio Vitali. 2010. “Handling markup overlaps using OWL.” In 
                        Knowledge Engineering and Management by the Masses, 391–400. Springer.
                    
               
                  Di Iorio, Angelo, Silvio Peroni, and Fabio Vitali. 2011. “A Semantic Web Approach to Everyday Overlapping Markup.” 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62 (9). Wiley Online Library:1696–1716.
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie. 2005. “XML-Based Stand-Off Representation and Exploitation of Multi-Level Linguistic Annotation.” In 
                        Berliner XML Tage, 39–50.
                    
               
                  Durusau, Patrick, and M Brook O'Donnell. 2002. “Concurrent Markup for XML Documents.” In 
                        Proc. XML Europe.
                    
               
                  Götze, Michael, and Stefanie Dipper. 2006. “ANNIS: Complex Multilevel Annotations in a Linguistic Database.” In 
                        Proceedings of the 5
                  th
                   Workshop on NLP and XML: Multi-Dimensional Markup in Natural Language Processing, 61–64. Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    
               
                  Hanrahan, Elise. 2015. “Over-Tagging with XML in Digital Scholarly Editions.” In 
                        DHd2015 Conference – von Daten Zu Erkenntnissen. Book of Abstracts., edited by Various, 162–65. Graz, Austria.
                    
               
                  Huitfeldt, Claus. 1994. “Multi-Dimensional Texts in a One-Dimensional Medium.” 
                        Computers and the Humanities 28 (4-5). Springer:235–41.
                    
               
                  Huitfeldt, Claus, and CM Sperberg-McQueen. 2001. “TexMECS: An Experimental Markup Meta-Language for Complex Documents.” 
                        URL Http://Www. Hit. Uib. No/Claus/Mlcd/Papers/Texmecs. Html.
                    
               
                  Kuczera, Andreas. 2016. “Digital Editions Beyond Xml – Graph-Based Digital Editions.” In 
                        Proceedings of the 3
                  rd
                   Histoinformatics Workshop on Computational History (Histoinformatics 2016), edited by Johannes Preiser-Kappeller Marten Düring Adam Jatowt.
                    
               
                  Peroni, Silvio, Fabio Vitali, and Angelo Di Iorio. 2009. “Towards markup support for full GODDAGs and beyond: the EARMARK approach.” 
                        .
                    
               
                  Renear, Allen H, Elli Mylonas, and David Durand. 1993. “Refining Our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem of Overlapping Hierarchies.” Oxford University Press.
               Schmidt, Desmond. 2014. “Towards an Interoperable Digital Scholarly Edition.” 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, no. 7. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Desmond, and Robert Colomb. 2009. “A Data Structure for Representing Multi-Version Texts Online.” 
                        International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 67 (6). Elsevier:497–514.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas, Christian Chiarcos, Timm Lehmberg, Georg Rehm, Andreas Witt, and Erhard Hinrichs. 2006. “Avoiding Data Graveyards: From Heterogeneous Data Collected in Multiple Research Projects to Sustainable Linguistic Resources.” In 
                        6
                  th
                   E-Meld Workshop, Ypsilanti.
                    
               
                  Sperberg-McQueen, C Michael, and Claus Huitfeldt. 2000. “GODDAG: A Data Structure for Overlapping Hierarchies.” In 
                        Digital Documents: Systems and Principles, 139–60. Springer.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium. 2016a. “A Gentle Introduction to XML” In 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, by TEI Consortium, Version 3.2.0. Last updated on 10th July 2017, revision 0fcf651. 
                        .
                    
               ———. 2016b. “About These Guidelines.” In 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, by TEI Consortium, Version 3.2.0. Last updated on 10th July 2017, revision 0fcf651. 
                        .
                    
               ———. 2016c. “Design Principles.” In 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, by TEI Consortium, Version 3.2.0. Last updated on 10th July 2017, revision 0fcf651. 
                        .
                    
               ———. 2016d. “Non-Hierarchical Structures.” In 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, by TEI Consortium, Version 3.2.0. Last updated on 10th July 2017, revision 0fcf651. 
                        .
                    
               
                  Tennison, Jeni, and Wendell Piez. 2002. “The Layered Markup and Annotation Language (LMNL).” In 
                        Extreme Markup Languages.
                    
               
                  Witt, Andreas. 2007. “Guideline: Multiple Hierarchies.” In 
                        Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Die vom Institut für die Geschichte der deutschen Juden (IGdJ) erstellte, seit Juli 2015 von der DFG geförderte und seit September 2016 frei zugängliche zweisprachige (deutsch/englisch) Online-Quellenedition „Hamburger Schlüsseldokumente zur deutsch-jüdischen Geschichte“ (
                http://juedische-geschichte-online.net/) wirft am Beispiel von derzeit etwa 75 ausgewählten Quellen thematische Schlaglichter auf zentrale Aspekte der deutsch-jüdischen Geschichte Hamburgs.
            
         Mit der Auswahl und Digitalisierung von Text-, Bild-, Ton- und Sachquellen, die exemplarisch Einblick in historische Zusammenhänge und Ereignisse von der frühen Neuzeit bis in die Gegenwart bieten – den sog. Schlüsseldokumenten – führt sie das aufgrund von Vertreibung und Migration verstreute jüdische Erbe der Stadt digital wieder zusammen und trägt zu seiner langfristigen Sicherung für zukünftige Generationen bei. Ziel ist dabei, das Digitale nicht nur als ein weiteres Medium zu begreifen, sondern als einen Werkzeugkasten, mit dem das Material auf unterschiedlichen Ebenen bearbeitet werden kann. Zum einen führt die Digitalisierung selbst zur besseren Zugänglichkeit und nachhaltigen Sicherung, zum anderen erlauben die technische Auszeichnung nach TEI und Verknüpfung der bereitgestellten Materialien die Auswertung bislang nicht systematisch erfasster Informationen. Und schließlich bietet eine digitale Publikationsumgebung die Möglichkeit, neben Textquellen Bild-, Ton- und Videodokumente (sowie zukünftig 3D-Repräsentationen von Objekten) einzubinden und damit in den Geschichtswissenschaften bislang eher stiefmütterlich behandelte Quellengattungen verstärkt in den Blick zu nehmen.
         Von diesen Überlegungen ausgehend, bilden die digitalisierten und technisch aufbereiteten Quellen konsequenterweise den Dreh- und Angelpunkt der Edition, die zugleich so strukturiert ist, dass sie hypertextuell angelegt und modular aufgebaut ist. Dass die Auseinandersetzung über konkrete Deutungen und Einordnungen am Beispiel konkreter Dokumente erfolgt und diese zugleich neuartig aufbereitet präsentiert werden, erlaubt ihre Fruchtbarmachung für neue Fragestellungen und kann Impulse für die deutsch-jüdische Geschichte geben. Alle Quellen werden als Transkript und digitales Faksimile bereitgestellt. Sowohl Quellen als auch Interpretationstexte werden nach TEI P5 gemäß dem Basisformat des Deutschen Textarchivs ausgezeichnet (Haaf et al 2015). Dies erlaubt neben der Auszeichnung der grundlegende Textstruktur die Verknüpfung mit Normdaten (Personen, Institutionen, Orte) sowie eine interne Verlinkungen mit weiteren Quellen, um so den Texten eine zweite Informationsebene einzuschreiben. Zugleich werden alle bereitgestellten Materialien mit einer DOI versehen, die die langfristige Referenzierbarkeit sicherstellt und die Bearbeitungshistorie transparent werden lässt.
         Da die Digitalisierung und Online-Stellung von Quellen jedoch auch immer ein Herauslösen aus dem Überlieferungszusammenhang bedeutet und damit mit einer Entkontextualisierung und Entmaterialiserung verbunden ist, wird bei dieser Edition Wert darauf gelegt, neben der Bereitstellung der digitalisierten Quelle, diese durch begleitende Interpretations- und Hintergrundtexte verstärkt in ihre historischen Kontexte einzubetten und zusätzliche Informationen zur Überlieferung, Rezeptionsgeschichte und zu wissenschaftlichen Kontroversen bereitzustellen.
         Indem für die Digitalisierung, Textauszeichnung und Metadatenerschließung auf existierende Standardformate digitaler Editionen und der Langfristarchivierung wie MODS (Katalogdaten), METS (Digitalisate), TEI (Textauszeichnung der Transkriptionen und Übersetzungen), DOI (persistente Adressierung) sowie GND-Beacon-Dateien zurückgegriffen wird und bestehende Werkzeuge (Oxygen XML Editor) und technische Infrastrukturen (MyCoRe, Zotero) nachgenutzt werden, zugleich aber die Nutzerfreundlichkeit und Bedienbarkeit im Vordergrund steht, wurde eine innovative digitale Quellenedition zur jüdischen Geschichte Hamburgs geschaffen, die das Digitale als eine Möglichkeit ansieht, analoge Quelle neuartig zu präsentieren und mit weiteren (Informations-)schichten anzureichern und damit neue Impulse für die Forschung zu geben. Der Quellcode der Webanwendung ist für andere Projekte frei nachnutzbar (https://github.com/burki/jewish-history-online).
         Neben der Auswahl und Aufbereitung des ausgewählten heterogenen Quellenmaterials zeichnet sich das Angebot durch umfassende Recherchemöglichkeiten (Karte, Zeitstrahl, Themen) sowie eine attraktive Präsentationsform aus. Auf diese Weise werden digitale Edierungstechniken für Quellen zur jüdischen Geschichte erprobt und einer breiten Öffentlichkeit vorgestellt. Die systematische Auszeichnung von Personen, Organisationen und Orte mit Normdaten ermöglicht die bidirektionale Verknüpfung der Edition mit externen Angeboten. So können ergänzende Informationen aus Linked Data Services wie denen der DNB und von Getty automatisiert ergänzt werden. Umgekehrt ermöglicht die Generierung von eigenen GND-Beacon-Listen externen Anbietern eine einfache Verknüpfung ihrer Angebote mit den entsprechenden Inhalten im Quellenportal.
         Unser Poster zeigt die zentralen Eigenschaften der Online-Edition und hilft, den konzeptionellen Rahmen sowie die technische Umsetzung zu verstehen. Es illustriert die Verknüpfung zwischen TEI-Kodierung der Dokumente sowie ihrer Präsentation und Navigation. Es soll damit den konzeptionellen Grundgedanken des Projektes veranschaulichen, das Digitale mit seinen Möglichkeiten ernst zu nehmen, jedoch nicht in Konkurrenz, sondern in Ergänzung zum Analogen.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Haaf, Susanne / Geyken, Alexander / Wiegand, Frank (2015): "The DTA 'Base Format': A TEI Subset for the Compilation of a Large Reference Corpus of Printed Text from Multiple Sources", in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8, December 2014 - December 2015, http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1114 [letzter Zugriff 10. Januar 2018].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Schon länger wird die Frage nach der Lehre der Digital Humanities gestellt (cf. u. a. Hirsch (2012), Gold (2012), Warwick / Terras / Nyhan (2012)). Zudem sind Initiativen wie die EU geförderte 
                    #dariahTeach entstanden, die Materialien für die Lehre von Digital Humanities entwickelt und online zur Verfügung stellt. 2017 haben dann Fotis Jannidis, Hubertus Kohle und Malte Rehbein ein umfangreiches deutschsprachiges Lehrbuch zu 
                    Digital Humanities vorgelegt. In keiner dieser Publikationen wird aber, soweit wir sehen können, der Frage nachgegangen, wie der Auftrag, den die neue Epistemologie 
                    Digital Humanities als den ihren erkennt, nämlich ein umfassenderes und kritischeres Wissen von Artefakten sowie deren Relationen untereinander mittels der Nutzung von computationellen Methoden zu schaffen, in der Lehre umgesetzt werden kann. Einen Versuch in diese Richtung unternehmen wir in einem romanistischen Master-Modul, wo frühe gedruckte Grammatiken und Sprachtraktate zunächst als „Kinder des Buchdrucks“ eingeordnet und dann mittels Transkription und Auszeichnung für Forschungen im digitalen Zeitalter verfügbar gemacht werden. 
                
         
         
            Grundlagen des Versuchs
            Dem Versuch zugrunde liegt ein Projekt, das es sich zum Ziel setzt, die kulturellen, politischen, gesellschaftlichen, ideologischen, genderbedingten etc. Vorstellungen, Ideen und Ziele, die sich hinter sprachbetrachtenden, sprachbeschreibenden und sprachnormierenden Werken, wie Grammatiken und Sprachtraktate, der frühen Gutenberg-Ära verbergen, vergleichend und in ihren Zusammenhängen über die einzelnen romanischen Kulturen und Sprachen hinweg zu untersuchen. Um diese Werke systematisch erforschbar zu machen, bedarf es allerdings zunächst einmal ihrer Digitalisierung und Erschließung. 
            Bei den Texten, die bisher berücksichtigt wurden, handelt es sich um:
            
               Francesco Fortunio (1516): 
                        Regole grammaticali della volgar lingua. Ancona: Bernardin Vercellese
                    
               Louis Meigret (1550): 
                        Le trętté de la GRAMMĘRE FRANCOĘZE. Paris: Chrestien Wechel
                    
               Speron Sperone (1542): “Dialogo delle lingue”, in: Speron Sperone: 
                        I dialogi di Messer Speron Sperone. Vinegia: Aldus 106-131
                    
               Joachim Du Bellay (1549): 
                        Deffence, et illustration de la langue francoyse. Paris: Arnoul l’Angelier.
                    
            
            Als „Kinder des frühen Buchdrucks“ weisen diese Texte nicht nur eine Vielzahl von heute nicht mehr gebrauchten Lettern, von Abkürzungen und Variationen auf, sondern sie sind zugleich auch Ausdruck der durch den Buchdruck maßgeblich geförderten Hinwendung zur eigenen romanischen Volkssprache, zur eigenen Nation, zur Abgrenzung gegenüber anderen bzw. zum Vergleich oder gar zur Konkurrenz mit anderen. Zudem wird hier ein Modell der jeweiligen romanischen Sprache entwickelt und eine (soziale) sprachliche Norm fixiert, an der gerade auch die Drucker (nicht zuletzt aus ökonomischen Gründen) ein großes Interesse haben (cf. z. B. Tory (1529)). Darüber hinaus legen sie auch Zeugnis ab von der Entstehung eines Marktes, eines Lesepublikums und der Entwicklung von Layout- und Strukturierungsverfahren, die das Lesen und Verstehen von Texten fördern.
         
         
            Umsetzung des Versuchs
            Der Versuch wird in einem grundständigen und aus zwei Seminaren bestehenden Master-Modul zur französischen und italienischen Sprachwissenschaft unternommen. In diesem Modul sollen sich die Studierenden mit der Geschichte der Sprachbetrachtung und Normbildung bzw. Normierung und den dabei eingesetzten Werkzeugen auseinandersetzen. 2015 habe ich diesem Modul das oben genannte Projekt unterlegt und so konzipiert, dass die Studierenden selbst dazu einen Beitrag leisten können. Die beiden Seminare werden seither dazu genutzt, den Studierenden zu ermöglichen, alle für das Projekt benötigten Kenntnisse und Fertigkeiten zu erwerben und dabei auch ein Verständnis für die 
                    Digital Humanities, ihre Ziele und Methoden zu entwickeln.
                
            Umfassendes und kritisches Wissen von diesen „Kindern des Buchdrucks“ und ihrer Bedeutung für die romanischen Sprachen sowie ein Verständnis für die Implikationen von Medienrevolutionen allgemein und der Gutenberg-Ära sowie der digitalen Revolution im Besonderen erwerben die Studierenden in den beiden Seminaren durch das gemeinsame Aufarbeiten von Medientheorien (cf. Kloock / Spahr (1997)), Darstellungen zum Buchdruck und seinen Folgen (cf. Eisenstein (1997), Giesecke (
                    42006)) und Abhandlungen zur Grammatikographie der romanischen Sprachen und zu romanische Sprachen fokusierenden Sprachtraktaten (cf. u. a. Bierbach / Pellat (2003), Lüdtke (2001), Lubello (2003), Poggi Salani (1988), Swiggers (1990)). Die dabei zum Einsatz kommenden Technologien (Etherpad, Wiki, Datenbanken, Stylesheets bzw. Formatvorlagen) fordern sie zudem zu einem Umdenken bezüglich der Wissensproduktion im digitalen Zeitalter heraus (cf. z. B. Schöch (2017)), lange bevor sie sich – gestützt durch ein Tutorium - der Modellierung der zu digitalisierenden Texte, ihrer Transkription und Auszeichnung zuwenden. Bei letzterer spielen dann die Dokumentation des 
                    Deutschen Textarchiv (cf. DTA 2016), die Guidelines der 
                    Text Encoding Initiative (cf. TEI 2015), der 
                    Unicode Standard (cf. Uni 1991–2017) und die 
                    Medieval Unicode Font Initiative (cf. Haugen 2011) sowie der Oxygen XML-Editor eine zentrale Rolle.
                
         
         
            Poster
            Das komplexe Zusammenspiel von verschiedenen Wissensdomänen und einer Vielzahl von Technologien sowie die intendierten konzeptuellen Änderungen wollen wir in unserem Poster visualisieren. Dabei wollen wir nicht nur eine kritische Reflektion über dieses Vorgehen einbringen, sondern auch Ergebnisse, die sich in den Modulabschlussarbeiten der Studierenden zeigen, werten.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Albrecht, Jörn (2001): „Sprachbewertung / Évaluation de la langue“, in: Holtus, Günter / Metzeltin, Michael / Schmitt, Christian (eds.): 
                        Lexikon der romanistischen Linguistik (LRL). Band I / 2: 
                        Methodologie (Sprache in der Gesellschaft / Sprache und Klassifikation / Datensammlung und -verarbeitung) / Méthodologie (Langue et société / Langue et classification / Collection et traitement des données). Tübingen: Niemeyer 526-540.
                    
               
                  Bierbach, Mechtild / Pellat, Jean-Christophe (2003): "Histoire de la réflexion sur les langues romanes: le français / Geschichte der Reflexion über die romanischen Sprachen: FranzöRomanische Sprachgeschichte / Histoire linguistique de la Romania. Ein internationales Handbuch zur Geschichte der romanischen Sprachen / Manuel international d'histoire linguistique de la Romania 1 (= Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft 23). Berlin / New York: De Gruyter 226-229. 
                    
               
                  Du Bellay, Joachim (1549): 
                        Deffence, et illustration de la langue francoyse. Paris: Arnoul l’Angelier (Digitalisat: PDF, BnF Gallica).
                    
               
                  DTA (12.01.2016): „Dokumentation“, in: 
                        Deutsches Textarchiv  [25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Eisenstein, Elisabeth I. (1997): 
                        Die Druckerpresse. Kulturrevolution im frühen modernen Europa. Wien / New York: Springer. 
                    
               
                  Fortunio, Francesco (1516): 
                        Regole grammaticali della volgar lingua. Ancona: Bernardin Vercellese / Bernardino Guerralda (Digitalisat: TIFF, Universitätsbibliothek Eichstätt-Ingolstadt 03.06.2015).
                    
               
                  Giesecke, Michael (
                        42006): 
                        Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit. Eine historische Fallstudie über die Durchsetzung neuer Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologien. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. 
                    
               
                  Gold, Matthew K. (ed.) (2012): 
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis / London: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
               
                  Haugen, Odd Einar (ed.) (2011): 
                        Medieval Unicode Font Initative  [25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Hirsch, Brett D. (ed.) (2012): 
                        Digital Humanities Pedagogy. Practices, Principles and Politics. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers.
                    
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis / Kohle, Hubertus / Rehbein, Malte (eds.): 
                        Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung . Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler.
                    
               
                  Kloock, Daniela / Spahr, Angela (1997): 
                        Medientheorien. Eine Einführung (= UTB 1986). München: Wilhelm Fink.
                    
               
                  Lubello, Sergio (2003): "Storia della riflessione sulle lingue romanze: italiano e sardo / Geschichte der Reflexion über die romanischen Sprachen: Italienisch und Sardisch", in: Ernst, Gerhard / Gleßgen, Martin-Dietrich / Schmitt, Christian / Schweickard, Wolfgang (eds.): 
                        Romanische Sprachgeschichte / Histoire linguistique de la Romania. Ein internationales Handbuch zur Geschichte der romanischen Sprachen / Manuel international d'histoire linguistique de la Romania. Berlin: De Gruyter 208-225.
                    
               
                  Lüdtke, Jens (2001): "Romanische Philologie von Dante bis Raynouard / La philologie romane de Dante à Raynouard", in: Holtus, Günter / Metzeltin, Michael / Schmitt, Christian (eds.): 
                        Lexikon der romanistischen Linguistik (LRL). Band I / 1: Geschichte des Faches Romanistik. Methodologie (Das Sprachsystem) / Histoire de la philologie romane. Méthodologie (Langue et système). Tübingen: Niemeyer 1-35. 
                    
               
                  Meigret, Louis (1550): 
                        Le tretté de la GRAMMeRE FRANCOEZE. Paris: Chrestien Wechel (Digitalisat: PDF, Bayrische Staatsbibliothek, Münchner Digitalisierungszentrum Digitale Bibliothek 05.09.2015, JPG 10.11.2017).
                    
               
                  Oxygen XML Editor (2002-2017)  [25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Poggi Salani, Teresa (1988): "Italienisch: Grammatikographie / Storia delle grammatiche", in: Holtus, Günter / Metzeltin, Michael / Schmitt, Christian (eds.): 
                        Lexikon der Romanistischen Linguistik (LRL) IV: Italienisch, Korsisch, Sardisch / Italiano, Corso, Sardo. Tübingen: Niemeyer 774-786.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof (2017): „Digitale Wissensproduktion“, in: Jannidis, Fotis / Kohle, Hubertus / Rehbein, Malte (eds.): 
                        Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung . Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler 206-212.
                    
               
                  Schreibman, Susan / Ping Huang, Marianne / Benardou, Agiatis/ Tasovac, Toma / Scagliola, Stef / Durco, Matej / Clivaz, Claire (2015-2017): 
                        #dariahTeach. DH Training Materials  [24.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Sperone, Speron (1542): “Dialogo delle lingue”, in: Speron Sperone: 
                        I dialogi di Messer Speron Sperone. Vinegia: Aldus 106-131 (Digitalisat: TIFF, Universitätsbibliothek Leipzig 27.04.2017).
                    
               
                  Swiggers, Pierre (1990): “Französisch: Grammatikographie / Grammaticographie“, in: 
                        Lexikon der Romanistischen Linguistik (LRL), V, 1: Französisch, Okzitanisch, Katalanisch / Le français, L'occitan, Le catalan. Tübingen: Niemeyer 843-869. 
                    
               
                  TEI (05.10.2015): “Guidelines”, in: 
                        Text Encoding Initiative  [25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Tory, Geoffroy (1529): 
                        Champ Fleury. Paris: Geoffroy Tory / Giles Gourmont.
                    
               
                  Uni (1991–2017): “The Unicode Standard“, in: 
                        The Unicode Consortium  25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Warwick, Claire / Terras, Melissa / Nyhan, Julianne (eds.) (2012): 
                        Digital Humanities in Practice. London: Facet Publishing.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Motivation
            
                    »Angesichts der steigenden Sichtbarkeit der Digital Humanities, auch und gerade bei universitären Schwerpunktsetzungen, ist die Frage, wie sie am sinnvollsten gelehrt werden sollen, von steigender Bedeutung« […] »Um diese Bemühungen längerfristig in der Community zu verankern, wurde auf der ersten Jahreskonferenz der Digital Humanities der deutschsprachigen Länder im März 2014« […] »eine Arbeitsgruppe der DHd gegründet. Die Proponenten der Arbeitsgruppe schlugen vor,« […] »die bisher losen Diskussionen stärker auf ein »Referenzcurriculum« zu fokussieren.«
                    (https://dig-hum.de/ag-referenzcurriculum-digital-humanities)
            
            
                    Diesem Anliegen fühlt sich der als Dozent für die Vermittlung von Digitalisierungskompetenz an der Universitäsbibliothek Würzburg arbeitende Autor verpflichtet. Er engagiert sich in der 
                    
                  AG Referenzcurriculum Digital Humanities,
                ist Mitglied des Würzburger Arbeitskreis Digitale Editionen und unterstützt das Editionsprojekt 
                    
                  Narragonien digital.
                
                    Er plädiert mit seinem Beitrag dafür, die DH-Ausbildung bezüglich der Bilddigitalisierung und des OCR (Optical Character Recognition) stärker zu kanonisieren. Mit seiner eigenen 
                    Lehrveranstaltung
               
                  Bilddigitalisierung und OCR für Geisteswissenschaftler
               , deren Schwerpunkt auf der Erstellung der Digitalisate und dem OCR liegt, bietet er eine Referenz, die er hiermit zur Diskussion in der Community stellt.
                
            Das Ziel der Lehrveranstaltung ist die Vermittlung von Kenntnissen des gesamten Digitalisierungsprozesses für MA-, BA- und LA-Studentinnen und Studenten aller geisteswissenschaftlichen Fachrichtungen. Diese nachfolgend als Zielgruppe Bezeichneten sollen in die Lage versetzt werden, selbständig strukturiert ausgezeichnete, digitale Volltexte zu erzeugen und die Ergebnisse der Erstellung derselben beurteilen zu können. Diese Kenntnisse sind wichtig, weil Projekte häufig auch dadurch gefährdet sind, dass Vertretern der Zielgruppe die mangelnde Qualität der ihnen vorliegenden Digitalisate zu spät bewusst wird. Darum müssen sie von Beginn an Digitalisate auf ihre Brauchbarkeit für die automatische Texterkennung beurteilen können. Strukturiert ausgezeichnete, digitale Volltexte sind unabdingbar beispielsweise für Topic Modeling oder Sentiment Analysis auf größeren Textcorpora und als Zwischenstufe für die Erstellung digitaler Editionen.
         
         
            Ablauf
            Kurz gefaßt sind die sechs Arbeitschritte dafür
            
               die Sensibilisierung für juristische Aspekte der Bilddigitalisierung,
               die Suche nach vorhandenen oder die Erstellung von eigenen Digitalisaten,
               deren Vorverarbeitung,
               das OCR,
               die Anreicherung der Digitalisate und des generierten Rohtextes – im Idealfall einer diplomatische Transkription – mit Metadaten, sowie
               die inhaltliche Auszeichnung des generierten Rohtextes.
            
            
               2.1. Rechtliche Grundlagen der Bilddigitalisierung
               Um den Teilnehmern den typischen Arbeitsablauf der Textdigitalisierung möglichst stringent und ohne thematische Abschweifungen vorzuführen, werden sie zuerst intensiv mit den juristischen Grundlagen der Bilddigitalisierung vertraut gemacht. Dazu gehören
               
                  die Vorstellung des UrhG beziehungsweise speziell der § 60d und 60g UrhG in der novellierten Fassung des UrhWissG 2017,
                  die Unterscheidung zwischen Immaterial- und Materialgüterrecht und was daraus für die Digitalisierung zweidimensionaler Objekte folgt,
                  die Persönlichkeitsrechte des Urhebers und weiterer Betroffener sowie
                  der Umgang mit Werken, die unter der Creative Commons Lizenz stehen und die Möglichkeit, diese selbst zu benutzen.
               
            
            
               2.2. Suche nach vorhandenen Digitalisaten beziehungsweise deren Erstellung
               Am Anfang der Transformation vom gedruckten zum digitalen Corpus steht die Suche nach möglicherweise bereits vorhandenen Digitalisaten. Diese Suche setzt neben nicht DH-spezifischen Kenntnissen der Erschließung das Wissen um Metadaten zu digitalen Bildformaten voraus. Die Vertreter der Zielgruppe müssen in dieser Situation wissen, dass beispielsweise die Chancen eines erfolgreichen OCR mit einem JPEG mit 72 dpi deutlich geringer sind als mit einem unkomprimierten TIFF, True Color und 300 dpi. Sollte er schließlich feststellen, dass ihm Digitalisate in der gewünschten Form nicht zugänglich sind, bedarf er der Kenntnisse zu digitalen Bildformaten genauso, um im nächsten Schritt erfolgreich den Scan selbst durchzuführen oder nach seinen Vorgaben durchführen zu lassen.
               Ausgehend von den skizzierten Anforderungen werden den Vertretern der Zielgruppe in der Veranstaltung die Grundlagen der Bilddigitalisierung nahe gebracht. Vertieft wird hier auf das menschliche Sehen und die Farbreproduktion, die Entstehung digitaler Bilder (Rastergraphik, optische und interpolierte Auflösung, Farbtiefe), Farbräume, Color-Management-Systeme, verschiedene Graphikspeicherformate, Speichermedien und verschiedene Scannertypen eingegangen. Auch für die Berücksichtigung konservatorischer Aspekte werden die Teilnehmer sensibilisiert.
            
            
               2.3. Aufbereitung der Digitalisate für das OCR
               Die Forschung im Bereich OCR, insbesondere auf Inkunabeln und Wiegendrucken, sowie die eigene Praxis des Autors belegen die Bedeutung einer vorherigen Aufbereitung der Digitalisate für das OCR, der darum entsprechend Platz in der Veranstaltung eingeräumt wird (Springmann 2015: 9). Als Tätigkeiten sind hier in der Reihenfolge ihrer Ausführung die Bereinigung und anschließende Binarisierung der Digitalisate, deren Segmentierung in einzelne Textabschnitte und schließlich einzelne Textzeilen sowie die Transkription (›ground truth‹) einer Anzahl der Textzeilen zu nennen. Die gesamte Aufbereitung der Digitalisate für das OCR führen die Vertreter der Zielgruppe in der Veranstaltung selbst an ausgewähltem Trainingsmaterial durch. Nach der Teilnahme an der Veranstaltung sollen sie auch diesen Arbeitsschritt selbständig erledigen und Arbeitsergebnisse anderer in diesem Bereich beurteilen können.
            
            
               2.4. OCR
               Entsprechend der zunehmenden Spezialisierung des Digitalisierungszentrums der UB Würzburg ist es erstens wünschenswert, in der Lehrveranstaltung besonders auf das Training eigener Modelle beispielsweise mit 
                    
                     OCRopus
                   einzugehen. Zweitens soll ein Arbeitsablauf für die Digitalisierung eigener Texte vorgestellt werden, der von den Vertretern der Zielgruppe selbständig mit möglichst geringem technischen Aufwand realisierbar ist. Diese Form der Digitalisierung von Texten soll als handhabbares Mittel zum Zweck wahrgenommen werden.
                    
               Schließlich wird in diesem Zusammenhang auf die Frage nach dem Zeitpunkt der Normalisierung des mit dem OCR erstellten Textes eingegangen. Soll bereits mit dem OCR ein normalisierter Text erstellt werden und wenn ja, nach welchen Regeln? Ist also beispielsweise von der verwendeten OCR-Software das Schaft-s bereits automatisch als Rund-s zu lernen und anschließend zu transkribieren? Oder soll das Ergebnis des OCR graphisch so dicht wie möglich am Original bleiben und normalisierende Eingriffe erst hinterher erfolgen?
            
            
               2.5. Auszeichnung/Anreicherung
               Nach dem OCR wird erst die Notwendigkeit der Auszeichnung sowohl der Digitalisate mit Metadaten als auch des Rohtextes erläutert, die die Teilnehmer dann auch selbst vornehmen sollen. Für den extrahierten Rohtext gilt das in zweifacher Hinsicht: Erstens sind ihm Metadaten hinzuzufügen, welche die spätere, eindeutige Identifikation des Werkes und dessen Auffindbarkeit ermöglichen. Zweitens muss der Text strukturiert mit inhaltsbezogenen Elementen angereichert werden.
               Konkret sind bei der digitalen Repräsentation eines Romans beispielsweise die Figuren, Orte, Zeitpunkte und gegebenenfalls weitere signifikante Entitäten im Text für das spätere, automatisierte Retrieval zu kodieren. Andere Anforderungen stellen digitalierte Transkriptionen gesprochener Sprache und wiederum andere die Erstellung einer Urkundenedition (Vogeler 2015). Für die visuelle Präsentation, beispielsweise auf einem Webportal, sind textstrukturierende Merkmale wie die Einteilung nach Kapiteln, Abschnitten, Fußnoten etc. zu kennzeichnen. Dem unterschiedlichen Kenntnisstand der Teilnehmer geschuldet muss hier vor der Vorstellung der TEI Guidelines zuvor zweifelsohne XML dargestellt werden. Wie ausführlich daneben 
                    Dublin Core und bibliotheksspezifische Formate (MARC21) thematisiert werden, ist noch nicht entschieden. Wieviel Zeit für weiterführende Themen wie 
                    Named Entity Recognition, 
                    PID und Normdaten wie GND bleibt, muß ebenfalls die Praxis weisen.
                    
            
         
         
            Forschungsbezug und Weiterentwicklung
            Die eine Stärke der Würzburger Lehrveranstaltung ist die Praxisorientierung, der nach der zweitägigen Einführung noch stärker mit einer drei Tage dauernden Übung Rechnung getragen wird. Bei dieser werden die Vertreter der Zielgruppe mit vorbereiteten Scans selbständig die genannten Arbeitsschritte von der Bereinigung und anschließenden Binarisierung über die Segmentierung und Transkription, dem OCR bis zum anschließenden Auszeichnen beziehungsweise der Anreicherung des digitalen Corpus mit den nötigen Metadaten vornehmen.
            Unverzichtbar für die gesamte Ausbildung im DH-Bereich ist neben dem Praxisbezug die Orientierung am neuesten Stand der Forschung in allen Teilbereichen. Dem wird bei der skizzierten Lehrveranstaltung erstens durch die Forschung einzelner Mitglieder des Digitalisierungszentrums als die Veranstaltung verantwortende Abteilung Rechnung getragen (1. Reul/Wick/Springmann/Puppe: 2017. 2. Springmann: 2016. 459–462). Zweitens ist die enge Zusammenarbeit des Digitalisierungszentrums mit dem Lehrstuhl für Informatik VI der Universität Würzburg zu nennen.
            Denkbare Erweiterungen für eine zukünftig breiter angelegte Lehrveranstaltung der beschriebenen Art sind die Vorstellung a) des OCR von Handschriften, beispielsweise in der Kooperation mit einer 
                    Transkribus anwendenden Institution, idealerweise der 
                    
                  Digitalisierung und elektronische Archivierung – DEA
                der Universität Innsbruck, und b) des Einsatzes virtueller Forschungsumgebungen zur Herstellung digitaler Ressourcen.
                
            Aus Sicht des Autors ist nach der erfolgreichen Durchführung die kritische Diskussion mit den Autors ähnlicher oder gleicher Veranstaltungen von anderen Institutionen unverzichtbar. Ausgehend von
                    http://cceh.uni-koeln.de/digitale-geisteswissenschaften-studiengange-2011/ befragt er aktuell die Mitarbeiter einschlägiger Institutionen nach deren Angeboten im Bereich der Digitalisierung von Texten. Er hofft mit seinem Beitrag wie dem AG Treffen an der DHd2018 auf einen fruchtbaren Meinungsaustausch.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Corbach, Almuth: 
                        Bestandsschonendes Digitalisieren von schriftlichem Kulturgut. In: Digital und analog. Die beiden Archivwelten. 46. Rheinischer Archivtag. Ratingen 21.-22. Juni 2012.
                    
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis / Hubertus Kohle / Malte Rehbein [Hrsg.]: 
                        Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung. Springer-Verlag GmbH Deutschland, 2017.
                    
               
                  Kneißl, Michael: 
                        Scannen wie die Profis : Text- und Bildvorlagen perfekt digitalisieren. München: DTV. (2)2002.
                    
               
                  Loewenheim, Ulrich / Adolf Dietz / Gerhard Schricker: 
                        Urheberrecht. Kommentar. München: Beck. (4)2010.
                    
               
                  Reul, Christian / Christoph Wick / Uwe Springmann / Frank Puppe: 
                        Transfer Learning for OCRopus Model Training on Early Printed Books. In: 
                        Zeitschrift für Bibliothekskultur. Bd. 5, Nr. 1 (2017).
                    
               
                  Springmann, Uwe: 
                        A high accuracy OCR method to convert early printings into digital text. A Tutorial. 
                        Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS). LMU. München. 2015. S. 9.
                    
               
                  Springmann, Uwe: 
                        OCR für alte Drucke. 
                        Informatik-Spektrum. 39(6):459–462. 2016.
                    
               
                  Vogeler, Georg: 
                        Die Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) als Werkzeug des Urkundeneditors – Erfahrungen und Desiderate. In: Fees, Irmgard Prof. Dr.; Hotz, Benedikt; Schönfeld, Benjamin (Hrsg.): 
                        Papsturkundenforschung zwischen internationaler Vernetzung und Digitalisierung. Neue Zugangsweisen zur europäischen Schriftgeschichte. Göttingen. 2015.
                    
               
                  Weitzmann, John H. / Paul Klimpel: Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen für Digitalisierungsprojekte von Gedächtnisinstitutionen. Berlin: Zuse Institute Berlin. digiS – Servicestelle Digitalisierung Berlin. (3)2016.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ausgangslage
            Die Vielschichtigkeit der Aufklärungszeit, die Funktionsweise der Gelehrtenrepublik und ihre Wechselwirkungen mit Wirtschaft, Politik und Gesellschaft, aber auch die Ausdifferenzierung der Naturgeschichte werden an der Universität Bern seit den frühen 1990er-Jahren intensiv beforscht.
                     Zentrale Figur des Forschungsinteresses ist dabei Albrecht von Haller (1708-1777), Schweizer Universalgelehrter und Schöpfer eines vielfältigen Oeuvres, das unter anderem in einem außerordentlich reichhaltigen handschriftlichen Nachlass überliefert ist. 
                
            Wichtigstes Hilfsmittel ist seit 1991 eine Forschungsdatenbank, die schrittweise durch den Zusammenschluss mit mehreren Forschungsprojekten (etwa zur Oekonomischen Gesellschaft Bern) zur Verbunddatenbank erweitert und bis heute laufend ausgebaut wurde.
                     Sie enthält detaillierte und untereinander stark verlinkte Daten zu rund 40
                    '000 Publikationen (Hallers Bibliothek, Forschungsliteratur), 22
                    '000 Personen, 20
                    '000 Briefen, 3
                    '000 Pflanzenarten, 2
                    '500 Orten und 800 Institutionen, jeweils in projektspezifisch gewachsenen Datenstrukturen abgelegt.
                
            Um diese wertvolle Forschungsquelle umfassender verfügbar und sie zugleich als Grundlage für die anstehende Edition von Primärquellen nutzbar zu machen, wird die Datenbank gegenwärtig in einer Forschungskooperation zwischen dem Historischen Institut der Universität Bern und dem Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH) bereinigt, umstrukturiert und in eine zugleich entstehende Forschungs- und Editionsplattform integriert.
                     Zielformat sind XML-Daten, die sich eng an die TEI-Guidelines anlehnen.
                    
            
         
         
            Charakteristika der Datenbank und der entstehenden Editionen
            Das Potenzial der Datenbank lässt sich gut anhand der Personenobjekte veranschaulichen, die für rund 24
                    '000 historische Persönlichkeiten (dazu zählen Hallers rund 1
                    '050 Korrespondenten und 156 Korrespondentinnen) verschiedene Aspekte sehr detailliert und mit Quellennachweisen versehen beschreiben. Je nach Objekttyp enthalten die Personendatensätze bis zu 385 Felder: Neben den gängigen Lebensdaten wurden zu diesen Personen alle Verwandtschaftsbeziehungen, Ausbildungsgang, sowie Arbeits-, Forschungs- und Reisetätigkeiten erhoben und wo möglich mit den entsprechenden Datenbankobjekten verlinkt.
                     Für die historische Forschung stellt dieses dichte und qualitativ gesicherte Informationsnetz eine herausragende Forschungsressource dar.
                
            Die Datenbank wird im Rahmen der Forschungskooperation ergänzt durch eine prototypische Korrespondenzedition des Briefverkehrs zwischen dem von Hannover aus wirkenden Universitätskurator Gerlach von Münchhausen und Albrecht von Haller.
                     Die Edition, die sowohl innerhalb der Forschungs- und Editionsplattform als auch mit externen Ressourcen wie correspSearch.net verlinkt wird, dient als Modell für die 
                    Open Access-Edition von zunächst 8
                    '000 Briefen und 9
                    '000 Rezensionen Hallers, die ab 2018 im Rahmen des SNF-Projekts 
                    Online-Edition der Rezensionen und Briefe Albrecht von Hallers: Expertise und Kommunikation in der entstehenden Scientific community ediert werden.
                
            Hinsichtlich digitaler Forschungspraktiken sind die laufenden Modellierungs-, Konversions- und Entwicklungsarbeiten in zweierlei Hinsicht von Interesse: einerseits werfen sie die Frage auf, inwiefern Datenstrukturen durch die zugrunde liegenden Werkzeuge beeinflusst werden und bieten zugleich einen Rahmen konkreter Reflexion, andererseits erfordert die Konzeption eines übergreifenden Portals für unterschiedliche, aber zusammenhängende Inhalte eine geeignete Präsentation und Kommunikation.
         
         
            Datenmodellierung und -transformation als Reflexionsprozess
            Die 
                    ad hoc gewachsenen Datenstrukturen werden in ein neu definiertes Textformat überführt, das den TEI-Guidelines inhärente bestehende semantische Konzepte nutzt und sich mithin (zu einem gewissen Grad) selbst beschreibt. Angestrebt wird Verständlich- und Nachvollziehbarkeit nicht nur in der Präsentation, sondern auch auf der Datenebene. Da die TEI-Guidelines für viele vorliegende Forschungsdaten (z.B. Eigenschaften von Personen) keine entsprechenden Elemente kennen, wurden generische Lösungen durch Abstraktion gesucht. Damit bedingt die Überführung aus einer Feld-, Tabellen- und Maskenbasierten Datenbank in ein TEI-basiertes Format eine analytische Durchdringung der Datenstruktur, die auch den mit den Daten vertrauten Forschenden einen neuen Blick auf ebendiese gibt. Aus dieser Perspektive betrachtet erscheinen die Forschungsdaten deutlicher als Objekte der realen Welt mit semantisch klar definierten Eigenschaften. Die Reflexion verstärkt auf diese Weise die gegenseitige Wechselwirkung zwischen Datenmodellierung und wissenschaftlicher Analyse. Die Generalisierung spezifischer Datenbeschreibungsformen ist wesentlicher Bestandteil, um die neue Datenbank nicht nur im bestehenden, um Albrecht von Haller und die Oekonomische Gesellschaft Bern zentrierenden Kontext nutzen zu können, sondern z.B. auch für die Naturforschende Gesellschaft Zürich. Sie ermöglicht inskünftig auch Anschluss an Schnittstellen Dritter wie 
                    correspSearch
                im Bereich der Korrespondenzdaten oder die im Entstehen begriffene 
                    prosopogrAPhi
                im Bereich der Personendaten.
                
         
         
            Spezifizierung eines übergreifenden Editionsportals
            Das entstehende Editionsportal will eine einheitliche Grundlage schaffen für verschiedene Inhalte, seien es beschreibende und Metadaten, digitale Neu-Editionen bestehender gedruckter Briefeditionen oder neu erarbeitete digitale Brief- und Rezensionseditionen mit unterschiedlichen thematischen, geographischen und personellen Schwerpunkten. Dabei sollen bestimmte Inhalte der Plattform den Nutzern in verschiedenen Kontexten (z.B. ein Brief als atomares Datum, als Bestandteil einer “Sammlung”, als edierter Brief) jeweils so präsentiert werden, dass die Situierung innerhalb des Portals jederzeit nachvollziehbar bleibt. Der Anspruch des Portals geht dadurch konzeptionell beträchtlich über den Standardfall einer digitalen Edition (im Sinne tiefer editorischer Erschließung) eines einzelnen Textes oder verschiedener Texte eines Autors hinaus. Zugleich greift durch die Tiefe der Erschließung aber auch der Vergleich mit digitaler Datenbereitstellung, wie sie in Bibliotheken und Archiven oftmals betrieben wird, zu kurz. Eine einfache und verständliche visuelle Kommunikation und Umsetzung dieser Ansprüche erweist sich in der konzeptuellen Arbeit als Herausforderung.
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Segmentierte Landingpage der in Entwicklung begriffenen Webanwendung: Datenbank, Sammlungen, Editionen
            
         
      
      
         
             Wegweisend war das SNF-Projekt 
                            Albrecht von Haller und die Gelehrtenrepublik der Aufklärung (Laufzeit 1991-2003, Leitung: Urs Boschung, medizinhistorisches Institut der Universität Bern, in Kooperation mit der Burgerbibliothek Bern).
                        
             Realisiert wurde die Datenbank mit dem Dokumentations- und Retrievalsystem 
                            FAUST Professional der Firma Land Software: ursprünglich in der Version 1.0, zuletzt wurde das Programm in der Version 6.0 genutzt.
                        
             Der Umbau ist das Ziel des Projekts Haller Online (Laufzeit 2016-2019), das von der Burgergemeinde Bern mit der Albrecht von Haller-Stiftung sowie der Universität Bern finanziert wird. Über den Abschluss des Projekts hinaus ist die Zugänglichkeit und der Unterhalt der Plattform institutionell durch die Haller-Stiftung und die Burgerbibliothek Bern abgesichert.
             Die Datentransformation erfolgt in XProc-orchestrierten XSL-Transformationen und die künftige Datenpflege im oXygen-Autorenmodus; die Webanwendung vereinigt ein XML-Backend (XSLT 3.0, Solr) und ein Vue.js-Frontend, die Digitalisate sollen über eine IIIF-Schnittstelle eingebunden und verfügbar gemacht werden.
             Verlinkungen können sowohl auf andere Personen wie auch auf andere Objekte (wie Orte, Pflanzen oder Institutionen) referenzieren.
             Otto Sonntag (ed.): The Albrecht von Haller-Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen Correspondence, Digitale Edition, Bern 2018 (in Vorbereitung).
             Stefan Dumont et al.: correspSearch, URL: http://correspsearch.net (14.1.2018).
             Georg Vogeler et al.: prosopogrAPhI, URL: https://github.com/GVogeler/prosopogrAPhI (14.1.2018).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Boschung, Urs et al. (eds.): Repertorium zu Albrecht von Hallers Korrespondenz 1724-1777 (Studia Halleriana VII), Basel: Schwabe 2006.
               
                  Dumont, Stefan et al.: correspSearch, URL: http://correspsearch.net (14.1.2018).
               
                  Flückiger, Daniel / Stuber, Martin: Vom System zum Akteur. Personenorientierte Datenbanken für Archiv und Forschung, in: Kirchhofer, André et al. (eds.), Nachhaltige Geschichte. Festschrift für Christian Pfister, Zürich: Chronos 2009, S. 253-269.
               
                  Sonntag, Otto (ed.): The Albrecht von Haller-Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen Correspondence, Digitale Edition, Bern 2018 (in Vorbereitung).
               
                  Steinke, Hubert: Archive databases as advanced research tools: the Haller Project, in: Monti, Maria Teresa (ed.), Antonio Vallisneri. L'edizione del testo scientifico d'età moderna, Firenze: Olschki 2003, S. 191–204.
               
                  Steinke, Hubert / Profos, Claudia: Bibliographia Halleriana: Verzeichnis der Schriften von und über Albrecht von Haller (Studia Halleriana VIII), Basel: Schwabe 2004.
               
                  Stuber, Martin: Findmittel und Forschungsinstrument zugleich. Die Datenbank des Berner Haller-Projekts, in: Arbido 14, 1999, S. 5-10.
               
                  Stuber, Martin / Hächler, Stefan / Lienhard, Luc (eds.): Hallers Netz. Ein europäischer Gelehrtenbriefwechsel zur Zeit der Aufklärung, Schwabe: Basel 2005.
               
                  Vogeler, Georg et al.: prosopogrAPhI, URL: https://github.com/GVogeler/prosopogrAPhI (14.1.2018).
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In den letzten Jahren wurden verschiedene Werkzeuge zur Annotation von Dokumenten entwickelt, z.B. 
                    WebAnno (Eckart de Castilho et al. 2016), 
                    Cor
               A (Bollmann et al. 2014) und 
                    CATMA (Meister et al. 2016). Diese Werkzeuge bieten zahlreiche Funktionalitäten, die für viele Sprachen und Anwendungen ausreichend sind. Die Unterstützung verschiedener Skripten erweckt den Eindruck, dass diese Werkzeuge für die Annotation aller Sprachkorpora erfolgreich eingesetzt werden können, was solange korrekt ist, wie man sehr flache Annotation durchführt.
                
            Tiefere Annotationen, insbesondere für Sprachen außerhalb der Europäischen Sprachfamilie oder für historische Sprachen, dagegen gestalten sich problematischer. Häufig jedoch wird die Verwendung bereits etablierter Annotationstools trotzdem bevorzugt, weil diese eine reibungslose Integration mit weiteren Analyse- und Visualisierungs-Tools wie z.B. 
                    ANNIS (Krause & Zeldes 2016) versprechen. In diesem Beitrag werden wir zeigen, dass die Entwicklung dedizierter Annotationswerkzeuge dann als Lösung in Betracht gezogen werden kann, wenn gleichzeitig Schnittstellen (z.B. zu Analyse-Tools) entwickelt werden, die die Neuentwicklung wiederum an vorhandene Software und Infrastrukturen anbinden. Auf diese Weise können die Nachteile einer Neuentwicklung unter Gesichtspunkten der nachhaltigen Entwicklung von Forschungssoftware gegenüber der Anpassung bestehender Tools - bei gleichzeitiger Ermöglichung eines spezialisierten Anwendungsfalles - weitgehend abgeschwächt werden. Der Vorteil eines solchen Verfahrens ist die Realisierung eines Annotationsmodells, das exakt den Besonderheiten der Sprache entspricht. 
                    Insbesondere für diachrone Analysen ist es häufig nötig, dass man eine sehr detaillierte Modellierung der morphologischen, syntaktischen und semantischen Merkmale vornimmt, da die Unterschiede häufig nur im Detail reflektiert sind. Im Einzelnen werden wir die Entwicklung des 
                    GeTa-Annotationstools, eines Mehrebenenannotationswerkzeugs für die Altäthiopische Sprache, und dessen Integration mit dem Such- und Visualisierungsframework 
                    ANNIS darstellen.
                
         
         
            Spezielle Anforderungen für die Altäthiopische Sprache
            Das Altäthiopische (Geʿez), ist eine südsemitische Sprache. Es war bis ins 19. Jahrhundert hinein die bedeutendste Schriftsprache des christlichen Äthiopien. Die reiche christlich-äthiopische Literatur ist zunächst von Übersetzungen - anfangs aus dem Griechischen und später aus dem Arabischen - geprägt, bevor sich eine mannigfaltige indigene Literatur mit ganz eigenen Zügen entwickelt. Insbesondere Texte, die einzig im Altäthiopischen vollständig überliefert, und deren Textzeugen in anderen Sprachen entweder vollständig verloren, oder von denen nur Fragmente erhalten sind (z.B. das Henochbuch) erlangen dabei ganz besondere Bedeutung (Vertan et. al. 2016).
            Das Altäthiopische hat aus einer südsemitischen Schrift ein eigenes Silbenalphabet entwickelt, das bis heute in mehreren modernen Sprachen Äthiopiens und Eritreas Verwendung findet. Innerhalb der semitischen Sprachen fällt es durch die verwendete Rechtsläufigkeit auf; außerdem werden die Vokale vollständig geschrieben. Das äthiopische Silbenalphabet bringt dabei mit sich, dass Morphemgrenzen in der Schrift nicht darstellbar sind, sodass beispielsweise ein einzelner Vokal als Bestandteil einer Silbe eine eigenständige Wortart darstellen kann und tokenisiert werden muss; z.B. ist im zweisilbigen Wort ቤቱ፡ /be·tu/ das /u/ als pronominales Suffix zu bet-
                    u (
                    sein Haus) zu segmentieren. Eine solche Annotation kann nur auf der Transkription erfolgen. Annotationen auf anderen Ebenen (z.B. Seiten- Spaltenumbrüche, Textkorrekturen) müssen auf dem Fidal-Skript realisiert werden. Dies bedeutet, dass Original und Transkription synchronisiert im Annotationswerkzeug dargestellt werden müssen. Eine korrekte Darstellung einer Transliteration benötigt die Transkription. Während diese regelbasiert automatisch durchgeführt werden kann, ist korrekte Transliteration (z.B. Konsonantendopplung) in vielen Fällen nur zusammen mit morphologischer Analyse möglich. Daher muss das Annotationstool Korrekturen am Basistext während der Annotation zulassen und zuverlässig verarbeiten können. Keins der existierenden Annotationswerkzeuge erfüllt diese Voraussetzungen. CorA arbeitet mit Listen von Wertkombinationen von Attributen. Die benötigte morphologische Annotation im Fall der altäthiopischen Sprache umfasst 30 Merkmale, mit je mindestens drei möglichen Werten. Die Handhabung solch einer umfangreichen Liste macht manuelle Annotation praktisch unmöglich. Weder WebAnno noch CATMA ermöglichen die Korrektur des zugrunde liegenden Textes während der Annotation. Die Implementierung einer solchen Funktion auf Basis eines dieser Werkzeuge würde tief in die Architektur der Software eingreifen, was innerhalb der Laufzeit des Projektes nicht realisierbar war. Auch die semi-automatischen Annotationsmöglichkeiten unter Supervision des Benutzenden sind für diese beiden Werkzeuge nicht leicht erweiterbar.
                
         
         
            Das GeTa Annotationstool
            Im TraCES-Projekt
                    , das als Hauptziel die Entwicklung eines diachronen, tief annotierten Korpus für die Altäthiopische Sprache hat, implementieren wir eine neuartige Architektur, die sowohl Änderungen im Text als auch eine Mehrebenenannotation ermöglicht.
                
            Wir betrachten als Grundtext den Originaltext in der altäthiopischen Schrift. Die Transliteration bildet die erste, die morphologische Annotation die zweite Ebene, wobei die Transliteration und der Originaltext bei allen Arbeitsschritten synchronisiert bleiben. Im folgenden Abschnitt beschreiben wir das Datenmodell, das diese Architektur ermöglicht.
            Die Basiseinheit in unserem System ist ein Wort, das eine einmalige ID zugewiesen erhält (graphische Einheit). Ein Wort hat folgende Komponenten:
            
               Eine Liste der einzelnen Fidal
                        -Objekte, wobei ein Fidal-Objekt aus einer ID und einem Label (dem Fidal-Buchstaben) besteht.
                    
               Eine Liste einzelner Silben-Objekte, wobei ein Silben-Objekt aus einer ID und einer Liste von einzelnen Buchstaben-Objekten besteht.
               Ein Buchstaben-Objekt hat immer eine ID und ein Label (das graphische Symbol).
            
            Graphische Einheiten können in mehreren Tokens geteilt werden. Die Tokens sind getrennt gespeichert (mit eigenenen IDs) und verlinkt mit der graphischen Einheit. Elemente der Textstruktur werden durch selbständige Objekte dargestellt, die mit den beinhalteten Tokens verlinkt werden. Editorische Annotationen werden mit den graphischen Einheiten verlinkt. Eine derartig stark vernetzte komplexe Struktur ist mit XML schwierig zu modellieren, insbesondere bei manueller Annotation. Auch die maschinelle Verarbeitung einer derartig tief vernetzten TEI-Struktur wäre sehr kompliziert. Alternativ bietet JSON für dieses Modell eine bessere Handhabbarkeit. Wir haben uns daher entschieden, die Daten in JSON zu speichern und zusätzlich XML-Export zu implementieren. Die Datenstruktur ist in vier JSON-Dateien gespeichert: eine für die graphischen Einheiten, eine für die Tokens, je eine für weitere Annotationsebenen (Textstruktur und Edition). Diese JSON-Dateisammlung wird via Konverterschnittstelle nach 
                    ANNIS importiert.
                
         
         
            corpus-tools.org: 
                    ANNIS, 
                    Pepper, 
                    Salt
            
            
               ANNIS (Krause & Zeldes 2016) ist eine Such- und Visualisierungsplattform für linguistische Daten, die mehrebenenfähig ist, d.h., verschiedene Annotationsebenen eines Korpus darstellen kann und dabei verschiedenste Annotationsarten berücksichtigt. Dies macht 
                    ANNIS zu einem hervorragenden Analysetool für die Daten des TraCES-Projekts. Eine besondere Rolle dabei spielt die Mächtigkeit der 
                    ANNIS-eigenen Abfragesprache AQL (ANNIS Query Language), die neben Freitextsuche und regulären Ausdrücken sich vor allem dadurch auszeichnet, linguistische Strukturen über mehrere Ebenen suchen zu können.
                
            Durch 
                    ANNIS‘ beschriebene Eigenschaften und seine Konfigurierbarkeit ist die Software für die Verwendung in den unterschiedlichsten Analyseszenarien geeignet und wird in der Tat bereits in verschiedenen Communities verwendet, z.B. in historischer Linguistik, Typologie, Sprachdokumentation u.v.m.
                
            Diese Eignung wird verstärkt durch eine hohe Kompatibilität mit vielen unterschiedlichen linguistischen Datenformaten, die erreicht wird durch Einsatz von 
                    Pepper (Zipser et al. 2011), einem Konvertierungsframework für liguistische Daten. 
                    Pepper nutzt ein generisches, graphbasiertes Zwischenmodell, 
                    Salt (Zipser & Romary 2010), das unterschiedlichste, auch über mehrere Ebenen eines Korpus verteilte, Annotationsarten aufnehmen kann und so weiterverarbeitbar macht. 
                    Pepper zeichnet sich weiterhin durch eine Plugin-Architektur aus, die es ermöglicht mit geringem Aufwand sowohl Import- als auch Manipulations- und Exportmodule zu entwickeln, die die Quelldaten in ein 
                    Salt-Modell im Hauptspeicher übertragen, das dort manipuliert werden und anschließend in ein Zielformat überführt werden kann.
                
            
               ANNIS, 
                    Pepper und 
                    Salt sind Komponenten der Softwarefamilie 
                    corpus-tools.org (Druskat et al. 2016).
                
         
         
            Schnittstelle zwischen 
                    GeTa und 
                    ANNIS
            
            Diese Infrastruktur ermöglicht es ohne Weiteres, die in 
                    GeTa annotierten Daten über ein dediziertes 
                    GeTa-Importmodul für 
                    Pepper und die Verwendung der bereits existierenden 
                    ANNIS-Module für 
                    Pepper – hier das Exportmodul – in 
                    ANNIS verarbeitbar zu machen. Mit 
                    GeTaModules (Druskat 2018) haben wir einen solchen Importer entwickelt, dessen Funktionsweise hier kurz beschrieben werden soll. 
                    GeTaModules ist in Java implementiert und wird als OSGi-Bundle ausgeliefert, das von 
                    Peppers OSGi-Plattform verwaltet werden kann. 
                    GeTaModules ist Open Source unter der Apache License, Version 2.0.
                
            Um Performanz und Speicherökonomie zu optimieren nutzt der 
                    GeTaModules-Importer eine Kombination aus Streaming und Object-Mapping-Methoden, um die aus 
                    GeTa exportierten JSON-Dateien einzulesen. Dabei werden die kleinsten Einheiten der Transliteration auf den graphischen Einheiten genutzt, um eine Tokenisierung in 
                    Salt zu erstellen und einen virtuellen Primärtext aufzubauen. Auf den so erstellten Modelltokens werden rekursiv die Silben- und Fidal-Objekte als Spannen aufgebaut. Im Anschluss werden die linguistischen Annotationen der 
                    GeTa-Tokens sowie die weiteren Annotationen aus den JSON-Objekten per Identifikator auf die entsprechenden Einheiten projiziert.
                
            In diesem Zustand hält 
                    Pepper einen kompletten 
                    Salt-Dokumentgraphen für das entsprechende Korpusdokument im Hauptspeicher. In einem weiteren Schritt werden Ordnungsrelationen jeweils zwischen den Knoten der Fidal und der transliterierten Wortebene erstellt, damit diese später in 
                    ANNIS als Segmentierungsgrundlage angezeigt werden können.
                
            Im dritten Schritt werden mit Hilfe des 
                    ANNIS-Exportmoduls
                     die für den Import in 
                    ANNIS benötigten Dateien im nativen Format geschrieben. Diese können nun in 
                    ANNIS über dessen graphische Benutzeroberfläche importiert werden.
                
            Die Konfiguration der Visualisierungen erfolgt durch Anpassung einer während des Exportvorgangs generierten Konfigurationsdatei. Im Fall der 
                    GeTa-Daten müssen hier lediglich die anzuzeigenden Annotationsebenen und ihre Reihenfolge eingestellt werden. In den 
                    ANNIS-Daten wird weiterhin ein dedizierter HTML-Visualisierer konfiguriert, der Wortartenannotationen auch graphisch Fidalwörtern zuordnet.
                
            Mit 
                    Pepper erfolgt die Konvertierung auf der Kommandozeile und die Konfiguration in Textdateien. Da dies für einige potenzielle Anwendergruppen unbekanntes Terrain bedeuten könnte haben wir den Prototypen einer Desktopanwendung für 
                    Pepper für die Verwendung mit 
                    GeTaModules angepasst, die eine grafische Oberfläche für die Verwendung von 
                    Pepper bietet: 
                    Pepper Grinder (Druskat 2017). 
                    Pepper Grinder (TraCES Edition) bietet so den Workflow für die Konvertierung der 
                    GeTa-Daten nach 
                    ANNIS quasi per Knopfdruck an. 
                    Pepper Grinder wird in Zukunft in eine vollfunktionale Anwendung ausgebaut, die Modi für verschiedene Anwendergruppen anbieten wird.
                
            Neben der projektinternen Nutzung von 
                    GeTaModules für die Konvertierung in das 
                    ANNIS-Format eröffnet die Software weitere Nachnutzungsszenarien für die annotierten Daten. Durch die Existenz von Manipulator- und Export-Modulen für 
                    Pepper für die verschiedensten Datenformate können die Daten mit anderen Werkzeugen nachgenutzt und etwa um zusätzliche Annotationsebenen angereichert, oder mit anderen Visualisierungen zu weiteren Forschungsfragen analysiert werden. 
                    Gleichzeitig leistet die Nachnutzung und Anpassung von 
                    Pepper durch 
                    GeTaModules einen Beitrag zur Vernachhaltigung dieses Frameworks. Durch die Ermöglichung des Imports von GeTa-Daten in ANNIS wird aus dem GeTa-Modell eine durchaus attraktive Modellierungsalternative für andere Sprachen mit ähnlichen Merkmalen. Derzeit wird das Modell in laufenden Projekten zu Mayasprachen und Jiddisch erprobt.
                
            Zusammenfassend stellt unser Ansatz eine Alternative dar zu Tendenzen der „Format-Hoheit“, also der Modellierung auf Grundlage eines – eventuell de facto standardisierten – Datenformats im Gegensatz zur Modellierung auf Grundlage der Forschungsfrage und der vorliegenden Daten. Die Einrichtung von Schnittstellen, wie z.B. 
                    GeTaModules, die eine Nachnutzbarkeit der Daten auch über die ursprüngliche Erstellung hinaus gewährleisten können, ermöglicht eine optimierte Modellierung und die Entwicklung spezifischer, den Bedürfnissen der Forschung und ihrer Daten hochgradig angepasster Werkzeuge, wie etwa 
                    GeTa.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               .
            
             "Fidal" ist der Terminus technicus für das äthiopische Silbenalphabet.
            
               .
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bollmann, Marcel / Petran, Florian / Dipper, Stefanie / Krasselt, Julia (2014): „CorA: A web-based annotation tool for historical and other non-standard language data“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH). Gothenburg, Sweden: 86-90.
                    
               
                  Druskat, Stephan (2018): „GeTaModules (Version 0.9.0)“. Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1146985. 
                        
               
               
                  Druskat, Stephan (2017): „Pepper Grinder (Version 0.1.7)“. Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1041735. 
                        
               
               
                  Druskat, Stephan / Gast, Volker / Krause, Thomas / Zipser, Florian (2016): "corpus-tools.org: An Interoperable Generic Software Tool Set for Multi-layer Linguistic Corpora", in: 
                        Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016): 23–28.
                    
               
                  Eckart de Castilho, Richard / Mújdricza-Maydt, Éva / Yiman, Seid Muhie / Hartmann, Silvana / Gurevych, Iryna / Frank, Anette / Biemann, Chris (2016): „A Web-based Tool for the Integrated Annotation of Semantic and Syntactic Structures“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the LT4DH workshop at COLING 2016, Osaka, Japan: 76-84.
                    
               
                  Krause, Thomas / Zeldes, Amir (2016): "ANNIS3: A new architecture for generic corpus query and visualization", in: 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities: 118-139.
                    
               
                  Meister, J.C. / Petris, M. / Gius, E. / Jacke, J. (2016): CATMA 5.0 [Software for text annotation and analysis] 
                        http://www.catma.de [letzter Zugriff 10.01.2018]
                    
               
                  Vertan, Cristina / Ellwardt, Andreas / Hummel, Susanne (2016): "Ein Mehrebenen-Tagging-Modell für die Annotation altäthiopischer Texte", in: 
                        Proceedings der DHd-Konferenz 2016
                  http://www.dhd2016.de/abstracts/vortr%C3%A4ge-061.html [letzter Zugriff 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Zipser, Florian / Romary, Laurent (2010): "A model oriented approach to the mapping of annotation formats using standards", in: 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Resource and Language Technology Standards (LREC 2010)
                   [letzter Zugriff 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Zipser, Florian / Zeldes, Amir / Ritz, Julia / Romary, Laurent / Leser, Ulf (2011): "Pepper: Handling a multiverse of formats", Poster, 
                        33. Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Sprachwissenschaft, Göttingen.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Vernetzung von Texten und anderen Ressourcen war und ist ein großes Versprechen des digitalen Zeitalters im Allgemeinen, aber auch der digitalen Editionsphilologie im Besonderen. Während man um 2000 darunter noch vorwiegend das manuelle Setzen von einzelnen Links verstand, wurde spätestens seit Beginn dieses Jahrzehnts die automatisierte Verknüpfung in den Blick genommen. So wurde in Portalen, Websites und auch digitalen Editionen (vornehmlich des deutschsprachigen Raums) die automatisierte Verlinkung von Personenregistereinträgen eingeführt, die mit Hilfe der Gemeinsamen Normdatei und von BEACON-Schnittstellen ermöglicht wird. Diese Vernetzung auf Basis von BEACON-Schnittstellen gehört heute zum Standard digitaler Editionen und ist nicht mehr wegzudenken (Stadler 2012). 
         Mit den Fortschritten im Internet allgemein wuchs aber seit einigen Jahren der Wunsch, digitale Editionen über solche basalen Verlinkungen hinaus zu verknüpfen. Im Bereich der Briefeditionen z.B. wurde schon recht früh der Wunsch geäußert, Briefe editionsübergreifend durchsuchbar zu machen und zu vernetzen. Basis dafür sollten die in TEI-XML kodierten Briefmetadaten, also die wichtigsten Kopfdaten eines Briefes, sein. Mit Entwicklung des Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (TEI Correspondence SIG 2015) und des da-rauf aufbauenden Webservices correspSearch (
                http://correspSearch.net) konnte dies realisiert werden. Nicht nur können Briefeditionen jetzt digitale Briefverzeichnisse bereitstellen, die durch correspSearch zentral recherchierbar gemacht werden. Digitalen Briefeditionen ist es hier nun möglich, über die API von correspSearch Briefmetadaten zu beziehen und passend zu einem – in der eigenen Edition vorliegenden – Brief zu präsentieren (Dumont 2018). Damit werden schon einige methodische Probleme der Briefedition überwunden, andere bleiben hingegen noch offen.
            
         So kann es vorkommen, dass ein Brief mehrfach ediert vorliegt. Diese Situation kann dadurch entstanden sein, dass ältere Editionen (etwa des 19. Jahrhunderts) durch zeitgemäße abgelöst werden. Sie kann aber auch dadurch aufgekommen sein, dass der Brief nicht in einer Briefwechselausgabe, sondern in zwei Gesamtausgaben erschienen ist: Einerseits in derjenigen Gesamtausgabe, die die Korrespondenz des Autors ediert, andererseits in derjenigen, die die Korrespondenz des Empfängers ediert. In so einem Fall entstehen zum einen Kommentierungen, die in beiden Editionen ähnlich vorgenommen werden (z.B. Identifizierung von Personen etc.). Zum anderen werden aber auch Kommentierungen vorgenommen, die aus der spezifischen Perspektive der Edition entstehen – d.h. mit Fokus auf diejenige Person, deren Korrespondenz ediert wird. Dadurch entstehen zwei Annotationslayer, die sich im Idealfall ergänzen. Die Einzelstellen(-kommentierung) aus der jeweils anderen Edition kann also u.U. äußerst wertvoll für einen Nutzer sein. 
         In digitalen Briefeditionen besteht nun prinzipiell die Möglichkeit, Daten aus anderen digitalen Editionen bzw. Portalen zu integrieren. Anstelle eines einmaligen, manuellen Importes bzw. Übernahme dieser Daten, ist heutzutage deren automatisierter Abruf über ein Application Programming Interface (API) zu favorisieren. Daten aus externen Quellen können so schneller aggregiert, aktualisiert und zusammen mit den eigenen Forschungsdaten – hier: edierte Briefe – angeboten werden. Daher erscheint die Nutzung von APIs und standardisierten Datenformaten angeraten. Im Regelfall liegen Einzelstellenkommentare in digitalen Briefeditionen heutzutage als Bestandteil der TEI-XML-Dokumente vor (etwa im Element ). Sollen diese Kommentare allerdings über eine Schnittstelle zur freien Nachnutzung durch externe Editionen angeboten werden, müssen sie deutlich mehr Informationen tragen, als im Kontext der Edition – nämlich Metadaten (Autor des Kommentars, Bezugstext etc.). Auch eine Übermittlung des ganzen Briefes mitsamt seinen Einzelstellenerläuterungen ist nicht gewünscht, liegt der Text doch gerade im hier geschilderten Fall bereits vor. 
         In Betracht kommt daher ein Datenformat, dass dediziert für den Austausch und die Aggregation von Kommentaren, also vorwiegend textuell vorliegender Annotation, konzipiert ist. Zwar wäre es möglich ein solches Format in TEI-XML neu zu definieren, allerdings gibt es für diesen Bereich bereits einen Standard, der auch schon breite Anwendung findet: das Web Annotation Data Model (Sanderson, Ciccarese, und Young 2017). Es ist für genau dieses Nutzungsszenario – Austausch von Kommentaren – konzipiert und durch das W3C standardisiert. Es wird daher auch von DARIAH-DE empfohlen (Lordick u. a. 2016). 
         Das Poster stellt nun anhand eines Beispiels diesen Ansatz exemplarisch vor und demonstriert seinen Nutzen. Als Beispiel ist der überlieferte Briefwechsel zwischen Alexander von Humboldt und Samuel Thomas Soemmerring gewählt, der zum einen in 
                edition humboldt digital (
                http://edition-humboldt.de) vorliegt, zum anderen in einer (derzeit noch unveröffentlichten) digitalen Edition zu Soemmerrings Biographica. Konkret sieht die Implementierung so aus: Einzelstellenerläuterungen aus der Soemmerring-Edition, die ursprünglich als TEI-XML vorliegen, werden über eine API im Web Annotation Data Model angeboten. Diese API wird von correspSearch abgefragt und die Daten aggregiert. Andere digitale Editionen, hier beispielhaft die 
                edition humboldt digital, können anhand einer Kalliope-URI, also der eindeutigen und maschinenlesbaren Archivkennung, den Webservice correspSearch auf Annotationen zu einem bestimmten Brief hin abfragen. Im Erfolgsfall werden die Annotationen ausgeliefert und in der 
                edition humboldt digital am Brief angezeigt (mit Quelle, Autor etc.). 
            
         Das Poster stellt nicht nur Konzept und Implementierung vor, sondern diskutiert auch die noch offenen Probleme einer solchen API, wie z.B. die korrekte und stabile Referenzierung des Bezugstextes (d.h. der kommentierten Textstelle).
         
            
            Beispielhafte Implementierung in der Entwicklungsversion von edition humboldt digital
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Dumont, Stefan. 2018. „CorrespSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters“. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 10. [Im Erscheinen].
                    
               
                  Lordick, Harald, Rainer Becker, Michael Bender, Luise Borek, Canan Hastik, Thomas Kollatz, Beata Mache, Andrea Rapp, Ruth Reiche, und Niels-Oliver Walkowski. 2016. „Digitale Annotationen in der geisteswissenschaftlichen Praxis“. Bibliothek Forschung und Praxis 40 (2): 186–199. doi:10.1515/bfp-2016-0042.
                    
               
                  Sanderson, Robert, Paolo Ciccarese, und Benjamin Young. 2017. „Web Annotation Data Model. W3C Recommendation“. W3C. https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-model/.
                    
               
                  Stadler, Peter. 2012. „Normdateien in der Edition“. editio 26: 174–83.
                    
               
                  TEI Correspondence SIG. 2015. „Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (CMIF)“. https://github.com/TEI-Correspondence-SIG/CMIF.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Die Anforderungen an die Erstellung von Editionen sind im letzten Jahrzehnt gestiegen.
                     Es ist unstreitig, dass digitale Editionen Annäherungen an den edierten Text ermöglichen, die weit über den statischen Druck hinausgehen (Sahle 2016). Gleichzeitig gibt es aber auch noch immer Anforderungen, etwa die Zitierbarkeit, die im Druck gelöst sind, zu denen es aber in der Webpublikation noch keine einheitliche Entsprechung gibt. Insbesondere stellt sich die Frage nach der Nachhaltigkeit und der Langzeitarchivierung.
                    
            
            Ein Lösungsansatz besteht darin, Techniken der Data Curation zu etablieren (Pempe 2012: 141f.). Damit ist aber ein Aufwand verbunden, der linear mit der Zahl der Webpublikationen wächst und sogar polynomial ansteigt, wenn auch die Schnittstellen zu verknüpften Ressourcen gepflegt werden müssen. Eine besondere Herausforderung stellt sich, wenn man sinnvollerweise annimmt, dass die Darstellung und die Funktionalitäten Teil der Edition selbst sind (Ralle 2016, Pierazzo 2015: 127-146, Porter 2016 und Turska et al. 2016). Wenn also nur die Forschungsdaten nachhaltig archiviert werden, geht die ursprüngliche Präsentation letztendlich verloren. Es wird zwar momentan auf die Einführung von Standards gesetzt, 
                     einen wirklichen Mehrwert für den Gebrauch von digitalen Editionen entfalten diese aber erst, wenn sie durch das Angebot von technischen Schnittstellen unterstützt werden.
                     Bisher fehlt es jedoch an einem klar definierten Interface, welches die Forschungsdaten in eine nachhaltige funktionale Präsentationsform mit allen Aspekten einer digitalen Edition übersetzt.
                    
            
         
         
            Entwurf einer Schnittstelle
            Hier wird nun ein System für die Nachhaltigkeit von Webpublikationen entworfen. Es verbindet die Daten mit der Präsentationsschicht und kann mithilfe einer projektspezifischen, archivierbaren Konfiguration über eine Schnittstelle gesteuert werden. Durch den Einsatz einer solchen Schnittstelle können Webpublikationen inklusive der entsprechenden Funktionalitäten aus den Forschungsdaten reproduziert werden.
                     Digitale Editionen unterscheiden sich technisch zwar zurzeit noch stark voneinander (Robinson 2016), der hier gemachte Vorschlag und das sich anschließende Software-Beispiel zeigen daher, wo es schon jetzt Möglichkeiten zur Standardisierung gibt und wie diese aussehen könnten. 
                
            Vorbild für das System ist der erfolgreiche IIIF-Standard, der zu einem ähnlichen Zweck für Bilder eingeführt wurde (Cramer 2011). Der IIIF-Standard sieht eine Aufteilung von Server- und Clientstruktur vor, und als Austauschformat fungiert eine Manifest-Datei. Übertragen auf Digitale Editionen heißt dies, dass eine archivierbare Manifestdatei notwendige Definitionen festhält, mit denen es einem Viewer möglich ist, die vollständige Präsentation und Funktionalität der jeweiligen digitalen Edition herzustellen.
            
            
               Manifestdatei
               Der Vorschlag für eine Manifestdatei, aus der die Funktionalitäten hergestellt werden können, lautet wie folgt (vgl. auch die nachstehende Tabelle):
               Ganz konkret sollten die notwendigen Metadaten der digitalen Edition definiert werden. Dabei kann darüber diskutiert werden, welche Informationen für eine digitale Edition notwendig und welche für wünschenswert gehalten werden.
               Mit der Definition einer Gliederung der Materialien, also von Editionstexten, Kommentaren und Begleitmaterial, können sinnvolle hierarchische Navigationselemente in der Darstellung umgesetzt werden.
               In der Präsentationsoberfläche muss es möglich sein, zu den verschiedenen Datentypen zu navigieren und entsprechende Überblickslisten anzeigen zu lassen. Dafür werden die Typen von Datenobjekten (etwa Textsorten oder Register) definiert. Für die Unterstützung von facettierten Filtern, müssen diese entsprechend festgelegt werden. 
               Die Darstellung der Dokumente in der Einzelansicht kann unter Einbindung von Schnittstellen für die Transformation geschehen.
                         Auch können für die Navigation zu Abschnitten im Dokument, die entsprechenden Teile definiert werden. Zu jedem Objekttyp sollten auch die vorhandenen Beziehungen zu Teilen, als auch zu anderen Objekttypen festgehalten werden. Damit können verschiedene Forschungsdaten in einer dynamischen Ansicht zusammengeführt werden.
                    
               Für eine nachhaltige Einbindung externer Ressourcen sollte definiert werden, auf welche Ressourcen die Edition Bezug nimmt und welche Schnittstellen dazu genutzt werden. Die Integration externer Ressourcen kann problematisch sein, wenn deren Verfügbarkeit noch nicht gesichert ist.
                        
               
               
                  
                     
                        Zu definierende Elemente
                     
                     
                        Zu definierende Eigenschaften
                     
                     
                        Steht in Beziehung zu
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Metadaten
                     
                     Titelei, Impressum, Lizenzangaben
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Gliederung der Edition
                     
                     Hierarchie, Verweise auf Objekte / Objekttypen
                     Objekttypen
                  
                  
                     
                        Gesamtschau
                     
                     Typ, Sortierungen
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Filterdefinitionen
                     
                     
                        Name, Typ, ID
                        Kontext: Zugehöriger Objekttyp
                        Wurzel des Filterobjekts (XPath)
                        Pfad zum Filterwert (XPath oder XQuery)
                        Labelingfunktion (XPath oder XQuery)
                     
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Dokumente und Objekte
                     
                     
                        Name, Typ
                        Schnittstelle: Zugang zu den Objekten
                        Objekt-Wurzel
                        Pfad zur Objekt-ID (XPath oder XQuery)
                        Pfad zum Objekttitel
                        Thumbnail: Funktionsdefinition für Kurzanzeige (HTML)
                     
                     Gesamtschau, Filter, Einzelpräsentation, Binnenstruktur, Beziehungen, Schnittstellen, Zitation
                  
                  
                     
                        Einzelpräsentation
                     
                     Schnittstelle: Formate und Transformationskripte (ODD)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Binnenstruktur
                     
                     
                        Name, ID
                        Wurzel der referenzierbaren Objektteile (XPath)
                        Pfad zur jeweiligen ID (XPath)
                        Titel und Thumbnail für die Darstellung in einer Liste
                     
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Beziehungen
                     
                     
                        Name, ID
                        Subjekt, Prädikat, Objekt-Beziehungen
                     
                     Objekttypen, Teile von Objekttypen
                  
                  
                     
                        Schnittstellen
                     
                     Label
                                Pfad zu den Elementen (XPath)
                                Schnittstellen (URLs)
                            
                     
                  
               
               Tabelle 1: Definitionen für die Schnittstelle
            
         
         
            Prototyp
            Im Forschungprojekt „ediarum“ wird momentan ein Prototyp entwickelt, der das vorgestellte Konzept umsetzt und die Anforderungen der Darstellung erfüllen soll (Dumont/Fechner 2014 und 
                    http://www.bbaw.de/telota/software/ediarum
               ). Dieser enthält eine Programmbibliothek, die die Funktionalitäten zur Anzeige bereitstellt. Kern der spezifischen Darstellung einer digitalen Edition wird durch eine Manifestdatei nach obigem Konzept gebildet. Mit diesem Prototypen ist es bereits möglich mithilfe der Manifestdatei und wenigen Anpassungen, die vor allem das Layout betreffen, eine Webseite für eine Digitale Edition zu erstellen. Mit dem Einsatz des Prototyps für mehrere Editionen werden die einzelnen Funktionalitäten und Konfigurationsmöglichkeiten ausgetestet und verbessert. Schließlich soll er als Viewer zur Verfügung stehen, der zur Präsentation lediglich die Manifestdatei und Zugang zu den Daten über eine entsprechende Serverinfrastruktur benötigt. Durch das Zusammenspiel der Kernkomponente, die alle Funktionalitäten bereitstellt, und der projektspezifischen Komponente, die im Layout angepasst werden kann, wird eine hohe Flexibilität erreicht. Somit kann für jedes Projekt ein individueller Auftritt erzeugt werden.
                
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Manifestdatei des Prototyps
            
         
         
            Fazit
            Hier wird die Entwicklung einer neuen Standardschnittstelle vorgeschlagen, um die Nachhaltigkeit digitaler Editionen zu verbessern. Denn es braucht für die Langzeitarchivierung digitaler Editionen auch eine Standardisierung ihrer Funktionalitäten. Editionen sind zwar sehr unterschiedlich, doch mit dem hier beschriebenen Interface und dem zugehörigen Austauschformat wird beispielhaft ein praktikabler Ansatz vorgestellt, um diese Lücke zu schließen. Eine Weiterentwicklung des hier gemachten Entwurfs und die Integration weiterer Standards unter Einbindung unterschiedlicher Editionsprojekte kann in Zukunft die Unabhängigkeit digitaler Editionen von einzelnen technischen Systemen erhöhen und unterstützt damit die Langzeitarchivierung.
         
      
      
         
            
                    Ziele von Editionen finden sich bei (Förderkriterien 2015, Eggert 2016, Ralle 2016 und Sahle 2016).
                
            
                    Für die Forschungsdaten selbst ist die Langzeitarchivierung grundsätzlich gelöst. Digitalen Editionen wird jedoch nur geringe Zuverlässigkeit zugeschrieben  (Pierazzo 2015: 169).
                
            
                    So wird das Format der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) verbreitet eingesetzt, das nur ein erster Schritt zur Standardisierung ist (Holmes 2017). Weitere Standards und Identifikatoren sind etwa die GND für Personen, GeoNames-IDs für Orte oder der Canocical Text Service (CTS) für Zitationen, das DITA- oder DocBook-Format für (technische) Dokumentationen. Als Langzeitarchivierungsformat für Metadaten gibt es etwa LMER (Steinke 2005).
                
            
                    Gute Ansätze einer Präsentationsoberfläche für Einzeldokumente bietet der "teiPublisher", der auf dem Datenformat ODD aufbaut (Meier 2017, Meier/Turska 2016 und Turska et al. 2016). 
                
            
                    Die Benutzbarkeit digitaler Editionen leidet unter mangelnden Interfaces (Robinson 2016). Pierazzo sieht es als Nachteil, dass viele digitale Editionen unterschiedliche User Interfaces besitzen, hält aber eine zukünftige Angleichung für wahrscheinlich (Pierazzo 2015: 162).
                
            
                    Es gibt dabei sehr unterschiedliche Anforderungen, die an die Präsentation digitaler Editionen gestellt werden (Shillingsburg 2016, Ralle 2016: 154f. und Sahle 2014).
                
            
                    Für die Langzeitarchivierung könnte eine Kompatibilität der Manifestdatei etwa mit LMER hergestellt werden (Steinke 2005).
                
            
                    TEI-Dokumente können etwa mit ODD zur Einzelpräsentation transformiert werden (Meier 2017).
                
            
                    Externe Daten können auch in eine "Standalone" Version überführt werden (Holmes 2017).
                
         
         
            Bibliographie
            
               Cramer, Tom (2011): The International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF): Laying the Foundation for Common Services, Integrated Resources and a Marketplace of Tools for Scholars Worldwide. Blogpost. URL: 
                    https://www.cni.org/topics/information-access-retrieval/international-image-interoperability-framework
            
            
               Dumont, Stefan / Fechner, Martin (2014): “Bridging the Gap: Greater Usability for TEI encoding”, in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8. URL: 
                    http://jtei.revues.org/1242
            
            
               Eggert, Paul (2016): “The reader-oriented scholarly edition”, in: Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31, 4: 797–810. DOI: 
                    10.1093/llc/fqw043
            
            Förderkriterien für wissenschaftliche Editionen in der Literaturwissenschaft. In: Informationen für Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftler/innen (11) 2015.
            
               Holmes, Martin (2017): “Whatever happened to interchange?” In: Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 32, suppl_1: i63–i68. DOI: 
                    10.1093/llc/fqw048
            
            
               Meier, Wolfgang (2017): teiPublisher. The instant publishing toolbox. Version v2.2.0, Stand 8. September 2017. URL: 
                    http://teipublisher.com/index.html
            
            
               Meier, Wolfgang / Turska, Magdalena (2016): “TEI Processing Model Toolbox: Power To The Editor”, in: Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts: 936. URL: 
                    http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/401
            
            
               Pempe, Wolfgang (2012): „Geisteswissenschaften“, in: Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten: Eine Bestandsaufnahme. Hg. v. Heike Neuroth et al., Version 1.0, Stand 2012: 137-159. URN: 
                    urn:nbn:de:0008-2012031401
            
            
               Pierazzo, Elena (2015): Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Abingdon, England.
                
            
               Porter, Dot (2016): "What is an edition anyway?" My Keynote for the Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces conference, University of Graz. Blogpost, in: Dot Porter Digital. URL: 
                    http://www.deporterdigital.org/?p=309
            
            
               Ralle, Inga Hanna (2016): „Maschinenlesbar – menschenlesbar. Über die grundlegende Ausrichtung der Edition“, in: Editio 30, 1: 144-156. DOI: 
                    10.1515/editio-2016-0009
            
            
               Robinson, Peter M. W. (2016): “Project-based digital humanities and social, digital, and scholarly editions”, in:
                    Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31, 4: 875–889. DOI: 
                    10.1093/llc/fqw020
            
            
               Sahle, Patrik (2014): Kriterienkatalog für die Besprechung digitaler Editionen. Version 1.1, Stand Juni 2014. URL: 
                    https://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/kriterien-version-1-1/
            
            
               Sahle, Patrik (2016): “What is a Scholarly Digital Edition?” In: Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories and Practices: 19-40. DOI: 
                    10.11647/obp.0095.02
            
            
               Shillingsburg, Peter (2016): “Reliable social scholarly editing”, in: 
                    Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31, 4: 890–897. DOI: 
                    10.1093/llc/fqw044
            
            
               Steinke, Tobias (Redaktion) (2005): LMER Langzeitarchivierungsmetadaten für elektronische Ressourcen.Version 1.2, Stand 7. April 2005. URN: 
                    urn:nbn:de:1111-2005041102
            
            
               Turska, Magdalena / Cummings, James / Rahtz, Sebastian (2016): Challenging the Myth of Presentation in Digital Editions, in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 9. DOI: 
                    10.4000/jtei.1453
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die literarische Netzwerkanalyse hat sich in den letzten Jahren zu einer gefragten Methode der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft entwickelt. Dabei rangiert die Größe der Arbeitskorpora im Sinne des »scalable reading« (Martin Mueller) von der Betrachtung von Einzeltexten (Schweizer/Schnegg 1998, Moretti 2011) über kleinere Korpora bis hin zur Untersuchung hunderter oder gar tausender Dramen (Fischer u. a. 2016, Trilcke u. a. 2016, Algee-Hewitt 2017). Dabei zeigt sich auch immer wieder Interesse an bestimmten, etwa autorzentrierten Subkorpora (Wade 2017).
            
         In diesem Kontext siedelt sich auch unser Posterprojekt an, in dessen Mittelpunkt die extrahierten Netzwerkdaten zu den Stücken des russischen Dramatikers Anton Tschechow (1860–1904) stehen. Die Datengrundlage bildet das von uns aufgebaute und betriebene Russian Drama Corpus (RusDraCor), das es sich zur Aufgabe gestellt hat, russischsprachige Stücke in der Zeitspanne zwischen den 1740er-Jahren (Sumarokow, Lomonossow u. a.) und den 1930er-Jahren (mit Texten von Autoren wie Majakowski oder Gorki) im TEI-Format zur Verfügung zu stellen (Fischer u. a. 2017). Neben Large-Scale-Analysen zur strukturellen Evolution des russischen Dramas ergibt sich so auch die Möglichkeit zur Betrachtung von nach verschiedenen Kriterien portionierten Teilkorpora, etwa der Stücke einzelner Autoren.
         Anton Tschechow gehört zu den meistgespielten russischen Dramatikern, dessen Werke bis heute inszeniert werden, gerade auch an deutschsprachigen Bühnen, vor allem seine vier letzten Stücke, »Die Möwe«, »Onkel Wanja«, »Drei Schwestern« und »Der Kirschgarten«. Von der Figurenkonstellation her haben diese Werke einen hohen Wiedererkennungswert: Es gibt keine wirklichen Protagonisten; die Redeanteile und Gesprächssituationen sind relativ gleichmäßig über eine Gruppe von Figuren verteilt. Dies zeigt sich sofort auch in den Netzwerkgraphen: Die Knoten (von denen jeder für eine Figur des jeweiligen Dramas steht) bilden einencharacter space
                , der bei der Visualisierung einem Polyeder gleicht. Die einzigen Figuren, die nicht am gemeinsamen Gesprächskreis teilhaben, sind die Diener und sonstige Gehilfen, deren Redeanteile sich auf Dialoge mit ihren direkten Weisungsbefugten beschränken. Dieses Sichtbarwerden der sozialen Zweiteilung des Dramenpersonals ist eine der Leistungen der Netzwerkvisualisierung. Zieht man die Werkchronologie als Größe hinzu, wird außerdem deutlich, wie sich die für Tschechow typischen Personenkonstellationen allmählich herausbilden, ab den frühen Stücken »An der Landstraße« (1884), »Iwanow« (1887) und »Der Waldteufel« (1889), über mehrere Kurzdramen oder Etüden wie »Der Bär«
                (1888), »Tragödie wider Willen« (1889) oder »Das Jubiläum« (1891), bis 1895 mit der »Möwe« die typische Tschechow’sche Charakterkonstellation gefunden ist.
            
         Die Beschaffenheit des Russian Drama Corpus erlaubt es, quantitative Analysen auch zugeschnitten auf bestimmte Figurengruppen zu beschränken, etwa gesondert nach Geschlecht oder sozialem Status. Bereits eine simple Worthäufigkeitsanalyse kann so etwa zeigen, dass weibliche und männliche Rollen in Tschechow-Stücken von den Redeanteilen und dem Vernetzungsgrad her vergleichbar sind (anders als etwa bei allen anderen Autoren im Korpus). Diese Verteilungsdiagramme sowie netzwerktheoretische Werte wie Dichte, Diameter, Clustering-Koeffizient und Average Path Length ergänzen die chronologisch sortierten Netzwerkvisualisierungen.
         Die im Poster geschaffene Übersicht über alle Tschechow-Dramen hat auch enzyklopädischen Charakter, enthält sie doch etwa alle Figuren im Kontext ihres Auftretens im Tschechow’schen Dramenkosmos. Der netzwerkanalytische Blick ist somit durchaus geeignet, als Brücke zur inhaltlichen Auseinandersetzung mit den Werken Tschechows zu dienen.
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Algee-Hewitt, Mark (2017): Distributed Character: Quantitative Models of the English Stage, 1500–1920. DH2017, Montréal. URL: 
                        >.
                    
               
                  Fischer, Frank; Göbel, Mathias; Kampkaspar, Dario; Kittel, Christopher; Meiners, Hanna-Lena; Trilcke, Peer; Vogel, Andreas (2016): Distant-Reading Showcase. 200 Years of Literary Network Data at a Glance. DHd2016, Leipzig. DOI: 
                        >.
                    
               
                  Fischer, Frank; Orlova, Tatyana; Skorinkin, Danil; Palchikov, German; Tyshkevich, Natasha (2017): Introducing RusDraCor – A TEI-Encoded Russian Drama Corpus for the Digital Literary Studies. CORPORA2017, St. Petersburg. Abstractband, S. 28–31.
                    
               
                  Schweizer, Thomas; Schnegg, Michael (1998): Die soziale Struktur der »Simple Storys«. Eine Netzwerkanalyse. URL: 
                        >.
                    
               
                  Trilcke, Peer; Fischer, Frank; Göbel, Mathias; Kampkaspar, Dario; Kittel, Christopher (2016): Dramen als ›small worlds‹? Netzwerkdaten zur Geschichte und Typologie deutschsprachiger Dramen 1730–1930. DHd2016, Leipzig. URL: 
                        >.
                    
               
                  Wade, Karen (2017): Jane Austen’s Social Networks. In: The Sea of Books, 4. Juli 2017. URL: 
                        >.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Das Projekt 
                Altägyptische Kursivschriften (AKU 2015) an der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz unter der Leitung von Prof. Dr. Ursula Verhoeven-van Elsbergen (JGU Mainz) in Kooperation mit Prof. Dr. Andrea Rapp (TU Darmstadt) besteht seit April 2015. Ziel ist es, in verschiedenen Modulen im Verlauf von maximal 23 Jahren eine digitale Paläographie zum Hieratischen und zu den Kursivhieroglyphen zu erstellen sowie verschiedene Aspekte der Kursivschrift-Kultur systematisch unter Einbeziehung digitaler Methoden zu untersuchen. 
            
         Im Alten Ägypten gab es neben den monumentalen und detailliert ausgeführten Hieroglyphen auch kursive (Hand-)Schriften, die als Hieratisch, Kursivhieroglyphen, Kursivhieratisch und Demotisch bezeichnet werden. Sie wurden mit Pflanzenstengeln und Rußtusche auf Papyrus, Leinen, Leder, Holz, Ton oder Stein geschrieben oder eingeritzt. Die Kursivschriften spielten unter Gelehrten, Priestern, Beamten und Schreibern eine wesentliche Rolle in den Bereichen der Kommunikation und Verwaltung, aber auch in der Dichtung, den Wissensgebieten sowie religiösen und funerären Texten. Das Hieratische war über 3000 Jahre lang in Gebrauch und wurde von den Schülern als erste Schriftart noch vor den Hieroglyphen erlernt.
         Bis heute ist die knapp 100 Jahre alte 
                Hieratische Paläographie von Georg Möller das Standardwerk für die ägyptologische paläographische Forschung (Möller 1909–1912). Er hat aus nur 32 gut datierten Schriftzeugnissen (vor allem Papyri) alle identifizierbaren Grapheme faksimiliert und in übersichtlichen Listen erfasst, die die Zeitspanne von der 5. Dynastie (ca. 2500 v. Chr.) bis zur römischen Kaiserzeit (3. Jh. n. Chr.) abdecken; die drei Bände bestehen aber zusammengenommen aus nur etwa 220 Seiten. Da ihm für manche Epochen nur sehr wenige oder gar keine Schriftquellen zur Verfügung standen, sind einige Zeiträume nicht oder nur unzureichend dokumentiert. Möller selbst betrachtete diese Listen als Vorarbeiten für weitergehende Untersuchungen, was er aber aufgrund seines frühen Todes nicht realisieren konnte. Erst ca. 70 Jahre später formulierte Posener (1973) seine Anforderungen an eine zukünftige paläographische Forschung und einen 
                nouveau Möller. Mit den damaligen technischen Voraussetzungen hätten die komplexen Anforderungen in Verbindung mit der Materialfülle selbst von einer Forschergruppe nicht erfüllt werden können. So erklären sich die zahlreichen Teilpaläographien, die in den nachfolgenden Jahrzehnten im Rahmen ägyptologisch-paläographischer Forschung entstanden sind (z. B. Goedicke 1988, Verhoeven 2001, Allen 2002, Lenzo 2011). Diese halten sich bis heute an das Prinzip von Möller, ordnen die Zeichen allerdings nach der Standardliste (
                Sign-list), die Gardiner in seiner 
                Egyptian Grammar (Gardiner 1927, 31973: 438-548) publiziert hat. Da bei Gardiner aber nicht alle hieroglyphischen Entsprechungen zu den 
                Hieratogrammen (Verhoeven 2001: 1) zu finden sind, kam es in den verschiedenen Teilpaläographien zu diversen Erweiterungen, die keinem einheitlichen Prinzip folgen und somit nicht eindeutig referenzierbar sind (Gülden 2016: 3).
            
         Digitale Ansätze zur Analyse von Handschriften beschreiben beispielsweise Stokes (2009) für das europäische Mittelalter und Quirke (2011) für die hieratische Schrift des Alten Ägypten. Das AKU-Projekt entwickelt erstmals eine Paläographiedatenbank, in der nach und nach das gesamte Zeichenrepertoire der altägyptischen Kursivschriften erfasst wird: ca. 600 Grapheme ¬– sowohl Laut- als auch Deutzeichen, Zahlen, Maße und Korrekturzeichen sowie Ligaturen, Zeichengruppen und besondere Orthographien (Verhoeven 2015: 32). Fü
         Während für alphabetische Schriften bereits zahlreiche Vorarbeiten im Bereich der Handschriftenerkennung vorliegen, muss dies für die Handschrift des Alten Ägypten erst entwickelt werden, um eine Grundlage für automatisierte Prozesse bei der Zeichenerkennung, -erfassung und -auswertung dieser komplexen Schrift zu ermöglichen.
         Zunächst werden die einzelnen Schriftzeichen (
                Hieratogramme) auf der Basis hochauflösender Digitalisate der Textträger faksimiliert (umgezeichnet). Diese werden sowohl als Vektor- und Rastergrafiken gespeichert. In der Datenbank, die in den nächsten Jahren als 
                open access online tool zur Verfügung stehen soll, werden sie kategorisiert und annotiert. Dadurch soll die Auswertung mit unterschiedlichen Verfahren (z. B. 
                shape matching, 
                image retrieval und 
                pattern recognition) ermöglicht werden. 
            
         Für die Hieratistik sind das vor allem Fragen zu Entwicklung und Diversität der Kursiven, Bezügen zur Hieroglyphenschrift sowie kontextuellen und funktionellen Anpassungen. Hinzu kommen Aspekte zur Schriftökonomie, Schreibrichtung, zu Abkürzungen, Diakritika und Ligaturen sowie zum Layout. Mithilfe von Clusteranalysen können Datierungen, Schreiberpersonen und regionale Unterschiede identifiziert werden. 
         Langfristig erhofft sich das Projekt mit den erfassten Zeichen zudem eine Basis für weitere automatisierte Verfahren (
                machine learning) zu schaffen, damit auch umfangreiche Textträger (bspw. verfügt ein 23 m langen Papyrus hochgerechnet über 140.000 Einzelzeichen) analysiert werden können. Für ein Repositorium, aber auch für Auswertungen, Visualisierungen und 
                linked open data, sollen die Daten in verschiedene Formate übertragen werden, z. B. in ein TEI konformes XML-Schema und als csv-Files.
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Allen, James P. (2002): 
                        The Heqanakht papyri. Publications of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Egyptian Expedition 27. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
                    
               
                  AKU (2015): 
                        Altägyptische Kursivschriften. Digitale Paläographie und systematische Analyse des Hieratischen und der Kursivhieroglyphen (AKU). Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz http://aku.uni-mainz.de [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Gardiner, Sir Alan (1927 
                        31973): 
                        Egyptian Grammar. Oxford 1927. Third edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
                        31973.
                    
               
                  Goedicke, Hans (1988): 
                        Old Hieratic Paleography. Baltimore: Halgo.
                    
               
                  Gülden, Svenja A. (2016): „
                        Ein ‚nouveau Möller‘? Grenzen und Möglichkeiten. Ein working paper zum gleichnamigen Vortrag“. Hieratic Studies Online 1 urn:nbn:de:hebis:77-publ-557584.
                    
               
                  Gülden, Svenja A. / Krause, Celia / Verhoeven, Ursula (2017): „Prolegomena zu einer digitalen Paläographie des Hieratischen“ in: Fischer, Franz / Sahle, Patrick / Busch, Hannah (eds.):
                         Kodikologie & Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter 4. Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 11. Norderstedt: Books on Demand 253-273 kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/7774/.
                    
               
                  Gülden, Svenja A. / Krause, Celia / Verhoeven, Ursula (im Druck): „Digital Palaeography of Hieratic“, in: Davies, Vanessa / Laboury, Dimitri (eds.):
                         Oxford Handbook of Epigraphy and Palaeography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                    
               
                  Lenzo, Giuseppina (2011): „Paleografia“, in: Roccati, Alessandro: 
                        Magica Taurinensia. Il grande papiro magico di Torino e i suoi duplicati. Analecta Orientalia 56. Roma: Gregorian & Biblical Press 193–255.
                    
               
                  Möller, Georg (1909–1912): 
                        Hieratische Paläographie. Die Aegyptische Buchschrift in ihrer Entwicklung von der fünften Dynastie bis zur Römischen Kaiserzeit I–III. Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1909–1912. I–IV: Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 
                        21927–1936. Neudruck Osnabrück: Otto Zeller, 1965.
                    
               
                  Posener, Georges (1973): „L’écriture hiératique“, in: 
                        Textes et langages de l’Égypte pharaonique, cent cinquante années de recherches I
                        , 1822–1972. Bibliothèque d’Étude 64, 1. Le Caire: Institut français d’archéologie orientale 25-30.
                    
               
                  Quirke, Stephen (2011): „Agendas for Digital Palaeography in an Archaeological Context: Egypt 1800 BC“, in: Fischer, Franz et al. (eds.): 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter. Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 3. Norderstedt: Books on Demand 279-294 kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/4354/.
                    
               
                  Stokes, Peter (2009): „
                        Computer-Aided Palaeography, Present and Future“, in: Rehbein, Malte et al. (eds.): 
                        Kodikologie und Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter. Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 2. Norderstedt: Books on Demand GmbH 310-338 kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/2978/.
                    
               
                  Verhoeven, Ursula (2001): 
                        Untersuchungen zur späthieratischen Buchschrift. Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 99. Leuven: Peeters.
                    
               
                  Verhoeven, Ursula (2015): „Stand und Aufgaben der Erforschung des Hieratischen und der Kursivhieroglyphen“, in: Verhoeven, Ursula (ed.): 
                        Ägyptologische „Binsen“-Weisheiten I–II, Neue Forschungen und Methoden der Hieratistik, Akten zweier Tagungen in Mainz im April 2011 und März 2013. Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz, Einzelveröffentlichungen Nr. 14. Mainz und Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag 23–63 urn:nbn:de:hebis:77-publ-547544.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Der Beitrag diskutiert kritisch, welche nicht allein arbeitsökonomischen, sondern vor allem intellektuellen, methodologischen und wissenschaftstheoretischen "Kosten" mit der Digitalisierung und dem dadurch etablierten Fokus auf Fragen der Interoperabilität entstehen. Die deutlichen wissenschaftlichen Vorteile von Interoperabilität müssen nämlich einem Umbau (und z.T. Rückbau) in wissenschaftlichen Modellierungen und im Verständnis wissenschaftlicher Erkenntnisvermehrung gegenüber gestellt werden. Dabei wird im Sinne des doppelten Genitivs "Kritik der digitalen Vernunft" sowohl das naheliegende Phänomen diskutiert, dass die digitale Transformation Hoffnungen weckt und Lösungen wissenschaftlich-methodologischer Schwierigkeiten nahelegt, die sich (z.T. erst bei der Implementierung) als wissenschaftlich nicht akzeptabel erweisen, als auch der umgekehrte Fall, dass die digitale Transformation ein kritisches Umdenken in der Ausrichtung der eigenen wissenschaftlichen Arbeit und eine Umorientierung wissenschaftlicher Ambitionen erzwingt.
            Diese Diskussion wird im Durchgang durch einige beispielhafte Entwicklungen im seit vier Jahren laufenden Projekt "Die Schule von Salamanca" geführt, bevor ein Versuch der Verallgemeinerung unternommen wird. Dass Interoperabilität signifikante wissenschaftliche Kosten mit sich bringt, heißt im Übrigen nicht, dass diese nicht womöglich durch die Vorteile aufgewogen würden. Es ist allerdings in der Orientierung der Projektarbeit wichtig, sich an den „Grenzen der Interoperabilität“ abzuarbeiten und sich regelmäßig beide Seiten dieser Bilanz vorzulegen.
         
         
            Interoperabilität
            Mit der digitalen Transformation sind die Möglichkeiten des überregionalen und interdisziplinären Austauschs und der Weiterverwendung von Forschungsdaten in einer ganz neuen Weise möglich geworden. So hat sich der Begriff der Interoperabilität als zentrales Paradigma in den Digital Humanities etabliert, um den Anspruch zu beschreiben, diese Möglichkeiten methodisch auszubauen und ein Evaluationskriterium für Forschungsleistungen und -ergebnisse anzubieten. Interoperabilität ist auf mehreren Ebenen zu verstehen (vgl. Gradmann 2009) und wird auf den konkreten technischen und syntaktischen Ebenen vor allem durch Standards für Datenformate und Schnittstellen, sowie auf der pragmatischen Ebene u.a. durch den Bezug auf Normdaten realisiert. Mag Interoperabilität auf der semantischen Ebene schließlich vor einiger Zeit noch als ein utopisches Ziel angemutet haben (vgl. Baumann 2011), so haben sich etwa durch die Selbstreflexion digitaler geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungs-Arbeit (Hughes et al. 2016) oder in der Beschreibung von kulturellen und geistigen Phänomenen (Le Boeuf et al. 2017; Stead et al. 2015) deutliche Fortschritte in der Modellierbarkeit geisteswissenschaftlicher Phänomene und in der Verfügbarkeit und Relationierbarkeit von semantischen Forschungsdaten und ‑ergebnissen ergeben.
            Wie Forschungsprojekte den derart gewachsenen Interoperabilitätserwartungen gerecht werden können, kann jedoch kaum allgemein, sondern nur im Rahmen ihrer jeweils spezifischen Arbeit ermittelt werden (zu einer projektunabhängig formulierten Handreichung vgl. aber Beer et al. 2014). Dabei stellt sich die Frage nach dem Nutzen, den Grenzen und den Kosten interoperabler Techniken im Projekt "Die Schule von Salamanca" insofern auf besondere Weise, als dieses einerseits über einen langen Zeitraum und mit Blick auf eine langzeitverfügbare Erschließung von relativ großen (Text-)Datenmengen operiert, andererseits aber auch die Erforschung innovativer Textaufbereitungsverfahren und Webanwendungsfunktionen zur Ermöglichung neuartiger Forschungserkenntnisse für die beteiligten Fachwissenschaften anstrebt.
         
         
            Das Projekt
            Im durch die Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz geförderten und insgesamt auf 18 Jahre angelegten Projekt "Die Schule von Salamanca. Eine digitale Quellensammlung und ein Wörterbuch ihrer juristisch-politischen Sprache" (Duve et al. 2013) werden voraussichtlich insgesamt etwa 120 Texte der gleichnamigen Schule iberischer Theologen und Juristen des 16. und 17. Jahrhunderts nach und nach digitalisiert und als Volltexte erfasst. Die in TEI-XML ausgezeichneten und aufwändig normalisierten Texte werden nicht nur strukturell, sondern auch im Hinblick auf als Linked Open Data (LOD) referenzierbare Entitäten – etwa Personennamen – erschlossen; dabei werden die Text-Digitalisate, die Volltexte und die LOD-Datensammlungen online bereit gestellt. Hinzu kommt ein digitales (und schließlich auch gedrucktes) Wörterbuch, in dem sowohl biographische Informationen zu den in der Edition vertretenen Autoren als auch zentrale Begriffe der Rechts- und politischen Ideengeschichte und deren Entwicklung im Diskussionszusammenhang der "Schule von Salamanca" erfasst werden. In diesen beiden Säulen des Projekts ist die Erschließung und Repräsentation der Struktur der internen Verweise (Autoren, die sich wechselseitig zitieren, Wörterbuchartikel, die auf Textstellen verweisen) eines der zentralen wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse.
            Die sowohl für die Benutzung als auch für die Bereitstellung der Daten als zentrales Portal dienende Webseite des Projekts (
                    https://salamanca.school/) ist technisch in Form einer komplex modularisierten Webanwendung implementiert, die fachwissenschaftlichen BenutzerInnen eine Vielzahl von Funktionen bieten soll, z.B. eine geräteübergreifende und performante Darstellung der Editionstexte, eine intelligente Suchfunktion, die den frühmodern-lateinischen und -spanischen Volltexten angepasst ist, und eine feinkörnige Referenzierung der Texteinheiten. Durch technische Mechanismen (content negotiation, API, RESTful Microservice-Architektur), Exportfunktionen (abschnitts-, text- oder corpusweise, plaintext-, TEI- oder andere Formate) und die Orientierung an Formatstandards wird Anforderungen der Interoperabilität explizit Rechnung getragen. Der Quelltext der Webanwendung wird bis Januar 2018 ebenfalls veröffentlicht und fortan in Open Source weiterentwickelt werden.
                
         
         
            Interoperabilitäts-"Konflikte": Einige Beispiele
            Einhergehend mit der Open Source-Veröffentlichung der Webanwendung soll über einige repräsentative Aspekte der Projektarbeit reflektiert werden, in denen sich an vermeintlich technischen Herausforderungen Konflikte um die wissenschaftlichen Implikationen von Interoperabilität entzünden:
            
               a) Textrepräsentation:
               Während in diesem Kernbereich der Projektarbeit gegenwärtig noch mit einem eigens spezifizierten und den bisherigen Forschungsanforderungen entsprechenden "idiosynkratischen" TEI-Format gearbeitet wird und die Datenmodellierung somit eher als "research-driven" (vgl. Flanders/Jannidis 2016: 233) bezeichnet werden kann, wird eine langfristige Verfügbarmachung der Texte in einem interoperableren, "curation-driven" Format wie etwa 
                        TEI Simple (Text Encoding Initiative Consortium 2016) erwägt. Dies ist nicht zuletzt auch durch den Blick auf die Wissenschaftsförderung motiviert (vgl. etwa DFG 2015, Anhang), die die Interoperabilität von Textauszeichnungen dem erst noch nachzuweisenden Erkenntnisgewinn 'reicher' Annotationen gegenüberstellt. Nun beinhaltet das XML-Ökosystem der Edition allerdings auch Informationen wie etwa Metadaten zur Zeichenkodierung (die nicht zuletzt Interoperabilitäts-Funktionen erfüllen), die sich nach derzeitigem Stand nicht ohne weiteres in 
                        TEI Simple abbilden lassen. So ergibt sich eine nur durch einigen Aufwand aufzulösende Spannung zwischen detaillierter wissenschaftlicher Gegenstandsbeschreibung und Maßnahmen zur Förderung der Nachnutzbarkeit der eigenen Ressourcen (z.B. des Angebots mehrerer alternativer Datenformate), und es stellt sich die Frage, wann und durch wen jener Aufwand erbracht werden soll. Selbst eine gegenüber den "Experten"-Annotationen tolerantere Zielvorgabe, die sich etwa am Konzept des 'Interchange' (als einer durch menschliche Interpretation vermittelten Nachnutzung, vgl. Holmes 2017, Baumann 2011) orientiert und im Vergleich zum Modell einer bruchlosen Weiterverwertbarkeit der Daten durch automatische Prozesse gemäßigtere Ansprüche erhebt, sieht sich ähnlichen Fragen der Standardisierung von Schnittstellen und Datenformaten ausgesetzt.
                        
            
            
               b) Modulare Infrastruktur:
               Im Zuge der Einrichtung einer Linked Open Data-Infrastruktur haben wir 
                        content-negotiation-Mechanismen, Weiterleitungen und die Adressierung unterschiedlicher Funktionen über verschiedene Server und Server-Adressen eingeführt. Diese Entwicklung legt eine Fortsetzung nahe, die den Umbau der Web-Anwendung insgesamt in ein Ensemble von Microservices bedeuten würde (vgl. Wolff 2016), in dem Daten und Dienste aufs Engste verschränkt sind. Während dies die Interoperabilität, d.h. konversions- und barrierearme Nachnutzbarkeit der Daten enorm verbessert (etwa dadurch, dass auf verschiedenen Ebenen in verschiedenen Formaten und verschiedenen Granularitäten Daten und Dienste verfügbar sind, vgl. Turska et al. 2016) hat es jedoch auch den Nachteil, dass der Daten- und Anwendungszusammenhang – der eben auch 
                        als Zusammenhang eine Forschungsleistung darstellt – nur in einer sehr viel aufwändigeren Weise repliziert und ggf. archiviert werden kann: Während erste Infrastrukturen die Archivierung und langfristige Zugänglichkeit von Javascript-Anwendungen erlauben sollen (vgl. Bingert/Buddenbohm 2016; kritischer: Brunelle 2016), so ist dies für eine solche Infrastruktur mit mehreren kooperierenden und kommunizierenden Servern nur sehr viel schwerer vorstellbar.
                    
            
            
               c) Adressierung, Versionierung und Persistenz:
               Im Zusammenhang mit der Adressierung von einzelnen Textpassagen haben wir ein System eingeführt, das sowohl semantische Aussagen über Text-Entitäten als auch die Realisierung der Verweisstrukturen auf implementierungs- und plattformunabhängige, intellektuell intuitive Weise erlaubt (im Anschluss an das Canonical Text Services-Schema, Blackwell/Smith 2014; vgl. Wagner 2016). Diese Struktur der komplexen Verknüpfung von Ressourcen und Entitäten untereinander verträgt sich aktuell nicht mit etablierten Methoden, Dokumente persistent zu identifizieren und die Überarbeitungshistorie der Ressourcen in einer Versionierung transparent und nachvollziehbar zu machen. Diese Methoden spezifizieren nämlich zumeist den Umgang mit einem ganzen Dokument und vernachlässigen den Bedarf, Entitäten innerhalb des Dokuments (persistent) zu referenzieren oder die Einbettung jenes Dokuments in ein Corpus zu verwalten. Wenn beispielsweise ein Dokument verändert wird, muss es unter anderem normalerweise eine neue persistente ID erhalten - damit entsteht ein Aktualisierungs- oder mindestens Kontrollbedarf bei den Querverweisen innerhalb des Dokuments sowie in allen weiteren Dokumenten des Corpus (und in unserem Falle in allen Artikeln des Wörterbuchs), welche Verweise auf das aktuelle Dokument enthalten. Mechanismen wie das Memento framework (van de Sompel/Nelson 2015) bieten eine transparente und flexible Versionierung, die für Web-Dokumente wie für Semantische Ressourcen gleichermaßen funktioniert, sind jedoch in ihrer Integration mit PID-Systemen ebenfalls noch nicht erprobt. Versteht man diese Motive in einem Interoperabilitäts-Zusammenhang, lesen sie sich wie ein Konflikt zwischen etablierten Lösungen auf verschiedenen Interoperabilitäts-Ebenen und es fragt sich, wie kanonische Verweissysteme (funktional-pragmatische Ebene nach Gradmann 2009) und Persistent Identifiers (technische Ebene) miteinander harmonieren können.
            
         
         
            Diskussion
            Die hier am Beispiel digitaler Projektarbeit aufgezeigten Probleme etwa einer gesteigerten Spannung zwischen „Interoperabilität und Expressivität“ (Baumann 2011) weisen auf grundlegendere wissenschafts- und erkenntnistheoretische Fragestellungen hin, die nicht zuletzt das Selbstverständnis der Digital Humanities und die mit ihnen verbundenen Hoffnungen berühren: Ist Expertenwissen am Ende vielleicht gar nicht "interoperabel"? Erweisen sich die Möglichkeiten, durch Verknüpfung digitaler Forschungsdaten und ‑anwendungen verschiedenster Kontexte neuartige Einsichten zu generieren, als stark begrenzt? Eine wissenschaftspolitische Pointe des Beitrags besteht so darin, auf die entscheidende Rolle aufmerksam zu machen, die die Erwartung darüber spielt, an welchem Ort – zwischen den Disziplinen oder “tief” in den fachwissenschaftlichen Spezialdiskursen – wissenschaftlicher Fortschritt erzielt wird.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Baumann, Syd (2011): “Interchange vs. Interoperability”, in: 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2011 7, 
                        https://
                  
                     doi
                  
                  .org/
                  10.4242/BalisageVol7.Bauman01 [letzter Zugriff: 13.01.2018].
                    
               
                  Beer, Nikolaos / Herold, Kristin / Kolbmann, Wibke / Kollatz, Thomas / Romanello, Matteo / Rose, Sebastian / Walkowski, Niels-Oliver (2014): "Interdisciplinary Interoperability", DARIAH-DE Working Papers Nr. 3, 
                        http://nbn-resolving.de/urn.nbn.de.gbv:7-dariah-2014-1-0 [letzter Zugriff: 18.01.2018].
                    
               
                  Bingert, Sven / Buddenbohm, Stefan (2016): "Die HDC-Anwendungskonservierung - ein Dienst zur Archivierung und Bereitstellung komplexer Forschungsergebnisse", in: 
                        GWDG-Nachrichten 11/2016: 7-9 
                        https://www.gwdg.de/documents/20182/27257/GN_11-2016_www.pdf [letzter Zugriff: 23.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Blackwell, Christopher / Smith, Neel (2014): "The Canonical Text Services protocol, version 5.0.rc.2", 
                        https://cite-architecture.github.io/cts_spec/ [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Brunelle, Justin F. / Kelly, Mat / Weigle, Michele C. / Nelson, Michael L. (2016): "The impact of JavaScript on archivability", in: 
                        International Journal on Digital Libraries 17/2: 95–117, 
                        https://doi.org/10.1007/s00799-015-0140-8 [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  DFG (2015): "Förderkriterien für wissenschaftliche Editionen in der Literaturwissenschaft", 
                        http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/grundlagen_dfg_foerderung/informationen_fachwissenschaften/geisteswissenschaften/foerderkriterien_editionen_literaturwissenschaft.pdf [letzter Zugriff: 12.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Duve, Thomas / Lutz-Bachmann, Matthias / Birr, Christiane / Niederberger, Andreas (2013): "Die Schule von Salamanca: eine digitale Quellensammlung und ein Wörterbuch ihrer juristisch-politischen Sprache. Zu Grundanliegen und Struktur eines Forschungsvorhabens". Mainz: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur. 
                        http://nbn-resolving.de/urn/resolver.pl?urn:nbn:de:hebis:30:3-324011 [letzter Zugriff: 12.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Flanders, Julia / Jannidis, Fotis (2016): "Data Modeling", in: Schreibman, Susan / Siemens, Ray / Unsworth, John (eds.): 
                        A New Companion to Digital Humanities. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell 229-237.
                    
               
                  Gradman, Stefan (2009): "Interoperability. A key concept for large scale, persistent digital libraries". 
                        Digital Preservation Europe
                  http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.363.6311&rep=rep1&type=pdf [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Holmes, Martin (2017): "Whatever happened to Interchange?", in: 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 32 (Issue suppl_1): i63–i68 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw048 [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Hughes, Lorna / Constantopoulos, Panos / Dallas, Costis (2016): “Digital Methods in the Humanities: Understanding and Describing their Use across the Disciplines“, in: Susan Schreibman / Ray Siemens / John Unsworth (eds.), 
                        A New Companion to Digital Humanities, Wiley & Sons, 150–170, 
                        https://doi.org/10.1111/b.9781118680643.2016.00013.x [letzter Zugriff: 13.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Le Boeuf, Patrick / Doerr, Martin / Ore, Christian Emil / Stead, Stephen et al. (2017): “Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model”, Version 6.2.2, 
                        http://www.cidoc-crm.org/sites/default/files/2017-09-30%23CIDOC%20CRM_v6.2.2_esIP.pdf
                         [letzter Zugriff: 13.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Desmond (2014): “Towards an Interoperable Digital Scholarly Edition”, in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 7, 
                        https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.979 [letzter Zugriff: 13.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Stead, Stephen / Doerr, Martin et al. (2015): “CRMinf: the Argumentation Model. An Extension of CIDOC-CRM to support argumentation”, 
                        
                     http://www.cidoc-crm.org/crminf/sites/default/files/CRMinf-0.7%28forSite%29.pdf
                   [letzter Zugriff: 13.1.2018].
                    
               
                  Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (2016): "TEI Simple" 
                        https://github.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Turska, Magdalena / Cummings, James / Rahtz, Sebastian (2016): "Challenging the Myth of Presentation in Digital Editions", in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 9 
                        http://jtei.revues.org/1453 [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  van de Sompel, Herbert / Nelson, Michael L. (2015): "Reminiscing about 15 Years of Interoperability Efforts", in: 
                        D-Lib Magazine 21 (11/12) 
                        http://www.dlib.org/dlib/november15/vandesompel/11vandesompel.html [letzter Zugriff: 25.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Wagner, Andreas (2016): "What’s in a URI? Part I: The School of Salamanca, the Semantic Web and Scholarly Referencing" 
                        https://blog.salamanca.school/2016/11/15/whats-in-a-uri-part-1/ [letzter Zugriff: 22.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Wolff, Eberhard (2016): "Microservices. Grundlagen flexibler Softwarearchitekturen". Heidelberg: dpunkt.verlag.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ausgangslage
            Digitale Editionen haben sich bereits als geeignete Publikationsform für die Präsentation von umfangreichen Textbeständen im Bereich des kulturellen Erbes etabliert. Für ein so umfangreiches und komplexes textgenetisches Korpus wie Robert Musils literarischen Nachlass und die daran entwickelte Datenstruktur der Klagenfurter Ausgabe stehen jedoch keine fertigen Modelle zur Verfügung. Im Rahmen des Panels soll einerseits diskutiert werden, welche Kriterien eine digitale Edition erfüllen muss, um eine Grundlage zur Erforschung von Robert Musils Gesamtwerk zu erstellen und andererseits, ob die derzeit geltenden Standards zur Langzeitarchivierung, interoperablen Repräsentation und Online-Kommentierung von digitalen Textkorpora noch zeitgemäß sind. 
         
         
            Gegenstand
            Der umfangreiche literarische Nachlass des österreichischen Schriftstellers Robert Musil umfasst 12.000 Manuskriptseiten und wird bereits seit 1985 digital ediert. Die wichtigsten bisherigen Publikationsetappen markieren die CD-ROM-Ausgabe 
                Robert Musil: Der literarische Nachlass (Hg. F. Aspetsberger, K. Eibl, A. Frisé, Rowohlt 1992) und die DVD-Edition Robert Musil: 
                Klagenfurter Ausgabe. Kommentierte Edition sämtlicher Werke, Briefe und nachgelassener Schriften. Mit Transkriptionen und Faksimiles aller Handschriften (Hg. W. Fanta, K. Amann, K. Corino, Robert-Musil-Institut/Kärntner Literaturarchiv, AAU Klagenfurt 2009). Um für das Editionsvorhaben, das mittlerweile mehrere Computer-Generationen, System- und Formatwechsel sowie Veränderungen der editorischen Vorgaben und Richtlinien erlebt hat, eine befriedigende und zukunftssichere Lösung zu entwickeln, entsteht am Robert-Musil-Institut/Kärntner Literaturarchiv seit 2016 eine Hybrid-Edition. Sie soll einerseits die Bedürfnisse der LeserInnen und der wissenschaftlichen UserInnen befriedigen, andererseits auch für nachhaltige Verfügbarkeit der Daten sorgen. Die TeilnehmerInnen des vorliegenden Panels präsentieren die einzelnen Lösungsansätze aus theoretischer und methodologischer Sicht in exemplarischer Weise und stellen sie als Best-Practice-Modelle im Bereich des digitalen Edierens zur Diskussion: 
                
            a) Die 
                    Hybrid-Edition setzt sich aus der 
                    Musil-Gesamtausgabe in 12 Bänden (Salzburg, Jung und Jung, 2016-2022) und dem Internetportal 
                    musilonline (Prototyp seit 2016: 
                    www.musilonline.at) zusammen. Die Buchausgabe enthält einen Lesetext für die literarische Lektüre in leserfreundlicher Ausstattung. 
                    musilonline wird unter 
                    Musil-Text die digitale Version des Lesetexts, unter 
                    Archiv das gesamte textgenetische Dossier (Faksimiles, XML/TEI-Dateien) und unter 
                    Kommentar neben dem textkritischen bzw. textgenetischen auch einen interdiskursiven Kommentar bieten. Im Kurzvortrag wird die Hybrid-Edition in Hinblick auf ihre medienhistorische Bedeutung, intermediale Funktion, literaturdidaktische Vermittlungsleistung und Leser/User-Orientierung erläutert. (Anke Bosse, Robert-Musil-Institut/Kärntner Literaturarchiv, AAU Klagenfurt)
                
            b) Das künftige 
                    Interface für die literaturwissenschaftliche, insbes. textgenetische Forschung auf 
                    musilonline soll sich aus folgenden Komponenten zusammensetzen: 
                
            
               
                  Suchmaschinen (zur Treffergenerierung im edierten Musil-Textkorpus sowie im XML/TEI-ausgezeichneten Text- und Metadatenbereich)
                    
               
                  Navigation entlang hypertextueller Verknüpfungen zwischen ediertem Text, Faksimiles, XML/TEI-Dateien und Kommentarbereich
                    
               
                  Bild-Browser (zum Studium der Originalmanuskripte)
                    
               
                  Textdarstellung (zur visuellen Inszenierung der Textstufen und ‑schichten am Manuskript, aus XML/TEI-Dateien generierte HTML-Lösungen). Diese Funktionen werden derzeit auf der Grundlage von zwei zentralen Manuskriptmappen aus Musils Nachlass entwickelt. 
                    
            
            Im Kurzvortrag werden noch keine fertigen Lösungen vorgestellt, sondern es erfolgt ein kritischer Aufriss der Problemlage in Folge der komplexen Struktur von Musils Manuskripten und die Präsentation eines Grundkonzepts an Hand von exemplarischen Ausschnitten aus dem Manuskriptbestand. (Walter Fanta, Robert-Musil-Institut/Kärntner Literaturarchiv, AAU Klagenfurt)
            c) Die fachgerechte 
                    Speicherung des gesamten Text- und Metadatenbestands zu Robert Musils autor-autorisierten und nachgelassenen Schriften 
                    via XML/TEI ist vorgesehen und bereits begonnen worden. Die Manuskripte des Musil-Nachlasses stellen eine besondere Herausforderung für die Textauszeichnung dar, weil sie äußerst komplexe Varianzbeziehungen auf der Ebene der Makrovarianz zwischen den Entwurfsfassungen und der Ebene der Mikrovarianz – Korrekturschichten – enthalten. Es stellt sich heraus, dass die Struktur der großen philosophischen und literarischen Fragmente der Moderne (Nietzsche, Wittgenstein, Musil, Bachmann) den Rahmen sprengt, der von XML/TEI (Baumstruktur) vorgegeben ist. Im Kurzvortrag erfolgt ein Problembericht zu Auszeichnungsschwierigkeiten mit XML/TEI. Im Rahmen des österreichischen Kompetenzzentrums für Digitale Edition (KONDE), sowie mit Hilfe der TEI Guidelines und DariahTeach wurden bereits Lösungen gefunden. In Hinblick auf die Datenkonservierung und –interoperabilität muss aber diskutiert werden, ob XML/TEI für die Langzeitarchivierung des Musil-Nachlasses geeignet ist. (Katharina Godler, Robert-Musil-Institut/Kärntner Literaturarchiv, AAU Klagenfurt)
                
            d) Die 
                    Migration des gesamten Textdaten-Korpus erfolgt aus dem Flatfile des Formats FolioViews der Klagenfurter Ausgabe in das Zielformat XML/TEI. Dabei werden Scripts entwickelt, welche die im Flatfile enthaltenen Kodierungen (Formatierungen und Sprungverknüpfungen von FolioViews) sowie die diakritischen Zeichen der 1992 publizierten Transkription soweit wie möglich automatisch im automatischen Austausch in sachadäquate XML/TEI-Auszeichnungen umsetzen. Der Kurzvortrag erläutert den erreichten Stand und die Probleme dieser Migrationsprozesse; sie bestehen kurz gesagt im Alter der Nachlass-Transkription (entstanden 1984-1990), in der chaotischen Struktur der FolioViews-Infobase mit insgesamt 735.000 Einträgen und ca. 250.000 Verknüpfungen, zahlreichen Redundanzen, Inkonsistenzen, Fehlern und Ergänzungsbedarf. Für die drei Hauptbereiche gedruckte Quellen, Nachlassmanuskripte, Metadaten müssen jeweils eigene Lösungen gefunden werden. (Gerrit Brüning, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt / Freies Deutsches Hochstift)
                
            e) Der 
                    interdiskursive Online-Kommentar auf 
                    musilonline wird 2018-2022 in einem vom Österreichischen Wissenschaftsfonds (FWF) geförderten Projekt am Robert-Musil-Institut / AAU Klagenfurt entwickelt. Die Grundidee besteht darin, über die herkömmliche (textkritische) Erläuterungsfunktion von Kommentaren hinaus zu wirken, auf der Bedeutungsebene anzusetzen und die Bedeutungsvielfalt in Musils Texten dadurch zu bewahren, dass Interpretamente im Musil-Textkorpus identifiziert und mit den Deutungen der bisherigen Interpretationsliteratur verknüpft werden. Aus der Sicht der Digital Humanities stellt sich die Herausforderung, für die Online-Inszenierung der Diskurse um Musils Texte eine digitale Struktur zu finden, die den heterogenen, teils widersprüchlichen Anforderungen und Erwartungen unterschiedlicher Usergruppen Genüge tut. Im Kurzvortrag wird das Vorhaben mit Fokus auf den Online-Kommentar als Desiderat der Literaturvermittlung exemplarisch skizziert. (Artur Boelderl, Institut für Germanistik, AAU Klagenfurt)
                
            Das Panel integriert höchst unterschiedliche Bereiche und Aspekte der Digital Humanities, die sich im Projekt 
                    musilonline verknüpft finden. Der Stoßrichtung der Tagung, eine 
                    Kritik der digitalen Vernunft zu formulieren, tragen die geplanten Diskussionsbeiträge in besonderem Maße Rechnung, da nicht in allen Belangen schon mit fertigen Lösungen aufgewartet wird, sondern das Erkennen von Problemen, die Verbesserung etablierter Strukturen, die Suche nach Alternativen und die Erfindung neuer Konzepte im Vordergrund stehen. Die Präsentationen und Diskussionen des Panels reflektieren u.a. auch die neuen editionswissenschaftlichen Forschungsansätze und Best Practices, die im Rahmen des österreichischen Kompetenznetzwerks digitale Edition (KONDE) seit 2017 entwickelt werden.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Burghart, Marjorie (2017): 
                        Creating a Scholarly Digital Edition with the Text Encoding Initiative. Demm: 
                        https://www.digitalmanuscripts.eu/digital-editing-of-medieval-texts-a-textbook/ (letzer Zugriff 12. Jänner 2018)
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou (2014): 
                        What Is the Text Encoding Initiative? How to Add Intelligent Markup to Digital Resources. Encyclopédie Numérique. Marseille: OpenEdition Press: 
                        http://books.openedition.org/oep/426 (Letzter Zugriff 12. Jänner 2018)
                    
               
                  Fanta, Walter (2016): 
                        "Editionsgeschichte.",in: 
                        Nübel, Birgit/ Wolf, Norbert Christian:
                        Robert-Musil-Handbuch. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, S. 799-810.
                    
               
                  Fanta, Walter (2016): 
                        "Nachlass.",in: 
                        Nübel, Birgit/ Wolf, Norbert Christian (eds):
                        
                  Robert-Musil-Handbuch. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, S. 470-497.
                    
               
                  Fanta, Walter (2010): 
                        "Robert Musil – Klagenfurter Ausgabe.",in: 
                        editio, S. 117-148.
                    
               
                  Fanta, Walter (2011): 
                        "Zur Immortalität elektronischer Korpora am Beispiel der Musil-Edition.",in: 
                        Braungart, Georg / Gendolla, Peter /
                         Jannidis, Fotis (eds): 
                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie online: 
                  http://computerphilologie.tu-darmstadt.de/jg09/fanta.html (letzter Zugriff 12. Jänner 2018)
                    
               
                  Fanta, Walter (2008): 
                        "Das Zögern vor dem letzten Schritt. Zur digitalen Edition von Robert Musils „Mann ohne Eigenschaften", in: 
                        Golz, Jochen /
                         Koltes, Manfred (eds.): 
                        Autoren und Redaktoren als Editoren - Tagung der Arbeitsgemeinschaft für germanistische Edition an der Klassik Stiftung Weimar, Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, S. 342-352
                    
               
                  Pierazzo, Elena (2015): 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Farnham, Surrey; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
                    
               
                  Sperberg-McQueen, C.M. / Burnard, Lou (2017): 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Inwieweit verändert der Einsatz digitaler Verfahren die sozialwissenschaftliche Forschung? Diese Frage lässt sich am Beispiel der Digitalisierung des Zettelkastens Niklas Luhmanns stellen, die im Rahmen des Forschungsprojektes “Niklas Luhmann - Theorie als Passion. Wissenschaftliche Erschließung und Edition des Nachlasses” erfolgt. Das Langzeitvorhaben (2015-2030), in dem die Fakultät für Soziologie der Universität Bielefeld mit dem Cologne Center for eHumanities kooperiert, wird im Akademienprogramm durch die Nordrhein-Westfälische Akademie der Wissenschaft und der Künste gefördert.
                
            
               Luhmann (1927-1998) zählt zu den bedeutendsten Soziologen des 20. Jahrhunderts. Im Laufe seiner 35-jährigen Forschungstätigkeit entwickelte er eine universale Sozial- und Gesellschaftstheorie, die er in annähernd fünfzig Monographien und 500 Aufsätzen publiziert hat. Als Basis für diese erstaunliche Produktivität diente Luhmann ein Zettelkasten, den er über vierzig Jahre lang systematisch gefüllt und gepflegt hat. Im Zuge der seit 2015 laufenden Nachlasserschließung wurden die ca. 90.0000 Zettel digitalisiert, in einem zweiten Schritt werden sie nun transkribiert und fachwissenschaftlich editiert sowie in eine Internetpräsentation überführt. Ziel dieses Prozesses ist zunächst eine digitale Reproduktion des Zettelkastens, die aber zugleich die Möglichkeiten der modernen digitalen Technik nutzt, um die nicht linear strukturierte Sammlung lesbar und ihre Genese nachvollziehbar zu machen. Indem die Digitalisierung über die reine Reproduktion hinausgeht, macht sie den Kasten selbst zu einem Forschungsobjekt.
                
         
         
            Der (analoge) Zettelkasten Niklas Luhmanns
            Die Zettelsammlung ist durch vier Merkmale gekennzeichnet, deren Kombination das besondere theoretische Kreativitätspotential der Sammlung begründet:
            (a)
                    Nichthierarchische Ordnungsstruktur:
                    Luhmann verzichtet weitgehend auf eine vorher festgelegte
                    
                    systematische Ordnung der Sammlung; diese ist primär ein historisches Produkt seiner Lektüre- und Forschungsinteressen. Aufgrund seines spezifischen Einstellprinzips führt die jeweilige thematische Erstfestlegung nämlich nicht zu einer monothematischen Reihung von Zetteln: Die für den Zettelkasten konstitutive Idee ist, dass
                    ein Zettel thematisch nur in irgendeiner Weise an den
                    vor ihm stehenden anschließen muss, ohne sich an einer übergeordneten (systematischen) Themenstruktur zu orientieren. Damit korrespondiert eine spezifische Art der Notizgenerierung, bei der Luhmann Nebengedanken weiterverfolgt, indem er diese zusätzlichen Notizen, auf einen an dieser Stelle einzuschiebenden Zettel notiert, so dass ein Wachstum des Zettelkastens ‚nach innen‘ erfolgt.
                
            (b)
                     Nummerierungssystem:
                    
                    Mit der skizzierten Ablagetechnik in einem konstitutiven Zusammenhang steht das besondere Nummerierungssystem: Jeder Zettel erhält eine von seinem jeweiligen Einstellplatz abhängige Nummerierung, die zugleich auf das Problem reagiert, wie Luhmann neue Zettel in den Altbestand einfügen kann, ohne die schon bestehende Nummerierung in Frage zu stellen. Zunächst erfolgt eine einfache Durchnummerierung der Zettel entsprechend des Zeitpunkts des jeweiligen Eintrags (1, 2, 3 usw.). Ein später erstellter Zettel, der einen einzelnen Aspekt (also gerade nicht zwingend monothematisch) von Zettel 1 weiterverfolgt, wird mit 1a nummeriert und zwischen den Zettel 1 und 2 eingeschoben. Daran kann wiederum monothematisch 1b anschließen oder aber eine thematisch abzweigende weitere Verzettelung folgen, beispielsweise 1a1. Das führt dazu, dass zwischen zwei ursprünglich direkt hintereinander eingestellten Zetteln im Extremfall bis zu 1000 später erstellte Zettel mit einem entsprechend komplexen Nummernsystem eingestellt werden.
                
            (c)
                    Verweisungssystem:
                    Das skizzierte Ablagesystem macht es außerdem nötig, dass die thematisch oder konzeptionell miteinander zusammenhängenden, aber eben verstreut in der Sammlung stehenden Zettel aufeinander verweisen, indem auf den Zetteln jeweils die entsprechenden Zettelnummern notiert werden. Neben Einzelverweisen findet man häufig am Beginn eines thematischen Abschnitts auf einem einleitenden Zettel auch
                    eine ganze Sammlung von Verweisen, die thematisch verwandte Bereiche des Zettelkastens systematisch erschließen. Aufgrund einer stichprobenartigen Auszählung kann man davon ausgehen, dass sich in der Sammlung insgesamt ca. 50.000 Verweise befinden. Luhmann selbst nennt diese netzwerkartige Verweisungsstruktur ein „spinnenförmiges System“.
                
            (d)
                    Schlagwortverzeichnis:
                    Um Einstiegspunkte in dieses Verweisungsnetz zu erhalten, hat Luhmann ein ca. 4000 Einträge umfassendes Schlagwortverzeichnis erstellt. Dieses Schlagwortregister war das zentrale Werkzeug für seine Nutzung des Kastens, da nur so Notizen zu einem bestimmten Thema zuverlässig wiedergefunden werden konnten. Das Schlagwortregister des Kastens beansprucht dabei aber keinen Anspruch auf Vollständigkeit hinsichtlich der Erfassung der einschlägigen Stellen in der Sammlung. Vielmehr notiert Luhmann in der Regel nur maximal drei Systemstellen, an denen der jeweilige Begriff zu finden ist, da er annimmt, dass man dann über das interne Verweisungsnetz schnell die anderen relevanten Stellen findet.
                
         
         
            Technische Umsetzung
            
               Datenmodell und Arbeitsumgebung
               Der Anlage des Zettelkastens folgend verstehen wir die Zettel als semantisch freie Einheiten und erzeugen für jede Zettelseite eine XML-TEI-Datei, in der die Transkription des Zettelinhalts erfolgt. Der Kopf () bietet Raum für Metainformationen, in einem umfangreichen Anhang zur Transkription () betten wir den Zettel in das Zettelnetzwerk ein. Wir unterscheiden mehrere Navigationswege durch den Kasten: Erstens eine physische Navigation in der von Zettelvorderseite zu folgender Vorderseite gesprungen wird. Zweitens geht es um übergeordnete Gliederungsverläufe. In einer dritten Navigation modellieren wir logische Abfolgen. In Form von Sprungzielen wird hier der nächste, in einem Gedankenstrang folgende Zettel angegeben, dabei werden von Luhmann eingeschobene Zettel zunächst ausgeblendet. Diese Abfolgen werden in eigenen Feldern klassifiziert und explizit gemacht.
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 1: Ausschnitt aus der oXygen-Arbeitsoberfläche zur Transkription und Bearbeitung von Zettelseiten (Zettel 1-5B1c).
                  
               
               Um den Fachwissenschaftlern die Arbeit mit den XML-Texten zu erleichtern, arbeiten wir mit dem Author-Mode des oXygen XML-Editors. Die von uns für die Zetteltranskription und Einbettung in das Netzwerk entwickelte Arbeitsoberfläche setzt im Verknüpfungsanhang auf fest eingerichtete Standardfelder, in die die Editoren IDs vorausliegender Zettel eintragen. Auf Basis dieser Einträge - die im Arbeitsprozess einer stetigen Weiterbearbeitung unterliegen - ergänzen wir über Skripte die Verbindung zu den davor liegenden Zetteln, um für die Portalnavigation beide Richtungen anbieten zu können.
                    
               Für die Transkription selbst stellen wir im Framework ein Mixed-Content Feld zur Verfügung, in dem weitere Textphänomene und von Luhmanns selbst explizit formulierte Zettelverweise über Buttons ausgezeichnet werden können.
            
            
               Forschungsportal
               Das Forschungsportal soll dem Benutzer eine intuitive Möglichkeit bieten, durch den Zettelkasten zu navigieren und ihn dabei nicht nur so benutzen zu können, wie Luhmann es vorgesehen hat, sondern die Nutzbarkeit durch die digitalen Möglichkeiten zu erweitern. Dazu wird für jeden Zettel dessen Ort in der im Rahmen des Projekts erstellten Inhaltsübersicht sowie eine interaktive Visualisierung seiner inhaltlich-logischen Einordnung angezeigt. Über indikative Buttons ist erkennbar, welche Navigationsmöglichkeiten sich für den momentan angezeigten Zettel für den Benutzer bieten (siehe Abbildung 2). Die Buttons sind gruppiert nach dem Navigationstypus.
               Innerhalb der Transkription sind Schlagwörter, bibliographische Angaben, Personennamen und vor allem Verweise zu anderen Zetteln verlinkt. Außerdem ist eine facettierte Volltext-Suche (z.B. nach Schlagworten oder bibliographischen Angaben) über vom Benutzer definierbare Bereiche des Zettelkastens möglich.
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 2: Ansicht eines Zettels im Forschungsportal
                  
               
               Neben optimierten Darstellungen für einzelne Zettelseiten gibt es Visualisierungen, die größere Bereiche des Kastens abdecken. Dazu zählt eine Visualisierung der im Rahmen der Edition erstellten inhaltlich-logischen Einordnungs- und Navigationsstruktur des Zettelkastens (siehe Abbildung 3), sowie ein Arc Diagram zur Darstellung von Zettelverweisen innerhalb verschiedener Bereiche (siehe Abbildung 4), um die Dichte der Vernetzung innerhalb und zwischen den verschiedenen Abteilungen des Zettelkastens zu verdeutlichen.
                    
               Die Datenaufbereitung der TEI-XML-Dateien geschieht jeweils über im Rahmen des Projekts entwickelte Node.js-Skripte, bevor die Visualisierungen mit der JavaScript-Bibliothek D3.js erstellt werden.
                    
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 3: Ausschnitt einer Visualisierung der im Rahmen der Edition erstellten inhaltlich-logischen Einordnungs- und Navigationsstruktur des digitalen Zettelkastens.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 4: Visualisierung der internen Zettelverweise des ersten Auszugs von Zettelkasten I (ca. 3300 Zettel). Man erkennt die deutlichen Unterschiede der Vernetzungsdichte innerhalb und zwischen den 21 Abteilungen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Fazit: Der Zettelkasten als Subjekt und Objekt der Forschung
            Die Digitalisierung des Zettelkastens erfolgt als ein Editionsprojekt im Rahmen einer Nachlasserschließung, insofern ist das primäre Ziel eine digitalisierte
                    Reproduktion mit der Intention, die Nutzbarkeit im Luhmannschen Sinne zu rekonstruieren und zu erleichtern. Die
                    dafür notwendige digitale Modellierung hatte eine vertiefte Reflexion über das Design des Zettelkastens zur Folge, insbesondere aufgrund der damit einhergehenden Notwendigkeit einer eindeutigen Typendifferenzierung von Zettelanschlüssen. Durch diese Differenzierung, die ihren Niederschlag in einer entsprechend komplexen Navigationsstruktur des digitalen Kastens gefunden hat
                    , die eine erleichterte Nutzbarkeit des Kastens ermöglicht, kam es zu einer deutlichen Konkretisierung der zweiten fachwissenschaftlichen Intention der Publikation: der Möglichkeit einer werkgenetischen Lesbarkeit des Kastens über eine Rekonstruktion der Einstellhistorie. Gerade weil die Zettel selbst undatiert sind, ist eine solche historisierende Lesart nur über die (fachwissenschaftliche) Identifizierung von ursprünglichen Zettelanschlüssen und späteren Einschüben möglich; die Lesbarkeit der dadurch implizierten Zettelfolgen, die sich von der physischen Stellordnung der Zettel in Teilen unabhängig macht, ist dann aber nur aufgrund der entsprechenden technischen Umsetzung möglich.
                
            Die technische ‚Aufrüstung‘ des digitalen Kastens führt allerdings auch dazu, dass diese Version kein reines Abbild des analogen Kastens mehr darstellt, sondern den Zettelkasten nun in einer Weise verfügbar macht, wie Luhmann selbst ihn nie genutzt hat. Diese 
                    Differenz zum ursprünglichen Zettelkasten wird verstärkt durch die weiteren o.g.  Recherchemöglichkeiten im Rahmen der digitalisierten Version sowie durch die  Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten der Verweisungsstruktur zwischen den Zetteln, die zudem die Netzwerkförmigkeit der Sammlung transparent macht. Diese Form der Edition des Zettelkastens rekonstruiert den Kasten selbst also nicht mehr als das Forschungssubjekt, das er für Luhmann als ‚Denkmaschine‘ und Theorieapparat war, sondern macht den Kasten selbst schon bei der Editionsarbeit zu einem Forschungsobjekt und bietet die für die Beantwortung von jetzt noch unbekannten Forschungsfragen notwendigen Instrumentarien an.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  www.niklas-luhmann-archiv.de
               
            
            Vgl. oXygen Visual (WYSIWYG) XML Editors:
                
            
            Arc diagram:
                
            
            Node.js:
                
            
            D3.js:
                
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Krajewski, Markus (2002):
                        ZettelWirtschaft. Die Geburt der Kartei aus dem Geiste der Bibliothek
                        . Berlin: Kadmos.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Johannes F.K. (2016): "Niklas Luhmann´s Card Index: Thinking Tool, Communication Partner, Publication Machine", in: Alberto Cevolini (ed.): Forgetting Machines. Knowledge Management Evolution in Early Modern Europe. Leiden: Brill, 289-311.
                    
               
                  Watts, Duncan (2004): "The »new« science of networks", in: Annual Review of Sociology 30, 243-270.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die Hieroglyphenschrift des Klassischen Maya
            Die logosyllabische Hieroglyphenschrift der Maya umfasst rund 1000 Zeichen und wurde etwa zwischen 350 v. Chr. und 1550 n. Chr. im südlichen Mesoamerika zur Aufzeichnung der Hochsprache des Klassischen Maya verwendet. Die Anzahl der Graphe ist raum-zeitlich betrachtet mit rund 3000+ Formen weitaus höher, da Zeichen gleichzeitig mehrere Graphvarianten aufweisen können, die von einer Vollform abgeleitet sind.
            Einzelne Graphe werden in einem meist mit einem Wort oder morphemischem Verbund identischen Hieroglyphenblock arrangiert, ähnlich dem koreanischen Hangul. Allerdings offenbart das Maya aufgrund seines Variantenreichtums eine wesentlich größere kalligraphische Freiheit als die einzelnen Varianten nur durch simples Aneinanderreihen im Block zu schreiben. Je nach Platzbedarf und Ästhetik können Graphe etwa miteinander verschmelzen, infigiert oder gedreht werden.
            Bei der Katalogisierung der Graphe muss weiterhin mehr als ein Jahrtausend paläographischer Entwicklung berücksichtigt werden, ebenso unterschiedliche Stile in skulptierten oder gemalten Texten. Wegen all dieser Eigenheiten und der herausfordernden Struktur widersetzt sich die Maya-Schrift aktuell, Teil des Unicode-Standards zu werden.
         
         
            Zeichenkataloge als Hilfskonstrukte der Epigraphik
            Bis in die 1950er Jahre war die Maya-Schrift nicht entziffert und blieb es in großen Teilen bis in die 1980er Jahre, als eine Reihe bahnbrechender Erkenntnisse einen Kaskadeneffekt in Gang setzte, etwa Stuart (1987). Bis heute kennt man ebensowenig die genaue Zahl der Zeichen und ihrer graphischen Repräsentationen, da alle bisher publizierten Verzeichnisse aufgrund des Entzifferungsprozesses unvollständig und unzulänglich sind. Über 300 Zeichen sind bis heute nur vage oder gar nicht entziffert. Für viele dieser Fälle  existieren  konkurrierende Entzifferungsvorschläge, die vielleicht nur in ausgewählten Kontexten valide sind, sich aber wegen möglicher Polyvalenz nicht gegenseitig ausschließen müssen. Es gilt nicht nur, das Zeicheninventar vollständig zu erfassen, sondern existierende Entzifferungsvorschläge kritisch im Textzusammenhang zu prüfen, ob sie verifizierbar sind, und wo sie sich als falsch oder nicht überprüfbar herausstellen und somit nicht weiter berücksichtigt werden müssen.
            Die elf bisher publizierten Zeicheninventare, vor allem Thompson (1962), weisen viele Schwachstellen auf, besonders problematisch sind dabei Mehrfachinventarisierungen von Allographen als verschiedene Zeichen. Ein weiterer offensichtlicher Nachteil der traditionellen Zeichenkataloge ist die unveränderbare Natur einer gedruckten Fassung. Dies verhindert, dass gegebene Mehrfach- und Fehlklassifikationen korrigiert oder neue Beziehungen zu Zeichen und zu verschiedenen Zeichenfunktionen erstellt werden können, wobei zudem neue Entzifferungen nicht berücksichtigt werden können.
            Um einen Überblick über die bisher geleistete Zeichenklassifikationsarbeit der Mayaschriftforschung zu schaffen und den Vergleich der Inventare zu ermöglichen, fließen die bisher publizierten Kataloge in unseren digitalen Zeichenkatalog als Konkordanz ein. Die fehlerhaften Klassifikationen werden durch unseren Katalog korrigiert, bleiben aber nachvollziehbar dokumentiert, da wir die konkordanten Katalogeinträge beim jeweiligen Graph, das optional einem Zeichen zugeordnet werden kann, erfassen.
         
         
            Ein digitales Zeichen- und Graphinventar für das Klassische Maya
            Als Resultat interdisziplinärer Arbeit, bei dem die Modellierung und Verarbeitung der Daten auf Grundlage epigraphischer Prinzipien und Forschungsfragen erfolgte, ist unser digitaler Zeichenkatalog so konzipiert, dass er sowohl bisherige Forschungsergebnisse kritisch abbilden als auch noch zu erwartende Erkenntnisse flexibel einbinden kann.
            Der Katalog basiert auf einem innovativen Konzept der flexiblen Zuordnung von Zeichen zu ihren Graphen: Zeichen als Träger sprachlicher Informationen und Graphe als Form ihrer schriftlichen Realisierung werden getrennt erfasst, und erst die Verbindung eines Zeichens mit seinen Graphen macht es zu dessen Allograph, deren Gesamtheit bildet das Graphem eines Zeichens, das phonemisch KV-Silben oder freie und gebundene Morpheme, Diakritika und Zahlen wiedergibt.
            Die ontologisch-vernetzte Struktur des Modells und dessen Implementierung in RDF erlauben es, semantische Relationen über persistente URIs zwischen eindeutig referenzierbaren Entitäten herzustellen. Dadurch ist es möglich, Zuordnungen flexibel anzupassen und Allographe durch neue Verknüpfungen hinzuzufügen oder Falschzuweisungen zu korrigieren, etwa wenn ein Graph in Wirklichkeit aus zwei Graphen verschiedener Zeichen besteht.
            
               Sobald die Neuinventarisierung abgeschlossen ist (voraussichtlich Mitte 2018), wird der Katalog auf unserem zukünftigen Projektportal (
                    
                  https://classicmayan.org/
               ) publiziert und die RDF-Daten über einen SPARQL-Endpoint zugänglich gemacht. Zusätzlich werden die Daten auch im TextGrid Repository (
                    
                  https://textgridrep.org/
               ) veröffentlicht, wo sie mittels einer OAI-PMH Schnittstelle auch für externe Nutzer abrufbar sind. Die Dokumentation des digitalen Zeichenkatalogs ist unter 
                    
                  http://idiom-projekt.de/catalogue
                erreichbar.
                
         
         
            Bewertung und qualitative Einstufung von Lesungshypothesen
            Bei einer noch nicht vollständig entschlüsselten Schrift machen Epigraphiker zwangsläufig verschiedene Annahmen zur phonemischen Lesung von Zeichen. Es ist notwendig, alle plausiblen und nicht eindeutig widerlegten Entzifferungsvorschläge zu dokumentieren, vor allem aber, deren Qualität nach formalen Kriterien bewertbar zu machen. Dazu haben wir ein neutrales, transparentes System modelliert, das anhand formaler Kriterien eine qualitative Einstufung von Lesungshypothesen ermöglicht und deren Plausibilität im Textkorpus überprüfbar macht.
            Die Zeichen werden Zeichenklassen (syllabisch, morphographisch, diakritisch und/oder numerisch) zugewiesen, die jeweils einen breiten Transliterationswert ohne allophonische Varianz haben, z.B. “ku” für das Silbenzeichen 528. Aufgrund der Polyvalenz hat das Zeichen noch zwei logographische Lesungen mit distinktem Transliterationswert, statt des normalen “TUN” wird “CHAHUK” gelesen, wenn es als Tagesname verwendet wird. Für die Konfidenz eines Transliterationswertes werden jene Kriterien ausgewählt, auf die er sich stützt (siehe Abb. 1). Für jede Art der Zeichenfunktion wurde ein eigenes Kriterien-Set basierend auf Kelley (1962) und Houston (2001) entwickelt, das sich vor allem am graphematischen und sprachlichen Nutzungskontext orientiert, z.B. hat die Übereinstimmung mit einer bestimmten Wortart durch das Syntagma für ein Silbenzeichen keine Bedeutung, jedoch für Logogramme - hier besonders auch der Nachweis in modernen Maya-Sprachen.
            
               
               Abb. 1: Polyvalentes Zeichen mit drei Lesungen und jeweils unterschiedlichen Konfidenzen.
            
            Die Kriterien sind mittels Aussagenlogik so miteinander in Bezug gesetzt, dass je nach Kombination eine qualitative Einstufung vorgenommen wird. Dabei steht “1” für die höchstmögliche Konfidenz und eine evidente Lesung. Die Anzahl der Konfidenzstufen je Zeichenfunktion ist unterschiedlich: während Logogramme eine granulare Einteilung benötigen, brauchen Silbenzeichen weniger Stufen, da deren Permutationen im Kontext eines Wortes recht eindeutig sind.
            Das Wortzeichen “CH’AM” etwa taucht mit phonemischen Komplementen auf, die entsprechenden Kriterien ergeben Stufe 2. Damit liegt eine wahrscheinliche, aber ohne funktional äquivalente syllabische Substitution noch keine gesicherte Entzifferung vor. Die Kriterien sind bewusst streng gehalten, um für jede Lesungsaussage eine kritische Evaluation gegenüber den Zeichenvorkommen im von uns TEI-kodierten Textkorpus durchführen zu können und damit unserem Wörterbuch eine hohe Zuverlässigkeit für den Nutzer zu geben. Lesungen unterhalb einer bestimmten Konfidenz werden nämlich nicht aufgenommen, so dass in unserem Wörterbuch bestimmten Entzifferungsvorschlägen der normative Charakter genommen wird, den sie vielleicht in der epigraphischen Forschung durch Zitierung gewonnen haben.
         
         
            Zusammenspiel von Zeichenkatalog, Textkorpus und linguistischer Analyse
            Ohne eine sichere Identifizierung aller Graphe und mit vielen Zeichen unbekannter oder umstrittener Lesung kann das TEI-kodierte Textkorpus weder aus einem festen Schriftzeichensatz wie Unicode noch aus phonemisch transliterierten Werten bestehen. Für ein flexibles Korpus, das auf neue Entzifferungen und verschiedene Lesungshypothesen reagieren kann, nutzen wir den Zeichenkatalog als eine Art “Grundbaukasten” bei der Korpuserstellung.
            Im kodierten Text wird jede Hieroglyphe mittels Katalognummer und einer Referenz zur URI im Zeichenkatalog erfasst. Mittels einer Software zur linguistischen Analyse, Teil unserer virtuellen Arbeitsumgebung, wird in einem weiteren Prozessierungsschritt die numerische Transliteration (Katalognummern) zunächst in eine graphemische Transliteration (Transliterationswerte) überführt. Dies geschieht wegen der Polyvalenz semi-automatisch, wenn der Epigraphiker nach Verwendungskontext eine Entscheidung fällen muss - erst damit wird der Text “menschenlesbar”.
            Die qualitative Einstufung der Entzifferungsvorschläge im Zeichenkatalog wird jetzt relevant: Die Analyse kann anhand hoher oder niedriger Konfidenzstufen durchgeführt werden. Die Entzifferungsaussagen können in ihrem Verwendungskontext überprüft werden, was idealerweise zu neuen Erkenntnissen für die Entzifferung führen kann, aber auch der Vorbereitung der zweiten Stufe der phonemischen Transliteration dient. Jetzt werden die quasi als Container genutzten Transliterationswerte aus dem Zeichenkatalog kontextuell der korrekten sprachlichen Lesung angepasst. So besitzt das Zeichen “CHAN” üblicherweise die Lesung “chan” - “Himmel”, syllabische Substitutionen in Nordwest-Yukatan zeigen aber, dass das Zeichen dort in einem vernakularen Kontext “káan” ausgesprochen wurde. Der Einfluss lokaler Maya-Sprachen (relevant sind drei Sprachfamilien) auf die Schriftsprache ist noch nicht systematisch erforscht und mit Ergebnissen der historischen Linguistik abgeglichen worden.
            Das Tool zur linguistischen Analyse ermöglicht darüber hinaus die Anlage paralleler, als gleichwertig anzusehende Textanalysen, damit wird den verschiedenen Entzifferungsvorschlägen Rechnung getragen. Durch die Verbindung von Zeichenkatalog, Textkorpus und linguistischer Analyse entsteht letztendlich ein dynamischer Text, der je nach Forschungsfrage individuell generiert werden kann. Dieser Ansatz der ontologischen Vernetzung der Komponenten dürfte auch für die Erforschung weiterer nicht entzifferter Schriften von Interesse sein.
         
         
            Neue Perspektiven für die Maya-Epigraphik
            Auch ein digitaler Zeichenkatalog des Klassischen Maya kann nur so gut sein wie die epigraphische Forschung, und ist vor allem vom Grad der kritischen Selbstreflektion abhängig. Konkurrierende Entzifferungsvorschläge werden erst einmal als gleichwertig aufgenommen und erst dann anhand formaler Kriterien kategorisiert. Die Kriterienvergabe folgt den Argumenten der Hypothese und ist damit faktisch. Die Aussagelogiken zur Festlegung der Konfidenzstufen sind dabei eine kritische Zusammenführung fast 70-jähriger epigraphischer Forschungspraxis, auch im Vergleich mit den Methoden bei der Entzifferung anderer nicht-alphabetischer Schriftsysteme. Die Konfidenz eines Entzifferungsvorschlags ist damit weit mehr als ein Wahrscheinlichkeitsbegriff. Das Datenmodell ist dabei dem noch nicht gefestigten Erkenntnisstand zum Mayaschriftsystem angepasst.
            Die Arbeit mit digitalen Methoden hat so manche Kritik an der eigenen Forschungstradition erst in Gang kommen lassen, lenkt diese aber auch in eine vorher nicht denkbare Richtung. Die Möglichkeit eines digitalen Zeichenkatalogs und eines digitalen Textkorpus erlaubt erstmals, den gesamten Schriftschatz des Klassischen Maya nach Entzifferungskontexten zu durchsuchen, anstatt sich auf sein “cerebrales” Textkorpus verlassen zu müssen. Erst die Verbindung von geisteswissenschaftlichen und digitalen Methoden erlaubt es, die Maya-Epigraphik in eine neue Phase eintreten zu lassen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Houston, Stephen (2001): 
                        The Decipherment of Ancient Maya Writing. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press: 3–19.
                    
               
                  Kelley, David H. (1962): Review of “A Catalog of Maya Hieroglyphs, by J. Eric S. Thompson. Pp. xiv + 458, Including pls 16. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, in Cooperation with the Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1962.” 
                        American Journal of Archaeology 66(4): 436–438.
                    
               
                  Stuart, David (1987): 
                        Ten Phonetic Syllables. Research Reports on Ancient Maya Writing 14. Center for Maya Research, Washington, D.C.
                    
               
                  Thompson, J. Eric S. (1962): 
                        A Catalog of Maya Hieroglyphs. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
                    
               
                  Wichmann, Søren (2006): Mayan Historical Linguistics and Epigraphy: A New Synthesis. 
                        Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 279–294.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung
            Im Bereich digital basierter Untersuchungen wird zunehmend eine Verzahnung quantitativen und qualitativen Arbeitens gefordert. In der konkreten Arbeit der Korpusanalyse wird aus dieser scheinbaren Dichotomie jedoch schnell eine Methodenvielfalt, denn gerade durch Kombinationen verschiedener Perspektiven auf die Daten werden unterschiedliche Phänomene greifbar und entfaltet sich das volle Potential quantitativ-qualitativen Arbeitens. Das hier präsentierte Poster soll dies an einem konkreten Beispiel veranschaulichen.
         
         
            Fragestellung
            Inhaltlicher Ausgangspunkt ist die Frage nach Textgliederungsprinzipien, welche für bestimmte erbauliche Textsorten kennzeichnend sind. Mittel der Textgliederung können als Mittel der Markierung von Teiltexten innerhalb eines Gesamttextes beschrieben werden (Hausendorf/Kesselheim 2008: 41) und können wiederum für Textsorten charakteristisch sein. Sie finden sich auf verschiedenen Ebenen des Textes, u.a. im Bereich der Typographie (Stein 2003: 422). 
            Gerade diese typographischen Gliederungsmerkmale stellen einen guten Ausgangspunkt für eine quantitative Analyse von Textgliederungsmerkmalen dar, da sie in TEI-annotierten Korpora z.B. durch die XML-Strukturierung automatisch greifbar werden. Anders als bei dem Verfahren, textbezogene Phänomene reduziert auf bestimmte TEI-Strukturen zu untersuchen (z.B. Schöch 2016: 351ff., Haaf 2016), gelangen hier die im Korpusvergleich möglicherweise signifikanten Häufigkeiten der TEI-Strukturierungen selbst in den Blick.
            Die inhaltliche Frage nach Textgliederungsprinzipien erbaulicher Textsorten wird ausführlich behandelt in Haaf (in Vorber.). Im vorliegenden Beitrag stehen – der thematischen Ausrichtung der Konferenz entgegenkommend – Überlegungen zur adäquaten Methodik einer solchen Untersuchung im Vordergrund. 
         
         
            Korpus- und Analysegrundlage 
            Der hier präsentierten Studie liegen drei Teilkorpora des 17. Jahrhunderts aus dem Deutschen Textarchiv (2017) zugrunde: 
            
               Prosaische Erbauungsliteratur: 25 Bände (10 Autoren, 10.501 Seiten)
               Funeralschriften: 334 Schriften (14.316 Seiten)
               Referenzkorpus: 187 Bände verschiedener Textsorten (60.798 Seiten)
            
            Die Texte des DTA-Korpus wurden nach einheitlichen Richtlinien und mittels eines TEI-Subsets, das Ambiguitäten der Auszeichnung möglichst reduziert, ausgezeichnet (Haaf et al. 2014/15). 
            Für die vorliegende Untersuchung wurden einzelne TEI-Strukturen hinsichtlich der Häufigkeit ihres Auftretens (relativ zur Token-Anzahl) und ihrer Verteilung im jeweiligen Korpus verglichen, um speziell die Unterschiede in der Textgliederung zwischen den untersuchten Textsorten herauszuarbeiten. Dabei wurden solche Tags einbezogen, die voraussichtlich Textgliederungsmerkmale repräsentieren. So kann z.B. tei:div die Kapitelstruktur eines Textes anzeigen, durch tei:l wird der Wechsel zwischen Prosatext und Lyrik greifbar, tei:note zeigt Metatexte in Form von Anmerkungen, z.B. Marginalien, an, tei:hi repräsentiert Hervorhebungen von Textpassagen gegenüber dem Grundtext. Die Ergebnisse wurden einer qualitativen Beurteilung unterzogen. 
         
         
            Ergebnisse
            Zur Evaluation eines Merkmals war hier nicht allein der Blick auf seine relativen Häufigkeiten in und deren signifikante Unterschiede zwischen den untersuchten Korpora relevant. Die signifikant erhöhte Häufigkeit eines Merkmals kann vielmehr unterschiedliche Gründe haben. So kann sie einerseits zwar durchaus (1) auf die höhere Relevanz des Merkmals im Korpus hindeuten, wie sich am Merkmal der Marginalie zeigt, das signifikant häufig und regelmäßig verteilt im Korpus der Funeralschriften auftritt (Abb. 1). Sie kann andererseits aber auch (2) aufgrund der unausgewogenen Verteilung des Merkmals im Korpus gar nicht aussagekräftig sein, entweder weil (2a) sich das Korpus selbst als in sich unausgewogen und nicht repräsentativ für den zu beschreibenden Gegenstand erweist oder weil (2b) das Merkmal im gegebenen Kontext nicht relevant ist, wie etwa die horizontale Trennlinie zwischen Textteilen, die in allen drei Vergleichskorpora unregelmäßig verteilt war (Abb. 2). Andererseits kann es (3) auch vorkommen, dass die bestehende Ausgewogenheit der Verteilung eines Merkmals in einem Korpus letztlich nicht aussagekräftig für dessen Relevanz ist. 
            
               
               Abb. 1: Relative Häufigkeiten je 1 Mio. Token und deren Verteilung in den drei untersuchten Korpora für das Merkmal „Marginalie“
            
            
               
               Abb. 2: Relative Häufigkeiten je 1 Mio. Token und deren Verteilung in den drei untersuchten Korpora für das Merkmal „Horizontale Trennlinie“
            
            Weiterhin konnten im gegebenen Kontext (4) auch Merkmale mit geringeren Häufigkeiten relevant sein, und schließlich ist nicht zuletzt (5) auch der Ort, an dem ein Merkmal im Dokument auftritt, zu berücksichtigen. Beide Aspekte (4 und 5) zeigen sich z.B. am Merkmal der Liste, die in den erbaulichen Prosawerken erwartungsgemäß selten, aber relativ regelmäßig auftritt, und zwar in Form von Registern am Buchbeginn oder Buchende (in tei:front oder tei:back).
            Methodisch zeigte sich also, dass für eine adäquate Beurteilung der untersuchten Merkmale verschiedene Blickwinkel notwendig sind. Das Poster veranschaulicht anhand der erwähnten und weiterer Beispiele diese genannten methodischen Aspekte.
            Inhaltlich führte die Untersuchung zutage, dass z.B. Merkmale, die den Zugang zum Text erleichtern und Hilfe zur Orientierung im Text geben, für die erbaulichen Textsorten relevant sind (Näheres vgl. Haaf (in Vorber.)). 
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Deutsches Textarchiv. Grundlage für ein Referenzkorpus der neuhochdeutschen Sprache. Herausgegeben von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin 2017. http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de [letzter Zugriff: 24.09.2017]
                    
               
                  Haaf, Susanne (i. Vorb.): „Art und Funktion von typographischen Mitteln zur Textgliederung in erbaulichen Textsorten des 17. Jahrhunderts. Automatische Analyse im Korpusvergleich und qualitative Einordnung“, in: Simmler, Franz / Baeva, Galina (Hrsg.): 
                        Textgliederungsprinzipien. Ihre Kennzeichnungsformen und Funktionen vom 8. bis 18. Jahrhundert. Akten zum Internationalen Kongress vom 22. bis 24. Juni 2017 an der Universität St. Petersburg. Berlin: Weidler [2018].
                    
               
                  Haaf, Susanne (2016): “Corpus Analysis based on Structural Phenomena in Texts. Exploiting TEI Encoding for Linguistic Research”, in: Nicoletta Calzolari et al.: 
                        Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), 23.–28. Mai 2016, Portorož (Slovenia). Paris.
                    
               
                  Haaf, Susanne / Geyken, Alexander / Wiegand, Frank (2014/15): “The DTA ‘Base Format’. A TEI Subset for the Compilation of a Large Reference Corpus of Printed Text from Multiple Sources”, in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8.
                    
               
                  Hausendorf, Heiko / Kesselheim, Wolfgang (2008): 
                        Textlinguistik fürs Examen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christoph (2016): „Ein digitales Textformat für die Literaturwissenschaften. Die Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative und ihr Nutzen für Textedition und Textanalyse“, in: 
                        Romanische Studien 4. 
                    
               
                  Stein, Stephan (2003): 
                        Textgliederung. Einheitenbildung im geschriebenen und gesprochenen Deutsch. Theorie und Empirie, Berlin.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ausgangspunkt: Die TEI2016 Abstacts App
            Die Abstracts zur TEI Konferenz 2016 wurden via ConfTool eingereicht und anschließend in Microsoft Word und InDesign ediert, um ein gedrucktes Book of Abstracts herzustellen.
                     Die InDesign-Datei wurde dann als PDF exportiert und online verfügbar gemacht. Diese beiden Fassungen des Book of Abstracts wurden vor der Konferenz fertiggestellt. Nach der Konferenz wurde die InDesign Datei erneut exportiert, diesmal in XML Format. Diese Datei wurde dann teils manuell, teils automatisiert in Einzeldateien (jedes Abstract als eine Datei) zerlegt, bearbeitet und mit umfangreichen Metadaten versehen, um TEI-P5-Dateien herzustellen. Diese wurden auf GitHub veröffentlicht. Die jeweiligen  wurden mit umfassenden Informationen ausgestattet und detailliert codiert; etwa wurden innerhalb der mit Normdaten (VIAF) angereicherten - und -Tags konsequent -, - und -Tags eingesetzt. Das stellte sich für die Weiterverarbeitung, Analyse und Visualisierung der Daten später als vorteilhaft heraus.
                
            Dieses Corpus bildete die Basis für die TEI2016 Abstracts App, in der die Abstracts in der Erstversion über ein Inhaltsverzeichnis, das nach Abstract-Titel oder nach Verfassenden sortiert werden konnte, ansteuerbar waren. Schon in dieser rudimentären Form zeigte sich das Potential der Daten und der Applikation für Auswertungen, die über Struktur und Zusammensetzung der Konferenz und ihrer Beitragenden Auskunft geben würden. Die App wurde daher sowohl im Bereich der Funktionalität als auch auf der Ebene der enthaltenen Daten substantiell weiterentwickelt.
         
         
            Fragestellung und gender-theoretische Überlegungen
            Wir trafen die Entscheidung, der weiteren Entwicklung des Prototyps der App eine Forschungsfrage zugrundezulegen. Wir entschieden uns für die Frage nach der Geschlechterverteilung unter den Beitragenden.
            Aus Perspektive der Gendertheorie (in Butler’scher Tradition) bedarf die Entscheidung, diese Frage zu stellen, an sich eine Rechtfertigung, denn “a performative utterance (or practice) brings into being that of which it speaks.” (Butler 2010, 150f) Das bedeutet, dass die Frage nach der Verteilung der Geschlechter die Unterscheidung der Geschlechter erst hervorbringt, und so die historische Situation, die unser Körper bedeutet, fortsetzt: “As an intentionally organized materiality, the body is always an embodying of possibilities both conditioned and circumscribed by historical convention. In other words, the body is a historical situation, as Beauvoir has claimed, and is a manner of doing, dramatizing, and reproducing a historical situation.” (Butler 1988, 521) Berücksichtigt man außerdem die Konzepte des 
                    Doing bzw. 
                    Undoing Gender (West & Zimmerman 1987; Hirschauer 1994 & 2001), so wird deutlich, dass die oben formulierte Frage deutlich präzisiert werden muss, um die zu erhebenden Daten in einer Weise strukturieren zu können, die eine zeitgenössische Auffassung von Geschlechteridentitäten wiedergibt.
                
            Die Frage nach dem Geschlecht der Konferenzbeitragenden wurde daher wie folgt präzisiert: Da sie aus einem Interesse an der Stellung bzw. Repräsentation der Geschlechter im gegenwärtigen Wissenschaftsbetrieb heraus gestellt wurde, richtet sie sich nicht auf die biologische Beschaffenheit der Körper der Konferenzbeitragenden, sondern auf ihre gesellschaftliche (Selbst-)Wahrnehmung (also auf 
                    gender und nicht 
                    sex). Folgt man Butlers Auffassung, nach der die performative Äußerung das, wovon sie spricht, hervorbringt, wären daher eigene Angaben der Betroffenen zu ihrem Geschlecht die ideale Datenquelle für diese Fragestellung gewesen. Solche Angaben standen allerdings nicht zur Verfügung.
                
         
         
            Datenmodellierung und -anreicherung
            Nachdem eine Personenliste aus dem abstracts-Corpus extrahiert worden war, kamen wir zu dem Schluss, dass das Zuweisen von Geschlechtern an Personen unter Berücksichtigung der oben skizzierten geschlechtertheoretischen Überlegungen kein gangbarer Weg sein konnte. Um die soziodeterministische Neugier, aus der heraus die Ausgangsfrage gestellt worden war, dennoch befriedigen zu können, entwickelten wir ein gendersensibles Workaround für die Modellierung der Daten, das uns dennoch eine Erhebung der Geschlechterverteilung erlaubte: Anstatt den s ein  zuzuweisen, wie es die TEI-Richtlinien vorsehen, entschieden wir uns dafür, dem jeweiligen  einen @type zuzuweisen, der eine Angabe zum (sozialen) Geschlecht enthalten sollte. Diese Vorgehensweise erlaubte es, die Daten nicht den eigentlichen Personen nachzubauen und damit annahmen über deren Selbstwahrnehmung zu treffen, sondern zu erheben, welchem Geschlecht sie von einer allgemeinen Gesellschaft oder Öffentlichkeit aufgrund ihrer Namen aller Wahrscheinlichkeit nach zugeordnet würden.
            Um das Vorgehen weiter zu objektivieren, entschieden wir uns gegen die Zuordnung der Geschlechter zu den Vornamen auf Basis unseres eigenen Weltwissens. Stattdessen machten wir uns auf die Suche nach Namensdatenbanken, die Angaben zum Geschlecht enthalten. Im Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) etwa ist eine solche Liste enthalten (Kantrowitz 1997), jedoch werden keine Angaben gemacht, wie diese Liste zustande kam und auf welcher Grundlage die Geschlechter zugeordnet wurden. Wir entschieden uns daher für genderize.io, eine Datenbank, die nach eigenen Angaben auf Daten von Social-Media-Plattformen basiert, wo Personen die Informationen zu ihrem Geschlecht selbst bestimmen können. Nach dem Abgleich unserer Personenliste mit genderize.io via deren API konnten wir 102 von 124 Namen ein Geschlecht zuordnen. Da genderize.io nur zwei Geschlechter kennt, setzten wir “male”, “female” und “no-match” als @type-Werte ein. Die Namen, die nach diesem ersten Abgleich “no-match” waren, verglichen wir anschließend manuell mit der genderchecker.com-Datenbank, die ihre Geschlechtsangaben aus den "2001 and 2011 UK Census Data" bezieht, "together with multiple online sources and contributions from our 2m website visitors". Diese kommerzielle Datenbank konnte nicht für einen Gesamtvergleich genutzt werden, da nur die manuelle Verwendung kostenfrei ist. Ein interessanter Aspekt des Datenmodells von genderchecker.com ist die Berücksichtigung der Möglichkeit eines dritten Geschlechts: "If we see just one instance of a name appearing as both male and female, we categorise it as unisex." Aus gendertheoretischer Perspektive ist dieses Modell ein Schritt in die richtige Richtung, wenngleich die Benennung “unisex” diskutabel scheint. In unserer Namensliste kam kein solcher Fall vor - nach dem Abgleich der verbleibenden 22 Namen mit genderchecker.com blieben drei Namen “no-match”.
            Da Daten und Code, aus denen die TEI2016 Abstracts App gebaut ist, unter einer offenen Lizenz auf GitHub frei zugänglich sind, steht es den Beitragenden frei, ihr Geschlecht und damit unsere statistische Auswertung der Geschechterverteilung zu verändern - das Ergebnis bleibt also ein vorläufiges. Im geplanten Vortrag wird es im Rahmen einer live-Demonstration der App präsentiert werden.
         
      
      
         
             Dieser Workflow ist, zugegebenermaßen, einer Konferenz im Bereich der Digital Humanities, und der TEI Konferenz im Besonderen, nicht ganz angemessen; eine Integration etwa des DH-Convalidators hätte den Prozess wesentlich gestrafft. Eingespielte Prozesse und Zeitdruck waren die Hauptgründe für diese Vorgehensweise.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Peter Andorfer, Vanessa Hannesschläger (2017): TEI Abstracts 2016. A little application to publish the abstracts of the TEI conference 2016. 
                        http://tei2016app.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/
                        
               
               
                  Judith Butler (1988): Performative Acts and Gender Constitution: An Essay in Phenomenology and Feminist Theory. In: Theatre Journal 40:4, 519–531.
               
                  Judith Butler (2010): Performative Agency. In: Journal of Cultural Economy 3:2, 147–161.
               
                  Genderchecker: 
                        http://genderchecker.com/
                        
               
               
                  genderize.io: Determine the gender of a first name. 
                        https://genderize.io/
                        
               
               
                  Vanessa Hannesschläger, Daniel Schopper (Hg.) (2017): TEI Conference and Members’ Meeting 2016. Book of Abstracts [XML/TEI files]. 
                        https://github.com/acdh-oeaw/TEI2016abstracts
                        
               
               
                  Stefan Hirschauer (1994): Die soziale Fortpflanzung der Zwei-Geschlechtlichkeit. In: Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 46:4, 668–692.
               
                  Stefan Hirschauer (2001): Das Vergessen des Geschlechts: Zur Praxeologie einer Kategorie sozialer Ordnung. In: Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie (Sonderheft 41), 208–235.
               
                  Mark Kantrowitz (1997): Name Corpus: List of Male, Female, and Pet names. CMU Artificial Intelligence Repository. 
                        http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/ai-repository/ai/areas/nlp/corpora/names/
                        
               
               
                  Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK). 
                        http://www.nltk.org/
                        
               
               
                  Susanne Oelkers (2003): Naming gender. Empirische Untersuchungen zur phonologischen Struktur von Vornamen im Deutschen. Frankfurt a. M.: Lang.
               
                  TEI Consortium (2017): TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/Guidelines.pdf
                        
               
               
                  Virtual International Authority File (VIAF). 
                        https://viaf.org/
                        
               
               
                  Candance West, Don Zimmerman (1987): Doing Gender. In: Gender and Society 1:2, 125–151.
            
         
      
   



      
         Das Deutsche Historische Institut in Washington (DHI) befindet sich in der Entwicklungsphase von " Deutsche Geschichte-
                Digital / German History-
                Digital" (DG-D), einer transatlantischen digitalen Initiative, um die wissenschaftlichen Bedürfnisse von HistorikerInnen im Kontext neuer historiografischer und technologischer Herausforderungen zu bewältigen. DG-D ist eine neue Infrastruktur zur Erleichterung der transnationalen historischen Wissensschöpfung für eine große Wissenschaftsgemeinschaft und eine wachsende Zahl von "Citizen Scholars", die bereits auf digitale Ressourcen des DHI angewiesen sind. Im Poster stellen wir zwei zentrale GH-Digital-Pilotprojekte und deren Integration in die DG-D "Knowledge Creation Environment" vor. Das erste ist "Deutsche Geschichte in Dokumenten und Bildern", unterstützt von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), und das zweite ist Deutsche Geschichte 
                Intersections, unterstützt durch das Europäische Wiederaufbauprogramm (ERP). 
            
         Die Planung für DG-D umfasste die Befragung von mehr als vierhundert WissenschaftlerInnen, die bereits mit digitalen Ressourcen arbeiten, welche vom DHI produziert wurden. Die umfassendste dieser Ressourcen ist die im Jahr 2003 gestartete digitale Quellensammlung "Deutsche Geschichte in Dokumenten und Bildern / German History in Documents and Images" (GHDI), die an deutsch- und englischsprachigen Universitäten weitläufig genutzt wird. Derzeit wird GHDI in Verbindung mit DG-D einem technischen und konzeptionellen Umbau unterzogen. Es enthält Tausende Seiten englischsprachiger Übersetzungen deutscher historischer Texte sowie Bilder und Karten, die von ca. 5.000 Besuchern pro Tag genutzt werden. Unsere Planung für DG-D beinhaltet auch weiterhin Konsultationen und Workshops mit ExpertInnen aus den Geschichtswissenschaften und den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften sowie die Gründung von Partnerschaften mit Institutionen und großen Initiativen, die unser Interesse für die Zukunft der Geschichte im digitalen Zeitalter teilen.
         Die Deutsche Geschichte-
                Digital-Plattform befasst sich mit den Bedürfnissen der digitalen Forschung durch fünf Ziele und integrierte Arbeitspakete, die auf diese Ziele abgestimmt sind: Entdeckung, Analyse, Produktion, Bewahrung und Gemeinschaft. DG-D beinhaltet die Entwicklung eines Peer-Review-Index von wissenschaftlichen digitalen Objekten mit Dublin Core (DC) und CLARINs Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) Standards über einen angepassten Blacklight (http://projectblacklight.org/) Technologie-Stack.
            
         Für WissenschaftlerInnen, die historische digitale Projekte in Nordamerika entwickeln, gibt es keine interinstitutionelle Infrastruktur für die Speicherung ihrer Daten oder die Bereitstellung von Open Access. CLARIN-D, Teil der europäischen Forschungsinfrastruktur CLARIN, berät und unterstützt das DG-D-Projekt zur Erstellung eines Portals für CLARIN in Nordamerika am DHI Washington. Im Mittelpunkt dieses Prozesses steht die Implementierung eines Repository-Systems, das eine nachhaltige Speicherung des Inhalts und die Einbindung in eine digitale Umgebung ermöglicht, um den Zugriff, die Suche und die interoperablen Datenformate zu erleichtern. Unsere Partnerschaft mit CLARIN fördert den freien Zugang, die offene, kooperative Wissenschafts- und Wissenserzeugung im nordamerikanischen Kontext und ist ein wichtiger Bestandteil der gesamten Strategie der digitalen Geisteswissenschaften des DHI. Als Institut der Max Weber Stiftung sind wir auch in Partnerschaft mit DARIAH-DE. DARIAH-DE wird Web-Hosting und langfristige Bewahrung von DHI-Digitalprojekten in ihrer Gesamtheit, einschließlich der ersten Version der Webseite Deutsche Geschichte in Dokumenten und Bildern, zur Verfügung stellen.
         Als kooperative Wissensplattform wird DG-D Redakteure, Forscher und Citizen Scientists bei der Entwicklung weiterer innovativer Online-Projekte zusammenbringen. Drei solcher Pilotprojekte befinden sich derzeit in der Entwicklung und beinhalten TEI und unsere Internationalisierung der Scalar 2.0 Plattform. DG-D verwendet Scalar 2.0 für das Baseline Content Management System, insbesondere aufgrund seiner Schnittstellenfunktionen, Unterstützung für Resource Description Framework (RDF), Konnektivität zu externen Repositorien, Dublin Core (DC) Unterstützung, Hypothes.is Integration und sein Mehrfachpfad-Navigationssystem.
         HistorikerInnen nutzen zunehmend digitale Geisteswissenschaften, um Daten zu analysieren und ihre Forschungsergebnisse darzustellen. Ein weiterer Vorteil der Speicherung von TEI-Digitalobjekten in einem CLARIN-Repository ist, dass eine ganze Palette von korpus-linguistischen analytischen Werkzeugen von WissenschaftlerInnen auf Textinhalte angewendet werden kann. In diesem Zusammenhang werden wir unsere Entwicklung von Scalar Adapters für den Anschluss an deutsche Repositorien und virtuelle Forschungsumgebungen (VREs) diskutieren.
         Die DG-D-Plattform integriert die Blog-Aggregation, ein erweitertes Diskussionssystem, Community-orientierte Tools und Social Media, um miteinander kooperierende Wissensgemeinschaften zu erleichtern und Forschung zu öffnen. Dies ist ein wegweisender Aspekt unseres Projektes, das die Annahme von sozialen und gemeinschaftlichen digitalen Instrumenten durch HistorikerInnen in ihren Forschungsaktivitäten untersuchen wird. Wir wollen hierbei auch die einzigartige Rolle nutzen, die das DHI als Drehscheibe des transatlantischen wissenschaftlichen Dialogs und als eines großen Knotenpunkts in einem internationalen Netzwerk von HistorikerInnen spielt, um die Zusammenhänge zwischen verschiedenen Wissenschaftsgemeinschaften zu erleichtern.
         Deutsche Geschichte-
                Digital Projekte bietet ein Modell für neue, quellenbasierte methodische Ansätze in den Geschichtswissenschaften. Die Initiative zielt darauf ab, durch digitale Instrumente, Standards und Methoden zur argumentbasierten Forschung beizutragen. Es fördert transnationale Ansätze in der historischen Forschung durch das Verfügbarmachen einer transnationalen technischen Plattform, die auf TEI und anderen aufkommenden Standards in den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften wie DC und RDF gründet. 
            
         Es unterstützt narratologische Komplexität in der Geschichtsschreibung und vermeidet redaktionelle Ansätzen, die eine singuläre Erzählung oder „
                Master Narrative“ ergeben. 
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Cohen, Daniel J., and Roy Rosenzweig (2006): 
                        Digital History: A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and Presenting the Past on the Web. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
                    
               
                  Cohen, Daniel J., Michael Frisch, Patrick Gallagher, Steven Mintz, Kirsten Sword, Amy Murrell Taylor, William G. Thomas III, and William J. Turkel (2008): “Interchange: The Promise of Digital History.” 
                        Journal of American History, volume 95, issue 2, 452-491.
                    
               
                  “Diskussionsforum: Historische Grundwissenschaften und die digitale Herausforderung.” From H-Soz-Kult, November 15, 2015 (
                        http://www.hsozkult.de/text/id/texte-2890).
                    
               
                  Fiedler, Norman and Werthmann, Antonina and Stuehrberg, Maik and Schonefeld, Oliver and Bingel, Joachim and Witt, Andreas (2014): Research infrastructures in non-university research facilities. Research paper. Mannheim: Institute for German Language, 2014. 116 S.
               
                  Hiebert, Matthew, Lässig, Simone and Witt, Andreas (2017): German history-digital: A platform for transnational historical knowledge co-creation. In: Digital Humanities 2017, Conference Abstracts, McGill University & Université de Montréal Montréal, Canada August 8-11, 2017. Montréal: McGill University & Université de Montréal, 2017. p. 269-271
               
                  Hiebert, Matthew, Bowen, W. R., and Siemens, R.G (2015): “Implementing a social knowledge creation environment.” Scholarly and Research Communication, 6(3).
               
                  Mandić, Slobodan (2005): 
                        Computerization and Historiography 1995-2005. Belgrade: Belgrade Historical Society.
                    
               
                  McCullough, Kelly, and James Retallack (2013): “Digital History Anthologies on the Web: German History in Documents and Images.” 
                        Central European History, volume 46, 346-361.
                    
               
                  Ngai, Mae M (2012): “The Future of the Discipline: The Promise and Perils of Transnational History.” 
                        Perspectives on History, December 2012 (
                        https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/december-2012/the-future-of-the-discipline/promises-and-perils-of-transnational-history).
                    
               
                  Patel, Kiran Klaus (2010): “Transnational History.” In European History Online (EGO), published by the Institute of European History (IEG). Mainz, 2010 (http://www.ieg-ego.eu/patelk-2010-en).
                    
               
                  Patel, Kiran Klaus (2011): “Zeitgeschichte im digitalen Zeitalter: Neue und alte Herausforderungen.” 
                        Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte, volume 59, issue 3, July, 331-51.
                    
               
                  Putnam, Lara (2016): “The Transnational and the Text-Searchable: Digitized Sources and the Shadows They Cast.” 
                        The American Historical Review, volume 121, issue 2, April, 377-402. 
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013):
                        Digital Editionsformen. 
                            Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Volume 3 (Norderstedt).
                    
               
                  Thomas, William G., III (2016): “Renegotiating the Archive: Scholarly Practice in the Digital Age.” 
                        (http://railroads.unl.edu/blog/?p=1195). 
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Die Aufbereitung und Erkennung von handschriftlichen Dokumenten oder von speziellen Druckschriften ist sowohl für Menschen als auch für Computeralgorithmen eine (technische) Herausforderung. Die Bearbeitung von schriftlichem, insbesondere handschriftlichem Material aber auch früher Drucke wird bislang von spezialisierten Experten durchgeführt, um technisch und qualitativ hochstehende Resultate aus historischen Dokumenten zu erhalten. Zur Erstellung hochwertiger Editionen sind hilfswissenschaftliche Kenntnisse (Paläographie, Editorik), historisches Kontextwissen und technisches Know-how gefragt.
         Im Rahmen des Projekts READ (Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents) werden unterschiedliche Aufgaben der Automatisierung (weiter-)entwickelt, um qualitativ gute Ergebnisse mit optimalem Ressourceneinsatz zu erhalten. Ein speziell dafür entwickeltes Tool ist die Software Transkribus und die Transkribus Weboberfläche (öffentliche Vorstellung im November 2017). Beide Ansätze verkoppeln auf unterschiedliche Weise die Arbeit von Expertinnen und maschinelle Erkennleistung. Software und Webservice sind frei verfügbar unter www.transkribus.eu. Im Workshop wird Transkribus vorgestellt und kann durch die Teilnehmenden mit eigenen oder zur Verfügung gestellten Dokumenten getestet werden.
         Transkribus unterstützt alle Prozesse vom Import der Bilder über die Identifikation der Textblöcke und Zeilen, die zu einer detaillierten Verlinkung zwischen Text und Bild führt, sowie die Transkription und Annotation der Handschrift bis zum Export der gewonnen Daten in standardisierten Formaten.
         
            Workflow in Transkribus
            Um Texte zu transkribieren oder zu edieren, müssen digitale Bilder hochgeladen und danach mit Layouterkennungswerkzeugen bearbeitet werden. Die Analyse des Layouts kann automatisiert geschehen, wobei die manuelle Kontrolle und falls nötig die Nachbearbeitung im Moment noch sinnvoll ist.
            Dokumente können entweder automatisch mit bereits bestehenden ATR-Modellen (Automatic Text Recognition) erkannt werden oder die Transkription erfolgt händisch und kann danach zum Training neuer Modelle genutzt werden. Insbesondere für die Bearbeitung großer Dokumentenkorpora, die in ähnlichen Handschriften verfasst wurden, lassen sich bereits heute Effizienzgewinne und Vereinfachungen erzielen.
            Aufbauend auf den Transkriptionen ist es möglich eine Vielzahl von Auszeichnungen und Annotationen innerhalb des Textes, aber auch darüber hinaus für Einzeldokumente und ganze Dokumentenbestände anzulegen. Neben der Anreicherung der Dokumente mit Metadaten (Identifikation von Personen, Orten und Sachwörtern) ist somit auch die Möglichkeit der Herstellung von Bestandsbeschreibungen und der Hinterlegung von Transkriptions- und Editionsvorschriften gegeben.
         
         
            Ausgabeformate
            Für den Export stehen unterschiedliche Formate und Ausgabeformen zur Verfügung. So ist es möglich XML-Dateien zu exportieren, die den Vorgaben der TEI entsprechen. Ausgehend davon können komplexe digitale Editionen erstellt werden, die jedoch im Unterschied zu den meisten herkömmlichen Editionen eine enge Verzahnung mit den verwendeten Bilddateien aufweisen. Dadurch werden Editionen ermöglicht, die den transkribierten Text in der Zusammenschau mit der faksimilierten Vorlage sichtbar machen. Daneben sind auch Ausgaben als Druckdaten (PDF) oder zur Weiterbearbeitung für Textverarbeitungsprogramme (DOCX) implementiert. Schließlich ist auch ein Export im PAGE-Format (zur Anzeige in Viewern für OCR gelesene Dokumente, Pletschacher, 2010) sowie als METS (Metadata Encoding and Transmission) möglich.
         
         
            Zielpublikum
            Die Plattform ist für unterschiedliche Gruppen konzipiert. Einerseits für GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEN, die selbst Transkriptionen und Editionen historischer Dokumente erstellen möchten. Andererseits richtet sich die Plattform an Archive, Bibliotheken und andere Erinnerungsinstitutionen, die handschriftliche Dokumente in ihren Sammlungen aufbewahren und ein Interesse an der Aufbereitung des Materials haben. Angesprochen werden sollen auch Studierende der Geistes-, Archiv- und Bibliothekswissenschaften mit einem Interesse an der Transkription historischer Handschriften.
            Das Ziel, eine robuste und technisch hochstehende Automatisierung von Layout- und Handschriftenerkennung, lässt sich nur durch die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEn und ComputerspezialistINNen mit unterschiedlichen Voraussetzungen und Ansprüchen an Datenqualität und Herstellung von Transkriptionen erreichen. Die Algorithmen werden somit nicht nur bis zu einem Status als 
                    proof-of-concept erarbeitet, sondern bis zur Praxistauglichkeit verfeinert und in grösseren Forschungs- und Aufbewahrungsumgebungen getestet und verbessert. Die ComputerwissenschaftlerINNEN sind entsprechend ebenfalls ein wichtiges Zielpublikum, wobei bei ihnen weniger die Nutzung der Plattform als das Beisteuern von Software(teilen) anvisiert wird. 
                
            Die Speicherung der Dokumente erfolgt in der Cloud, gehostet auf Servern der Universität Innsbruck. Die importierten Daten bleiben auch während der Bearbeitung unverändert im Dateisystem liegen und werden ergänzt durch METS und PAGE XML. Alle bearbeiteten Dokumente und Daten bleiben somit in den unterschiedlichen Bearbeitungsstadien nicht nur lokal verfügbar, sondern können für andere Transkribusnutzerinnen und -nutzer freigegeben werden. Dank elaboriertem
                     user-management ist die Zuteilung von Rollen möglich. 
                
            Die eingespeisten Dokumente und Daten bleiben privat und vor dem Zugriff Dritter geschützt. Von Projektseite können vorgenommene Arbeitsschritte zwecks besserem Verständnis der ausgeführten Arbeiten und letztlich der Verbesserung der Produkte ausgewertet werden.
            Die Erkennprozesse werden serverseitig durchgeführt, sodass die Ressourcen auf den lokalen Rechnern nicht strapaziert werden. Transkribus ist mit JAVA und SWT programmiert und kann daher plattformunabhängig (Windows, Mac, Linux) genutzt werden.
         
         
            Ein- und Ausblicke im Workshop
            Der Workshop richtet sich sowohl an GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEN als auch an ComputerwissenschaftlerINNEN, wobei vorwiegend die Tools und Möglichkeiten von Transkribus präsentiert werden.
            Zwei zentrale Forschungsaspekte aus READ werden im Rahmen des Workshops durch Experten vorgestellt:
            Einerseits das technische Verfahren des Automatic Text Recognition mit rekurrenten neuronalen Netzen (Leifert et al. 2016). Dabei wird kurz in die Trainings- und Auswertungsmechanismen mit neuronalen Netzen eingeführt und Möglichkeiten der Auswertung demonstriert.
            Andererseits wird die Erkennung von komplexen Layouts, insbesondere Tabellen, erklärt und neueste technische Lösungen vorgestellt.
         
         
            Programm/Ablauf des Workshops
            
               
                  Begrüßung und Informationen zum Projekt READ (Tobias Hodel, Zürich): 20‘
                        Überblick über Ziele und Fortschritte im Rahmen des von der EU geförderten Projekts.
               
                  Machine Learning und automatisierte Text Erkennung (Tobias Strauß, Rostock): 30‘
                        Einführung und Erklärung zum Einsatz neuronaler Netze bei der Texterkennung
                    
               
                  Einführung in Transkribus
                   30‘
                        Aufbau und Funktionieren des Programms, Demonstration des Gebrauchs anhand von Beispielen. Aufzeigen der Möglichkeiten zum Einsatz der Automatisierungen.
                    
               
                  Selbstständiges Arbeiten der Teilnehmenden mit Transkribus:
                   90‘
                    
               Die Möglichkeiten und Grenzen von Transkribus sollen von den Teilnehmenden (falls gewünscht mit eigenen Dokumenten) selbst ausgetestet werden.
               
                  Layout Analyse: Tabellen und andere schwierige Formen
                   (Markus Diem, Wien): 30‘
                        Ein über Transkribus hinausgehender Teil des Projekts beschäftigt sich mit 
                        computer vision. Ziel ist es, auch komplexe Strukturen korrekt als Layout zu erkennen, um die automatisierte Texterkennung überhaupt zu ermöglichen. Tabellen gehören in dem Bereich zu den schwierigsten Formen der Texterkennung.
                    
               
                  Diskussion über Vor- und Nachteile der Software: 30‘
                        Inklusive Evaluation des Tools und der Veranstaltung. Feedbacks werden eingeholt, zur Verbesserung der Software und Webtools (usability, Umfang und Leistung der Automatisierungen etc.).
                    
               Nach Interesse der Teilnehmenden werden während des Workshops Kurzinputs zu folgenden Themen angeboten:
                        
                     Matching von Text und Bild (bspw. aus bestehenden Transkriptionen), 
                            Transkribus Learn (e-Learningumgebung), 
                     Crowdsourcing-Infrastruktur, 
                     ScanTent und DocScan (Fotografieren eigener Dokumente mit Android App).
                  
               
            
         
         Workflow in Transkribus
         Um Texte zu transkribieren oder zu edieren, müssen digitale Bilder hochgeladen und danach mit Layouterkennungswerkzeugen bearbeitet werden. Die Analyse des Layouts kann automatisiert geschehen, wobei die manuelle Kontrolle und falls nötig die Nachbearbeitung im Moment noch sinnvoll ist.
         Dokumente können entweder automatisch mit bereits bestehenden ATR-Modellen (Automatic Text Recognition) erkannt werden oder die Transkription erfolgt händisch und kann danach zum Training neuer Modelle genutzt werden. Insbesondere für die Bearbeitung großer Dokumentenkorpora, die in ähnlichen Handschriften verfasst wurden, lassen sich bereits heute Effizienzgewinne und Vereinfachungen erzielen.
         Aufbauend auf den Transkriptionen ist es möglich eine Vielzahl von Auszeichnungen und Annotationen innerhalb des Textes, aber auch darüber hinaus für Einzeldokumente und ganze Dokumentenbestände anzulegen. Neben der Anreicherung der Dokumente mit Metadaten (Identifikation von Personen, Orten und Sachwörtern) ist somit auch die Möglichkeit der Herstellung von Bestandsbeschreibungen und der Hinterlegung von Transkriptions- und Editionsvorschriften gegeben.
         Ausgabeformate
         Für den Export stehen unterschiedliche Formate und Ausgabeformen zur Verfügung. So ist es möglich XML-Dateien zu exportieren, die den Vorgaben der TEI entsprechen. Ausgehend davon können komplexe digitale Editionen erstellt werden, die jedoch im Unterschied zu den meisten herkömmlichen Editionen eine enge Verzahnung mit den verwendeten Bilddateien aufweisen. Dadurch werden Editionen ermöglicht, die den transkribierten Text in der Zusammenschau mit der faksimilierten Vorlage sichtbar machen. Daneben sind auch Ausgaben als Druckdaten (PDF) oder zur Weiterbearbeitung für Textverarbeitungsprogramme (DOCX) implementiert. Schließlich ist auch ein Export im PAGE-Format (zur Anzeige in Viewern für OCR gelesene Dokumente, Pletschacher, 2010) sowie als METS (Metadata Encoding and Transmission) möglich.
         Zielpublikum
         Die Plattform ist für unterschiedliche Gruppen konzipiert. Einerseits für GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEN, die selbst Transkriptionen und Editionen historischer Dokumente erstellen möchten. Andererseits richtet sich die Plattform an Archive, Bibliotheken und andere Erinnerungsinstitutionen, die handschriftliche Dokumente in ihren Sammlungen aufbewahren und ein Interesse an der Aufbereitung des Materials haben. Angesprochen werden sollen auch Studierende der Geistes-, Archiv- und Bibliothekswissenschaften mit einem Interesse an der Transkription historischer Handschriften.
         Das Ziel, eine robuste und technisch hochstehende Automatisierung von Layout- und Handschriftenerkennung, lässt sich nur durch die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEn und ComputerspezialistINNen mit unterschiedlichen Voraussetzungen und Ansprüchen an Datenqualität und Herstellung von Transkriptionen erreichen. Die Algorithmen werden somit nicht nur bis zu einem Status als 
                proof-of-concept erarbeitet, sondern bis zur Praxistauglichkeit verfeinert und in grösseren Forschungs- und Aufbewahrungsumgebungen getestet und verbessert. Die ComputerwissenschaftlerINNEN sind entsprechend ebenfalls ein wichtiges Zielpublikum, wobei bei ihnen weniger die Nutzung der Plattform als das Beisteuern von Software(teilen) anvisiert wird. 
            
         Die Speicherung der Dokumente erfolgt in der Cloud, gehostet auf Servern der Universität Innsbruck. Die importierten Daten bleiben auch während der Bearbeitung unverändert im Dateisystem liegen und werden ergänzt durch METS und PAGE XML. Alle bearbeiteten Dokumente und Daten bleiben somit in den unterschiedlichen Bearbeitungsstadien nicht nur lokal verfügbar, sondern können für andere Transkribusnutzerinnen und -nutzer freigegeben werden. Dank elaboriertem
                 user-management ist die Zuteilung von Rollen möglich. 
            
         Die eingespeisten Dokumente und Daten bleiben privat und vor dem Zugriff Dritter geschützt. Von Projektseite können vorgenommene Arbeitsschritte zwecks besserem Verständnis der ausgeführten Arbeiten und letztlich der Verbesserung der Produkte ausgewertet werden.
         Die Erkennprozesse werden serverseitig durchgeführt, sodass die Ressourcen auf den lokalen Rechnern nicht strapaziert werden. Transkribus ist mit JAVA und SWT programmiert und kann daher plattformunabhängig (Windows, Mac, Linux) genutzt werden.
         Ein- und Ausblicke im Workshop
         Der Workshop richtet sich sowohl an GeisteswissenschaftlerINNEN als auch an ComputerwissenschaftlerINNEN, wobei vorwiegend die Tools und Möglichkeiten von Transkribus präsentiert werden.
         Zwei zentrale Forschungsaspekte aus READ werden im Rahmen des Workshops durch Experten vorgestellt:
         Einerseits das technische Verfahren des Automatic Text Recognition mit rekurrenten neuronalen Netzen (Leifert et al. 2016). Dabei wird kurz in die Trainings- und Auswertungsmechanismen mit neuronalen Netzen eingeführt und Möglichkeiten der Auswertung demonstriert.
         Andererseits wird die Erkennung von komplexen Layouts, insbesondere Tabellen, erklärt und neueste technische Lösungen vorgestellt.
         Programm/Ablauf des Workshops
         
            Begrüßung und Informationen zum Projekt READ (Tobias Hodel, Zürich): 20‘
                Überblick über Ziele und Fortschritte im Rahmen des von der EU geförderten Projekts.
                Machine Learning und automatisierte Text Erkennung (Tobias Strauß, Rostock): 30‘
                Einführung und Erklärung zum Einsatz neuronaler Netze bei der Texterkennung
                Einführung in Transkribus
             30‘
                Aufbau und Funktionieren des Programms, Demonstration des Gebrauchs anhand von Beispielen. Aufzeigen der Möglichkeiten zum Einsatz der Automatisierungen.
                Selbstständiges Arbeiten der Teilnehmenden mit Transkribus:
            90‘
            
         Die Möglichkeiten und Grenzen von Transkribus sollen von den Teilnehmenden (falls gewünscht mit eigenen Dokumenten) selbst ausgetestet werden.
         
            Layout Analyse: Tabellen und andere schwierige Formen
             (Markus Diem, Wien): 30‘
                Ein über Transkribus hinausgehender Teil des Projekts beschäftigt sich mit 
                computer vision. Ziel ist es, auch komplexe Strukturen korrekt als Layout zu erkennen, um die automatisierte Texterkennung überhaupt zu ermöglichen. Tabellen gehören in dem Bereich zu den schwierigsten Formen der Texterkennung.
            
         
            Diskussion über Vor- und Nachteile der Software: 30‘
                Inklusive Evaluation des Tools und der Veranstaltung. Feedbacks werden eingeholt, zur Verbesserung der Software und Webtools (usability, Umfang und Leistung der Automatisierungen etc.).
            
         Nach Interesse der Teilnehmenden werden während des Workshops Kurzinputs zu folgenden Themen angeboten:
                - Matching von Text und Bild (bspw. aus bestehenden Transkriptionen), 
                - Transkribus Learn (e-Learningumgebung), 
                - Crowdsourcing-Infrastruktur, 
                - ScanTent und DocScan (Fotografieren eigener Dokumente mit Android App).
            
         Während des gesamten Workshops stehen drei wissenschaftliche Mitarbeitende des Projekts für Fragen und Auskünfte zur Verfügung. 
                Tobias Hodel (
            
               tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch)
            
             nimmt bereits im Vorfeld gerne Dokumente oder Projektideen an, damit sich die Veranstalter bereits vor dem Workshop Gedanken zu möglichen technischen Umsetzungen machen können.
         
         Das Projekt READ und somit die Weiterentwicklung von Transkribus werden finanziert durch einen Grant der Europäischen Union im Rahmen des Horizon 2020 Forschungs- und Innovationsprogramms (grant agreement No 674943).
         Zahl der möglichen Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer: 30-40 Personen (auch abhängig von der Raumgrösse).
                Benötigte technische Ausstattung: Allgemein: Beamer, evtl. Whiteboard.
                Teilnehmende: Eigener Rechner (wenn möglich Installation von Transkribus; Hilfe zur Installation von Transkribus wird 15 Minuten vor der Veranstaltung angeboten)
            
         Anmeldungen und Rückfragen bitte an tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch
         Kontaktdaten aller Beitragenden (inkl. Forschungsinteressen)
         Markus Diem, Technische Universität Wien, Institute of Computer Aided Automation Computer Vision Lab, Favoritenstr. 9/183-2, A-1040 Vienna, Österreich; diem@caa.tuwien.ac.at (Computer Vision, Document Analysis, Layout Analysis/Page Segmentation, Cluster Analysis, Automated Flow Cytometry Analysis).
         Tobias Hodel, Staatsarchiv des Kantons Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 170, CH-8057 Zürich, Schweiz; tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch (Digital Humanities; Automatic Textrecognition; eArchiving; Information Retrieval).
         Tobias Strauß, Institut für Mathematik, Ulmenstraße 69, Universität Rostock, 18051 Rostock, Deutschland; tobias.strauss@uni-rostock.de; (Deep Learning, Information Retrieval und Natural Language Processing).
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               Leifert, G., Strauß, T., Grüning, T., Wustlich, W., Labahn, R., 2016. Cells in Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research 17, 1-37.
               
                  Leifert, G., Strauß, T., Grüning, T., Wustlich, W., Labahn, R., 2016. Cells in Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research 17, 1-37.
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Computergestütztes Arbeiten kann geisteswissenschaftliches Forschen auf unterschiedlichste Weise befördern und bereichern. Dennoch müssen wir in unserem Arbeitsalltag und in Gesprächen mit Kolleginnen und Kollegen immer wieder feststellen, dass viele traditioneller arbeitende Geisteswissenschaftler digitalen Methoden noch immer mit Skepsis begegnen. Dies liegt nicht zuletzt daran, dass in den Geisteswissenschaften zahlreiche Methoden zum Einsatz kommen, von denen nur einigen wenigen eine derart formalisierte Arbeitsweise naheliegt, wie sie im Rahmen der Digital Humanities oft verfolgt wird.
                
            Das lässt sich gut am Beispiel der Literaturwissenschaft illustrieren: Digitale Methoden werden bisher vornehmlich von Literaturwissenschaftlern genutzt, die an strukturellen oder anderen formalen Aspekten literarischer Texte interessiert sind (beispielsweise an narrativen Strukturen, Figurennetzwerken etc.).
            
            Ihrem traditionellen Selbstverständnis nach ist die Literaturwissenschaft allerdings zentral an komplexen und innovativen 
                    Interpretationen literarischer Texte interessiert – und wie diese durch digitale Methoden der Textanalyse befördert werden können, ist nicht evident.
                
            Damit digitale Methoden eine breitere Akzeptanz finden, ist es deswegen notwendig, den Nutzen dieser Methoden auch für stärker hermeneutisch ausgerichtete geisteswissenschaftliche Forschungsfragen zu reflektieren. Unserem (weiten) Verständnis von “Hermeneutik” entsprechend handelt es sich bei hermeneutischen Forschungsfragen um Fragen, die auf die (holistische) Auslegung bzw. Deutung von Texten gerichtet sind (vgl. bspw. Spörl 2004: 128). In literaturwissenschaftlichen Zusammenhängen spielen dabei insbesondere Fragen nach Funktion bzw. Wirkung bestimmter Textelemente oder des Gesamttextes eine Rolle, ebenso wie die In-Beziehung-Setzung des Textes mit bestimmten Kontexten. Diese Forschungsfragen sollten exponiert im Zusammenhang mit der Entwicklung von Tools, digitaler Forschungsumgebungen und vor allem didaktischer Konzepte zur Vermittlung von DH-Methoden berücksichtigt werden. Diese Forderungen werden bisher jedoch nicht in zureichendem Maße erfüllt.
            
            Wir möchten in diesem Beitrag das aktuelle Projekt forTEXT (2017–2020) vorstellen, das der Vermittlung, Aufbereitung und Bereitstellung von Mitteln zur computergestützten Textanalyse insbesondere für hermeneutisch arbeitende Geisteswissenschaftler gewidmet ist. Im Folgenden sollen in diesem Zusammenhang zunächst die unterschiedlichen konzeptionellen Dimensionen (Abschnitt 2) sowie anschließend erste inhaltliche Ergebnisse des Projekts präsentiert werden (Abschnitt 3).
         
         
            Dimensionen des forTEXT-Projekts
            
               Paradigmen
               Das Anfang 2017 gestartete DFG-Projekt 
                        forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen (http://www.fortext.net) hat die Entwicklung einer digitalen Forschungsumgebung zum Ziel, die im Rahmen der qualitativen Analyse und Interpretation von Texten genutzt werden kann. Das Augenmerk bei der Gestaltung dieser Umgebung liegt insbesondere auf zwei Aspekten:
                    
               (a) Orientierung an genuin geisteswissenschaftlichen Arbeitsweisen: Es geht, ganz im Sinne des geisteswissenschaftlichen Selbstverständnisses, um die Unterstützung der genuin 
                        interpretativen Auseinandersetzung mit Texten. In anderen Worten: forTEXTs Fokus liegt 
                        nicht ausschließlich auf der statistischen Auswertung von Texten, wie es sonst im Rahmen von DH-Methoden zur Textanalyse oft der Fall ist.
                         Auf diese Weise soll gewährleistet werden, dass traditioneller arbeitende Geisteswissenschaftler die Umgebung tatsächlich zur digitalen Unterstützung vertrauter Methoden der Textanalyse und -interpretation nutzen können und ihnen keine Hinwendung zur statistischen Textanalyse abverlangt wird.
                    
               (b) Niedrigschwelliger Zugang: Geisteswissenschaftler sollen die digitale Forschungsumgebung 
                        intuitiv und weitgehend ohne technische Vorkenntnisse nutzen können. Hierzu trägt zum einen die Tatsache bei, dass forTEXT ein individualisiertes Empfehlungssystem zur Verfügung stellt, das geisteswissenschaftlichen Nutzern Vorschläge unterbreitet, welche digitalen Ressourcen, Routinen und Tools für ihr Projekt hilfreich sein könnten (siehe auch Abschnitt 2.2). Nutzer werden also nicht einfach mit einem unüberschaubaren digitalen Angebot alleingelassen, dessen potenziellen Nutzen für die eigene Fragestellung sie sich erst noch selbst erschließen müssen. Zum anderen stellt forTEXT leicht verständliche Beschreibungen zu digitalen Methoden und Korpora zur Verfügung, ebenso wie intuitiv bedienbare Benutzeroberflächen für digitale Werkzeuge zur Textanalyse und -interpretation (siehe auch Abschnitt 2.3). Auf diese Weise können DH-Methoden ohne technisches Know-how sowie ohne das aufwändige Studieren von Nutzerhandbüchern eingesetzt werden.
                    
               In den folgenden Unterabschnitten sollen sowohl forTEXTs Empfehlungssystem als auch die drei Komponenten des Informationsrepositoriums (
                        Routinen, Ressourcen und Tools) kurz etwas detaillierter vorgestellt werden.
                    
            
            
               Individualisiertes Empfehlungssystem
               Für Geisteswissenschaftler, die noch nicht wissen, auf welche Weise digitale Methoden der Textanalyse und -interpretation ihre eigene Forschung unterstützen können, bietet forTEXT ein individualisiertes Empfehlungssystem in Form eines digitalen Fragebogens an (siehe Abb. 1).
               
                  
                  Abb. 1: forTEXTs individualisiertes Empfehlungssystem für digitale Textuntersuchung (Ausschnitt des Prototyps)
               
               Hier können die Nutzer beispielsweise angeben, ob sie schon Vorerfahrungen mit digitalen Methoden der Textanalyse gemacht haben, in welchem Zustand sich ihr Textkorpus befindet, unter welcher Fragestellung sie ihre Texte untersuchen wollen und welcher literaturtheoretischen Schule sie sich zuordnen. Als Output erhalten die Forscher, angepasst an die von ihnen gemachten Angaben, eine Liste mit Vorschlägen zu digitalen Korpora, Methoden und Werkzeugen, die zu ihrer Fragestellung und Arbeitsweise passen. Das Empfehlungssystem also eine individualisierte Kompilation aus forTEXTs Inhalten und Verzeichnissen, die im Folgenden kurz vorgestellt werden sollen.
                    
            
            
               Routinen, Ressourcen und Tools
               forTEXTs digitale Forschungsumgebung ist in drei Bereiche gegliedert.
               (a) Routinen: Im Teilbereich 
                        Routinen finden sich zum einen Informationstexte zu digitalen Methoden, die der Analyse und Interpretation von Texten dienen (bspw. zu taxonomiebasiertem Annotieren, zur Textanalyse mittels individualisierter Abfragen auf Text- und Annotationsdaten, zu Topic Modeling etc.), sowie zu vorbereitenden Prozeduren wie der Digitalisierung von Texten. In diesen Informationstexten finden sich darüber hinaus Links zu digitalen Tools (s.u.), mithilfe derer die fraglichen Methoden ausgeführt werden können.
                    
               Zum anderen werden unter 
                        Routinen auch didaktische Texte (d.h. Lerneinheiten und Lehrmodule) zur Verfügung gestellt. Die Lerneinheiten dienen der selbstständigen Aneignung bestimmter digitaler Methoden und Tools, während die Lehrmodule didaktisches Material für Lehrende zur Verfügung stellen, die auf 90-minütige Workshopsituationen zugeschnitten sind (siehe auch Abschnitt 3). Die Entwicklung neuer Lehrmodule wird sich dabei an den im Projektverlauf akquirierten Bedarfen der Nutzer orientieren.
                    
               (b) Ressourcen: Unter 
                        Ressourcen ist ein Verzeichnis digital nutzbarer Korpora zu finden. Hierunter fallen sowohl hochqualitativ digitalisierte Textkorpora als auch inhaltlich annotierte Korpora, die nachgenutzt werden können. Einige annotierte Korpora werden im Rahmen von forTEXT selbst bzw. affiliierten Projekten produziert. Das Verzeichnis enthält darüber hinaus informative Beschreibungen der gelisteten Ressourcen.
                    
               (c) Tools: Im Bereich 
                        Tools findet sich schließlich eine kommentierte Liste digitaler Werkzeug-Suites bzw. Funktionskomponenten, mithilfe derer unterschiedliche textanalytische und -interpretatorische Operationen durchgeführt oder unterstützt werden können. Darüber hinaus sollen in forTEXT auch eigene Funktionskomponenten entwickelt werden. Hierzu gehört vornehmlich die Weiterentwicklung des Textannotations- und Analyseprogramms CATMA (
                        http://www.catma.de) – aber auch die Entwicklung von graphischen Step-by-step-Benutzerschnittstellen für bestehende Tools. Dies soll es technisch weniger versierten geisteswissenschaftlichen Nutzern ermöglichen, hochfunktionale Tools einzusetzen, ohne sich umfangreich einarbeiten zu müssen.
                    
               Alle Verzeichnisse und Einträge aus den drei forTEXT-Bereichen Routinen, Ressourcen und Tools können von Nutzern eigenständig durchsucht und aufgerufen werden – oder es erfolgt ein angeleiteter Zugriff durch die Nutzung des Empfehlungssystems.
               Im verbleibenden Teil dieses Beitrags möchten wir etwas genauer auf einen Lehrmodulentwurf eingehen, das dem forTEXT-Bereich 
                        Routinen zuzuordnen ist. Anhand dieses Moduls soll beispielhaft gezeigt werden, wie in forTEXT die Paradigmen der Orientierung an einer genuin geisteswissenschaftlichen Arbeitsweise und des niedrigschwelligen Zugangs umgesetzt werden.
                    
            
         
         
            Lehrmodule Manuelles Annotieren
            Zwei von forTEXTs 90-minütigen Lehrmodulen sind der Vermittlung der digitalen Methode des 
                    manuellen Annotierens gewidmet. Die Methode des Annotierens stellt einen guten Brückenschlag zur traditionelleren geisteswissenschaftlichen Arbeitsweise dar – schließlich gehört das Anbringen von Notizen in zu interpretierenden literarischen Texten seit jeher zur literaturwissenschaftlichen Arbeitspraxis. In den Lehrmodulen zum 
                    digitalen Annotieren gilt es nun, zum einen an die bereits bekannte Praxis anzuknüpfen und zum anderen deutlich zu machen, inwiefern die digitale Unterstützung es ermöglicht, bekannte Arbeitsprozesse deutlich effektiver durchzuführen, oder gar ganz neue Arbeitsweisen eröffnet, die das jeweilige Forschungsziel befördern.
                
            Um diese Anforderungen umzusetzen, sieht forTEXT zwei Lehreinheiten zum manuellen Annotieren vor, von denen wir die erste im Folgenden kurz vorstellen möchten.
            In der Einheit Taxonomiebasiertes Annotieren wird schrittweise gezeigt, wie mithilfe des Annotations- und Analysetools CATMA freie Kommentare in literarischen Texten angebracht sowie analysiert und systematisiert werden können. Die Systematisierung freier Kommentare kann wiederum als Grundlage dienen, um eine Annotationstaxonomie zu entwickeln, die dann für eine noch feinere und zielgerichtetere Analyse des literarischen Textes genutzt werden kann.
                
            Das verwendete Programm CATMA ist hierbei in zweifacher Hinsicht auf die forTEXT-Paradigmen abgestimmt: Es bietet eine intuitiv bedienbare Benutzeroberfläche und unterstützt den freien, undogmatischen und genuin interpretativen Zugang zu Texten, während es zugleich Optionen stärkerer Formalisierung bereithält (vgl. Abb. 2).
            
            
               
               Abb. 2: Intuitives, nicht-deterministisches Annotieren in CATMA
            
            Die im Rahmen des Lehrmoduls verfolgte didaktische Strategie hat mehrere Vorteile: Der erste Schritt, d.h. das digitale Anbringen freier Kommentare, stellt einen vollkommen explorativen und potenziell unstrukturierten Zugang zu literarischen Texten dar. Er erzwingt also kein formalistisches Umdenken und bildet die traditionellere geisteswissenschaftlich-hermeneutische Arbeitsweise gut ab. Im Vergleich zum analogen Arbeiten birgt er aber dennoch den Vorteil, dass die freien Kommentare durch digitale Unterstützung effektiver 
                    nachgenutzt werden können.
                
            Als zusätzliches Angebot an Literaturwissenschaftler, die für eine etwas stärkere Formalisierung ihres Zugangs offen sind, zeigt das Lehrmodul, welche weiteren Vorteile und Optionen 
                    taxonomiebasiertes Annotieren mit sich bringt (bspw. bessere Vergleichbarkeit, detailliertere und vereinfachte Analyse, ggf. Reproduzierbarkeit etc.) und wie dieses digital umgesetzt werden kann. Diese Herangehensweise kann in der Folge auch die Nützlichkeit noch stärker formalistisch anmutender DH-Techniken plausibilisieren – wie beispielsweise der kollaborativen, guidelinegestützten Annotation oder der automatisierten Annotation bzw. Informationsextraktion.
                
            Im Lehrmodul zum manuellen digitalen Annotieren sind also die Paradigmen umgesetzt, die auch die weitere Arbeit am forTEXT-Projekt bestimmen sollen: Durch stärkere Orientierung an der traditionell-geisteswissenschaftlichen Arbeitsweise und erleichterten Zugang können digitale Methoden einer breiteren Nutzergemeinschaft nähergebracht werden.
         
      
      
         
             Wir werden aufgrund besserer Lesbarkeit im Folgenden nur noch die männliche Form verwenden – unsere Ausführungen beziehen sich aber selbstverständlich dennoch auf alle Geschlechter.
             Auf diese persistente Skepsis verweisen beispielsweise auch Fiedler und Weiß in ihrem Tagungsbericht zur DHd-Konferenz 2015 in Graz (vgl. Fiedler/Weiß 2015).
             Beispiele hierfür sind u.a. die folgenden Projekte aus dem Bereich der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft: “heureCLÉA”, ein Projekt zur automatischen Annotation von Zeitphänomenen in narrativen Texten (
                            
                                http://www.heureclea.de
                            , vgl. Bögel et al. 2015); “Redewiedergabe. Eine literatur- und sprachwissenschaftliche Korpusanalyse”, ein Projekt zur automatisierten Annotation von Figurenrede (
                            
                                http://www.redewiedergabe.de
                            , vgl. auch Brunner 2015); die “Computational Stylistics Group” (
                            
                                https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics
                            , vgl. Rybicki/Eder/Hoover 2016); das “Rhythmicalizer”-Projekt (
                            
                                http://www.rhythmicalizer.net
                            , vgl. Baumann/Meyer-Sickendiek 2016), das ein Tool zur Erkennung von Prosodie in freien Versen entwickelt; ebenso wie Projekte zur Analyse von Figurennetzwerken wie etwa “Digital Literary Network Analysis” (
                            
                                https://dlina.github.io/about
                            , vgl. Fischer et al. 2017).
                        
             So betonen beispielsweise Kindt und Köppe, dass literaturwissenschaftliche Interpretationen weniger auf strukturelle Aspekte oder bloßes Sprachverstehen gerichtet sind als vielmehr auf mannigfaltige, komplexe und oft nicht eindeutig umrissene Verstehensziele (vgl. Kindt/Köppe 2008: 12–14).
             So sind beispielsweise bestehende Verzeichnisse für Tools zur Textanalyse aufgrund der vornehmlich technisch ausgerichteten Beschreibungen für Geisteswissenschaftler ohne DH-Vorwissen äußerst schwer zugänglich (z.B. TAPoR, 
                            
                                http://www.tapor.ca
                            ). Einen vielversprechenden Ansatz zur nutzbaren Aufbereitung und Vermittlung digitaler Methoden – allerdings vornehmlich in schulischen Kontexten – stellt das Projekt “Digitalität in den Fachdidaktiken” dar (
                            
                                http://dhd-blog.org/?p=6812
                            ).
                        
             So basieren zahlreiche DH-Praktiken zur Textanalyse auf der automatischen Verarbeitung von Textoberflächendaten wie Wortfrequenzen, beispielsweise stilometrische Untersuchungen oder Topic Modeling (vgl. Brett 2012).
             Der Fragebogen bietet Nutzern zudem die Option, auf fehlende Antwort- oder sogar Fragemöglichkeiten hinzuweisen. Auf diese Weise kann der Fragebogen – und mit ihm forTEXTs Empfehlungssystem – im Laufe des Projekts weiter optimiert werden.
             Affiliierte Projekte sind beispielsweise “3DH” (
                                
                                    http://www.threedh.net
                                ) und “SANTA: Shared Task on the Analysis of Narrative levels Through Annotation” (
                                
                                    https://sharedtasksinthedh.github.io/
                                ), in deren Rahmen narrative Ebenen in Texten annotiert werden.
                            
             Ein Vorbild hierfür ist der bereits in CATMA integrierte “Query Builder”, mithilfe dessen Nutzer komplexe Abfragen über Text- und Annotationsdaten laufen lassen können, ohne eine Abfragesprache lernen zu müssen.
             Vgl. bspw. Bauer/Zirker 2015: Absatz 1.
             So hat sich CATMA beispielsweise dem Konzept des 
                            hermeneutischen Markups verschrieben – darunter verstehen wir nach Piez Markup das bewusst interpretativ und flexibel ist (vgl. Piez 2010). Auf diese Weise erlaubt CATMA beispielsweise mehrfache und sogar “widersprüchliche” Annotationen derselben Textstelle – dennoch sind die Annotationen im standardisierten TEI-Format exportierbar und somit flexibel nachnutzbar. Diese Markup-Eigenschaften werden im Backend ermöglicht durch Standoff-Markup und die Nutzung von TEI Feature Structures (
                            
                                http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/de/html/FS.html
                            ).
                        
             Vgl. zu den Vorteilen von Klassifikationssystemen wie Taxonomien und Typologien auch Bailey 1994.
             Zur Methode und zum Nutzen kollaborativen Annotierens, siehe auch Gius/Jacke 2015 und Gius/Jacke 2017.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bailey, Kenneth D. (1994): 
                        Typologies and Taxonomies. An Introduction to Classification Techniques. Thousand Oaks/London/New Delhi: Sage Publications.
                    
               
                  Bauer, Matthias / Zirker, Angelika (2015): “Whipping Boys Explained. Literary Annotation and Digital Humanities”, in: 
                        MLA Commons. Literary Studies in the Digital Age
                  
                            https://dlsanthology.mla.hcommons.org/whipping-boys-explained-literary-annotation-and-digital-humanities/
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Baumann, Timo / Meyer-Sickendiek, Burkhard (2016): “Large-scale Analysis of Spoken Free-verse Poetry”, in:
                         Proceedings of LT4DH-Workshop 2016
                  
                            http://edoc.sub.uni-hamburg.de/informatik/volltexte/2016/228/pdf/baumann_large_scale_analysis.pdf
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Bögel, Thomas / Gertz, Michael / Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina / Meister, Jan Christoph / Petris, Marco / Strötgen, Jannik (2015): “Collaborative Text Annotation Meets Machine Learning. heureCLÉA, a Digital Heuristic of Narrative”, in: 
                        DHCommons Journal 1 
                        
                            http://dhcommons.org/journal/issue-1/collaborative-text-annotation-meets-machine-learning-heurecl%C3%A9-digital-heuristic
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Brett, Megan R. (2012): “Topic Modeling. A Basic Introduction”, in: 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities 2(1) 
                        
                            http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-a-basic-introduction-by-megan-r-brett/
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Brunner, Annelen (2015): 
                        Automatische Erkennung von Redewiedergabe. Berlin / Boston: de Gruyter (= Narratologia Bd. 47).
                    
               
                  Fiedler, Maik / Weiß, Andreas (2015): “Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen. Digitale Geisteswissenschaften als Mittler zwischen Information und Interpretation. DHd-Jahrestagung 2015” 
                        
                            http://www.hsozkult.de/conferencereport/id/tagungsberichte-6059
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Fischer, Frank / Göbel, Mathias / Kampkaspar, Dario / Kittel, Christopher / Trilcke, Peer (2017): “Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis. Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts”, in: 
                        Digital Humanities 2017. Conference Abstracts  
                        
                            https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/DH2017-abstracts.pdf
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina (2015): “Informatik und Hermeneutik. Zum Mehrwert interdisziplinärer Textanalyse”, in: 
                        Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, Sonderband 1 
                        
                            http://www.zfdg.de/sb001_006
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina (2017): “The Hermeneutic Profit of Annotation. On Preventing and Fostering Disagreement in Literary Analysis”, in: 
                        International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 11(2) 233–254.
                    
               
                  Kindt, Tom / Köppe, Tilmann (2008): “Einleitung”, in: dies. (eds.): 
                        Moderne Interpretationstheorien. Ein Reader. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 7–26.
                    
               
                  Piez, Wendell (2010): “Towards Hermeneutic Markup. An Architectural Outline”, in: 
                        Digital Humanities 2010. Conference Abstracts
                  
                            http://piez.org/wendell/papers/dh2010/
                         [letzter Zugriff 06. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Rybicki, Jan / Eder, Maciej / Hoover, David (2016): “Computational stylistics and text analysis”, in: Crompton, Constance / Lane, Richard J. / Siemens, Ray (eds.): 
                        Doing Digital Humanities. London / New York: Routledge 123–144.
                    
               
                  Spörl, Uwe (2004): 
                        Basislexikon Literaturwissenschaft. 2., durchges. Aufl. Paderborn [u.a.]: Schöningh.
                    
               
                  Websites
               
               
                  3DH (http://www.threedh.net)
                    
               
                  CATMA (http://www.catma.de) 
                    
               
                  Computational Stylistics Group (https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics)
                    
               
                  Digital Literary Network Analysis (https://dlina.github.io/about)
                    
               
                  Digitalität in den Fachdidaktiken. Projektpräsentation im DHd-Blog (
                        
                            http://dhd-blog.org/?p=6812)
                    
               
                  forTEXT (http://www.fortext.net)
                    
               
                  heureCLÉA (http://www.heureclea.de)
                    
               
                  Redewiedergabe (http://www.redewiedergabe.de)
                    
               
                  Rhythmicalizer (http://www.rhythmicalizer.net)
                    
               
                  
                     SANTA: Shared Task on the Analysis of Narrative levels Through Annotation (
                  https://sharedtasksinthedh.github.io/
                  )
               
               
                  TAPoR (http://www.tapor.ca)
                    
               
                  TEI Feature Structures (http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/de/html/FS.html)
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die Postkarte als Forschungsobjekt
            Denkt man an Postkarten, denkt man zunächst an Urlaub und Landschaftsmotive aus fernen Ländern. Die aktuelle Nutzung der Postkarte unterscheidet sich jedoch stark von der vor über hundert Jahren. Postkarten waren ein weit verbreitetes Kommunikationsmittel, vergleichbar mit Kurznachrichtendiensten von heute. Sie wurden aber auch gesammelt und getauscht. So vielfältig wie ihr Gebrauch ist auch ihre Nutzung in der geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschung. Postkarten werden seit den 1980er Jahren, als die Ethnologie sie zunächst für Kolonialismusforschungen vermehrt nutzte, als Quelle unterschiedlicher geisteswissenschaftlicher Disziplinen herangezogen. Mittlerweile dient das Massenmedium Postkarte dazu, Fragen aus der Geschichtswissenschaft, Sozial-, wie Kunst- und Fotografiegeschichte, den Literaturwissenschaften oder der Linguistik zu beantworten. Wurde zunächst in erster Linie bildwissenschaftlich gearbeitet, wird in den letzten zwanzig Jahren auch vermehrt auf die Relevanz der Postkarte als Bild-Text-Medium hingewiesen. Doch nicht nur die Motive dieses Hybridmediums, das zugleich Bild und Text beinhaltet, sondern auch die Natur des Massenmediums an sich, die Herstellung, der Vertrieb, die Zirkulation im politisch-gesellschaftlichen Kontext, Drucktechniken oder Auflagen sind für Forschungsfragen relevant (vgl. Holzer 2007, Tropper 2014).
            Insbesondere im Hinblick auf die letzten beiden Aspekte ermöglichen die digitalen Geisteswissenschaften neue Forschungsperspektiven. Aufbauend auf digitalisierte und strukturiert erfasste Konvolute können anhand digitaler Methoden statistische Auswertungen, quantitative Analysen und qualitative Untersuchungen durchgeführt werden.
         
         
            Das Projekt
            Das Projekt “Postkartensammlung GrazMuseum Online” zeigt, welche Wege für die Postkartenforschung denkbar sind, da im Projekt der Quellenwert der Postkarte an sich und die Aufbereitung für unterschiedliche Disziplinen im Mittelpunkt stehen. Zentrales Anliegen ist es, bildbasierte ebenso wie textbasierte Analysen zu gewährleisten und die Materialität der Postkarte - als Objekt, das produziert und gebraucht wurde, ernst zu nehmen. In diesem Sinne werden im Unterschied zu den meisten Postkarten, die online gezeigt werden (vgl. AKON, Bildarchiv ETH Schweiz), nicht nur die Bild-, sondern auch die Textseite präsentiert. Dadurch wird über bildwissenschaftliche Fragestellungen hinaus ein ganzheitlicher Blick auf das Medium und seine Verwendungsweisen ermöglicht. Für eine inhaltliche Recherche sind die Postkarten mit Schlagworten angereichert, wodurch thematische Zugänge - etwa zu einer Geschichte des Tourismus oder des Verkehrs möglich sind. Ebenso erfasst sind die Reproduktionsverfahren, die für Untersuchungen zu Druck- oder Fototechniken herangezogen werden können und auch Rückschlüsse auf Auflagenhöhe erlauben. Daneben sind auch die Produzenten der Karten erfasst. Damit ist erstmals die Möglichkeit gegeben, zielgerichtet nach Herstellern zu suchen und so auch einen Einblick in deren Sortimente und Produktionsweisen zu erhalten. 
            Für jede Postkarte gibt es einen Datensatz, der die zugehörigen Digitalisate und Metadaten beinhaltet und im digitalen Archiv GAMS (GAMS; Steiner/Stigler 2017) langfristig verfügbar gemacht wird.
            Der Zugang zum Bestand erfolgt über klassische Suchmöglichkeiten (Volltext- und Facettensuche), Schlagwortwolken, geographische Karten (DARIAH GeoBrowser) und virtuelle Rundgänge (StoryMapJS). Die digitalen Faksimiles können stufenlos gezoomt und gedreht werden (OpenSeadragon Viewer), wodurch unterschiedliche Leserichtungen oder etwa Details im Bildmotiv betrachtet werden können. Anhand der Faksimile der Text- oder Adressseite werden auch Informationen vermittelt, die bei der Aufnahme der Metadaten im Zuge des Projektes nicht erfasst werden konnten (z.B. Schriftbilder oder Postwertzeichen).
         
         
            
               Herausforderungen in der Datenmodellierung
                
            Bei der Datenmodellierung steht man vor der Entscheidung, aus welcher Richtung man sich der Beschreibung der Postkarte nähern will. Auf der einen Seite steht die Mitteilung, die Text beinhaltet, der transkribiert, annotiert und angereichert werden kann. Auf der anderen Seite steht das Objekt, das unter spezifischen Gesichtspunkten eingeordnet, bewertet und inventarisiert wird. Dafür bieten sich zwei etablierte Standards an: LIDO und TEI. Letzteres eignet sich speziell für den Zugang über textuelle Inhalte.
                     LIDO ist ein Standardformat, das eigens für die Beschreibung von Kulturerbeobjekten, ihre Klassifikation, Identifikation und Einbindung von in Bezug stehenden Ereignissen (Entstehung, Nutzung, Archivierung, ...), entwickelt wurde. Für tiefere Texterschließungen ist dieser Standard nicht geeignet.
                     Da im Projekt die Beschreibung der Postkarte aus museologischer Sicht im Vordergrund steht und sich das Modellierungskonzept der Events (insb. für Postläufe) anbietet, sind die Daten nach LIDO modelliert und annotiert. Für Transkriptionen handschriftlicher Mitteilungen, die im skalierbaren Modell für spätere Bearbeitungen angedacht sind, ist das Schema um TEI Lite erweitert. Sollte künftig Text detaillierter kodiert werden, als TEI Lite es zuläßt, ist die Textedition in einem separaten TEI-Dokument angedacht.
                
         
         
            
               Fazit
                
            Anhand digitaler Methoden eröffnen sich neue Wege für das Hybrid- und Massenmedium “Postkarte”. Will man bei der Datenmodellierung dem ganzheitlichen Blick gerecht werden, erkennt man bald, dass die Einbeziehung mehrerer Standards nötig ist. Denn auch wenn man zunächst dazu tendiert sich an die Restriktionen eines Standards zu halten, bieten genau die digitalen Methoden den enormen Vorteil, dass man sich von mehreren Richtungen dem Objekt nähern kann. Auch wenn spätestens die Europeana zu der Entscheidung IMAGE oder TEXT zwingt.
         
      
      
         
             Zur weiteren Beschreibung von Postkarten mit der TEI s. Correspondance-SIG, Burnard, Lou 2014.
             Obwohl das Element  für die strukturierte Erfassung von Transkriptionen und Beschreibungen von Markierungen oder Texten etc. definiert ist, ist das nur sehr oberflächlich möglich.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  AKON - Ansichtskarten Online der Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek, 
                        , [letzter Zugriff 2017-08-29].
                    
               
                  Bildarchiv ETH Schweiz, 
                        http://ba.e-pics.ethz.ch, [letzter Zugriff 2017-08-29].
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou (2014): TEI ODD workshop - Case Study: designing a TEI customization for a corpus of postcards, 
                        , [letzter Zugriff 2017-09-22].
                    
               
                  GAMS - Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System, 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at, [letzter Zugriff 2017-08-29].
                    
               
                  Holzer, Anton (2007): Naserümpfend am Postkartenstand. Was Ansichtskarten erzählen können (wenn man sie lässt), in: Hochreiter, Otto / Otti, Margareth (eds.): Hier ist es schön. Grazer Ansichtskarten. Ausstellungskatalog Stadtmuseum Graz, Salzburg: Fotohof (= Fotohof edition 93) 75-87.
               
                  LIDO - Lightweight Information Describing Objects, 
                        , [letzter Zugriff 2017-09-22].ademic press 10-41.
                    
               
                  Postkartensammlung GrazMuseum Online, 
                        , [letzter Zugriff 2017-08-29].
                    
               
                  Steiner, Elisabeth / Stigler, Johannes (2014): GAMS and Cirilo Client: Policies, documentation and tutorial, latest update 2017-04-10, 
                        , [letzter Zugriff 2017-09-22].
                    
               
                  TEI - Text Encoding Initiative, http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml, [letzter Zugriff 2017-08-29].
               
                  Tropper, Eva (2014): Illustrierte Postkarten - ein Format entsteht und verändert sich, in: Tropper, Eva / Starl, Timm (eds.): Format Postkarte - Illustrierte Korrespondenzen, 1900 bis 1936, Wien: new academic press.
            
         
      
   



      
         
         
            Goals of the workshop
            The workshop presents ATHEN
                     (Annotation and 
                    Text 
                    Highlighting 
                    Environment), an extensible desktop-based annotation environment which supports more than just regular annotation. Besides being a general purpose annotation environment, ATHEN supports indexing and querying support of your data as well as the ability to automatically preprocess your data with Meta information. It is especially suited for those who want to extend existing general purpose annotation tools by implementing their own custom features, which cannot be fulfilled by other available annotation environments. On the according gitlab, we provide online tutorials, which demonstrate the use of specific features of ATHEN.
                
         
         
            Related Work
            We compare ATHEN to three web-based and four desktop applications in 12 categories by adapting most criteria defined by Neves and Leser (Neves / Leser 2012) to compare different annotation tools:
            
               Availability and up-to-dateness of the documentation
               Active development at the present time
               Source code for download
               Complexity of system requirements
               Interoperability by supporting certain formats
               Support of different annotation layers
               Support of NLP-preprocessing to speed up manual annotation
               Support of visualization
               Support of self-learning systems to speed up manual annotation
               Support of querying annotated data
               Possibility to do an inter-annotator-agreement, this is important for projects, in which more than one annotator labels the same documents
               Extensibility 
            
            We explicitly do not want to compare subjective features like usability or how the annotations are presented.
            
               
               Table 1: Comparison of three web-based and four desktop applications with ATHEN in twelve categories. No tool excels in every category.
            
            All of the listed tools have an accessible documentation, either web-based or as a PDF, available for download. Besides UAM (O'Donnell 2008), every other application is listed as open source, so at least extensions based on code level can be made. WebAnno (Yimam et al. 2013) is the only application having a tutorial supporting a new developer to make changes in their project. ATHEN stands out in the sense that extensions to its UI can be made at runtime, therefore easing the process of adding functionality to it. WebAnno supports the largest number of formats and comes with a machine learning based automatic annotation, however lacks integrated NLP-preprocessing. CATMA (Meister 2017) is the only project that has a very good visualization component and also supports TEI-XML (Wittern et al 2009), the unspoken standard of text processing. Being a standalone web application, CATMA itself does not support NLP-preprocessing. ATHEN comes with the support of the execution of UIMA analysis engines, accessible from web repositories or a local repository, giving the user a chance to integrate her custom-made annotators. Four tools, ATHEN, UAM, MMAX2 (Müller / Strube 2006) and CATMA feature an integrated query language which helps to analyze existing corpora. Most tools allow the annotation of user-defined annotation schemas earning therefore the title “generic annotation tool”. Alongside UAM, ATHEN supports the annotation based on queries, while UAM defines its own language, ATHEN supports the annotation using Apache UIMA Ruta (Kluegl et al. 2016) rules. Three of the listed tools, MMAX2, Knowtator (Ogren 2006) and WordFreak (Morton / LaCivita 2003) are currently no longer in active development. 
         
         
            Brief technological description of ATHEN
            ATHEN is a Java-based desktop application with the vision to be extensible. Therefore, it makes use of the flexible plugin architecture of the eclipse 
                    Rich-
                    Client-
                    Platform (RCP)
                    . Internally, it is built around Apache UIMA, which means incoming data is automatically converted into the UIMA specific Common Analysis Subject (CAS) architecture. Working with UIMA allows the integration of standalone analysis engines, which can be used to preprocess data and speed up manual annotation. The use of Apache Lucene enables ATHEN to create an index comprising documents, as well as their annotations, which results in queries that can answer questions based on text and meta information in real time. With the ability to execute Apache UIMA Ruta one can even create queries of far higher complexity. On top of that, ATHEN features OWL-Support, which allows the definition of an ontological annotation schema in a machine- readable format. Using Apache UIMA internally allows ATHEN to even address more complicated input. Currently ATHEN supports the annotation of image regions, based on user defined polygons.
                
         
         
            Program of the workshop
            The program is split into four sections:
            
               Introduction to ATHEN and distinguishing from other existing annotation environments.
               Working with ATHEN, which contains the definition of scenarios and annotating sample documents.
               Utility of ATHEN (beyond regular annotation), which addresses the following topics:
                       
                     Defining an annotation schema using OWL
                     Preprocessing texts based on Apache UIMA Analysis Engines
                     Creating and executing queries based on Apache Lucene
                     Annotating images with ATHEN
                  
               
               Extending ATHENs functionalities and adapting it to your needs (developer specific)
            
            The first section is a presentation which shows the main differences between the existing annotation tools. The second section defines an ordinary annotation scenario and it is used to introduce the participants to the general-purpose annotation view of ATHEN. Afterwards, for tasks to which ATHEN has special support (annotating character references and their coreferences, annotating direct speech and their speaker) an introduction to the special purpose views of ATHEN is given.
            The third panel introduces the participants to the functionality of ATHEN beyond regular text annotation. It starts with the definition of an OWL ontology (and its utilization for texts). This is centered on relation detection of character references, as well as an attribution of those references.
            To speed up manual annotation it is helpful to have it preprocessed with existing tools. The task definition is then changed from pure annotation to an application with a consecutive correction of the output of the automatic engines. In this context, Nappi, a submodule of ATHEN is presented and it is shown how to define, execute and integrate custom analysis engines. 
            The next part is dedicated towards extracting knowledge from annotated data, for this purpose, an Apache Lucene Index is created using ATHEN and is queried in a live fashion. This feature allows rapid insight into an existing corpus and enables the user to answer their own hypothesis.
            The tutorial continues with the presentation of how images can be annotated with polygon-based annotations to show, that ATHEN is not only limited to textual resources.
            The last part is directed towards Java developers who are interested in developing their own annotation component.
            Each section starts with a set of slides which introduce the features in focus and presents the participants with one or more tasks that can be fulfilled by using ATHEN.
         
         
            Requirements
            The participants need their own laptops with an active internet connection. The number of participants is limited to 15 to 20. The last section requires knowledge of Java. Data which is necessary for the tutorials will be hosted on our own server and will be made accessible for download.
         
         
            Research projects
            ATHEN is mainly developed in the context of the project Kallimachos at the University of Wuerzburg. Its main purpose was to support the annotation process of DROC (
                    Deutscher 
                    ROman 
                    Corpus). Currently automatic creation of literary interaction networks, automatic genre detection of novels and sentiment analysis in literary novels are in the focus of interest.
                
            An extension to ATHEN was made in the project “Redewiedergabe” to manually annotate different forms of speech, thought and writing representation (STWR). These annotations will then be used to train an automatic recognizer for STWR.
         
      
      
         
            
               https://gitlab2.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/kallimachos/Athen
            
            A web version of ATHEN with its major features is available at: 
                            https://webathen.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Kluegl, Peter / Toepfer, Martin / Beck, Philip-Daniel / Fette, Georg / Puppe, Frank (2016): “UIMA Ruta: Rapid Development of Rule-based Information Extraction Applications“, in: 
                        Natural Language Engineering 22.1 1-41.
                    
               
                  Meister, Jan Christoph / Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina / Petris, Marco: 
                        CATMA 5.0.
                  http://catma.de/ [Accessed September 22, 2017].
                    
               
                  Morton, Thomas / LaCivita, Jeremy (2003): “WordFreak: an open tool for linguistic annotation“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology: Demonstrations-Volume 4 17-18.
                    
               
                  Müller, Christoph / Strube, Michael (2006): “Multi-level annotation of linguistic data with MMAX“, in
                        : Corpus technology and language pedagogy: New resources, new tools, new methods 3 197-214.
                    
               
                  Neves, Mariana / Leser, Ulf (2012): “A survey on annotation tools for the biomedical literature“, in: 
                        Briefings in Bioinformatics 15.2 327-340.
                    
               
                  O'Donnell, Mick (2008): “Demonstration of the UAM CorpusTool for text and image annotation“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 46th annual meeting of the Association for computational linguistics on human language technologies: Demo session 13-16.
                    
               
                  Ogren, Philip V. (2006): “Knowtator: a Protégé plug-in for annotated corpus construction“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 2006 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology: companion volume: demonstrations 273-275.
                    
               
                  Stenetorp, Pontus / Pyysalo, Sampo / Topić, Goran / Ohta, Tomoko / Ananiadou, Sophia / Tsujii, Jun’ichi (2012): “BRAT: a Web-based Tool for NLP-Assisted Text Annotation“, in : 
                        Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 102-107.
                    
               
                  Wittern, Christian / Ciula, Arianna / Tuohy, Conal (2009): “The making of TEI P5“, in: 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 24.3 281-296.
                    
               
                  Yimam, Seid Muhie / Gurevych, Iryna / de Castilho, Richard Eckart / Biemann, Chris (2013): “WebAnno: A Flexible, Web-based and Visually Supported System for Distributed Annotations“, in: 
                        Proceedings of ACL-2013, demo session, Sofia, Bulgaria 1-6
                        .
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Zusammenfassung
            Ziel der hier vorgestellten Studie ist eine Beschreibung der Schnittmenge von Diskursräumen in der Lexikographie bzw. Metalexikographie und den Digital Humanities (DH). Dabei geht es um die Bestimmung von explizit bzw. implizit als Teil der DH aufzufassenden Beiträgen zu lexikographischen Themen und, andersherum, von lexikographierelevanten Themen, die in den DH diskutiert werden. Zur Bestimmung der Diskursräume, von Schnitt- und disjunktiven Mengen, werden Volltexte und Metadaten analysiert, bibliometrische Netzwerke (Autoren- bzw. Zitationsnetzwerke) verglichen und Topic Modelings vorgenommen.
         
         
            Einleitung
            Der Einzug digitaler Methoden und Werkzeuge in die Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften, genauer: der als „computational turn“ (Berry 2011) bezeichnete methodisch-epistemologische Quantensprung, lässt sich in allen Disziplinen der Humanities beobachten. In der Sprachwissenschaft hat sich dieser Wandel bekanntermaßen besonders deutlich in der Etablierung der Computerlinguistik als eigene Disziplin niedergeschlagen. Neben computerlinguistischen Verfahren der Textanalyse sind eine maschinenlesbare Wissensrepräsentation und -organisation, sind Formate für digitale Editionen und komputationell erstellte Visualisierungen heute in allen textbasierten Disziplinen in Gebrauch.
            Der angesprochene Wandel lässt sich ebenfalls in der Lexikographie feststellen. Die Lexikographie bzw. Metalexikographie, als solche bereits seit geraumer Zeit als Disziplin emanzipiert (Tarp 2008; Wiegand 2013), haben den Übergang zum digitalen Medium inzwischen vollzogen (cf. zum frühen Stand der Dinge De Schryver 2003) und sind beständig dabei, ihr komputationell informiertes methodisches Instrumentarium weiterzuentwickeln (Heid 2013). Als zentrale Aspekte gelten hier der Einzug korpuslinguistischer Verfahren in die Lexikographie (Hanks 2008; Heid 2008), komputationelle Methoden zur Datenrepräsentation (Spohr 2012), speziell auch für die digitale Edition historischer Wörterbücher (Lemnitzer u. a. 2013) und zur Implementierung funktionsgerichteter Benutzerschnittstellen (Heid 2014) sowie zur Wörterbuchbenutzungsforschung (Müller-Spitzer 2014).
            In der hier vorgestellten Studie gehen wir der Frage nach, wie sich der gemeinsame Diskursraum als Schnittmenge von Lexikographie und Digital Humanities mit quantitativen Methoden definieren lässt. Nach einer nicht exhaustiven und von Hand durchgeführten Voruntersuchung folgen wir der Ausgangshypothese, der gemeinsame Diskursraum sei um ein Vielfaches größer als man annehmen könnte, folgte man allein denjenigen Themen, die als lexikographierelevant gelten können und die in Publikationen diskutiert werden, die explizit zum Bereich der DH gehören (vgl. Abb. 1).
            
               
                  
                  Abb. 1: Ausgangshypothese: Explizite und implizite Schnittmengen.
               
            
            Diejenigen Arbeiten, die im DH-Kontext veröffentlicht werden und explizit einem Thema der Lexikographie zugeordnet werden, sind recht leicht über relevante Schlüsselwörter bestimmbar. Dazu tritt die Gruppe jener Publikationen, die zur eingangs skizzierten Schnittmenge zu zählen sind, ohne dass sie sich selbst ausdrücklich den Digital Humanities zuordnen. Es ist das Ziel dieser Untersuchung, zu bestimmen, welche in der Lexikographie diskutierten Themen und welche Autoren zu dieser Gruppe gerechnet werden und also eine Zurechnung zu den Digital Humanities 
                    implizieren können.
                
         
         
            Voruntersuchung und Zwischenergebnis: Explizite Verortung in den DH
            Als Voruntersuchung zum benannten Gegenstand haben wir eine Recherche in den Archiven bedeutender englischsprachiger Zeitschriften der Digital Humanities
                     sowie in den Proceedings der ADHO-Jahreskonferenzen
                     durchgeführt. Über die Suchbegriffe „Lexicography“ und „Dictionary“ finden sich in den genannten Archiven 31 englischsprachige Beiträge, die sich mit lexikographischen Themen befassen, und die sich qua Erscheinen in DH-Medien zu denjenigen Publikationen zählen lassen, die sich explizit in den Digital Humanities verorten.
                
            Eine manuelle Zuordnung lexikographierelevanter Schlüsselwörter zu den genannten 31 Beiträgen ergibt das in Tabelle 1 wiedergegebene Bild; dabei sind mehrfache Zuordnungen möglich. Zunächst lässt sich ohne Verwunderung feststellen, dass in allen Beiträgen die digitale Repräsentation lexikalischer Daten eine Rolle spielt, allerdings mit unterschiedlichen Fragestellungen, Herangehensweisen und Zielsetzungen. Die drei größten Themencluster haben wir hier, in dieser Reihenfolge, mit den Schlagwörtern „e-Wörterbücher / Visualisierung lexikalischer Daten“, „Historische Lexikographie“ und „Korpuslinguistik“ bezeichnet. Ersteres benennt Fragen der Produktion digitaler Wörterbücher einschließlich neuer Methoden der Visualisierung, letzteres die Erstellung und Nutzung elektronischer Textkorpora zu einer Reihe lexikographischer Zwecke. Beide Bereiche sind durch die Heraufkunft digitaler Methoden überhaupt erst möglich geworden und haben die Lexikographie revolutioniert. Die Historische Lexikographie kann als philologische Disziplin gelten, die sich mit der Edition historischer lexikalischer Datensammlungen befasst; die diesem Schlüsselwort zugeordneten Beiträge befassen sich grundsätzlich mit Methoden digitaler Edition, einem Kernbereich der DH.
            
               
                  Schlüsselwort (Topic)
                  Zählung
               
               
                  Digitale Wissensrepräsentation / Formate
                  31
               
               
                  e-Wörterbücher / Visualisierung lexikalischer Daten
                  14
               
               
                  Historische Lexikographie
                  10
               
               
                  Korpuslinguistik
                  9
               
               
                  Wörterbuchnetz
                  4
               
               
                  NLP-Lexicon
                  2
               
               
                  Bilingual Dictionary Drafting
                  2
               
               
                  Autorenwörterbuch
                  2
               
               
                  Dialektologie
                  1
               
            
            Tabelle 1: Schlüsselwörter, manuelles Clustering, manuelle Zählung
            Unter den weniger häufig gewählten Schlüsselwörtern sticht das „Wörterbuchnetz“ hervor, das Strategien zur Vernetzung lexikalischer Ressourcen bezeichnet. Hinzu kommen noch lexikalische Datensammlungen zur Anwendung in der maschinellen Sprachverarbeitung („NLP-Lexicon“), Methoden zum Entwurf zweisprachiger Wörterbuchinhalte („Bilingual Dictionary Drafting“), das „Autorenwö
         
         
            Methode für die Bestimmung implizit in den DH verorteter Arbeiten
            Wir haben ein Textkorpus erstellt, das im Zeitraum 2000 bis zur Gegenwart (2018) erschienene englischsprachige Beiträge aus Zeitschriften, Kongressakten und Handbüchern zu den Digital Humanities (Subkorpus DH) und der Lexikographie (Subkorpus Lexicog) enthält; Tabelle 2 gibt die Titel der verarbeiteten Quellen wieder. Dabei wurden die ausgewählten Zeitschriften bzw. Sammelbände jeweils vollständig berücksichtigt; die Beiträge wurden zusammen mit Metadaten, u. a. Verfasser (Name und Affiliation), Datum, Textsorte, Umfang und Identifier (ISBN, DOI), im Tool Zotero
                     verwaltet. Die Volltexte wurden semiautomatisch bereinigt und zusammen mit Metadatensätzen in das Korpus aufgenommen. Darüber hinaus wurden die in den Volltexten enthaltenen bibliographischen Referenzen extrahiert (GROBID, Lopez 2009).
                
            
               
                  DH / 1.422 (41%)
                  Digital Humanities Quarterly: 
                             / 284
                        
               
               
                  
                  DSH (ex LLC):
                            https://academic.oup.com/dsh / 886
                        
               
               
                  
                  TEI Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative:
                            http://jtei.revues.org / 63
                        
               
               
                  
                  Digital Studies/Le champ numerique: 
                             / 152
                        
               
               
                  
                  Blackwell Companion to DH: Schreibman et al. (ed.) 2004 / 37
               
               
                  Lexikog
                            / 2.056
                            (59%)
                        
                  IJL: 
                            http://ijl.oxfordjournals.org/ 282
                        
               
               
                  
                  Lexikos: 
                             / 376
                        
               
               
                  
                  Dictionaries (Journal of the DSNA): 
                             / 257
                        
               
               
                  
                  Euralex: 
                             / 782
                        
               
               
                  
                  eLex: 
                             / 202
                        
               
               
                  
                  HSK 5/4: Gouws et al. (ed.) 2013 / 110
               
               
                  
                  The Routledge Handbook of Lexicography: Fuertes-Olivera (ed.) 2018 / 47
               
            
            Tabelle 2: Quellen für das DH/Lexikog Textkorpus / Zahl der Volltexte
            
               Topic Modeling 
               Unüberwachtes Topic Modeling (LDA, eingesetztes Tool: MALLET (McCallum 2002)) soll es uns ermöglichen, die in Abb. 1 grob skizzierten Mengen als sich überschneidende Diskursräume zu bestimmen und zu visualisieren. Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen die relative Relevanz in beiden Subkorpora von 50 durch den LDA-Algorithmus bestimmten, jeweils mit einer Reihe von Schlüssel-Tokens repräsentierten Topics. Eine Reihe von Anhaltspunkten spricht für das zuverlässige Funktionieren der Methode: Die Liste der Topics, die besonders DH-relevant seien, wird von den Tokens „digital humanities computing tools“ angeführt, die Liste der Lexikographie-Topics von „dictionary dictionaries english words word learners language“.
               Bei der Ansicht der im Mittelfeld befindlichen Topics, also Themen, die in beiden Subcorpora als relevant bezeichnet sind, stellt sich heraus, dass sich hier nicht nur der digitale Wandel als Thema widerspiegelt, sondern dass darüber hinaus weitere Topics den gemeinsamen Diskursraum von Lexikographie und DH ausmachen. Inmitten von Zeilen, die, quasi erwartungsgemäß, Tokens wie „information model data structure process analysis“ oder „corpus words frequency texts word corpora table“ sowie eine ganze Reihe von Namen natürlicher Sprachen enthalten, ist hier etwa das mit den Tokens „women male female gender woman man people [...] black [...] girl feminist [...]“ repräsentierte Topic auffällig (40 der 100 für dieses Topic relevantesten Beiträge stammen aus dem DH-, 60 aus dem Lexikog-Subkorpus).
               Abbildung 2 zeigt für 50 von MALLET bestimmte Topics (Spalten) die Verteilung der 100 jeweils relevantesten Texte über die Subcorpora (Ausgabe von MALLET; DH-Beiträge sind grün, Lexicog-Beiträge violett unterlegt). Es wird deutlich, dass ein Teil der Topics eindeutig einem der Subkorpora zuzurechnen ist, andere Topics dagegen eine starke Durchmischung aufweisen.
               
                  
                     
                     Abb. 2: Visualisierung des Topic Modeling
                  
               
            
            
               Citation Network
               Für alle Artikel des Korpus (siehe Tabelle 2) untersuchten wir die Anzahl der auf Items innerhalb des Netzwerks gerichteten Zitationen. Es zeigten sich 2.431 Zitationen (31% DH, 69% Lexicog). Die Zitationen aus DH sind nur zu 2% auf items aus Lexicog gerichtet; die Zitationen aus Lexicog zu 1% auf items aus DH.
            
         
         
            Ergebnisse und Schlussfolgerungen
            Die vorgestellten korpuslinguistischen und bibliometrischen Untersuchungen bieten wie beschrieben Aufschluss über Schnitt- und disjunkte Mengen von Themen- und Autorenclustern der Lexikographie und der Digital Humanities. Visualisierungen dieser Cluster und Listen der relevanten Keywords und Autoren werden bereitgestellt. Topic Modeling und Zitationsnetzwerke bilden unterschiedlich große Schnittmengen zwischen beiden Disziplinen ab: Während einerseits deutlich wird, dass eine ganze Reihe von Themen in beiden Disziplinen relevant ist, zitiert man sich vergleichsweise selten gegenseitig.
            Die gezeigten Ergebnisse können zunächst zu einer verbesserten gegenseitigen Wahrnehmung in Lexikographie und Digital Humanities beitragen sowie in der lexikographischen Community das Bewusstsein dafür stärken, ein Gutteil der Disziplin gehöre durch die inhaltliche Überschneidung de facto zum Einflussbereich der Digital Humanities. Dies wiederum kann in der Zukunft zu einer stärkeren expliziten Verortung relevanter lexikographischer Beiträge in den Digital Humanities führen.
            Weiterhin haben wir mit den für diese Studie durchgeführten Arbeiten eine annotierte bibliographische Datensammlung angelegt und die dazugehörigen Volltexte mit korpuslinguistischen Methoden annotiert und analysiert. Wir beabsichtigen, diese Sammlung auch weiterhin zu pflegen und öffentlich zugänglich zu machen.
         
      
      
         
             Digital Humanities Quarterly, DSH, TEI Journal
            
               http://adho.org
            
            
               http://www.zotero.org
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Berry, David M. (2011): „The Computational Turn: Thinking About the Digital Humanities“. (The Computational Turn). In 
                        Culture Machine 12 (0).
                    
               
                  De Schryver, Gilles-Maurice (2003): „Lexicographers’ Dreams in the Electronic‐Dictionary Age“. In 
                        International Journal of Lexicography 16 (2): 143–199.
                    
               
                  Fuertes-Olivera, Pedro (ed.) (2018): 
                        The Routledge Handbook of Lexicography. London: Routledge.
                    
               
                  Gouws, Rufus / Heid, Ulrich / Schweickard, Wolfgang / Wiegand, Herbert E. (eds.). (2013): 
                        Dictionaries. An International Encyclopedia of Lexicography. HSK 5/4. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.
                    
               
                  Hanks, Patrick (2008). „The Lexicographical Legacy of John Sinclair“. In 
                        International Journal of Lexicography 21 (3): 219–229.
                    
               
                  Heid, Ulrich (2008). „Corpus linguistics and lexicography“. In Anke Lüdeling / Merja Kytö (ed.) 
                        Corpus Linguistics. An international Handbook: 131–153. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Heid, Ulrich (2013): „The impact of computational lexicography“. In Gouws et al. 2013: 24–30.
                    
               
                  Heid, Ulrich (2014): „Natural Language Processing Techniques for Improved User-friendliness of Electronic Dictionaries“. In 
                        Proceedings of EURALEX 2012: 47–61.
                    
               
                  Lemnitzer, Lothar / Romary, Laurent / Witt, Andreas (2013): „Representing human and machine dictionaries in markup languages (SGML, XML)“. In Gouws et al. 2013: 1195–1209.
                    
               
                  Lopez, Patrice (2009): „GROBID: Combining Automatic Bibliographic Data Recognition and Term Extraction for Scholarship Publications“. In 
                        Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries: 473–474. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer
                    
               
                  McCallum, Andrew K. (2002): 
                        MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/.
                    
               
                  Müller-Spitzer, Carolin (2014): „Methoden der Wörterbuchbenutzungsforschung“. In 
                        Lexicographica 30 (1): 112–151.
                    
               
                  Schreibman, Susan / Siemens, Ray / Unsworth, John (2004): 
                        A Companion to Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell
                    
               
                  Spohr, Dennis (2012): 
                        Towards a Multifunctional Lexical Resource, Design and Implementation of a Graph-Based Lexicon Model. Lexicographica Series Maior, 141. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Tarp, Sven (2008): 
                        Lexicography in the borderland between knowledge and non-knowledge: general lexicographical theory with particular focus on learner’s lexicography. Lexicographica, Series Mayor 134. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
                    
               
                  Wiegand, Herbert E. (2013): „Lexikographie und Angewandte Linguistik“. In 
                        Zeitschrift für angewandte Linguistik 58 (1): 13–39.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Zusammenfassung des Vorhabens
            Die AG Datenzentren des DHd möchte ein Panel mit insgesamt fünf Diskussionspartnern und zwei Moderatoren veranstalten, um die Herausbildung fachbezogenen Datenmanagements im deutschsprachigen Raum in den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften weiter zu fördern sowie den Stand und die Perspektiven dieses Forschungsbereichs zu diskutieren. Das Panel reiht sich damit in den fachlich übergreifenden Organisationsprozess zum Datenmanagement ein. Im Mittelpunkt der Diskussion soll hier die Veränderung der Datenkultur in der Geisteswissenschaft stehen und damit die Frage, wie eine Konsolidierung, Vernetzung und fachliche Abrundung von Diensten die Anreize zur wissenschaftlichen Nutzung des Datenmanagements erhöhen können. Dies soll mit zwei Schwerpunktsetzungen erfolgen:
            A. Zunächst möchten wir anhand eines Überblicks zu bestehenden Angeboten von Datenzentren informieren und aufzeigen, welche fachbezogenen Leistungen momentan oder in naher Zukunft von Datenzentren in einem Netzwerk verteilter DH-Strukturen eingebracht werden. Dieser Block macht die Schwerpunktsetzungen, Rollen und herausgehobene fachliche Dienste einzelner Datenzentren sichtbar, die über allgemeine Anforderungen an ein Datenzentrum hinausragen. Daran anschließend kann über die mögliche Ausgestaltung kooperativer Strukturen und die Zusammenarbeit innerhalb eines Netzwerkes der DH-Datenzentren diskutiert werden.
            B. Weiterhin fragt das Panel grundlegend nach zentralen Aufgabenstellungen im Bereich von Standards aus den einzelnen Fachgebieten der Geisteswissenschaften: Welche fachlichen Standards müssen Datenzentren über die zuvor gezeigten Ansätze hinaus kooperativ entwickeln, um passfähige Daten für eine möglichst große Breite von Nachnutzungen interdisziplinär abzusichern? Wo liegen Möglichkeiten und wo Grenzen von fachlicher Standardisierung und Normalisierung über die einzelnen Fachdisziplinen der Geisteswissenschaft hinweg? Hierzu sollen Erkenntnisse und Erfahrungen aus abgeschlossenen bzw. weitgehend realisierten Projekten dazu dienen, abstrahierende Anforderungen aus fachwissenschaftlicher Perspektive zu benennen, die zugleich einen Mehrwert der Realisierung besitzen. Insgesamt geht es darum, die Notwendigkeit eines geisteswissenschaftlichen sowie fachspezifischen Angebots nachdrücklich unter Beweis zu stellen, zu etablierende Standards zu benennen und Desiderate zu erkennen. 
         
         
            Forschungsstand
            Der digitale Wandel, das Entstehen, Archivieren, Erschließen und Nachnutzen großer Datenbestände verändert wissenschaftliche Forschung in ihren Grundlagen, Arbeitsweisen und Methodiken fundamental (OECD 2007; HRK 2014; RfII 2016; Allianz 2010; DFG 2015). Die zahlreichen Aspekte dieses Wandels beschäftigen Fach-Communities und Fachverbände in umfassender Weise mit Fragen des Datenmanagements, der Lizenzen, Rechte und des Datenschutzes, der technischen und inhaltlichen Langzeitarchivierung sowie Nachnutzung von Daten. Die intensiven Diskussionen um das Datenmanagement sind verbunden mit einem grundlegenden Nachdenken über künftige Aufgaben, Strukturen und Workflows bestehender und sich neu formierender Institutionen oder Akteure und führen zu grundsätzlichen Reflexionen über die notwendige Schaffung verteilter nationaler infrastruktureller Angebote (RfII 2016: 39f.; RfII 2017). In der jüngeren Vergangenheit sind bevorzugt technische Aspekte des Datenmanagements diskutiert worden, wie sie etwa die interoperationale Metadatenhaltung (Bibliotheksparadigma), Probleme der Speicherformate, Speichermedien und Dokumentation in der technischen Langzeitarchivierung über einen Rahmen von zehn Jahren hinaus (Archivparadigma) betreffen (Nestor 2016). Solche Lösungen und Angebote können oft in übergreifenden technischen Strategien gefunden werden, die ein zentrales Aufgabengebiet von Bibliotheken und Archiven umfassen. Wie in den Arbeitsbereichen der digitalen Wissenschaft allgegenwärtig zu beobachten ist, lässt sich dabei eine sukzessive, aber dennoch intensive Spezialisierung und Differenzierung digitaler Erfordernisse und Techniken beobachten. War beispielsweise noch das erste große deutschsprachige Überblickswerk der nestor-Arbeitsgruppe zur Langzeitarchivierung fachübergreifend technisch geprägt (Neuroth 2010), offenbaren die neueren Arbeitsergebnisse eine deutliche Hinwendung zur fachbezogenen Darstellung (Neuroth 2012). Allerdings blieben auch in dieser Hinsicht die Parameter der technischen Langzeitarchivierung aus der Sicht der Archive und Bibliotheken bestimmend. 
            Gleiches lässt sich mit Blick auf die Wissenschaft erkennen, wenn man etwa auf die sich konstituierenden Fachgruppen im Rahmen des Verbandes der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum
                     oder andere traditionelle Fachverbände mit ihren sich ausdifferenzierenden digitalen Arbeitsweisen/Methoden schaut.
                     Intensiv diskutiert wurden solche Themen der fachbezogenen Binnendifferenzierung auch in der Auftaktveranstaltung zum Förderprogramm "'Mixed Methods' in den Geisteswissenschaften?" der VW-Stiftung im Frühsommer 2017, die eine Vielzahl deutschsprachiger Forschungsprojekte im Bereich der Digital Humanities versammelte.
                    
            
            Um nachhaltig wirksam zu sein, braucht Forschungsdatenmanagement eine enge Anbindung an die Wissenschaft mit ihren spezifischen Problemen und fachlichen Erfordernissen (RfII 2016: 60; RfII 2017: 1f., AG DZ 2017: 3). Nicht in erster Linie der technische Service zur Langzeitarchivierung standardisierter Daten, sondern die fachbezogene Datenkuration und die Tiefenerschließung auf der Basis von Standards sichert die Güte und Qualität von Forschungsdaten und ihre Nachnutzbarkeit für spezifische wissenschaftliche Forschungsprojekte. Qualitätsgerechtes Forschungsdatenmanagement - das auch im analogen Zeitalter den Kern jeder Forschung ausmachte - sichert den wissenschaftlichen Mehrwert von Daten, schafft vielfältige Nutzungsanreize und innerwissenschaftliche Akzeptanz (RfII 2016: 38-40; AG DZ 2017: 2). Im gleichen Maße wie daher die übergreifende Basis technischer Lösungen zur Metadatenhaltung, Lizenzierung und Langzeitarchivierung entwickelt werden muss, sind fachbezogene Standards der Datenkuration, der kontrollierten Vokabularien, der fachbasierten Quellenkritik und Annotation sowie spezialisierte Werkzeuge der fachlichen Datenverarbeitung zur Erzeugung nachhaltiger Datenstrukturen notwendig. Während erstere eher in den Verantwortungsbereich der Bibliotheken und Archive fallen, sind letztere das zentrale Aufgabenfeld der Wissenschaft mit ihren spezifischen Fachgebieten. 
            Hinzu treten die zahlreichen Herausforderungen des geisteswissenschaftlichen Datenmanagements im Unterschied zu natur- und sozialwissenschaftlichen Projekten. Geisteswissenschaftliche Daten bilden in vielen Anwendungsbereichen komplexe Textkorpora mit hochspezialisierten Formen der Transkription, Annotation und der Unterscheidung verschiedener Ebenen von Quellenbegriff, Lemmatisierung, Normalisierung, Standardisierung und Begriffserklärung. Ähnliche komplexe Formen der Erschließung gelten ebenso in eher auf Objekte und Gegenstände bezogene Geisteswissenschaften. Ansätze der einen Diziplin sind (bis heute) nicht ohne weiteres auf eine andere übertragbar bzw. nicht fachübergreifend bekannt. Gleichzeitig ist es Anliegen von Datenzentren übergreifende Standards bzw. Austauschformate zu definieren und zu etablieren, welche die Transparenz und Verschneidung von Daten überhaupt erst einmal ermöglichen.
            Ebenso muss auf der Ebene der Datenzentren intensiv über Kooperationsformen und Vorgehensweisen für neue heterogene Datenbestände mit einem Mix aus Quellen, Daten, Methoden, Medien und Rechten nachgedacht werden (AG DZ 2017: 3). 
         
         
            Fragestellung und Aufbau des Panels
            Die DH ist angetreten, um computergestützte Ansätze und Methoden quer über die geisteswissenschaftlichen Fachdisziplinen zu entwickeln. Was jedoch macht die Summe geisteswissenschaftlicher Bedürfnisse aus, um Daten tatsächlich interdisziplinär und langfristig nachnutzbar zu machen? Die "Kritik der digitalen Vernunft" besteht für ein solches geisteswissenschaftliches Unterfangen darin, gemeinsame Anforderungen und Standards der Datenhaltung aus bestehenden Projekten und Erfahrungen zu formulieren, zusammenzutragen, zu systematisieren und zu abstrahieren. Zudem bedürfen solche Standards der Akzeptanz durch Forschende, sollen sie Wirksamkeit entfalten. Standards müssen daher einen klaren Mehrwert für wissenschaftliche Arbeit bieten.
            1. Viele Datenzentren haben mittlerweile ihre reguläre fachliche Arbeit aufgenommen, projektbasiert Erfahrungen gesammelt und neben der regulären Arbeit oft spezifische Schwerpunkte gebildet. In Form einer Präsentation der wichtigsten Akteure, Dienste und Angebote möchten wir über das bestehende Leistungsangebot innerhalb der AG Datenzentren des DHd-Verbandes informieren, wobei bevorzugt die Schwerpunktsetzungen im Bereich der Standards thematisiert werden. Auf diese Weise können sich Tagungsteilnehmer einen Überblick zum Dienstleistungsspektrum von Datenzentren verschaffen, was angesichts der insgesamt unübersichtlichen (weil sich dynamisch entwickelnden) Forschungslandschaft einen erheblichen Vorteil darstellt. Diese ca. 15-20 Minuten dauernde Präsentation beruht auf einer Umfrage unter den im Verband organisierten Einrichtungen und Akteuren, die von der Organisatorin des Panels in Zusammenarbeit mit der AG Datenzentren vorstrukturiert und präsentiert wird. Bei Bedarf können weitere zentrale fachwissenschaftliche Angebote in den Geisteswissenschaften einbezogen werden. Dieser Leistungskatalog ist einerseits Grundlage der Diskussion mit dem Publikum und andererseits für die Außendarstellung der AG Datenzentren der DHd förderlich.
            2. Nach dieser Präsentation leitet die Moderation in den Diskussionsteil über. Eingeladen werden Vertreter und Vertreterinnen geisteswissenschaftlicher Datenzentren mit unterschiedlichen Schwerpunktsetzungen und Funktionen, die Impulsreferate zu notwendigen Anforderungen fachwissenschaftlicher Standards im Datenmanagement zu geben. Diese Statements werden vor der Tagung allen Diskussionspartnern zur Verfügung gestellt, um eine angeregte Diskussion über fachliche Belange und Standards für das Datenmanagement der Geisteswissenschaften zu ermöglichen und auch Kritik zu formulieren. Die Panelorganisatorin und Moderatoren sichten die Beiträge zuvor redaktionell-moderierend. Hier sollen vor allem Möglichkeiten und Grenzen von bestehenden innerfachlichen Standards (z.B. existierende Ansätze wie GND, XML, TEI, Transkriptionsregeln; neue Entwicklungen wie z.B. "Ontologie historischer Berufe” etc.) benannt und diskutiert werden. An Einzelbeispielen soll kontrovers diskutiert werden, welche Standards die Geisteswissenschaft und das Datenmanagement tatsächlich voranbringen. Sind es eher technische Aspekte und Rahmenbedingungen (Tools, Formate, Annotationswerkzeuge), die formale Aspekte des Datenmanagements vereinheitlichen oder thematisch übergreifende Normansätze, Ontologien oder kontrollierte Vokabulare, die häufig aber sehr voraussetzungsvoll und arbeitsintensiv sind? Zielgerichtet sollen so Ansätze, Möglichkeiten und Grenzen diskutiert werden. Fachwissenschaftliche Aspekte sollen zusätzlich durch die Öffnung der Diskussion für das Publikum einbezogen werden. Gleichzeitig kann das Publikum Hindernisse und Desiderate des Forschungsdatenmanagements formulieren. Insgesamt sollen zudem mögliche Kooperationen und Organisationsstrukturen zwischen verschiedenen Datenzentren angerissen werden (Wer darf Standards entwickeln? Wer muss sie nutzen?). Nach Möglichkeiten werden dazu Beiträge des Publikums bzw. die Use Cases der Diskussion aufgegriffen. Diese Diskussion soll die fachliche Positionierung und Ausdifferenzierung der Datenzentren schärfen.
            Es ist die Aufgabe der Moderation, entsprechend der Schwerpunktsetzungen in der Diskussion abstrahierende Aussagen zur Ansetzung von Standards zu finden, die aber zuvor innerhalb der AG und auch der eingeladenen Diskutanten bereits andiskutiert wurden, um ein konzentriertes und fachbezogen-klares Fazit der Diskussion zu ermöglichen.
         
         
            Zusammensetzung des Panels
            
               Organisation und Präsentation: 
            
            Dr. Katrin Moeller, Historisches Datenzentrum Sachsen-Anhalt (Hist-Data), Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Deutschland
            
               Moderation: 
            
            Dr. Ulrike Wuttke, Stellvertretende Vorsitzende der AG Datenzentren des DHd, Fachbereich Informationswissenschaften, Fachhochschule Potsdam, Deutschland
            Dr. Jörg Wettlaufer, Göttingen Centre for Digital Humanities, Georg-August Universität Göttingen, Deutschland
            
               Datenzentren:
            
            Marina Lemaire, M.A., Servicezentrum eSciences, Universität Trier, Deutschland
            
               DI Matej Ďurčo, Austrian Center for Digital Humanities, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Österreich
                    
               Dr. Barbara Ebert, Leiterin des Rats für Informationsinfrastrukturen (RfII), Geschäftsstelle Göttingen
                
            Prof. Dr. Lukas Rosenthaler, Data and Service Center for the Humanities DaSCH, Universität Basel (DHLab) und Schweizerische Akademie der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften, Schweiz
                    apl. Prof. Dr. Patrick Sahle, Data Center for the Humanities (DCH), Universität zu Köln, Deutschland
                
         
      
      
         
             Siehe die Arbeitsgruppen des Verbands DHd: 
                            https://dig-hum.de/dhd-ags
                            .
                        
             Vergleiche hier etwa das CfP und die daraus resultierenden Ergebnisse der Tagung: Quellen und Methoden der Geschichtswissenschaft im digitalen Zeitalter. Neue Zugänge für eine etablierte Disziplin, DIGIMET 2017, 25./26.09.2017 in Berlin, URL: http://welt-der-kinder.gei.de/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/CfP-DH-Abschlusstagung-WdK-02.05.2017.pdf.
             Dabei nahmen zahlreiche Vertreter der DH-Community in den Geisteswissenschaften teil, die auch über das eigentliche Förderprogramm "Mixed Methods" in den Geisteswissenschaften Projekte durchführen: https://www.volkswagenstiftung.de/fileadmin/downloads/publikationen/20161221_Mixed_Methods_Volkswagen
                Stiftung_Bewilligungen.pdf.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  AG Datenzentren des DHd (Hg.) (2017): Stellungnahme der DHd AG Datenzentren und des DHd-Verbands zur Nationalen Forschungsdateninfrastruktur (NFDI), URL: 
                        
                     http://dig-hum.de/sites/dig-hum.de/files/DHd_NFDI_Stellungnahme_2017-07-31.pdf
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Allianz der deutschen Wissenschaftsorganisationen (Hg.) (2010): Grundsätze zum Umgang mit Forschungsdaten, URL: 
                        
                     http://www.allianzinitiative.de/fileadmin/user_upload/www.allianzinitiative.de/Grundsaetze_Forschungsdaten_2010.pdf
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  DFG (Hg.) (2015): DFG-Leitlinien zum Umgang mit Forschungsdaten, Bonn 2015, 
                        
                     http://www.dfg.de/foerderung/antragstellung_begutachtung_entscheidung/antragstellende/antragstellung/nachnutzung_forschungsdaten/index.html
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Nestor (Hg.) (2016): Standardisierung, 2016, URL: 
                        
                     https://wiki.dnb.de/display/NESTOR/Standardisierung
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Neuroth, Heike / Oßwald, Achim / Scheffel, Regine / Strathmann, Stefan / Huth, Karsten (Hg.): nestor Handbuch. Eine kleine Enzyklopädie der digitalen Langzeitarchivierung. Version 2.3, Göttingen 2010, URL: 
                        
                     http://nestor.sub.uni-goettingen.de/handbuch/nestor-handbuch_23.pdf
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Neuroth, Heike / Strathmann, Stefan / Oßwald, Achim / Scheffel, Regine / Klump, Jens / Ludwig, Jens (Hg.) (2012): Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten. Eine Bestandsaufnahme. Boizenburg / Göttingen.
                    
               
                  OECD (Hg.) (2007): OECD Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding, Paris 2007, URL: 
                        
                     http://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/38500813.pdf
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                        OECD (Hg.) (2016):, "Research Ethics and New Forms of Data for Social and Economic Research", 
                        OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 34, OECD Publishing, Paris, URL: 
                        
                     http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jln7vnpxs32-en 
                  [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017]
                        .
                  
                  Hochschulrektorenkonferenz (HRK) (Hg.) (2014): Management von Forschungsdaten als strategische Aufgabe der Hochschulleitungen, 14. Mai 2014, URL: 
                        
                     https://www.hrk.de/positionen/beschluss/detail/management-von-forschungsdaten-eine-zentrale-strategische-herausforderung-fuer-hochschulleitungen/
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Rat für Informationsinfrastrukturen (RfII) (Hg.) (2016): Leistung aus Vielfalt, Empfehlungen zu Strukturen, Prozessen und Finanzierung des Forschungsdatenmanagements in Deutschland, Göttingen, URL: 
                        
                     http://www.rfii.de/de/category/dokumente/
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Rat für Informationsinfrastrukturen (RfII) (Hg.) (2017): Schritt für Schritt - oder: Was bringt wer mit? Ein Diskussionsimpuls zur Zielstellung und Voraussetzungen für den Einstieg in die Nationale Forschungsdateninfrastruktur (NFDI), URL: 
                        
                     http://www.rfii.de/de/category/dokumente/
                   [letzter Zugriff 22. September 2017].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Kontinuierlich steigt die Menge der erzeugten und prozessierten Information und damit der Bedarf an technologisch assistierter bishin zu autonomer Datenverarbeitung. Textuell repräsentierte Inhalte mittels strukturgebender Methoden aufzubereiten ist meist aufwendiger als deren Erzeugung, insofern gewinnt automatische Textprozessierung zunehmend an Bedeutung (Bernstein et al.: 2016).
          
         Mithilfe der formalen Grammatiken RBNF (Rich Backus-Naur Form)
                 und ABNF (Augmented Backus-Naus Form) können Produktionssysteme im Sinne domänenspezifischer, formaler Sprachen (engl. Domain-Specific Languages) modelliert und auf textuelle Daten angewandt werden: Syndred
                 nutzt als Parser konkretisierte Grammatiken zur Abbildung von Texten auf Strukturbäume (engl. Parse Trees), die in vielfältiger Form (z. B. als TEI-Dokumente) persistiert, mittels Treewalkern (Parr 2013: 17ff) für weitere Prozessierung transformiert oder beispielhaft zur Überprüfung formaler Korrektheit unter Berücksichtigung von Merkmalen wie bspw. Schriftgröße, -stil und -farbe eingesetzt werden.
            
          
         Wegweisend für die Entwicklung des hier beschriebenen Systems sind die Arbeiten von Wirth und Gutknecht (Gutknecht 1985 bzw. Wirth / Gutknecht 1992: 78ff). Entgegen der Funktionsweise eines Compilers jedoch, der die Analyse des zu übersetzenden Programms meist direkt in Programmcode vornimmt, definiert Syndred textuelle Strukturen anhand domänenspezifischer Grammatiken und bildet sie auf Syntaxgraphen ab.
          
         Der syntaxkontrollierte Editor (engl. Syntax-Driven Editor, kurz: Syndred) soll als flexibles Werkzeug in unterschiedlichsten Projekten (z. B. Lexikoneditoren und denzentraler Korrektur) dienen, kollaboratives Arbeiten durch effiziente formale Kontrolle unterstützen und damit die allgemeine Produktivität durch die Erstellung domänenspezifischer Sprachen erhöhen (Fowler 2011: xxi).
          
         Syndred wartet mit einem Split-View Design auf, welches einerseits das Erstellen und Bearbeiten von Grammatiken und andererseits syntaxkontrolliertes Editieren textueller Inhalte in direkten, visueller Bezug zueinander bringt. Kernkompetenzen der Benutzerschnittstelle sind die Herleitungen von Grammatiken aus textuellen Bestandsdaten oder Rückmeldungen formaler Produktionsregeln zu textuellen Inhalten.
          
         Dezentrales Arbeiten erfordert eine netzwerkbasierte Architektur, idealerweise eine Web-Applikation mit clientseitigem Editor und serverseitigem Parser; Syndred nutzt das auf ReactJS
                 basierende Editor-Framework DraftJS
                 und kommuniziert im JSON-Format über WebSockets mit einer zentralen, auf Basis des Spring-Frameworks
                 implementierten Java-Applikation. Neben dem Vorteil der Plattformunabhängigkeit ermöglichen die eingesetzten Web-Technologien die zentralisierung der Hardwareleistung wie auch des Speicherbedarfs und sichern gegen Datenverlust ab. Auch garantiert die Bidirektionalität der Client-Server-Verbindung die Kohärenz und Persistenz der kollaborativen Instanzen. Zeitnahe Verfügbarkeit aller für die kollaborative Arbeit mit Syndred notwendigen Ressourcen wird durch einen serverseitigen Cached Thread Pool sichergestellt; aktiven Instanzen wird bei Bedarf ein Parser-Threads zur Verfügung gestellt, der nach Verwendung beendet wird.
            
          
         Syndred ist somit ein Werkzeug zur intuitiven Entwicklung domänenspezifische Sprachen und Überprüfung textueller Inhalte anhand dieser formalen Grammatiken, realisiert als kollaborative Web- Applikation; zusammengenommen ein Meilenstein in der Entwicklung dieser Art von Programmiersprachen.
      
      
         
             RBNF ist eine EBNF (Extended Backus-Naus Form) Erweiterung um Rich-Text Auszeichnungen.
            
               https://github.com/spinfo/syndred
            
            
               https://facebook.github.io/react
            
            
               https://draftjs.org
            
            
               https://projects.spring.io/spring-framework
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bernstein, Abraham / Hendler, James / Noy, Natalya (2016): “A New Look at the Semantic Web.” in: 
                        Communications of the ACM. 59:9. 35-37.
                    
               
                  Fowler, Martin (2011): 
                        Domain-Specific Languages. Addison-Wesley: Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
                    
               
                  Gutknecht, Jürg (1985): “Concepts of the Text Editor Lara.” in: 
                        Communications of the ACM. 28:9. 942-960.
                    
               
                  Parr, Terence (2013):  
                        The Definitive ANTLR 4 Reference. Pragmatic Bookshelf: Dallas Texas.
                    
               
                  Wirth, Niklaus (19864): 
                        Compilerbau. Teubner: Stuttgart.
                    
               
                  Wirth, Niklaus (20005): 
                        Algorithmen und Datenstrukturen. Teubner: Stuttgart.
                    
               
                  Wirth, Niklaus / Gutknecht, Jürg (1992):  
                        Project Oberon: Design of an Operating System and Compiler. Addison-Wesley Longman: Amsterdam. 
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Forschungsstand:
            Berufsbezeichnungen sind eine der häufigsten Angaben von individualspezifischen Quellen. Besonders in den Sozial- und Politikwissenschaften, den Geisteswissenschaften und einigen naturwissenschaftlichen Disziplinen (Sozialtopografie, Medizin, Arbeitsmedizin, Epidemiologie etc.) bieten Berufsbezeichnungen einen wichtigen Bezugspunkt sozialstruktureller Analysen. Dazu kommen verschiedene Formen von Berufsklassifikationen zum Einsatz. Während für die Berufswelten des 20./21. Jahrhunderts verschiedene normierte Klassifikationsmodelle als Standard sowohl auf nationaler wie internationaler Ebene existieren, kann die interdisziplinäre Forschung für deutschsprachige, historische Berufe nicht auf ein solches Normsystem zurückgreifen. Insgesamt gibt es bisher keinen gültigen Standard. Zu den renommiertesten und qualitativ hochwertigsten historischen Klassifikationsmodellen gehören bisher die Historical International Standard Classification of Occupations (HISCO) (van Leeuwen et al. 2002), das PST-System der Cambridge Group um Wrigley und Davies (Wrigley 2010). Sie zeichnen sich durch eine theoretisch nachvollziehbare Konzeption der Tätigkeit aus, beinhalten bisher aber kaum deutschsprachige Berufsnamen. Berufsklassifikationssysteme wie zu Altona 1803 (Brandenburg et al.1991) und das Berufsklassifikationsmodell zur Analyse von Bürgerlichkeit von Schüren und Hettling (Schüren 1989, Hettling 1999) liefern Ansätze für deutschsprachige Berufe. Daneben existieren etliche andere, im Zuge der Städteforschung entstandene Systeme, die jedoch eher als Teilaspekt einer Arbeit entstanden sind (bspw. François 1982; Kill 2001; Rödel 1985; Sachse 1987). 
            Aufgrund des hohen personellen Aufwands werden Systematiken häufig induktiv entwickelt und die Einordnung der Berufe (Abklären des genauen historischen Tätigkeitsprofils; Zuordnung zur richtigen Beschreibungsform der Berufsklassifizierung) gar nicht durchgeführt bzw. nicht dokumentiert. Daher entwickeln Forschungsprojekte jeweils neue Klassifizierungsmodelle, was eine Vielzahl nicht vergleichbarer Ergebnisse und für das einzelne Projekt ein enorm zeitaufwendiges Verfahren produziert. Dies schmälert den wissenschaftlichen Mehrwert, da die Ergebnisse von sozialstrukturellen Aussagen und Analysen letztlich nicht reproduzierbar sind. Zudem unterbleibt bei solchen Vorhaben sowohl eine konzeptionelle als auch eine direkte Anbindung an moderne Klassifikationsmodelle, da diese keine unmittelbare „Schnittstelle“ zu historischer Beruflichkeit bieten.
            Mit der Ontologie deutschsprachiger Berufs- und Amtsbezeichnungen möchten wir diese Lücke schließen und eine Berufssystematik für historische, deutschsprachige Berufe entwickeln, die sowohl an die (modernen) Klassifikationssysteme anknüpfen (Klassifikation der Berufe 2010: Wiemer et al. 2011) als auch die deutschen Berufsbezeichnungen für internationale, historische Klassifikationssysteme (HISCO, PST) anschlussfähig macht und die sowohl als maschinenlesbare Ontologie als auch mittels eines Webservice für einen individuellen Zugriff genutzt werden kann. 
         
         
            Ziel des Projekts
            Ziel des Projektes ist es einen nationalen Standard zur Normierung und multiperspektivischen Klassifizierung von deutschsprachigen, historischen Berufsbezeichnungen zu entwickeln und als webbasierte, offene Ressource für die Nachnutzung in Forschungsprojekten und für Infrastrukturen des Forschungsdatenmanagements zur Verfügung stellen. Der hohe Mehrwert für die wissenschaftliche Analyse und die enorme Arbeitserleichterung sollte erheblich dazu beitragen, auf positive Weise tatsächlich einen anreizbildenden Standard zu etablieren, zumal dieser dann auch international anschlussfähig sein wird. Da sich die meisten Klassifizierungsmodelle auf Berufssysteme des 19./20. Jahrhundert konzentrieren, möchten wir diese Systematiken um Beruflichkeit der Frühen Neuzeit und des Spätmittelalters erweitern. Im Einzelnen umfasst dieser Service:
            
               Einen Standard zur Normierung von deutschsprachigen Berufsbezeichnungen. Dazu stehen ca. 200.000 Varianten von historischen Berufsschreibungen zur Verfügung, die sich in ca. 20.000 normierte Einheitsbezeichnungen zusammenfassen lassen. Dieser enorme Korpus ist Ergebnis jahrelanger eigener Datenproduktionen und Kooperationen mit qualitativ hochrangigen Projekten. Im Gegensatz zu vielen Handbüchern, Lexika und anderen gedruckten Kompendien (Ebener 2015; Gerholz 2005; Haemmerle 1933; Molle 1975; Palla 2014; Puchner / Stadler 1935; Reith 1991; Ulm-Sanford 1975) werden die Originalschreibungen der Varianten erhalten. Dies ermöglicht einen hohen Mehrwert für interdisziplinäre Zugriffe z.B. linguistische und etymologische Analysen, aber auch für den technischen Vorgang der Normierung und Zuweisung der Kodierung in einer Vielzahl von Erschließungsprojekten. Damit bietet das Werkzeug eine außerordentliche gute Grundlage, zur Erschließung (Lemmatisierung und Kodierung) von textuellen Quellen jeder Art.
               Um die Klassifizierung zu erleichtern, wie auch einen Informationsverlust durch die Klassifizierung zu verhindern, werden alle Berufsbezeichnungen zunächst in kategorial geordnete semantische Einheiten aufgetrennt. Dies erleichtert erheblich die Nutzbarkeit des Angebots für unterschiedlichste Anforderungen. Diese semantische Trennung und Normierung der Namenseinheiten ermöglicht später eine individuell flexible inhaltliche Auswahl verschiedener logischer Einheiten (Topic Modeling) nach eigenen Prinzipien. In unserem Vortrag möchten wir die Logik dieses Modells erläutern und dem Fachpublikum zur Diskussion stellen, um Anregungen für eine interdisziplinär optimal zu nutzende Methode zu erhalten. Diese Vorgehensweise unterscheidet das Projekt von allen anderen rein auf ID-Identifikatoren zugeschnittenen Verfahren und macht es wesentlich flexibler und breiter für verschiedenste Bedürfnisse geistes- und sozialwissenschaftlicher Forschung anwendbar. Bei herkömmlichen Verfahren kann lediglich über eine fest zugewiesene ID-Nummer auf den verschiedenen Ebenen des Kodierungssystems klassifiziert und sortiert werden. In dem hier vorgeschlagenen Modell erfolgt zusätzlich auch auf der semantischen Ebene die Möglichkeit zum intuitiven Systematisieren, Anordnen und Auswählen. Dies gilt auch für alle weiteren Informationen (Geschlecht, Herrschaft, Rechtsbeziehungen, Ruhestand, Karriere etc.), die mit typisch frühneuzeitlichen, quellenbasierten Berufsbezeichnungen einhergehen und in moderne Berufssystematiken meist keinen Eingang finden. Moderne Klassifikationssysteme für frühneuzeitliche Berufsnamen sind daher tendenziell mit einem sehr hohen Informationsdefizit belastet und können unter Umständen in ahistorischen Analysen enden.
            
            
               
            
            
               Zur Klassifizierung von Berufen werden aus zeittypischen Lexika des 17./18. Jahrhunderts Tätigkeitsbeschreibungen abstrahiert, welche die Anforderungsprofile und Kompetenzen einzelner Berufe definieren. Sie dienen dem Abgleich mit modernen Tätigkeitsprofilen und erlauben erstmals überhaupt eine tätigkeitsgenaue Zuordnung historischer Berufe. Im Vortrag möchten wir zeigen, welche Möglichkeiten zur Systematisierung und Kategorisierung Lexika der frühen Neuzeit bieten und welche inhaltlichen Anknüpfungspunkte sie für moderne Klassifikationssysteme liefern. Dieser Aspekt bietet zudem hervorragende Möglichkeiten zur fachwissenschaftlichen Analyse, werden auf diese Weise doch Definitionskriterien frühneuzeitlicher Beruflichkeit überhaupt ermittelt und mittels einer logischen Auszeichnung auffindbar und auswertbar (xml/TEI). Wir möchten zeigen, welche Probleme dabei auftreten und welche Lösungsansätze wir hierfür entwickelt haben.
            
            
               
            
            Weitere Ziel des Projektes (aber nicht unmittelbar unseres Vortrages, auch wenn wir auf die einzelnen Punkte sicherlich hinweisen) sind zudem folgende Punkte:
            
               Die Tätigkeitsprofile ermöglichen die nachvollziehbare, transparente Einordnung von Berufsbezeichnungen zum bereits existierenden englischsprachigen Berufsklassifizierungssystems HISCO. Momentan gibt es in HISCO lediglich 1.306 deutschsprachige Berufsbezeichnungen. Die Daten wurden nicht von einem Muttersprachler kodiert, weshalb viele Zuordnungen korrigiert werden müssten. Die Kodierung von HISCO ermöglicht das Mapping weiterer historischer Klassifikationsmodelle wie HISCLASS oder PST. Da HISCO moderne Beruflichkeit misst, ist eine Erweiterung und Präzisierung für die Berufe der Frühen Neuzeit unerlässlich (van Leeuwen et al. 2002; HISCO Tree Of Occupational Groups [http://historyofwork.iisg.nl/major.php]).
               Zudem werden die Einheitsbezeichnungen der KldB 2010 zugeordnet. Sie bieten nicht nur einen Zugriff auf (weitere) moderne Berufsklassifikationsmodelle, sondern durch den theoretischen Perspektivwechsel auch eine Systematisierung nach Anforderungsprofilen (Wiemer 2011).
               Die offenen Daten ermöglichen es Nutzern, transkribierte, quellenbasierte Originalberufsbezeichnungen zu normalisieren und automatisiert in ein ausgewähltes Kodierungssystem zu überführen. Ein Usecase wäre bspw. ein Forschungsprojekt, welches eine Netzwerkanalyse durch Heiratsverbindungen vornimmt. Der Beruf bietet hier häufig den einzigen Hinweis auf die sozialstrukturelle Dimension von Gruppen. Über das Werkzeug können die Daten in einem gewünschten Klassifizierungsmodell ausgegeben werden, indem die Originalschreibungen der Berufe in das Tool geladen und automatisiert kodiert werden. 
               Varianten die keine automatisierte Kodierung beinhalten, können anschließend recherchiert und kodiert und in das Kompendium übertragen werden. Das Werkzeug ist damit beliebig erweiterbar. Das Projekt entwickelt ein Geschäftsmodell, wie solche Daten als Teil eines Serviceangebots nachkodiert und integriert werden können. Als Teil der langfristigen Infrastruktureinrichtung DARIAH soll die Ontologie der Berufe durch die Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek auf Dauer angeboten werden.
            
         
         
            Zwischenergebnisse
            
               Im Bereich der Berufssegmentierung wurde ein Prototyp eines Datenschemas entwickelt, um die Berufe in adäquate Informationseinheiten aufzutrennen. 
               Der Informationsgehalt der Lexika bezogen auf berufskundliche Informationen wurde tiefergehend untersucht und erste Aussagen können darüber getroffen werden. 
            
            
               
            
            Des Weiteren ist ein erstes Netzwerk von Autorenschaften und Informationsflüssen nachweisbar.
            
               
            
            
               Die Taxonomie der Klassifikationssysteme von HISCO und der KldB 2010 wurden ausführlich untersucht und erste Ansätze einer eigenen Systematik können vorgestellt werden.
               Mehrere Workflowalternativen von der Quelle bis zum Ergebnis der Inhaltsanalyse wurden erprobt, bewertet und können mit ihren Vor- und Nachteilen präsentiert werden. An dieser Stelle platziert sich am deutlichsten die „Kritik an der digitalen Vernunft“, vor allem in Bezug auf die 
                        
                     Arbeit mit OCR-Erkennung (am Beispiel der OCR-Programmsammlung „ocropy“) 
                     dem Pre- und Postprocessing von Quellendigitalisaten (im Sinne von Ordnerstrukturen und Bildaufarbeitung) 
                     XML vs. QDA-gestützten hermeneutischen Verfahren der Inhaltsanalyse (zur Implementierung und Weiterverarbeitung der Ergebnisse und Daten) und
                     der Nutzung von Objekt- oder relationalen Datenbanken zur Datenverwaltung und Verarbeitung. 
                  
               
            
            Hierbei wird über die Vermeidung von epistemischen Fallstricken durch informationstechnische Automatisierung reflektiert und die Effizienzsteigerung digitaler Werkzeuge kritisch betrachtet, aber auch über die neuen Möglichkeiten zur Bewältigung von Big Data und dem dazugehörigen Erkenntnisgewinn referiert.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Brandenburg, Hajo / Gehrmann, Rolf / Krüger, Kersten / Künne, Andreas / Rüffer, Jörn (1991): Berufe in Altona. Berufssystematik für eine präindustrielle Stadtgesellschaft anhand der Volkszählung. Kiel: Arbeitskreis für Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte Schleswig-Holsteins.
                    
               
                  Brückner, Carola / Möhle, Sylvia / Pröve, Ralf / Roschmann, Joachim (1988): Vom Fremden zum Bürger: Zuwanderer in Göttingen 1700-1755. In: Hermann Wellenreuther (Hg.): Göttingen 1690-1755. Studien zur Sozialgeschichte einer Stadt. Göttingen (Göttinger Universitätsschriften. Serie A, Schriften, Bd. 9), S. 88–174.
                    
               
                  Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (1988): Klassifizierung der Berufe. Systematisches und alphabetisches Verzeichnis der Berufsbenennungen. Nürnberg. Online verfügbar unter http://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/Statischer-Content/Grundlagen/Klassifikation-der-Berufe/KldB1975-1992/Generische-Publikationen/KldB1988-Systematischer-Teil.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 07.06.2016.
                    
               
                  Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (2011): Klassifikation der Berufe 2010. Systematischer und alphabetischer Teil mit Erläuterungen. 2 Bände. Nürnberg (1). Online verfügbar unter https://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/Statischer-Content/Grundlagen/Klassifikation-der-Berufe/KldB2010/Printausgabe-KldB-2010/Generische-Publikationen/KldB2010-Printversion-Band1.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 07.06.2016.
                    
               
                  
                  Ebeling, Dietrich (1987): Bürgertum und Pöbel. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Kölns im 18. Jahrhundert. Köln (Städteforschung. Reihe A, Darstellungen, Bd. 26).
                    
               
                  Ebner, Jakob (2015) Wörterbuch historischer Berufsbezeichnungen. Berlin u.a.
                    
               
                  
                  Fischer, Volker (2000): Stadt und Bürgertum in Kurhessen. Kommunalreform und Wandel der städtischen Gesellschaft 1814-1848. Kassel (Hessische Forschungen zur geschichtlichen Landes- und Volkskunde, 35).
                    
               
                  
                  François, Etienne (1982): Koblenz im 18. Jahrhundert. Zur Sozial- und Bevölkerungsstruktur einer deutschen Residenzstadt. Göttingen (Veröffentlichungen des Max-Planck-Instituts für Geschichte, Bd. 72).
                    
               
                  
                  Gerber, Roland (2001): Gott ist Burger zu Bern. Eine spätmittelalterliche Stadtgesellschaft zwischen Herrschaftsbildung und sozialem Ausgleich. Weimar (Forschungen zur mittelalterlichen Geschichte, 39).
                    
               
                  Gerholz, Heinrich (2005): Gerholz-Kartei, Eine Sammlung alter Berufsbezeichnungen, Lübeck.
                    
               
                  Haemmerle, Albert (1966): Alphabetisches Verzeichnis der Berufs- und Standesbezeichnungen vom ausgehenden Mittelalter bis zur neueren Zeit, (Reprografischer Nachdruck der Ausgabe München 1933), Hildesheim.
                    
               
                  
                  Hahn, Hans-Werner (1991): Altständisches Bürgertum zwischen Beharrung und Wandel. Wetzlar, 1689-1870. München (Stadt und Bürgertum, Bd. 2).
                    
               
                  
                  Hettling, Manfred (1999): Politische Bürgerlichkeit. Der Bürger zwischen Individualität und Vergesellschaftung in Deutschland und der Schweiz von 1860 bis 1918. Göttingen.
                    
               
                  
                  ILO (1958): International Standard Classification of Occupations. Geneva. Online verfügbar unter http://www.ilo.org/public/libdoc/ilo/1958/58B09_81_engl.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 31.05.2016.
                    
               
                  
                  ILO (1969): International Standard Classification of Occupations. Revised Edition 1968. Geneva.
                    
               
                  
                  ILO (2004): ISCO-88. Main Objectives. Online verfügbar unter http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/isco/isco88/publ1.htm, zuletzt geprüft am 06.07.2016.
                    
               
                  
                  ILO (2008): Resolution Concerning Updating ISCO 1 Resolution Concerning Updating the International Standard Classification of Occupations. Online verfügbar unter http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/isco/docs/resol08.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 31.05.2016.
                    
               
                  
                  Jägers, Regine (2001): Duisburg im 18. Jahrhundert. Sozialstruktur und Bevölkerungsbewegung einer niederrheinischen Kleinstadt im Ancien Regime (1713-1814). Köln (Rheinisches Archiv, 143).
                    
               
                  
                  Kill, Susanne (2001): Das Bürgertum in Münster 1770-1870. bürgerliche Selbstbestimmung im Spannungsfeld von Kirche und Staat. München.
                    
               
                  
                  Kroll, Stefan (1997): Stadtgesellschaft und Krieg. Sozialstruktur, Bevölkerung und Wirtschaft in Stralsund und Stade 1700 bis 1715. Göttingen (Göttinger Beiträge zur Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte, Bd. 18).
                    
               
                  
                  Krüger, Kersten (1986): Sozialstruktur der Stadt Oldenburg 1630 und 1678. Analysen in historischer Finanzsoziologie anhand staatlicher Steuerregister. Oldenburg.
                    
               
                  Laufer, Wolfgang (1973): Die Sozialstruktur der Stadt Trier in der frühen Neuzeit. Bonn (Rheinisches Archiv, 86).
                    
               
                  
                  Lundgreen, Margret Kraul; Ditt, Karl (1988): Bildungschancen und soziale Mobilität in der städtischen Gesellschaft des 19. Jahrhunderts. Göttingen.
                    
               
                  
                  Manke, Matthias (2000): Rostock zwischen Revolution und Biedermeier. Alltag und Sozialstruktur. Rostock (Rostocker Studien zur Regionalgeschichte, Bd. 1).
                    
               
                  Molle, Fritz (1975): Wörterbuch der Berufs- und Berufstätigkeitsbezeichnungen, Wolfenbüttel .
                    
               
                  
                  Müller, Christina (1992): Karlsruhe im 18. Jahrhundert. Zur Genese und zur sozialen Schichtung einer residenzstädtischen Bevölkerung. Karlsruhe (Forschungen und Quellen zur Stadtgeschichte, 1).
                    
               
                  Palla, Rudi (2014): Verschwundene Arbeit. Das Buch der untergegangenen Berufe. Wien.
                    
               
                  
                  Paulus, Wiebke / Matthes, Britta (2013): Klassifikation der Berufe. Struktur, Codierung und Umsteigeschlüssel. Online verfügbar unter http://doku.iab.de/fdz/reporte/2013/MR_08-13.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 11.06.2016.
                    
               
                  Puchner, Karl / Stadler, Josef Klemens (1935): Lateinische Berufsbezeichnungen in Pfarrmatrikeln und sonstigen orts- und familiengeschichtlichen Quellen, Hirschenhausen (Obby).
                    
               
                  
                  Raschke, Helga (2001): Bevölkerung und Handwerk einer thüringischen Residenzstadt. Gotha zwischen 1640 und 1740. 1. Aufl. Jena (Palmbaum Texte. Kulturgeschichte, Bd. 9).
                    
               
                  Reith, Reinhold (1991): Lexikon des alten Handwerks. Vom späten Mittelalter bis ins 20. Jahrhundert. München.
                    
               
                  
                  Rödel, Walter Gerd (1985): Mainz und seine Bevölkerung im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert. Demographische Entwicklung, Lebensverhältnisse und soziale Strukturen in einer geistlichen Residenzstadt. Stuttgart (Geschichtliche Landeskunde, Bd. 28).
                    
               
                  
                  Sachse, Wieland (1987): Göttingen im 18. und 19. Jahrhundert. Zur Bevölkerungs- und Sozialstruktur einer deutschen Universitätsstadt. Göttingen (Studien zur Geschichte der Stadt Göttingen, Bd. 15).
                    
               
                  
                  Schüren, Reinhard (1989): Soziale Mobilität. Muster, Veränderungen und Bedingungen im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. St. Katharinen.
                    
               
                  Schüren, Reinhard (1989): Soziale Mobilität: Muster, Veränderungen und Bedingungen im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. St. Katharinen.
                    
               
                  
                  Statistisches Bundesamt (1992): Klassifikation der Berufe 1992 (KldB 92). Gliederungsstruktur bis zur 4 Steller-Ebene. Stuttgart: Metzler-Poeschel. Online verfügbar unter https://www.destatis.de/DE/Methoden/Klassifikationen/Berufe/klassifikationkldb92_4st.pdf?__blob=publicationFile, zuletzt geprüft am 06.06.2016.
                    
               
                  
                  Straubel, Rolf (1995): Frankfurt (Oder) und Potsdam am Ende des Alten Reiches. Studien zur städtischen Wirtschafts- und Sozialstruktur. 1. Aufl. Potsdam (Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur Brandenburg--Preussens und des Alten Reiches, Bd. 2).
                    
               
                  Ulm-Sanford, Gerlinde (1975): Wörterbuch von Berufsbezeichnungen aus dem siebzehnten Jahrhundert, gesammelt aus den Wiener Totenprotokollen der Jahre 1648 - 1668 und einigen weiteren Quellen, Bern 1975.
                    
               
                  
                  van Leeuwen, Marco H.D. / Maas, Ineke / Miles, Andrew (2002): Historical international standard classification of occupations. Leuven.
                    
               
                  
                  Weichel, Thomas (1993a): Die Berufsstruktur der Städte - erste Ergebnisse und Vergleiche. In: Lothar Gall (Hg.): Stadt und Bürgertum im Übergang von der traditionalen zur modernen Gesellschaft. München (Historische Zeitschrift. Beihefte, n.F., Bd. 16), S. 51–74.
                    
               
                  
                  Weichel, Thomas (1993b): Die Bürger in ihrer beruflichen und sozialen Stellung. In: Lothar Gall (Hg.): Stadt und Bürgertum im Übergang von der traditionalen zur modernen Gesellschaft. München (Historische Zeitschrift. Beihefte, n.F., Bd. 16), S. 93–103.
                    
               
                  Weichel, Thomas (1997): Die Bürger von Wiesbaden. von der Landstadt zur "Weltkurstadt", 1780 1914. München.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Eine Kritik der digitalen Vernunft muss auch eine Kritik der digitalen Ressourcen umfassen.
                 Eine traditionelle Form der Kritik ist die wissenschaftliche Besprechung oder Rezension. Die kritische Instanz eines Rezensionswesens fehlt den Digital Humanities bisher fast gänzlich. Digitale Ressourcen wie etwa wissenschaftliche Editionen, Textkorpora, Bilddatenbanken oder auch Software werden selten umfassend rezensiert.
                 Das Gleiche gilt für das “Primärmaterial” dieser Ressourcen, also für Datensätze.
            
         Im Gegensatz zu traditionellen Forschungsergebnissen der Geisteswissenschaften sind digitale Ressourcen nicht statisch, sondern wandelbar, oft prozesshaft und nicht abgeschlossen. Die Kritik der Ressourcen muss die besonderen Bedingungen, Eigenschaften und Folgephänomene digitaler Daten berücksichtigen und eine eigene Form finden.
                 Wie sich die Ressourcen wandeln, so muss sich auch die Kritik wandeln, denn panta rhei - “alles fließt”, sagt Heraklit.
                
         
         Vor diesem Hintergrund widmet sich das Panel u. a. folgenden Fragen: Wie können traditionelle Rezensionsorgane die Besprechung digitaler Ressourcen fördern? Brauchen die Digital Humanities ein eigenes Rezensionswesen, um den Besonderheiten digitaler Ressourcen gerecht zu werden? Wenn ja, wie muss die Rezension als ,Momentaufnahme’ einer digitalen Ressource methodisch und technisch konzipiert sein, um nicht der ,Schnelllebigkeit’ der digitalen Welt zu erliegen? Welche Herausforderungen stellen Publikationen von Daten oder Algorithmen an die RezensentInnen? Inwiefern steigen mit dem Zuwachs an technischen Möglichkeiten auch die Ansprüche an digitale Ressourcen und wie lassen sich diese als Standards und Evaluationskriterien verhandeln, dokumentieren und weiterentwickeln? Wie kann man die Digitalität des Rezensionswesens nutzen, um die Prozesshaftigkeit der zu rezensierenden Objekte zu berücksichtigen, z. B. auch durch dynamischere Formen der Kritik jenseits der traditionellen Rezension?
          Das Panel wird mit einer Moderation und sechs Impulsbeiträgen einen Überblick über das Themenfeld “Ressourcen und Rezensionen in den Digital Humanities” geben. Die ReferentInnen berichten von Erfahrungen aus der herausgeberischen Praxis, diskutieren Problemfelder und setzen theoretische Impulse, um im Anschluss rasch in eine offene Diskussion mit dem Publikum überzugehen.
         
            
               Rüdiger Hohls:
                     Die Rezension analoger und digitaler Medien bei H-Soz-Kult
                
            Die Tradition der wissenschaftlichen Rezensionen wird vor allem in den Geistes-, Kunst-, Kultur-, Politik- und Sozialwissenschaften gepflegt, überwiegend Fächer, die unter einer Überproduktion von Texten leiden und deshalb für eine Sichtung und für ein „Marketing“ über Rezensionen besonders empfänglich sind. 
                
            Zu den Pflichten einer Rezension zählt laut Georg Jäger (2001) die Berichtspflicht über Zielsetzung, Gliederung, Argumentationslinien und Ergebnisse, kritische Reflexion des methodischen Vorgehens und der ausgewählten Quellen, weiterhin die Wertung und Einbettung in den Kontext der einschlägigen Fachdiskussion. Zur Kür bei digital vertriebenen Rezensionen zählt darüber hinaus ein „feuilletonistischer Ton“. Außerdem sei es notwendig, die „Ethik wissenschaftlicher Kommunikation“ neu zu justieren. Viele dieser Aspekte gelten auch für die Rezension digitaler Medien, und natürlich haben wir bei H-Soz-Kult unsere formatspezifischen Hinweise für RezensentInnen regelmäßig an neue technische Entwicklungen angepasst. 
            H-Soz-Kult hat seit 1996 über 15.200 Buchrezensionen, mehr als 220 Ausstellungsrezensionen, knapp 160 Rezensionen zu Publikationen auf digitalen Trägermedien und lediglich 33 sogenannte Webrezensionen veröffentlicht. Die Zahlen sprechen nicht nur für die Relevanz der Genres bei H-Soz-Kult, sondern unterstreichen auch die Bedeutung des „Buchs“ in den Geschichtswissenschaften, egal ob analog oder digital publiziert. Es stellt sich aber u. a. die Frage, warum es trotz aller Bemühungen bei H-Soz-Kult nur vergleichsweise wenige Besprechungen von fachwissenschaftlichen digitalen Ressourcen gibt.
         
         
            
               Frederike Neuber:
                     RIDE und die Herausforderungen der Digitalität
                
            Seit 2014 gibt das IDE die digitale Rezensionszeitschrift RIDE (
                    A review journal for digital editions and resources) heraus. Bis Dezember 2017 wurden in sieben Ausgaben 30 wissenschaftliche digitale Editionen und 10 digitale Textsammlungen rezensiert. Zum methodischen Rahmenprogramm RIDEs zählen Kriterienkataloge für die Besprechung des jeweiligen Ressourcentyps (Henny u. Neuber 2017, Sahle 2014), die Erhebung von Daten in einem Questionnaire und ein externes Peer Reviewing der Beiträge.
                
            Ein “markantes Kennzeichen digitaler Texte ist deren Veränderbarkeit und prinzipielle Offenheit” (cf. Working Paper der DHd-Arbeitsgruppe “Digitales Publizieren” 2016), das gilt auch für die Rezensionsobjekte in RIDE: Etwa kann sich schon während des Rezensierens und/oder nach der Publikation einer Rezension die Datengrundlage einer besprochenen Ressource verändern; im Zuge eines Relaunches kann ein User Interface ersetzt werden. Um derlei Fällen vorzubeugen empfehlen die RIDE-
                    Reviewing Guidelines
               
                     etwa die Erstellung von Screenshots und die Archivierung von Websites. Damit ist der Status Quo der Ressourcen zum jeweiligen Rezensionszeitpunkt zumindest teilweise dokumentiert.
                
            Wie die Rezensionsobjekte, so sind auch die digitalen Rezensionstexte grundsätzlich offener und veränderlicher als das bei gedruckten Rezensionen der Fall ist. Vereinzelt wurden in RIDE bereits nachträgliche Änderungen (z. B. auf Wunsch der BetreiberInnen der rezensierten Ressource) in Rezensionstexte integriert, was in der XML/TEI-Version der jeweiligen Ressource dokumentiert ist.
            Grundsätzlich steht die “Aktualität” digitaler Rezensionen von digitalen Ressourcen trotz den in RIDE bestehenden und oben geschilderten Dokumentationsverfahren auf wackeligen Beinen. Es stellt sich daher die Frage, ob eine Rezension mehr sein kann bzw. muss als die “Momentaufnahme” eines bestimmten Entwicklungsstandes einer digitalen Ressource. Und wenn sich eine Ressource nach der Rezension signifikant weiterentwickelt, liegt es dann in der Verantwortung der RIDE-HerausgeberInnen, eine erneute Rezension anzustoßen? Oder sollte man den RessourcenbetreiberInnen selbst die Möglichkeit geben, in RIDE über Updates zu berichten, wenn Rezension und aktueller Ressourcenstand zu sehr divergieren? 
         
         
            
               Anne Baillot:
                     Daten als Rezensionsobjekte
                
            In den Geisteswissenschaften werden Forschungsfragen verfolgt und in Publikationen beantwortet. Diese sind traditionell Gegenstand von Rezensionen. Im Digitalen kommt mit den Forschungsdaten eine “neue” Publikationsform hinzu, die in das Rezensionswesen einbezogen werden muss. Der Status des "Primärmaterials" ist im digitalen Rezensionswesen zu klären und kann sich unter Umständen am Modell der Naturwissenschaften orientieren. Data Papers und Data Journals sind neue Formen der Dokumentation und Publikation, die sich Struktur, Kohärenz und Vollständigkeit von Daten widmen. Damit rückt auch Datenmodellierung als eine zu evaluierende wissenschaftliche Tätigkeit mehr in den Vordergrund.
            Während naturwissenschaftliche Zeitschriften, die Data Papers veröffentlichen oder rezensieren, solche Datensätze in speziellen, selten öffentlich zugänglichen Repositorien verfügbar machen, entwickelt sich in den Geisteswissenschaften die Tendenz, die Primärdaten eher zusammen mit ihren Auswertungen oder auf allgemeinen Plattformen offen und langzeitverfügbar zugänglich zu machen. Wie stabil ist diese offene Bereitstellung auf lange Sicht? Wie komplex wird dadurch bei einer immer wieder aktualisierten digitalen Ressource die Bezugnahme auf jene Version, die in einer Rezension begutachtet wird? Darüber hinaus stellt sich die grundsätzliche Frage: Stoßen Rezensionen von Data Papers und den Daten selbst in einem Kontext der Informationsflut, in der kaum die Auswertungen wahrgenommen werden, überhaupt auf Interesse? Welche Funktion hätten sie dann in einem geisteswissenschaftlichen Rezensionswesen in der digitalen Welt? Werden sie zur Rettung oder zum endgültigen Sturz des Rezensionswesens in die Bedeutungslosigkeit beitragen?
         
         
            
               Christof Schöch:
                     Im Spannungsfeld von Projektzielen und Best Practice-Anforderungen
                
            Bei der Rezension digitaler Ressourcen treffen zwei Perspektiven aufeinander: Einerseits ist das der Rahmen der jeweils spezifischen Projektziele, die für die Erstellung einer Ressource handlungsleitend waren. Hierzu gehören auch praktische Aspekte der Machbarkeit wie Zeitrahmen, Budget und Personal. Nicht immer ist diese Perspektive für die Rezensierenden transparent. Andererseits ist das die Perspektive der theoretischen Anforderungen und der mehr oder weniger gut etablierten Best Practices, die in Form von Qualitätskriterien an eine digitale Ressource herangetragen werden können. Auch hier sind die entsprechenden Maßstäbe nicht immer geteilt und explizit. 
            Dieses Spannungsfeld und die unter Umständen asymmetrische Verfügbarkeit von Informationen wirft die Frage auf, wie die Rezension einer digitalen Ressource sowohl fair als auch anspruchsvoll sein kann, wenn unterschiedliche Maßstäbe zugleich anzulegen sind. Es stellt sich auch die Frage, inwiefern die Rezension digitaler Ressourcen hier grundsätzlich anders funktioniert als die Rezension von Monographien oder Sammelbänden. Inwieweit sollten bei der Rezension digitaler Ressourcen die äußeren Bedingungen ihrer Erstellung berücksichtigt werden? Braucht es womöglich verschiedene Ebenen von Anforderungen, wenn z. B. Ergebnisse der Individualforschung mit denjenigen großer Projekte verglichen werden? Inwiefern muss beim Anlegen von Maßstäben berücksichtigt werden, ob eine digitale Ressource weitestgehend abgeschlossen oder noch in der Bearbeitung ist?
         
         
            
               Jürgen Hermes:
                     Die Rezension als Prozess
                
            Ein Leitsatz, der die Open Source-Softwareentwicklung stark geprägt hat, und der sich auch im Paradigma der agilen Entwicklung wiederfindet, lautet “Release early, release often” (Raymond 2001).
            Ist dieses Paradigma auch auf andere Arten digitaler Publikationen wie digitale Monographien, Aufsätze, Editionen, Text- und Datensammlungen anwendbar? Eine Veröffentlichung auf digitalen Plattformen bietet völlig neue Möglichkeiten des Austauschs zwischen ErstellerInnen und KonsumentInnen von digitalen Ressourcen ‒ Errata können kurz nach ihrer Entdeckung korrigiert, Verbesserungsvorschläge zum Zeitpunkt ihrer Einreichung aufgenommen werden. Das Zusammenspiel zwischen Veröffentlichung und kritischer Würdigung wird so granularer, als dies beim althergebrachten Zusammenspiel zwischen Monographie und Rezension der Fall war. 
            Derartige, sich im Fluss befindliche Ressourcen schaffen aber dort Probleme, wo auf verlässliche Quellen verwiesen werden soll. Ebenso wird die etablierte Kultur des wissenschaftlichen Diskurses in Frage gestellt, der auf der Grundlage fixierter Objekte stattfindet. Derlei Aspekte müssen ernst genommen, können aber womöglich durch Entwicklungen in den Bereichen der Kontrolle, Referenzierung und Kommentierung von Text- und Daten-Versionen aufgefangen werden. Des Vorteils, wissenschaftliche Daten, Methoden und Ergebnisse zeitnaher, barrierefreier und intensiver zu diskutieren, sollten sich auch GeisteswissenschaftlerInnen nicht berauben lassen. 
         
         
            
               Patrick Sahle:
                     Prinzipien der Digitalität
                
            Unsere digitale Informationsumwelt ist, wie die vorhergehende analoge Welt, von wenigen Grundprinzipien geprägt, die zunächst technischer Natur sind, dann aber Folgen in allen möglichen Bereichen erzeugen: Technik, Methode, Inhalte, Form, Soziologie, Politik von Wissen, Wissensproduktion und Wissenspräsentation in der Forschung. Im Bereich digitaler Ressourcen und Rezensionen lassen sich hier vielfältige Phänomene durch verallgemeinernde Schlagworte andeuten: Multimedialisierung, Vernetzung, Aufhebung von Mengenbegrenzungen, Trennung von Daten, Auswertung und Präsentation, Generativität und Prozesshaftigkeit von Publikationen, Dynamik und Interaktion, Zunahme der Komplexität, Kollaborativität, Interdisziplinarität, unmittelbare Diskursivität etc. Damit sind neue Herausforderungen markiert, deren Lösungen jetzt noch nicht absehbar oder erst thesenhaft formulierbar sind. Zu nennen wären hier unmittelbare Sichtbarkeit, “Unfassbarkeit” von Ressourcen (hinsichtlich Inhalt, Status, Version, Verantwortung), Probleme der Kreditierung von Leistungen, Interdisziplinarität als Kompetenzproblem, unformierte Wissenschaftskommunikation, Halbwertszeit von Kritik, eingefrorene versus dynamische Kritikdiskurse, Standardisierung versus Innovation etc. Auch die digitale Rezension digitaler Ressourcen steht damit vor ganz anderen Aufgaben als die eingeführte Form der Besprechung.
            Vielleicht kann man es aber auch so zusammenfassen: Die Rezension in der Buchkultur ist die Grabrede auf ein in den Brunnen gefallenes Kind ‒ die Rezension in einer digitalen Kultur ist ein Verbesserungsvorschlag, der mit seiner Annahme hinfällig wird. Wie so vieles wird in der digitalen Welt auch die Kritik komplexer, die ihre neue Form und Position noch nicht gefunden hat. Vielleicht muss sie aber auch grundsätzlich anders gedacht werden, denn als Fortsetzung des traditionellen Objekts “Rezension”?
         
      
      
         
            Unter “digitale Ressource” verstehen wir publizierte digitale Objekte, in Anlehnung an die Definitionen der DNB im Papier “Digitale Publikation” (DNB 2017).
            Werden digitale Ressourcen rezensiert, dann meist aus der Fachperspektive. Einige Beispiele für verstreute Rezensionen aus DH-Perspektive sind Schöch (2017); Schelbert (2017); Assmann und Sahle (2008) mit Rezension zur Rezension (Just 2009); erste Ansätze für systematische Kritik im Sinne gebündelter Aktivitäten zur Bewertung bestimmter Typen digitaler Ressourcen (wie Projekte, Editionen, Textsammlungen, Datensätze), mit Begleitmaterialien und eingebunden in einen kritischen Diskurs, finden sich im DH Commons Journal, dem jTEI und RIDE.
            Vgl. zu diesem Problemfeld u.a. die Sektion “Evaluating Digital Scholarship” in Profession, herausgegeben von Schreibman et al. 2011; das Working Paper der DHd-Arbeitsgruppe “Digitales Publizieren” 2016; der Band “Closing the Evaluation Gap” des JDH von Cohen / Fragaszy Trojano 2012; zu digitalen Editionen insbesondere Pierazzo 2014, Yates 2008 und Henny, erscheint demnächst.
            Ein Phänomen dieses Wandels sind diverse Kataloge für Best Practices und Bewertungskriterien digitaler Ressourcen (AHA 2015, Jannidis 1999, MLA 2012, Presner 2012, Rockwell 2012, Sahle et al. 2014, Henny und Neuber 2017).
            Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Redaktionsmitglied von Clio online bzw. H-Soz-Kult (Projektleitung).
            Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mit-Herausgeberin des Rezensionsjournals RIDE.
            Siehe Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik e.V. (2014 ff.), 
                            .
                        
            Le Mans Université, Managing Editor des Journals der Text Encoding Initiative und Redaktionsmitglied der Zeitschrift des französischsprachigen DH-Verbandes Humanistica sowie bei DHCommons.
            Universität Trier, Redaktionsmitglied bei Romanistik.de.
            Universität zu Köln, Institut für Digital Humanities.
            Universität zu Köln, CCeH, Mit-Herausgeber des Rezensionsjournals RIDE.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  American Historical Association (AHA, ed., 2015): “Guidelines for the Evaluation of Digital Scholarship in History”. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Assmann, Bernhard / Sahle, Patrick (2008): 
                        Digital ist besser. Die Monumenta Germaniae Historica mit den dMGH auf dem Weg in die Zukunft – eine Momentaufnahme. Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
                    
               
                  Cohen, Daniel J. / Fragaszy Trojano, Joan (eds., 2012): “Closing the Evaluation Gap”, in: 
                        Journal of the Digital Humanities 1, 4. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (ed., 2017): Definition des Begriffs “Digitale Publikation” und aktuelle Verwendung der Terminologie in der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek. Ergänzende Ausführungen im Rahmen der Diskussion “Zum Sammelauftrag der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek”. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum (DHd, ed., 2016): “Digitales Publizieren”. Wolfenbüttel: HAB. Stand: 01.03.2016. DOI: 10.15499/dhd-wp.001 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Henny, Ulrike / Neuber, Frederike / unter Mitarbeit von den Mitgliedern des IDE (2017):. 
                        Criteria for Reviewing Digital Text Collections, version 1.0. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Henny, Ulrike [erscheint demnächst]: “Reviewing von digitalen Editionen im Kontext der Evaluation digitaler Forschungsergebnisse.” In: 
                        Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften (ZfdG). 
                        Sonderband 2: Digitale Metamorphose. Digital Humanities und Editionswissenschaft. Hrsg. von Roland S. Kamzelak und Timo Steyer.
                    
               
                  Hohls, Rüdiger (eds., 1996ff.): 
                        H-Soz-Kult. Kommunikation und Fachinformation für die Geisteswissenschaften. Angeboten von Clio-online - Historisches Fachinformationssystem e.V. Berlin.
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik e.V. (eds. 2014ff.): 
                        RIDE. A Review Journal for Digital Editions and Resources. Köln. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Jäger, Georg (2001): “Von Pflicht und Kür im Rezensionswesen.” In: 
                        IASLonline Diskussionsforum. Wissenschaftliche Kommunikation in der Kontroverse. Bayreuth / München, 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis (1999): “Bewertungskriterien für elektronische Editionen”, in: 
                        IASL Diskussionsforum online. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Just, Thomas (2009): “Rezension von: Digital ist besser”, in: 
                        sehepunkte 9, Nr. 3 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Modern Language Association (MLA, ed., 2012): “Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities and Digital Media” 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Pierazzo, Elena (2014): “Trusting Digital Editions? Peer Review and Evaluation of Digital Scholarship”, in: dies. 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods, 182-205. Hal Id: hal-01182162. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Presner, Todd (2012): “How to Evaluate Digital Scholarship”, in: 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities 1, 4 (2012).
                    
               
                  Raymond, Eric S. (2001): 
                        The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary. Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Rockwell, Geoffrey (2012): “Short Guide To Evaluation Of Digital Work”, in: 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities 1, 4 (2012).
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick / unter Mitarbeit von Georg Vogeler und den Mitgliedern des IDE (2014): 
                        Kriterienkatalog für die Besprechung digitaler Editionen, Version 1.1. 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Schelbert, Georg (2017): “Digital kann mehr! Das neue Graphikportal”, in: 
                        blog.arthistoricum.net 
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof (2017):. “Poston / Niles, eds., Folger Digital Texts”, in: 
                        Variants 11, 2014, pp. 16-20. DOI: 
                         [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018].
                    
               
                  Schreibman, Susan / Mandell, Laura / Olsen, Stephen (eds., 2011): “Evaluating Digital Scholarship”, in: 
                        Profession. DOI: 10.1632/prof.2011.2011.1.123
                    
               
                  Yates, Kimberly (2008): “Creating a Prize for the Best Digital Editions / Online Archives.”, in: 
                        Scroll – Essays on the Design of Electronic Texts 1, 1.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Das hier beschriebene Poster thematisiert den technischen Entwurf und den funktionalen Aufbau von 
                    VedaWeb, einer webbasierten Plattform für die sprachwissenschaftliche Erforschung altindischer Texte (siehe 
                    http://vedaweb.uni-koeln.de). Das 2017 begonnene Vorhaben wird als Kooperationsprojekt an der Universität zu Köln durchgeführt, in enger Zusammenarbeit zwischen Fachwissenschaftlern des Instituts für Linguistik (Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, Historisch-Vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft und Sprachliche Informationsverarbeitung) sowie des Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH). Das Projekt wird von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in der LIS-Förderlinie „eResearch-Technologien“ gefördert. 
                
            Über die 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform werden altindische, in Sanskrit verfasste Texte morphologisch und metrisch annotiert, sowie nach lexikographischen und korpuslinguistischen Kriterien durchsuchbar zur Verfügung gestellt. Als Pilottext dient zunächst der 
                    Rigveda, einer der ältesten und wichtigsten Texte der indogermanischen Sprachfamilie. Der 
                    Rigveda ist in der ältesten Sprachform des Altindischen, dem Vedischen, verfasst. Seine Entstehung kann auf das späte zweite Jahrtausend v. Chr. datiert werden. Mit einem Umfang größer als Homers 
                    Ilias und 
                    Odyssee zusammen stellt er eine überaus reiche Datengrundlage dar. Perspektivisch sollen auch weitere Texte wie etwa der 
                    Atharvaveda, 
                    Yajurveda und vedische Prosatexte in die 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform integriert werden. Das Projekt wird Forschungen in allen Bereichen des Vedischen erleichtern und voranbringen, beispielsweise in Bezug auf Fragestellungen der Syntax (siehe z.B. zu referentiellen Null-Objekten Keydana/Luraghi 2012, zu Nicht-Konfigurationalität Reinöhl 2016), der Morphologie (siehe z.B. zum vedischen vr̥kī-Typus Widmer 2007, zu ya-Präsentien Kulikov, 2012) oder der Wortbildung (siehe z.B. zu Komposita Scarlata/Widmer 2015). Es wird angestrebt, die 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform längerfristig zur zentralen Anlaufstelle für die internationale Fachgemeinschaft, die mit altindischen Primärtexten arbeitet, auszubauen, um den in Köln bestehenden Schwerpunkt auf südasiatische Sprachen weiter zu stärken. 
                
         
         
            Projektziele
            Ausgangspunkt und Grundlage des Projekts ist eine vollständige morphologische (d.h. wortstrukturelle) Annotation des 
                    Rigveda, die im Vorfeld an der Universität Zürich durchgeführt und dem Projekt zur Verfügung gestellt wurde. Hinzu kommen metrische Informationen (Kevin Ryan, Harvard University, siehe 
                    ) sowie perspektivisch auch syntaktische Informationen aus verschiedenen abgeschlossenen und andauernden Forschungsprojekten als weitere Annotationsebenen. Anhand dieser Annotationen werden im Projekt verschiedene Recherche- und Analysewerkzeuge entwickelt und sukzessive in die 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform integriert. Hierzu gehören eine kombinierte Suchfunktion nach linguistischen Parametern (u.a. Lemmata, Wortformen, morphologische und metrische Informationen), die Verknüpfung mit dem Standardwörterbuch zum 
                    Rigveda von Hermann Grassmann (1873), die Anzeige von Übersetzungen (u.a. Grassmann 1876, Geldner 2003, Griffith 1896) und von Kommentaren (Oldenberg 1909/1912), sowie die Möglichkeit des Exports von annotierten Textabschnitten nach vom Nutzer gewählten Kriterien. 
                
            Von zentraler Bedeutung ist die Verknüpfung des 
                    Rigveda mit der am CCeH angesiedelten Portalseite für Sanskritwörterbücher (
                    Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries, siehe 
                    http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de), einer zentralen Anlaufstelle für die internationale Sanskritforschung. Auf Basis einer Modellierung der Daten in TEI werden die Wortformen über die jeweiligen Lemmata mit dem digital erfassten Wörterbuch von Grassmann verknüpft, so dass sowohl vom Text auf das Wörterbuch verwiesen wird als auch umgekehrt vom Wörterbuch aus Textstellen aufgesucht werden können. Auf diese Weise kann über das Lemma gleichzeitig auch eine Verknüpfung zu den weiteren Sanskrit-Wörterbüchern hergestellt werden, etwa um vergleichende, wörterbuchübergreifende Recherchen zu ermöglichen. In der direkten Verknüpfung von Text und Wörterbuch und der damit verbundenen Erweiterung der Analysemöglichkeiten besteht das wesentliche Alleinstellungsmerkmal des Projekts gegenüber bestehenden Ressourcen des Altindischen wie z.B. dem 
                    Thesaurus Indogermanischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien (TITUS, siehe 
                    http://titus.uni-frankfurt.de).
                
         
         
            Technische Aspekte
            Der Schwerpunkt des Posters liegt auf der Präsentation des Systementwurfs der 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform sowie der dort eingesetzten Technologien. Dies umfasst zum einen eine Beschreibung der funktionalen Elemente der Nutzerschnittstelle, die dem Anwender als Forschungsumgebung dient, indem sie verschiedene Werkzeuge bereitstellt (z.B. Suche, Verlinkung, Export in TEI-Format). Zum anderen werden die Systemarchitektur und die für deren Umsetzung verwendeten Technologien thematisiert. Die 
                    VedaWeb-Plattform wird als Webanwendung auf Basis des 
                    Spring-Frameworks umgesetzt (siehe 
                    https://spring.io). Durch dessen weite Verbreitung und den großen Funktionsumfang sind sowohl die langfristige Wartbarkeit als auch zahlreiche Möglichkeiten zur späteren Erweiterung der Plattform gewährleistet. Für die Umsetzung der Suchlogik wurde zunächst der Einsatz von etablierten, auf 
                    Lucene (siehe 
                    http://lucene.apache.org) aufbauenden Such-Servern wie 
                    Solr oder 
                    Elasticsearch geprüft, jedoch wieder verworfen, da ihre Stärken v.a. im Durchsuchen sehr umfangreicher, dabei aber verhältnismäßig einfach strukturierter Textsammlungen liegen. Die 
                    VedaWeb-Suche hingegen soll mittels komplexer, kombinierbarer Suchkriterien über die reine Volltextsuche hinaus auch linguistisch motivierte Suchanfragen auf Grundlage der verschiedenen Annotationsebenen zulassen. Anstelle der genannten Such-Server wird deshalb eine eigene, auf den gegebenen Anwendungsfall zugeschnittene Suchlogik direkt mit 
                    Lucene implementiert. Das Frontend wird unter Verwendung einer Template Engine (
                    Thymeleaf, siehe 
                    http://www.thymeleaf.org) und Client-seitigen JavaScript-Technologien umgesetzt, um eine möglichst flexible und effiziente Arbeitsweise zu ermöglichen. Mit der Fokussierung auf den Systementwurf möchten wir mit dem Poster vor allem einen kompakten Überblick über die Nutzungsmöglichkeiten sowie über die technische Funktionsweise der VedaWeb-Plattform geben.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Geldner, Karl Friedrich (2003) [1951-57]: 
                        Der Rig-Veda. Aus dem Sanskrit ins Deutsche übersetzt und mit einem laufenden Kommentar versehen von Karl Friedrich Geldner. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.
                    
               
                  Grassmann, Hermann (1873): 
                        Wörterbuch zum Rig-veda. Wiesbaden, O. Harrassowitz.
                    
               
                  Grassmann, Hermann (1876): 
                        Rig-veda. Übersetzt und mit kritischen und erläuternden Anmerkungen versehen von Hermann Grassmann. Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus.
                    
               
                  Griffith, Ralph T. H. (1896): 
                        The Hymns of the Rigveda. Benares: Lazarus.
                    
               
                  Keydana, Götz / Luraghi, Silvia (2012): 
                        Definite referential null objects in Vedic Sanskrit and Ancient Greek. Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 44 (2):116–28. 
                        .
                    
               
                  Kulikov, Leonid (2012): 
                        The Vedic -ya-Presents: Passives and Intransitivity in Old Indo-Aryan. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi.
                    
               
                  Oldenberg, Hermann (1909/1912): 
                        R̥gveda. Textkritische und exegetische Noten. Berlin: Weidmann.
                    
               
                  Reinöhl, Uta (2016): 
                        Grammaticalization and the Rise of Configurationality in Indo-Aryan. Oxford: Oxford University Press
                    
               
                  Scarlata, Salvatore / Widmer, Paul (2015): 
                        Vedische exozentrische Komposita mit drei Relationen. Indo-Iranian Journal, 58(1):26-47.
                    
               
                  Widmer, Paul (2007): 
                        Der altindische vrkī́-Typus und hethitisch nakki-: Der indogermanische Instrumental zwischen Syntax und Morphologie. Zeitschrift für Sprachwissenschaft, (1-2):190-208.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Historische Korpora (Gippert und Gehrke 2015; Claridge 2008; Rissanen 2008) dienen in vielen geisteswissenschaftlichen Disziplinen als Analysegrundlage und können sehr unterschiedlich aufbereitet sein. Mit korpusbasierten Studien können qualitative und quantitative Analysen, die für die Überprüfung von Hypothesen über ein bestimmtes Phänomen notwendig sind, durchgeführt werden. Dem gegenüber steht methodisch die korpusgetriebene Studie, die das Korpus selbst nutzt, um Hypothesen über ein Phänomen zu generieren (vgl. McEnery und Hardie 2012; Lüdeling und Zeldes 2007). Neben diesen zwei Studientypen können mit Hilfe von Korpora auch einzelne Belege und Kontexte für die Beantwortung verschiedenster Forschungsfragen ermittelt werden. 
         Eine andere methodische Unterscheidung wird mit dem 
                close reading und dem 
                distant reading gemacht (vgl. Moretti 2016; Federico 2015; Gooding et al. 2013; Simanowski 2011). Wobei 
                close reading hermeneutische, nicht zwingend digitale Methoden umfassen und eine methodische Nähe zu den korpusinformierten Belegstudien sowie zu qualitativen korpusbasierten Studien aufweisen kann. 
                Distant reading ist hingegen vergleichbar mit überwiegend quantitativen, korpusgetriebenen Studien. Ein zusätzlicher Aspekt dieser Methoden ist auch die Visualisierung der Daten für 
                distant reading oder des Textes für
                 close reading. Verschiedene Visualisierungen der Annotationen werden für die korpusbasierten, -getriebenen und -informierten Studien eingesetzt und können so verschiedene Analysen unterstützen oder auch erst ermöglichen.
            
         In den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften müssen daher für die jeweiligen Methoden und Forschungsdaten Analyse- und Visualisierungswerkzeuge entwickelt werden, die es den Forscherinnen und Forschern ermöglichen, für ihren jeweiligen Forschungskontext aus einem breiten methodischen Spektrum wählen zu können (vgl. für einen Überblick z.B. Kupietz und Geyken 2016). Ein solches Werkzeug ist ANNIS (Krause und Zeldes 2016), das Such- und Visualisierungstool für Annotationen, das wir in unserem Workshop den Forscherinnen und Forschern aus den Digital Humanities vorstellen möchten. ANNIS erlaubt das Durchsuchen von Korpora, die unterschiedliche Arten von Annotationen, die möglicherweise durch unterschiedliche Forschergruppen unter verschiedenen Gesichtspunkten annotiert worden, in einem Korpus vereinen. Diese Flexibilität erlaubt es, annotierte Phänomene in der Suche zu kombinieren und damit komplexere Strukturen zu finden.
         Neben der Unterstützung der vielfältigen Analysemethoden ist eine weitere Herausforderung für die Analysewerkzeuge, dass historische Korpora je nach Forschungskontext und -frage unterschiedlich erstellt und aufbereitet werden (Lüdeling 2011). Dies zeigt sich unter anderen in den vielfältigen Transkriptions- und Normalisierungsverfahren (vgl. z.B. Odebrecht et al. 2016; Krasselt et al. 2015; Archer et al. 2015; Bollmann et al. 2012; Jurish 2010) und Annotationsguidelines (für z.B. Annotation von Wortarten für historisches Deutsch Coniglio et al. 2016; Dipper et al. 2013) sowie verschiedenen Formaten (z.B. Romary et al. 2015; Schmidt und Wörner 2009; Burnard und Baumann 2008; Wittenburg et al. 2006; Dipper 2005), die allein für die Erstellung von historischen Korpora eingesetzt werden. 
         Damit historische Korpora mit verschiedenen Methoden analysiert werden können, muss deren Wiederverwendung ermöglicht werden. Die Wiederverwendung von historischen Korpora wird durch u.a. deren freie Veröffentlichung und umfassende Dokumentation möglich (Odebrecht 2014; Borgmann 2012; Büttner et al. 2011). Weiterhin erhöht eine Wiederverwendung ihre Sichtbarkeit und stellt eine Chance zur engeren Vernetzung und Zusammenarbeit in den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften dar. So können auch historische Korpora in unterschiedlichen Wiederverwendungsszenarien gedacht werden (vgl. Simons und Bird 2008) und als empirische Grundlage für die verschiedenen Analysemethoden dienen. 
         Dieser Workshop möchte ausgehend von diesen Themenkomplex mit den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern folgende Fragen diskutieren: Wie können Analysewerkzeuge den Forscherinnen und Forschern vielfältige Analysemethoden und Visualisierungsmethoden für verschiedene historische Korpora ermöglichen? Wie kann ANNIS die verschiedenen Analysemethoden bislang unterstützen? Wie kann es gelingen, auch die Vielfältigkeit der Forschungsdaten als solche zu berücksichtigen und deren Wiederverwendung zu ermöglichen? Wie können Werkzeuge spezifisch genug entwickelt werden, um genaue und für den Forschungskontext und die Forschungsdaten angepasste Analysen zu ermöglichen? 
         Der Workshop hat das Ziel, anhand mehrerer historischer Korpora des Deutschen das generische Such- und Visualisierungstool ANNIS (Krause und Zeldes 2016) für den Einsatz in den Digital Humanities zu diskutieren und anzuwenden, da es bislang überwiegend für korpusbasierte und korpusgetriebene Studien sowie für das Auffinden von sprachlichen Belegen eingesetzt wird. 
         ANNIS wird seit 2009 als ein generisches webbasiertes Such- und Visualisierungstool für verschiedene Korpustypen und Annotationskonzepte in verschiedenen Kooperationen mit der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin und der Georgetown University und in mehreren Projekten entwickelt. Der Quellcode von ANNIS ist frei zugänglich veröffentlicht und bietet gleichzeitig eine Desktop- sowie Server-Installation. In ANNIS können Korpora mit Token-, Spannen-, Baum- und Pointingannotationen unabhängig von den einzelnen, jeweils korpusspezifischen Annotationsguidelines in ANNIS analysiert werden. ANNIS bietet weiterhin den Korpuserstellerinnen und -erstellern annotations- oder fachspezifische Visualisierungen für Korpora. Mit einer wiederum generischen und mächtigen Anfragesprache (ANNIS Query Language – AQL) können alle Korpora in ANNIS nach Annotationen und Kombinationen von Annotationen durchsucht werden. Weiterhin können die Suchergebnisse für bspw. weitere statistische Auswertungen exportiert werden. Jedes Korpus, jede Suchanfrage und jeder Beleg kann über einen permanenten Link stabil referenziert werden. Mit dem Konverterframework Pepper (Zipser und Romary 2010) werden Korpora, die in verschiedenen Formaten vorliegen können, in das ANNIS-Format überführt.
         Repositorien wie das LAUDATIO-Repository (Odebrecht et al. 2015) ermöglichen einen Open Access Zugang zu verschiedensten historischen Korpora und stellen eine umfassende Korpusdokumentation (Odebrecht 2014) zur Verfügung, die eine Erschließung dieser heterogenen Datengrundlage unabhängig von den Korpuserstellerinnen und -erstellern ermöglicht. Damit wird eine Voraussetzung für die Wiederverwendung der historischen Korpora erfüllt. Für den Workshop werden aus LAUDATIO beispielhaft die Korpora „Referenzkorpus Altdeutsch“ (Donhauser 2015) und „RIDGES Herbology Korpus“ (Odebrecht et al. 2016) verwendet.
         Das Referenzkorpus Altdeutsch ist ein historisches Mehrebenenkorpus der ganzen Sprachperiode des Althochdeutschen mit ca. 650.000 Wörtern (von den ersten Überlieferungen bis Mitte des 11. Jahrhunderts). Als Grundlage für die diplomatischen Transkription sind Editionen der jeweiligen Handschriften, die mit weiteren Annotationen zur Textstruktur sowie mit komplexen Wortartenannotation (Dipper et al. 2013), Annotation zu Flexionsklassen und Lemmatisierung versehen sind. Das RIDGES Korpus ist ein tief annotiertes Korpus mit Auszügen aus gedruckten Kräuterbüchern aus der Zeit zwischen 1487 und 1910, anhand derer die Entwicklung der deutschen Wissenschaftssprache auf vielen Ebenen untersucht wird. Die Drucke sind diplomatisch transkribiert (wo möglich, nach vorher digitalisierten oder durch OCR-Verfahren erstellte Vorlagen, vgl. Springmann und Lüdeling 2017). Die Daten sind mehrfach normalisiert und auf vielen Ebenen annotiert (unter anderem mit Wortart, Lemma, Informationen zu Kompositionstypen (Perlitz 2014), Dependenzsyntax, Informationen zur graphischen Struktur nach den TEI Guidelines). Dabei werden automatische und manuelle Annotationsverfahren und Prüfverfahren genutzt.
         Um die eingangs formulierten Fragen adressieren zu können, wird der Workshop zwei Schwerpunkte enthalten. Der erste Schwerpunkt wird die Einführung in die Funktionen und Suchanfragesprache von ANNIS sowie die damit verbundene Vorstellung der zwei historischen Beispielkorpora umfassen. Wir wollen den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern die verschiedenen Analyse- und Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten online und hands-on vorstellen. Über die Vorstellung zweier historischer Korpora mit dem generischen ANNIS können bereits die Herausforderungen der heterogenen Datengrundlage in den digitalen Geisteswissenschaften für Analysetools herausgearbeitet werden.
         Der zweite Schwerpunkt soll Raum für eine Diskussion mit den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern sowie auch die Möglichkeit geben, weitere Korpora in ANNIS – geleitet von den Forschungsinteressen der Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern – zu durchsuchen. Mit diesem Workshop wollen wir uns gemeinsam mit den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern kritisch mit den Anforderungen an ein Analysetool für verschiedene Methoden zur Analyse und Visualisierung von historischen Korpora auseinandersetzen und prüfen, in wie weit ANNIS bereits einige dieser Anforderungen erfüllen kann. So wollen wir ANNIS in einem neuen Forschungskontext der Digital Humanities diskutieren und dabei neue Nutzerszenarien für die weitere Entwicklung erarbeiten. 
         Zeitplan:
            
            1,5 Stunden Online Hands-on-Einführung in das Such- und Visualisierungstool, der Anfragesprache mit dem Referenzkorpus Altdeutsch und RIDGES Korpus
            1,5 Stunden Teilnehmergeleitete Anfragen, weitere Korpora und Diskussion der Anforderungen
         
         Technische Anforderungen:
            
            Für den Workshop werden ein Raum mit Beamer und Zugang zu eduroam, ggf. einzelne WLAN-Zugänge für die Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer benötigt.
            Alle Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer benötigen eigenes Notebook.
         
         Teilnehmeranzahl: 
            
            max. 30
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2016): 
                        Distant Reading. Konstanz: Konstanz University Press.
                    
               
                  Romary, Laurent / Zeldes, Amir / Zipser, Florian (2015): ". Serialising the ISO SynAF syntactic object model", in: 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation 49 (1), S. 1–18. 10.1007/s10579-014-9288-x.
                    
               
                  Archer, Dawn / Kytö, Merja / Baron, Alistair / Rayson, Paul (2015): "Guidelines for normalising Early Modern English corpora. Decisions and justifications", in: 
                        ICAME Journal (39), 5–24.
                    
               
                  Bollmann, Marcel / Dipper, Stefanie / Krasselt, Julia / Petran, Florian (2012): "Manual and semi-automatic normalization of historical spelling. Case studies from Early New High German", in: 
                        Proceedings of KONVENS 2012 342–350. http://www.oegai.at/konvens2012/proceedings/51_bollmann12w/ [letzter Zugriff am 24.08.2016].
                    
               
                  Borgmann, Christine L. (2012): "The conundrum of sharing research data", in: 
                        Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 63 (6), 1059–1087. 10.2139/ssrn.1869155.
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou / Baumann, Sid (eds.) (2008): 
                        TEI P5. Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Oxford. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ [zuletzt geprüft am 11.11.2015].
                    
               
                  Büttner, Stephan / Hobohm, Hans-Christoph / Müller, Lars (2011): "Research Data Management", in: Büttner, Stephan / Hobohm, Hans-Christoph / Müller, Lars (eds.): 
                        Handbuch Forschungsdatenmanagement. Bad Honnef: Bock + Herchen, 13–23.
                    
               
                  Claridge, Claudia (2008): "Historical Corpora", in: Lüdeling, Anke / Kytö, Merja (eds.): 
                        Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook, Bd. 1. 2. Berlin: De Gruyter (1), 242–259.
                    
               
                  Coniglio, Marco / Donhauser, Karin / Schlachter, Eva / Rasskazova, Oxana / Odebrecht, Carolin / Wirth, Matthias / Miltenberger, Anke (2016): 
                        Historisches Predigtenkorpus zum Nachfeld (HIPKON Version 1.0). Technischer Bericht, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. 10.18452/13681.
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie (2005): "XML-based Stand-off Representation and Exploitation of Multi-Level Linguistic Annotation", in: 
                        Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage 2005 (BXML 2005). Berlin, 39–50.
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie / Donhauser, Karin / Klein, Thomas / Linde, Sonja / Müller, Stefan / Wegera, Klaus-Peter (2013): "HiTS. Ein Tagset für historische Sprachstufen des Deutschen“, in: Zinsmeister, Heike / Heid, Ulrich / Beck, Kathrin (eds.): Das Stuttgart-Tübingen Wortarten-Tagset. Stand und Perspektiven", in: 
                        Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics, 28(1), 85–137.
                    
               
                  Donhauser, Karin (2015): "Das Referenzkorpus Altdeutsch. Das Konzept, die Realisierung und die neuen Möglichkeiten", in: Gippert, Jost / Gehrke, Ralf (eds.): 
                        Historical Corpora. Tübingen: Narr (Korpuslinguistik und interdisziplinäre Perspektiven auf Sprache, 5), 35–49.
                    
               
                  Federico, Annette (2015): 
                        Engagements with Literature. Engagements with Close Reading. Florence: Routledge.
                    
               
                  Gippert, Jost / Gehrke, Ralf (eds.) (2015): 
                        Historical Corpora. Tübingen: Narr (Korpuslinguistik und interdisziplinäre Perspektiven auf Sprache, 5).
                    
               
                  Gooding, Paul / Terras, Melissa / Warwick, Claire (2013): “The myth of the new. Mass digitization, distant reading, and the future of the book”, in: 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 28 (4), 629–639. 10.1093/llc/fqt051.
                    
               
                  Jurish, Bryan (2010): “More than Words: Using Token Context to Improve Canonicalization of Historical German”, in: 
                        Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 25 (1), 23–40.
                    
               
                  Krasselt, Julia / Bollmann, Marcel / Dipper, Stefanie / Petran, Florian (2015): 
                        Guidelines für die Normalisierung historischer deutscher Texte. Bochumer Linguistische Arbeitsberichte, 15. urn:nbn:de:hebis:30:3-419680.
                    
               
                  Krause, Thomas / Zeldes, Amir (2016): ANNIS3. “A new architecture for generic corpus query and visualization”, in: 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31 (1), 118–139. 10.1093/llc/fqu057.
                    
               
                  Kupietz, Marc / Geyken, Alexander (eds.) (2016): “Corpus Linguistic Software Tools”, in: 
                        Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 31(1).
                    
               
                  Lüdeling, Anke (2011): “Corpora in Linguistics. Sampling and Annotation”, in: Grandin, Karl (ed.): 
                        Going Digital. Evolutionary and Revolutionary Aspects of Digitization. New York: Science History Publications (Nobel Symposium, 147), 220–243.
                    
               
                  Lüdeling, Anke / Zeldes, Amir (2007): “Three Views on Corpora. Corpus Linguistics, Literary Computing, and Computational Linguistics”, in: 
                        Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie (9), 149–178.
                    
               
                  McEnery, Tony / Hardie, Andrew (2012): 
                        Corpus Linguistics. Method, Theory and Practice. Cambride [u.a.]: Cambridge University Press (Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics).
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin (2014): "Modeling Linguistic Research Data for a Repository for Historical Corpora", in: 
                        Digital Humanities Conference Abstracts. Lausanne 284–285.
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin / Belz, Malte / Zeldes, Amir / Lüdeling, Anke / Krause, Thomas (2017): „RIDGES Herbology. Designing a Diachronic Multi-Layer Corpus”, in: 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation 51 (2) First Online 2016, 695-725
                        . 10.1007/s10579-016-9374-3.
                    
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin / Krause, Thomas / Lüdeling, Anke (2015): "Austausch von historischen Texten verschiedener Sprachen über das LAUDATIO-Repository", 
                        37. Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Sprachwissenschaft, DGfS-CL Poster Session, Leipzig. http://conference.uni-leipzig.de/dgfs2015/fileadmin/zusatzdokumente/dgfs-tagung-2015-final.pdf [letzter Zugriff am 17.08.2017].
                    
               
                  Perlitz, Laura (2014): 
                        Konkurrenz zwischen Wortbildung und Syntax. Historische Entwicklung von Benennung. Bachelorarbeit. Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin. 10.18452/14232
                    
               
                  Rissanen, Matti (2008): "Corpus Linguistics and Historical Linguistics", in: Lüdeling, Anke / Kytö, Merja (eds.): 
                        Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook. 2 Bände. Berlin: De Gruyter (1), 53–68.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas / Wörner, Kai (2009): "EXMARaLDA. Creating, analysing and sharing spoken language corpora for pragmatic research", in: 
                        Pragmatics 19 (4), 565–582.
                    
               
                  Simanowski, Roberto (2011): 
                        Digital Art and Meaning. Reading Kinetic Poetry, Text Machines, Mapping Art, and Interactive Installations (Electronic Mediations). Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press.
                    
               
                  Simons, Gary / Bird, Steven (2008): "Toward a global infrastructure for the sustainability of language resources", in: 
                        Proceedings of the 22nd Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation. Cebu City,  87–100.
                    
               
                  Springmann, Uwe / Lüdeling, Anke (2017): "OCR of historical printings with an application to building diachronic corpora. A case study using the RIDGES herbal corpus", in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 11 (2). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000288/000288.html [letzter Zugriff am 12.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Wittenburg, Peter / Brugmann, Hennie / Russel, Albert / Klassmann, Alex / Sloetjes, Han (2006): "ELAN. A Professional Framework for Multimodality Research", in: 
                        Proceeedings of LREC. Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Genoa 1556–1559. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2006/ [letzter Zugriff am 23.12.2016].
                    
               
                  Zipser, Florian / Romary, Laurent (2010): "A model oriented approach to the mapping of annotation formats using standards", in: 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Resource and Language Technology Standards, LREC 2010. http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/inria-00527799/en/ [letzter Zugriff am 12.11.2014].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Das interdisziplinäre Forschungsprojekt 
                    Digital Plato
                untersucht die Rezeption und Nachwirkung des platonischen Werkes in der griechischen Literatur bis in die Spätantike mit einem Fokus auf nicht-wörtlichen Referenzen. Der folgende Beitrag und das dazugehörige Poster geben einen Überblick über die wichtigsten Zwischenergebnisse, die während der zurückliegenden ersten Hälfte der Projektlaufzeit erzielt wurden. Neben der Organisation des Korpus sowie dessen linguistischer Anreicherung, dem Aufbau eines Wortnetzes und die Einbettung in einen Vektorraum, zählen dazu die Erfassung und Kategorisierung bekannter Referenzstellen, die Adaption der CTS zur wortgenauen Referenzierung, die theoretische Annäherung und schließlich die semi-automatische Suche nach neuen Paraphrasen.
                
         
         
            Teilbereiche
            
               Textgrundlage
               Die Textgrundlage des Projekts ist der Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG), der zunächst in ein XML-Format nach TEI-Standard überführtwurde. Da das Textkorpus als statisch anzusehen ist, wir im Laufe des Projektes aber mehrfach zusätzliche Annotationen hinterlegen und aktualisieren möchten, haben wir in einem zweiten Schritt Text und Annotationen nach dem Single-Source Prinzip voneinander getrennt. Dazu wurde der eigentliche Inhalt des Werks als unveränderliche Quelle (Single-Source) in Form einer einfachen fortlaufenden Textdatei angelegt, auf welche wiederum Dateien mit zusätzlichen Informationen (Standoff-Markup) referenzieren.Eine Referenz gibt dabei an, am wievielten Zeichen der Single-Source die Annotation startet und endet. Auch Texthervorhebungen und strukturelle Auszeichnungen des ursprünglichen TLG-Formats wurden so erfasst.
               Für jede Form der Annotation wird eine eigene Datei mit Standoff-Markup angelegt, sodass eine Bearbeitung dieser keinen Einfluss auf die übrigen Auszeichnungen hat und sogar überlappende Annotationen ermöglicht werden.
            
            
               Annotationen
               Der TLG enthält hauptsächlich strukturelle Annotationen. Über eine Kombination verschiedener bestehender linguistischer Werkzeuge, wie Morpheus (Crane 1991) und Mate Tagger (Bohnet und Nivre 2012), werden dem Korpus nachträglich Lemmata und morphologische Informationen in Form von Standoff-Markup hinzugefügt. Ferner sollen auf dieser Basis auch die Nominalphrasen automatisch erkannt und ausgezeichnet werden. Solche Angaben helfen bei der Suche nach für das Projekt relevanten Textstellen.
            
            
               Helleninet
               Über die Verknüpfung diverser Wörterbücher wurde im Rahmen des Projekts ein Wortnetz für das Altgriechischegeneriert. Die Helleninet getaufte Struktur stellt ein weiteres wichtiges Standbein für die Einordnung der Relationen zwischen Wörtern und Textstellen dar.
            
            
               Worteinbettung
               Die Wörter eines Korpus können mit Hilfe statistischer Verfahren in einen Vektorraum eingebettet werden, sodass dieser semantische Beziehungen zwischen den Wörtern abbildet. Vorteilhaft hierbei ist, dass lediglich ein hinreichend großes Korpus benötigt wird, da das Verfahren auf den Kontexten der Wörter und nicht auf Vorwissen zur Sprache aufbaut. Das genutzte Verfahren word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) erlaubte uns dank seiner Performanz die Durchführung einer umfangreichen Evaluation, um eine für das Projekt möglichst optimale Einbettung zu finden.
            
            
               Semi-automatische Rezeptionserkennung
               Um weitere Referenzen auf Platon im Korpus aufzuspüren, verfolgen wir verschiedene (semi-)automatische Ansätze, die über die aus der Literatur bekannten Ansätze hinausgehen. Beim auf der DHd 2017 vorgestellten 'Rütteln' (Kath et al. 2017) handelt es sich um ein exploratives Verfahren, bei dem interaktiv von einer Textstelle Platons ausgehend einzelne Worte mit sinnverwandten Wörtern (bspw. Synonyme oder Übersetzungen) ersetzt werden und anschießend nach der modifizierten Textstelle im Korpus gesucht wird.
               Ein ähnliches, aber systematisches Vorgehen stellt die n-Gramm-Suche dar. Nach einer umfangreichen Normalisierungwerden die n-Gramme verschiedener Längen für das gesamte Korpus indiziert. Anschließend können alle übereinstimmenden n-Gramme effizient ermittelt werden. 
               Ein drittes Verfahren basiert auf der Word Mover's Distance (Kusner et al. 2015), einem Distanzmaß für zwei Wortgruppen auf Grundlage einer Worteinbettung. Ausgehend von einer Textstelle wird das Korpus hierbei nach Textstellen mit möglichst geringer Distanz durchsucht(Pöckelmann et al. 2017).Die systematische Evaluation an Hand des im Projekt erstellten Goldstandard zeigt, dass dieses Verfahren zu sehr guten Ergebnissen führt.
            
            
               Referenzierungssystem
               Zur wortgenauen Referenzierung von Textstellen im Korpus wurden CTS-URNs adaptiert, d.h. 
                        Uniform Resource Names nach der Notation der 
                        Canonical Text Services (Blackwell und Smith 2014). Im Unterschied zum Standard werden die Wörter einer Zeile ebenfalls durchnummeriert, sodass in einer Subreferenz nicht das Wort selbst, sondern dessen Position genutzt werden kann. Um Probleme mit durch Zeilenumbruch getrennten Wörtern zu vermeiden, werden beide Teile in ihrer jeweiligen Zeile mitgezählt. Ein entsprechender Konverter bildet die CTS-URN auf Positionen in den Single-Sources sowie umgekehrt ab.
                    
            
            
               Goldstandard und Referenzannotierer
               Mit Hilfe des im Projekt entwickelten, graphischen Werkzeugs ‑ des Referenzannotierers ‑ wurde eine zuvor erstellte Sammlung bekannter Rezeptionen mit Annotationen verschiedener Kategorien versehen. Der Goldstandard erlaubt durch diese umfassende Kategorisierung eine statistische Auswertung und hilft bei der Begriffsbildung. Zudem bildet er die Grundlage zur systematischen Evaluation der automatischen Suchverfahren und für einen umfassenden Thesaurus.
            
            
               Begriffsbildung
               Das Projekt arbeitet an einer theoretischen Ausdifferenzierung des Paraphrasenbegriffs: als konstitutiv werden hierbei Ähnlichkeiten von Textstellen zueinander angesehen, die sich auf der Wortebene abbilden. Hierbei nehmen wir wie anderen Ansätze die Notwendigkeit eines ‘Dritten’ an, um die Relation von Texten zueinander zu charakterisieren, nur verorten wir dies weniger stark im Bereich der Semantik, der schwer operationalisierbar ist. Vielmehr zielen wir auf eine fruchtbare Synthese dieser Theorie, die Paraphrasen ohne Annahme von Autorenintentionen oder der Bestimmung von Abhängigkeitsverhältnissen zwischen Texten beschreibbar macht, mit bestehenden Ansätzen zur Bestimmung von Ähnlichkeit zwischen Texten aus den DH.
            
         
      
      
         
            Gefördert durch die VolkswagenStiftung. Weitere Informationen auf der Projektseite unter: 
                            
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Blackwell, Christopher / Smith, Neel (2014): "The Canonical Text Service (CTS)" 
                         [letzter Zugriff 18. September 2017].
                    
               
                  Bohnet, Bernd / Nivre, Joakim (2012): "A Transition-Based System for Joint Part-of-Speech Tagging and Labeled Non-Projective Dependency Parsing" in: 
                        Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning: 1455-1465.
                    
               
                  Crane, Gregory (1991): "Generating and parsing classical greek" in: 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 6(4):243–245.
                    
               
                  Kath, Roxana / Keilholz, Franz / Klinker, Fabian / Pöckelmann, Marcus / Rücker, Michaela / Švitek, Mihael / Wöckener-Gade, Eva / Yu, Xiaozhou (2017): "Paraphrasenerkennung im Projekt Digital Plato" in: 
                        Tagungsband der 4. Jahrestagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum: 266-270.
                    
               
                  Kusner, Matt J. / Sun, Yu / Kolkin, Nicholas I. / Weinberger, Kilian Q. (2015): "From Word Embeddings To Document Distances" in: 
                        Proceedings of the 32. International Conference on Machine Learning: 957–966.
                    
               
                  Mikolov, Tomas / Sutskever, Ilya / Chen, Kai / Corrado, Greg S. / Dean, Jeff (2013): "Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality" in: 
                        Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26: 3111–3119.
                    
               
                  Pöckelmann, Marcus / Ritter, Jörg / Wöckener-Gade, Eva / Schubert, Charlotte (2017): "Paraphrasensuche mittels word2vec und der Word Mover’s Distance im Altgriechischen"in: Digital Classics Online, Band 3, Ausgabe 3, S. 24-36.
            
         
      
   



      
         Daten werden laut der Vision der ‘High Level Expert Group on Scientiﬁc Data’ in der Zukunft einen Grad an Ausdrucksstärke und Formen der Selbstbeschreibung erhalten, dass sie in die Lage versetzt werden, ihre eigene Infrastruktur zu stellen (Neuroth, Heike / et al. 2012). Auch die Idee des Semantic Web verspricht eine Zukunft in der Maschinen selbständig mit Daten agieren können (Berners-Lee, Tim 2000). Die praktische Realität - gerade für die digitalen Geisteswissenschaften - ist noch eine Andere. Dennoch steckt in den Methoden des Semantic Webs ein Potenzial, das es mit vernünftiger Kritik zu nutzen gilt. 
                Das Projekt MEDEA (Modeling semantically Enriched Digital Edition of Accounts) versucht dies zu verwirklichen, indem an einem kollektiven Standard zu semantischen Anreicherung digitaler Editionen von historischen Rechnungsbüchern gearbeitet wird. Es wird der Frage nachgegangen, inwieweit Methoden des Semantic Webs bei der Erschließung, Analyse und Darstellung historischer Rechnungsbücher helfen können (MEDEA, 2017).
                Ein zentrales Anliegen jedes wissenschaftlichen Projektes ist es, über qualitative und konsistente Daten zu verfügen. Dateninkonsistenz und mangelnde Datenqualität bergen die Gefahr falscher wissenschaftlicher Interpretationen und kritischer Fehlerquellen für die technische Verarbeitung der Daten. Da unterschiedliche TEI-Kodierungen von unikalen Quellen zusammengeführt werden, ist es eine besondere Herausforderung im MEDEA Projekt, Workflows zu etablieren, die dieser Herausforderung begegnen. Die Entwicklung einer domänenspezifischen Ontologie zur Formalisierung von historischen Prozessen des Rechnungswesens kann als eine solche potenzielle Lösung betrachtet werden. Die (Bookkeeping Ontologie 2017) formalisiert in ihrem jetzigen Zeitpunkt eine grundlegende Wissensstruktur, um Einträge in Rechnungsbüchern, ihre Transaktionen von Gütern, Dienstleistungen oder Geldbeträgen von einem Akteur oder Konto zu einem anderen, standardisiert beschreiben zu können.
                Aus jeder Transaktion, die mittels des Attributes @ana in einem TEI kodierten Text annotiert wurde, wird ein XML/RDF Datensatz erzeugt, der auf Konzepte der in OWL serialisierten Bookkeeping-Ontologie referenziert (Vogeler 2016). Der Ontologie Editor Protégé erlaubt es, eine Ontologie und die darin enthaltenen Daten (Individuals) einem Reasoning - dem Abarbeiten alle Vorhanden Regeln in einer Ontologie auf Basis der Description Logic - zu unterziehen (Musen 2015). Das Reasoning gilt als ein essentieller Baustein im Design, der Entwicklung, der Wartung und in der praktischen Anwendung einer Ontologie. Das Ergebnis davon sind Inferenzen. Inferenzen sind neu hergeleitete Schlussfolgerungen auf Basis des Reasoning Prozesses (Dentler / et al. 2011). Die Überprüfung strukturierter Daten mittels logischen Schlussfolgerungen kann dazu dienen, größere Datenmengen auf ihre Konsistenz und somit auch auf ihre Qualität hin zu prüfen, da logische Inkonsistenzen als Fehlermeldung angezeigt werden. Die Überprüfung und Zusammenführung der TEI-Kodierungen wird im MEDEA Projekt auf Basis dieser Ontologie durchgeführt. Use Cases für die Bookkeeping-Ontologie im Projekt umfassen:
            
         
            Formalisierung und Systematisierung von Rechnungsbüchern in einer maschinenverständlichen Wissensbasis
            Überprüfung der Datenkonsistenz und inhaltliche Zusammenführung der Daten
            Schaffung eines Definitionskonsenses
            Grundlage für semantische Retrieval und Discovery Strategien
            Wiederverwendbarkeit und Erweiterbarkeit
            Interoperables und offenes, sowie transparentes Verteilen von Daten
         
         
            
            Dieser Zugang kann mit der Arbeit von (Steffen, Henniche / et al. 2015) verglichen werden, in der die Anwendung von Semantic Web Methoden, im Speziellen des Reasoning, auf geisteswissenschaftliche Daten angewandt wird. 
                So verlockend die Möglichkeiten einer Ontologie sein können, so kritisch sind diese auch zu betrachten. Ein grundlegendes Problem ist bereits durch den Widerspruch der hermeneutischen Arbeit der Historikerin und der Entscheidbarkeit von OWL gegeben. Sind Ontologien in OWL ausdrucksstark genug, um geisteswissenschaftliche Daten so beschreiben zu können, dass ein logisches Schlussfolgern Ergebnisse erzielt, das die Konsistenz und die Qualität der Daten abbildet?
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Berners-Lee, Tim. (2000): Weaving the Web: The Past, Present and Future of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor. London.
               
                  Bookkeeping Ontologie, 
                        http://glossa.uni-graz.at/o:medea.1951/ONTOLOGY [letzter Zugriff 21.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Dentler, Kathrin / et al. (2011): Comparison of reasoners for large ontologies in the OWL 2 EL profile. Semantic Web 2.2, 71-87.
               
                  MEDEA, 
                        https://medea.hypotheses.org [letzter Zugriff 21.09.2017].
                    
               
                  Musen, M.A. (2015): The Protégé project: A look back and a look forward. AI Matters. Association of Computing Machinery Specific Interest Group in Artificial Intelligence, DOI: 10.1145/2557001.25757003. 
               
                  Neuroth, Heike / et al. (2012): Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten. Eine Bestandsaufnahme. Hülsbusch.
               
                  Steffen, Henniche / et al. (2015): Reasoning with Reasoning. Using Faceted Browsers to Find Meaning in Linked Data. Berlin, 1-61, 
                        https://lirias.kuleuven.be/handle/123456789/485851
               
               
                  Vogeler, Georg (2016): The Content of Accounts and Registers in their Digital Edition. XML/TEI, Spreadsheets, and Semantic Web Technologies, in: SARNOWSKY, Jürgen (Hg.): Konzeptionelle Überlegungen zur Edition von Rechnungen und Amtsbüchern des späten Mittelalters. Göttingen, 13-41.
            
         
      
   



      
         Die digitale Erschließung historischer Zeitungen lag vor wenigen Jahrzehnten noch außerhalb des Vorstellbaren. Inzwischen ist die Zeitung als Forschungsgegenstand etabliert und damit für viele verschiedene Disziplinen ins Zentrum gerückt: NutzerInnen sehen Nachrichtenblätter nicht nur als Quelle, die punktuell und komplementär zu anderen Texten befragt wird, sondern haben auch ein besonderes Interesse an der diachronen Entwicklung von historischen Zeitungen und ihren Themen, von Textsorten und natürlich von Sprache ganz im Allgemeinen. Die Transformation historischer Zeitungen in ein digitales Format, die von Bibliotheken, Archiven und Forschungseinrichtungen in den letzten Jahren stark vorangetrieben worden ist, befördert Fragestellungen dieser Art und überlässt den geistes- und sozialwissenschaftlichen Disziplinen einen reichen Schatz an Daten. 
         Im Zuge des wachsenden Interesses an historischem Zeitungsmaterial in digitaler Form haben Bibliotheken eigene Portale mit Bild-Digitalisaten und Kalenderübersichten eröffnet (vgl. etwa die Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Bremen
                , die Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin
                , die Universität Bonn
                 oder die Österreichische Nationalbibliothek
                ) oder stellen ihre Daten Europeana
                 zur Verfügung. Um historische Zeitungen besser durchsuchbar zu machen, wird vereinzelt bereits an der sorgfältigen Volltexterschließung besonderer historischer Zeitungen gearbeitet, vgl. etwa das Projekt „Volltextdigitalisierung der Staats- und Gelehrte[n] Zeitung des Hamburgischen Unpartheyischen Correspondenten und ihrer Vorläufer (1712-1848)“
                 (Schuster, Wille 2016: 7-29) oder das „Mannheimer Korpus für Historische Zeitungen und Zeitschriften in COSMAS II“
                . Internationale Vernetzungsinitiativen
                 machen einerseits auf die Herausforderungen bei der Erschließung historischer Zeitungen aufmerksam (enorme Textmenge, fehlerhafte OCR-Ergebnisse, wenig Trainingsdaten) und lassen andererseits die Entwicklung gemeinsamer Strategien und Standards bei der Aufbereitung erkennen. 
            
         Die AutorInnen des vorliegenden Beitrags gehen davon aus, dass historische Zeitungen von Institutionen zwar „digital verfügbar“ gemacht werden, aber bislang kaum an die Erkenntnisinteressen potentieller NutzerInnen angepasst sind - auch, aber nicht nur aufgrund der oben genannten Herausforderungen und des erheblichen Aufwandes, der mit der Erschließung einer historischen Zeitung verbunden ist. Bevor ein aufwändiges Projekt startet, ist daher zu überlegen, wie eine Erschließung geplant sein muss, sodass sie idealerweise für mehrere Disziplinen von Nutzen ist. Bei der Konzeption ist darauf zu achten, dass keine (für den überwiegenden Teil der antizipierten Disziplinen) relevanten Informationen vernachlässigt werden oder verloren gehen: Die Entscheidungen, die zu treffen sind, beginnen (1) bei der Auswahl der Ausgaben, setzen sich (2) bei den Transkriptionsrichtlinien fort und lassen sich (3) bis zu den Annotationskonzepten weiterführen. 
         Anhand eines laufenden Projektes, das sich der Volltextdigitalisierung ausgewählter Nummern des „Wien[n]erischen Diariums“
                 aus dem 18. Jahrhundert widmet, sollen all diese Aspekte kritisch hinterfragt und anhand von Beispielen, Erfahrungswerten und Zwischenergebnissen dargestellt werden. Das methodische Konzept, auf dem dieses konkrete Vorhaben beruht, wurde ausgehend von der Überzeugung gestaltet, dass insbesondere bei einer vielseitig nutzbaren Ressource wie dem “Wiennerischen Diarium” die einzelnen Fachdisziplinen und NutzerInnen bereits möglichst früh in den interdisziplinären Erschließungsprozess einzubeziehen sind. Im Vortrag soll darüber berichtet werden, welche Maßnahmen bereits gesetzt wurden, um die Fachwissenschaften zu vernetzen, welche Tools im Projekt entwickelt wurden, um Personen außerhalb des Kernteams zu involvieren, und durch welche digitalen Angebote diese Kollaboration ermöglicht wird und gelingen kann. 
            
         Auswahl der Ausgaben: Um ein ausgewogenes Korpus von mehreren hundert Ausgaben verteilt über das 18. Jahrhundert zu erstellen, waren sowohl ExpertInnen mehrerer geisteswissenschaftlicher Disziplinen als auch LeserInnen der heutigen Wiener Zeitung dazu aufgefordert, jene Nummer(n) online zu nominieren, die sie als besonders relevant einstufen würden. Bei der Auswertung dieses Calls hat sich erneut bestätigt, wie breit das Themenspektrum und damit die individuellen Erkenntnisinteressen sind: Nominiert und zur Volltextdigitalisierung empfohlen wurden Ausgaben mit Geburten, Taufen und Sterbefällen bekannter Persönlichkeiten, Geburts- und Namenstage, Krönungen und Erbhuldigungen, kirchliche und weltliche Feste, Ankündigungen, Eröffnungen und Einweihungen sowie die Besuche prominenter Gäste in der Residenzstadt. Errungenschaften im weitesten Sinn – wie die Erklärung der Menschenrechte oder der Beginn der Luftfahrt – waren ebenso in der Auswahl wie das medienimmanente Thema der Herausgeberschaft. Die Ergänzungen, die das Projektteam letztlich vorgenommen hat, betrafen daher weniger die Vielfalt der angesprochenen Themen, sondern waren darauf ausgerichtet, zeitliche Lücken zu füllen. Um das Wien[n]erische Diarium als Korpus in einer kontinuierlich chronologischen Jahresabfolge plausibel dokumentieren zu können, wurden die Nominierungen dahingehend komplettiert, dass sich die Umbrüche und Wendungen in einer Periode sich verändernder politischer, sozialer, wissenschaftlicher und künstlerischer Bedingungen im 18. Jahrhundert, idealerweise auch korpusgestützt nachvollziehen lassen.
         Texterstellung und -transkription: Ausgangspunkt für die Weiterverarbeitung sind jene Image-Digitalisate, welche die Österreichische Nationalbibliothek in ANNO (Austrian Newspapers Online) zur Verfügung stellt.
                 Die Erstellung des digitalen Textes für die ausgewählten Nummern erfolgt mit Transkribus
                , genauer mittels der Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR). Anhand einer kleinen Zahl an Ausgaben, die im Rahmen von projektbezogenen Vorstudien (vgl. Resch et al. 2016) bearbeitet wurden, konnte ein erstes Modell für das Diarium erstellt werden. Je nach Beschaffenheit der Digitalisate liegt die Genauigkeit hiermit zwischen 70% und 95%. Um die Qualität zu steigern, werden mehrere Tranchen von 40 bis 50 Ausgaben von zwei unterschiedlichen externen Dienstleistern nach den für dieses Projekt erstellten Transkriptionsrichtlinien erfasst, sodass das Modell weiter trainiert und die Erfassungsgenauigkeit erhöht werden kann. 
            
         
            
         
         Ein „Reporting-Tool“
                , das direkt auf die Transkribus-Plattform zugreift, dokumentiert den Bearbeitungsstatus der ausgewählten Einzelnummern, gibt Auskunft über deren Umfang (Zählung von Regionen, Zeilen und Wörtern) und informiert die Fachgemeinschaft tagesaktuell über den Fortschritt des Projekts. 
            
         Erprobung von Annotationskonzepten: Parallel dazu arbeitet das Kernteam an einer digitalen Arbeits- und Annotationsoberfläche: Für die Präsentation der Texte wird nach derzeitigem Projektstand eine auf eXist basierende Umgebung genutzt, die auch in anderen Projekten des Instituts und in anderen Institutionen Anwendung findet. In die HTML-Präsentation integriert ist die Möglichkeit zur Annotation des Textes. Dabei kann entweder der Text korrigiert, eine Entität ausgezeichnet und/oder identifiziert oder eine Volltextanmerkung geschrieben werden. Die Möglichkeiten der Annotation, die Modellierung der annotierten Entitäten, ihre Verwaltung und Darstellung sollen im Rahmen eines „Annote-a-thons“ in Zusammenarbeit mit den NutzerInnen weiterentwickelt werden. Für das Projektteam ist es etwa wichtig zu erfragen, welche unterschiedlichen Sichtweisen es seitens der verschiedenen Disziplinen auf den Text gibt, welche Aspekte bei der Erschließung von besonderer Relevanz sind oder ob es so etwas wie einen “kleinsten, gemeinsamen Nenner” aller Annotationskonzepte geben kann. Die Einbeziehung von ExpertInnenen im Annotationsprozess ist dem Projektteam ein besonderes Anliegen: Es begreift das Annotieren als höchst anspruchsvolle Forschungsleistung, die ein profundes historisch-kulturelles Wissen bei der Beurteilung erfordert und für eine Quelle wie dem „Wiennerischen Diarium“ bei genauerer Betrachtung eigentlich nur gemeinsam erbracht werden kann. Ein kollaboratives Annotieren technisch vorzusehen und zu ermöglichen, ist hierbei die besondere Herausforderung. Die dafür entstehende benutzerfreundliche Präsentations- wie auch die Annotationsumgebung wird unter einer freien Lizenz zur Nachnutzung zur Verfügung gestellt werden.
      
      
         
             Vgl. 
                        
                  https://www.suub.uni-bremen.de/ueber-uns/projekte/alte-zeitungen/
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  http://zefys.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  http://digitale-sammlungen.ulb.uni-bonn.de/ulbbnz/date/list/229854
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  http://anno.onb.ac.at/
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  http://www.europeana-newspapers.eu/
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  https://kw.uni-paderborn.de/institut-fuer-germanistik-und-vergleichende-literaturwissenschaft/germanistische-und-allgemeine-sprachwissenschaft/schuster/forschung/projekte/der-hamburgische-unpartheyische-correspondent-volltextdigitalisierung/
                [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        
                  http://repos.ids-mannheim.de/mkhz-beschreibung.html
                [letzter Zugriff 14.01.2018]
                    
             Vgl. etwa die Einrichtung einer “Special Interest Group Newspapers” bei der TEI-Konferenz 2016 in Wien, das CLARIN-Vernetzungstreffen “Working with Digital Collections of Newspapers” 2016 in Leuven oder das “Transatlantic Digitised Newspaper Symposion” 2017 in London. 
             Das „Wien[n]erische Diarium“ ist am 8. August 1703 erstmals erschienen, als „Wiener Zeitung“ bis heute erhältlich und somit die älteste, noch existierende Tageszeitung der Welt. Insbesondere im 18. Jahrhundert lässt sich die Entwicklung der Zeitung von den Anfängen des modernen Journalismus in einer spannenden Zeit und unter sich verändernden politischen, sozialen und künstlerischen Bedingungen gut nachverfolgen und mitvollziehen. 
             Vgl. 
                        http://anno.onb.ac.at/cgi-content/anno?aid=wrz [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
             Vgl. 
                        https://www.oeaw.ac.at/acdh/projects/wienerisches-diarium-digital/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  ANNO – AustriaN Newspapers Online. 
                  
                     http://anno.onb.ac.at/
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Harald Burger / Luginbühl, Martin (2015): Mediensprache , Berlin / Boston, 2015, 39-45.
               
                  Reisner, Andrea / Schiemer, Alfred (2016): „Das Wien(n)erische Diarium und die Entstehung der periodischen Presse“ in: 
                        Österreichische Mediengeschichte 1: 87-112.
                    
               
                  Digitalisierung der vollständigen deutschsprachigen Zeitungsbestände des 17. Jahrhunderts der Staats- und Universitätsbilbiothek Bremen: 
                        https://www.suub.uni-bremen.de/ueber-uns/projekte/alte-zeitungen/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Europeana Newspapers: 
                        
                     http://www.europeana-newspapers.eu/
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Mannheimer Korpus für Historische Zeitungen und Zeitschriften in COSMAS II: 
                        
                     http://repos.ids-mannheim.de/mkhz-beschreibung.html
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Newspapers Sammlung der Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek Bonn: 
                        
                     http://digitale-sammlungen.ulb.uni-bonn.de/ulbbnz/date/list/229854
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Projekt „Volltextdigitalisierung der Staats- und Gelehrte[n] Zeitung des Hamburgischen Unpartheyischen Correspondenten und ihrer Vorläufer (1712-1848): 
                        
                     https://kw.uni-paderborn.de/institut-fuer-germanistik-und-vergleichende-literaturwissenschaft/germanistische-und-allgemeine-sprachwissenschaft/schuster/forschung/projekte/der-hamburgische-unpartheyische-correspondent-volltextdigitalisierung/
                   [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
               
                  Resch, Claudia / Schopper, Daniel / Hannesschläger, Vanessa / Wohlfarter, Eva / Mader, Anna / Fischer, Nora (2016): Wienerisches Diarium Digital: Unlocking a historic newspaper for interdisciplinary studies with the TEI Guidelines. 
                        
                     https://goo.gl/a9SmLk
                  
               
               
                  Schuster, Britt-Marie / Wille, Manuel (2016): Von der Kanzlei- zur Bügersprache? Textsortengeschichtliche Betrachtungen zur „Staats- und gelehrten Zeitung des Hamburgischen unpartheyischen Correspondenten“ im 18. Jahrhundert in: Jahrbuch für Kommunikationsgeschichte 17 Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag 7-29.
               
                  ZEFYS Das Zeitungsinformationssystem der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin: 
                        http://zefys.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de/ [letzter Zugriff 14. Januar 2018]
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            1. Thema
            Dieser Beitrag stellt anhand eines konkreten Fallbeispiels eine Methode zur inhaltlichen Analyse von heterogenen Textkorpora vor. Das Verfahren entstand im Rahmen einer Dissertation im Fach Musikwissenschaft und operiert einerseits mit X‑Technologien, andererseits bezieht es geisteswissenschaftliche Ansätze mit ein. Der Bezug zum Tagungsthema besteht vor allem in dem Unterfangen, eine Brücke zwischen digitalem Material und hermeneutischen Analyseansätzen zu schlagen.
            Das Vorhaben befasste sich mit der 
                    Messa da Requiem des italienischen Komponisten Giuseppe Verdi (1813–1901). Dieses geistliche Werk für Chor, großes Orchester und vier Solisten stellt eine Ausnahme in dem Schaffen des Opernkomponisten dar. Gewidmet ist es dem italienischen Schriftsteller Alessandro Manzoni, der ein Zeitgenosse und Freund Verdis war (vgl. Schweikert 2013) und 1873 verstarb. Das deshalb so genannte "Manzoni-Requiem" verbreitete sich schnell und mit großem Erfolg in ganz Europa, vor allem in Frankreich, Österreich und (kurze Zeit später) auch im Deutschen Reich.
                
            Der Fokus der Analyse liegt auf der deutschsprachigen Musikkritik im Zeitraum der Erstaufführungen (1874–1878). Mit Hinweis auf den oft emotionalen und bildhaften Charakter der Musik wurde das Werk vor allem im Deutschen Reich abschätzig beurteilt: Ein Kritiker aus Köln meinte beispielsweise, das Werk sei "kein Requiem nach deutscher Art" (August Guckeisen, Kölnische Zeitung, 12.12.1875). Diese dichotomische Abgrenzung einer "deutschen Art" gegen eine "italienische Art" ist nicht nur als Reflex von Wagnerismus und reichsdeutschem Kulturkampf zu interpretieren, sondern auch im Kontext romantischer Kirchenmusikästhetik und des zeitgenössischen Realismusbegriffs zu verstehen (vgl. Kirsch 2013). Darüber hinaus regten sich aber gerade auch in Österreich solche Stimmen, die dem geforderten "deutschen Ernst" nur wenig abgewinnen konnten und für mehr Emotionalität in der geistlichen Musik plädierten. Auch gegenwärtig führt die Ambivalenz des Werkes, das zwischen spiritueller und szenischer Musik changiert, immer wieder zu Diskussionen hinsichtlich der "richtigen" Interpretation. Das Nachdenken über historische Auffassungen und Begriffsbildungen gibt uns die Möglichkeit, unsere aktuellen Positionen und deren Ursprünge zu hinterfragen. Dies bildet den Ausgangspunkt der Untersuchung.
         
         
            2. Material
            Für die Grundlage der Analyse wurden Artikel aus Tageszeitungen und Musikfachblättern aus den Jahren 1874–1878 zu einem Textkorpus zusammengestellt. Auswahlkriterien waren erstens eine Erwähnung der 
                    Messa da Requiem und zweitens die Sprache Deutsch. Durch diese Offenheit entstand ein Korpus aus Texten, die hinsichtlich des Umfangs, der Gattung und der inhaltlichen Qualität stark variieren: Die Textsorten decken ein Spektrum von lapidaren Konzertanzeigen bis hin zu seitenlangen Werkbesprechungen mit zahlreichen Notenbeispielen ab. Für die Forschungsarbeit erfüllen die Texte unterschiedliche Zwecke: Die knapperen Texte beschränken sich meist auf Hinweise zu Aufführungen, Mitwirkenden oder Veranstaltungsorten und dienten deshalb vorrangig der Rekonstruktion einer Aufführungsgeschichte. Dabei gaben präzise Datumsangaben oft einen Anhaltspunkt für die Recherche nach ausführlicheren Quellen in lokalen Tageszeitungen. Für die Untersuchung der Rezeptionsgeschichte sind die längeren Texte weitaus interessanter und ergiebiger. Dabei bestand eine Herausforderung darin, dass sehr häufig (in ca. 70% der Fälle) nichts über den Hintergrund des Autors bekannt ist, so dass der Entstehungskontext bei der Analyse nicht einbezogen werden konnte. Bisherige Analysen berücksichtigten deshalb vor allem namhafte Autoren, deren (wie beispielsweise Eduard Hanslick, Heinrich Adolf Köstlin und Emil Naumann; vgl. z. B. Kreuzer 2005). Digitale Auswertungsverfahren sollten nun dabei helfen, auch die Äußerungen unbekannter Autoren in einem breiteren Spektrum einordnen und bewerten zu können.
                
            Die Texte wurden dazu nach Digitalisaten oder Fotokopien (20% der Fälle) transkribiert und die daraus resultierenden 950.000 Zeichen Reintext mit TEI-Markup versehen. Dabei wurde der Schwerpunkt, im Sinne von "smart data" (vgl. Schöch 2013), auf die Erschließung semantischer Einheiten gelegt. Dazu wurde ein halbautomatisches Verfahren eingesetzt, das mit Listen von bereits bekannten Eigennamen operierte. Das automatische Tagging wurde auf Richtigkeit überprüft und Sonderfälle (z.B. Pseudonyme oder Abkürzungen) manuell verzeichnet. Im Korpus konnten insgesamt 8.000 Entitäten identifiziert und mit Normdaten versehen werden. Die vier Register beinhalten 530 Personen, 142 Aufführungen, 96 Ortschaften und 135 Werke der Musik.
         
         
            3. Auswertung
            
               3.1. Metadaten
               Die Analyse der Metadaten mithilfe geographischer und einfacher statistischer Visualisierungstools (z. B. OpenLayers/MapWarper und Google Chart API) gab Aufschluss über die geographische und chronologische Verteilung der Texte. Die Presseresonanz ist in den Monaten der Erstaufführungen an den jeweiligen Orten wie erwartet am stärksten. Dabei fiel auf, dass die Verteilung im Deutschen Reich großflächiger ist als in dem stark auf Wien zentrierten Österreich (vgl. Abbildung 1). Die Anzahl der Berichte an einem Ort ist in Österreich durchschnittlich höher als im Deutschen Reich, da dort durch das Digitalisierungsprojekt ANNO erheblich mehr Periodika digitalisiert wurden und relevante Texte durch Suche im OCR-Volltext viel leichter aufzufinden sind als in realen Zeitungsbänden. Im Deutschen Reich überwiegt deshalb auch der Anteil an Texten aus den bereits umfassend digitalisierten Musikfachzeitschriften (vor allem aus Leipzig) um so mehr.
               
                  
                     
                     (Abbildung 1: Übersicht aller Spielorte, die im deutschsprachigen Raum erwähnt wurden)
                  
               
            
            
               3.2. Textanalyse
               Die Textanalyse knüpfte zunächst an mehrere Vorarbeiten zur Dichotomieanalyse und Rezeptionsgeschichte an (vgl. Sponheuer 2001) und entwickelte diese anhand des digitalen Materials weiter. Es wurde das Experiment unternommen, mithilfe eines vorgefertigten Sachvokabulars die relevanten Diskurskategorien zu erschließen und dichotomische Muster zu identifizieren. Dies musste im Rahmen des damaligen Vorhabens verworfen werden, da es in vielen Einzelfällen zu einer deutlichen Verzerrung der Textbedeutung kam, die durch den relativ geringen Umfang des Textkorpus leider nicht ausgeglichen werden konnte.
               Deshalb wurde der Fokus in einem zweiten Versuch auf die "Named Entities" gesetzt, also die bereits durch das Tagging identifizierten sachlichen Einheiten. Eine solche Einheit konnte beispielsweise ein Werkteil wie das "Kyrie" oder das "Agnus Dei" sein, zu dem dann aus allen Texten die unmittelbaren Kontexte ausgezogen und zu einem Spektrum zusammengestellt wurden. Die Kontexte zur stark umstrittenen Nummer "Mors stupebit" aus dem zweiten Teil des Werkes zeigen sowohl eine grundsätzliche Ablehnung und eine starke Grenzziehung zwischen "nordischen" und "italienischen" Stereotypen auf.
               
                  
                     
                     (Abbildung 2: Kontexte für "Mors stupebit")
                  
               
               Aus geisteswissenschaftlicher Perspektive genügt bereits diese Aufstellung, die ich hier "semantische Sichtachse" nennen möchte, um ein Spektrum von unterschiedlichen Positionen aufzuzeigen, in das auch die Haltungen der nicht näher bekannten Autoren mit einfließen. Vergleicht man die hier gezeigte Sichtachse zum "Mors stupebit" mit der Sichtachse des fast überall bewunderten "Agnus Dei", kommt ein Kontrast zwischen einer idealisierenden und einer realistischen Repräsentation des Todes deutlich zum Vorschein. Weitere aufschlussreiche Sichtachsen können beispielsweise zu Vergleichswerken (etwa die Requiem-Kompositionen von Mozart oder Cherubini), Komponistennamen (im Sinne einer stilistischen Referenz) und auch zu Schlagwörtern wie z. B. "Realismus" erzeugt werden.
               Der Zweck dieses Verfahrens ist es also, mithilfe der Textdatenbank vergleichbare Kontexte innerhalb des Korpus zu finden und diese gegenüberzustellen. Die komparative Analyse der Einzelkontexte eröffnet die Möglichkeit, übergreifende Rezeptionsmuster zu identifizieren. Ich bezeichne das hier rein metaphorisch als "horizontales Lesen" (in vager Anlehnung an den Begriff des "distant reading", vgl. Moretti 2016), da es die Texte gleichwertig nebeneinander anordnet und weniger den einzelnen Text, sondern mehr gemeinsame Bezugspunkte im gesamten Korpus betrachtet. Auf der Grundlage dieser vergleichbaren Extrakte könnte übrigens der erste, zunächst verworfene Ansatz wieder ins Spiel kommen – dies ist jedoch Zukunftsmusik.
               Ich füge noch einige Ergebnisse aus musikwissenschaftlicher Sicht an: Beispielsweise wurde das sehr beliebte "Agnus Dei", welches in über 60 Texten erwähnt wurde, auffallend oft als Abklatsch verschiedener Opernnummern gedeutet, um die schöpferische Qualität herabzusetzen. Hinsichtlich des Fugenstils im "Sanctus" verhielten sich die Berliner und Dresdner Kritiker auffallend empfindlich, während die Kritiker in Wien und auch in Köln in dieser Hinsicht liberaler waren. Eine ähnliche Aufteilung ist auch hinsichtlich des Einsatzes von musikalischen Effekten und Affekten festzustellen. Dabei wurden sowohl allgemeine Unterschiede zwischen dem Deutschen Reich und Österreich sowie dem katholischen und dem protestantischen Raum deutlich. Hinzu treten mehrere lokale Besonderheiten: So kam am Hamburger Stadt-Theater ein Bühnenbild zum Einsatz, welches das Innere einer katholischen Kirche zeigte, was die Hamburger Kritik durchaus faszinierte. In Salzburg schlossen sich mehrere Musikvereine zusammen, um das Werk für einen karitativen Zweck aufzuführen, weshalb die Kritik wohlwollender war als andernorts.
               Die insgesamt sehr unterschiedlichen Kritiken können deshalb erst aus den jeweiligen Kontexten heraus angemessen bewertet werden. Durch einen flächendeckenden Vergleich ist es möglich, allgemeine Tendenzen der Rezeption zu identifizieren und zu verorten, auch wenn die individuellen Hintergründe der Autoren nicht immer bekannt sind. Die Texte von unbekannten Autoren sind auf diese Weise leichter zu kontextualisieren, zu bewerten und in das Gesamtbild einzuordnen.
            
         
         
            4. Ausblick
            Das Textmaterial ist für das ursprüngliche musikwissenschaftliche Vorhaben zunächst ausgeschöpft, bietet aber Potenzial für weitere Analysen mit anderen Methoden. Wärenbeispielsweise positive und negative Kritiken mithilfe stilometrischer Verfahren voneinander unterscheidbar? Geben Netzwerkvisualisierungen von Vergleichswerken in den Texten möglicherweise einen Hinweis auf Strukturen kanonischer Bezugssysteme? Deckt sich dies mit den bisherigen Beobachtungen? Wäre es für die Präsentation denkbar, eine in MEI kodierte Partitur takt- oder abschnittsweise mit den diversen Kommentaren der Kritiker zu versehen? Es ist zu hoffen, dass in Zukunft ähnliche Projekte entstehen, um das digital aufbereitete Datenmaterial für weitere Forschung nutzen können – etwa mit dem Fokus auf der Rezeption des Werkes in anderen Sprachgebieten oder Zeiträumen, oder auch auf anderen Requiem-Vertonungen. Zu diesem Zweck wird das Material digital publiziert, offen lizenziert sowie in Hackathons und THATcamps eingebracht. Die Publikationsplattform wird zum Konferenztermin bekanntgegeben.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Kirsch, Winfried (2013): "Kirchenmusikreform, Cäcilianismus und Palestrina-Renaissance", in: Wolfgang Hochstein und Christoph Krummacher (eds.): 
                    Geschichte der Kirchenmusik, Bd. 3, Laaber: Laaber 56–71.
                    
               
                  Kreuzer, Gundula (2005): "Oper im Kirchengewande"? Verdi’s Requiem and the Anxieties of the Young German Empire, in: Journal of the American Musicological Society 58,2: 399–450.
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2016): 
                    Distant Reading, Konstanz: Konstanz University Press.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof (2013): "Big? Smart? Clean? Messy? Data in the Humanities", in: 
                    Journal of Digital Humanities 2, No. 3: 2–13.
                    
               
                  Schweikert, Uwe (2013): Messa da Requiem, in: Anselm Gerhard and Uwe Schweikert (eds.): 
                    Verdi-Handbuch, Kassel: Bärenreiter; Stuttgart/Weimar: Metzler (2., überarb. und erw. Auflage) 557–565.
                    
               
                  Sponheuer, Bernd (2001): "Über das ›Deutsche‹ in der Musik. Versuch einer idealtypischen Rekonstruktion", in: Hermann Danuser / Herfried Münkler (eds.): 
                        Deutsche Meister – böse Geister? Nationale Selbstfindung in der Musik, Schliengen: Edition Argus 123–150.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Introduction
            This poster presents a corpus of 19th-century sonnets in Spanish in XML-TEI (685 authors, 2677 sonnets). It includes well-known authors, but also less canonized authors. Texts and authors are enriched with identifiers and metadata. See 
                    
                  https://github.com/pruizf/disco
               
            
            A fundamental difficulty for Digital Humanities studies on Spanish literature is a scarcity of digital resources (Agenjo, 2015). 
            Some resources do however exist. BiDTEA (Gago Jover et al, 2015), ADMYTE (Marcos Marin and Faulhaber, 1992), ReMetCa (González-Blanco and Rodríguez, 2014) and PoeMetCa (Escribano et al, 2016) have digitized Spanish Medieval texts. Navarro-Colorado et al. (2015) presented the Corpus of Spanish Golden-Age Sonnets.
            Regarding 19th-century Spanish literature, available collections covering different genres are Textbox (Schöch et al., 2015), BETTE (Santa María Fernández, 2017), Aracne (Álvarez-Mellado and Martín-Fuertes, 2015), and Revistas Culturales 2.0 (Ehrlicher and Rißler-Pipka, 2015). Nevertheless, none of these projects are working on poetry. 
            DISCO complements this growing ecosystem by adding a meaningful representation of 19th-century sonnets, with more periods under validation, to be published shortly.
         
         
            Corpus description
            
               What is DISCO
               Our corpus collects 2677 sonnets in Spanish from the 19th century, by 685 authors (Spain or Latin America). It intends to provide a wide sample, inspired by distant reading approaches (Moretti, 2005). The raw texts were extracted from Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (1999), which contains an anthology (Garcia, 2006) of 19th century sonnets covering both well-known and non-canonical authors. We used an anthology in order to have external scholarly criteria for the literary relevance of the corpus texts. 
               The texts have been encoded in XML-TEI P5, given this standard’s benefits in terms of reuse, storage and retrieval. Author metadata have been extracted or inferred from unstructured content in the sources, and placed in the TEIheader (year, place of birth and death, and gender). Two versions of the texts are available: one collecting every sonnet per author, the other encoding a single sonnet per file. For corpus preparation, we closely followed the TEI guidelines and RIDE’s criteria for Digital Text Collections (Henny and Neuber, 2017).
               Additionally, authors have been assigned VIAF identifiers. This gives the corpus an entry-point to the linked open data cloud, enhancing its findability. The corpus is available on GitHub and saved in Zenodo, adopting good practices for data use, reuse, and conservation.
               The metadata we added allow users to create subcorpora, such as “female authors from Cuba born in the first half of the 19th century”.
               We have also obtained sonnets from other centuries, since the 15th century to the present. These are under validation and will be published shortly within the DISCO corpus, which intends to give a wide perspective on the sonnet in Spanish diachronically.
            
            
               Why sonnets
               The sonnet has had great importance in European poetry; the relevance of the corpus for literary scholarship is guaranteed. It is a "manageable" form to treat computationally, obeying clear restrictions. Variability stays within bounds, making meaningful comparison across poems easier, regarding scansion or rhyme types. Besides, some digital collections of sonnets already exist (with different features to ours, as discussed below) as well as automatic analyses of this form. The sonnet has received attention from the computational linguistics community (Navarro-Colorado et al, 2015, 2016, 2017; Agirrezabal, 2017) including the ADSO project (Navarro-Colorado 2017). The DISCO corpus will also be useful for that audience. For these reasons, a new sonnet corpus allows us to engage in a dialogue with earlier work in traditional literary studies, in digital corpus development, and in computational poetry analyses. 
               Concerning digitally available sonnet corpora, Sonnet-Archiv (Elf Edition) is organized as a forum, and its coverage is less wide than ours. The “Sonnet Library” (Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 2007) is organized alphabetically, rather than using meaningful criteria for literary scholarship, like periods. Both are traditional websites. Finally, the Corpus of Spanish Golden Age Sonnets (Navarro-Colorado et al., 2015) covers major authors from the 15th to the 17th century, with an automatic metrical annotation. Author metadata in these corpora are very limited and unavailable in a machine-readable format (see Calvo Tello, 2017, for discussion of related issues). With the DISCO corpus, we are offering a wider period and author range, from major to minor authors, encoded in XML-TEI, available as repository, with richer structured and standard metadata.
            
         
         
            Conclusion
            With the DISCO corpus, while focusing on sonnets, we intend to increase available digital resources in Spanish poetry, by addressing additional periods, covering minor as well as canonical authors, and including materials from several Spanish-speaking countries. Choosing the sonnet complements existing work on this form, in traditional and computational literary studies. TEI was adopted in order to serve the large community using this format. The corpus can be made available as linked open data as it includes VIAF IDs. It is published at 
                    https://github.com/pruizf/disco and 
                    https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1012567.
                
         
         
            Acknowledgements
            The work was supported by Starting Grant ERC-2015-STG-679528 
                    POSTDATA, PI Elena González-Blanco. We also thank Helena Bermúdez from the LINHD-UNED lab for later contributions to the corpus.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliography
               
                  Agenjo, Xavier (2015): “Las bibliotecas virtuales españolas y el tratamiento textual de los recursos bibliográficos”, in Ínsula: revista de letras y ciencias humanas 822: 12–15.
                    
               
                  Agirrezabal, Manex (2017): Automatic Scansion of Poetry. PhD Thesis. University of the Basque Country.
                    
               
                  Álvarez Mellado, Elena / Martín-Fuertes, Leticia (2015): Aracne Project [online]. Available at: http://www.fundeu.es/aracne/ [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (1999): Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes [online]. Available at: 
                        http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/ [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes (2007): Biblioteca del Soneto [Sonnet Library] [online]. Available at: 
                        http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/bib/portal/bibliotecasoneto/ [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Calvo Tello, José. (2017). Review of Corpus of Spanish Golden Age Sonnets by Borja Navarro Colorado, María Ribes Lafoz and Noelia Sánchez (ed.), in RIDE, 6. Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik, Köln. [Online]. Available at: http://ride.i-d-e.de/issue-6/corpus-of-spanish-golden-age-sonnets/ [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Ehrlicher, Hanno / Rißler-Pipka, Nanette (2015). Revistas Culturales 2.0. Augsburg: Universität Augsburg. [Online]. Available at: 
                        https://www.revistas-culturales.de/es [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Elf Edition: Sonett-Archiv [online]. Available at: http://sonett-archiv.com [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Escribano, Juanjo / González-Blanco, Elena / Río Riande, Gimena del (2016). PoeMetCa—Recursos digitales para el estudio de la Poesía Medieval Castellana. [Online]. Available at: 
                        http://poemteca.linhd.es [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Gago Jover, Francisco (2015): “La biblioteca digital de textos del español antiguo (BiDTEA), in Scriptum Digital 4: 5–36.
                    
               
                  García González, Ramón (2006): Sonetos del siglo XIX. Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, Alicante. [Online]. Available at: 
                        http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/sonetos-del-siglo-xix--0/html/ [Accessed 26 Nov. 2017
                        ]
               
               
                  González-Blanco, Elena / Rodríguez, José Luis (2014): “ReMetCa: A Proposal for Integrating RDBMS and TEI-Verse”, in Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8 [online]. Available at: 
                        https://jtei.revues.org/1274 [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017], doi:10.4000/jtei.1274.
                    
               
                  Henny, Ulrike / Neuber, Frederike (2017): “Criteria for Reviewing Digital Text Collections, version 1.0”. IDE, Institut for Dokumentologie und Editorik, [online]. Available at: 
                        https://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/criteria-text-collections-version-1-0/ [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Marcos Marín, Francisco / Faulhaber, Charles B. (coord.) (1992): ADMYTE. Archivo Digital de Manuscritos y Textos Españoles, in 
                        http://www.admyte.com/admyteonline/contenido.htm [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2005): Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. London and New York: Verso.
                    
               
                  Navarro-Colorado, Borja (2015): A computational linguistic approach to Spanish Golden Age Sonnets: metrical and semantic aspects. In ACL Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature 105.
                    
               
                  Navarro-Colorado, Borja (2017): ADSO project – Análisis distante del soneto castellano de los Siglos de Oro [Distant analysis of the Spanish Golden Age sonnet] [online]. Available at: 
                        http://adso.gplsi.es/index.php/es/proyecto-adso [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Navarro-Colorado, Borja / Ribes Lafoz, María / Sánchez, Noelia (2015): Corpus of Spanish Golden-Age Sonnets. Alicante: University of Alicante [online]. Available at: 
                        https://github.com/bncolorado/CorpusSonetosSigloDeOro [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017].
                    
               
                  Navarro-Colorado, Borja / Ribes Lafoz, María, / Sánchez, Noelia (2016): “Metrical Annotation of a Large Corpus of Spanish Sonnets: Representation, Scansion and Evaluation”, in Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference [online]. Available at: 
                        http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/453_Paper.pdf [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017]
                    
               
                  Navarro-Colorado, Borja (2017): “A metrical scansion system for fixed-metre Spanish poetry”, in Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx009 [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017]
                    
               
                  Santa María Fernández, María Teresa / Jiménez Fernández, Concepción María (2017): Biblioteca Electrónica Textual Del Teatro Español, 1868-1936. Universidad Internacional de la Rioja, Spain.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof / Henny, Ulrike / Calvo Tello, José / Popp, Stefanie (2015): The CLiGS Textbox. Würzburg: University of Würzburg. [Online]. Available at: 
                        https://github.com/cligs/textbox [Accessed 22 Sep. 2017]
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         In der Beschreibung der DHd-Konferenz 2018 „Kritik der digitalen Vernunft“ wird die These formuliert, dass die Digital Humanities„häufig als digital transformierte Bearbeitung von Fragestellungen aus den verschiedenen beteiligten Fächern beschrieben“ werden und „in weiten Teilen eine daten-, algorithmen- und werkzeuggetriebene Wissenschaft sei[en], die von ihren unmittelbaren Möglichkeiten und ihren Praktiken dominiert“ werden, welche den Prinzipien kritischer Wissenschaftlichkeit möglicherweise nicht genüge. Am Beispiel der Entwicklung der Guidelines sowie der Analyse einzelner konkreter Anwendungsfälle der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI; Synonym auch für die Richtlinien der Initiative, den „Guidelines for (Electronic) Text Encoding and Interchange“) soll untersucht werden, welche Wechselwirkungen es hierbei zwischen Theorie, Methode und Tool-Entwicklung gegeben hat. 
            
         
            Der Gegenstand
            Der Beobachtungsgegenstand dieser Untersuchung sind die Guidelines der TEI selbst, die daraus resultierenden Schemata sowie deren Anwendung in ausgewählten Anwendungsfeldern der DH. Die TEI dokumentiert die Entwicklung der Guidelines seit der Einführung 1990 mit der Version P1 in unterschiedlicher Tiefe. Während für die älteren Versionen meist nur deren Endprodukt in Form der Document Type Definition (DTD) bzw. des Textes der Guidelines vorliegt, kann man die Entwicklung des de-facto-Standards seit der Version P4 und dann ab 2007 in listenförmiger Dokumentation der vorgenommenen Änderungen nachvollziehen. Die TEI dokumentiert außerdem die Diskussionen, die in ihren Gremien sowie in der Community über Mailingliste geführt werden, in je eigenen Archiven. Damit lässt sich ein nahezu lückenloses Bild der Entwicklungsschritte hin zu der geltenden Version nachvollziehen. Diese Materialien können vor dem Hintergrund der oben genannten Thesen untersucht und mit den traditionellen Wissenschaften in Kontext gesetzt werden, um Aufschlüsse über die Wechselwirkungen zu erhalten.
                
            Ein weiterer Gegenstand besteht in der konkreten Anwendung der Guidelines bzw. Schemata der TEI in Projekten. Hier sollen beispielhaft Editionsprojekte sowie die Verwendung der TEI zur Speicherung von Metadaten betrachtet werden, um die Wechselwirkungen zu analysieren. Es soll damit der Frage nachgegangen werden, inwieweit die Definition einer Markup-Sprache, die Anwendung der Sprache bei der Erstellung konkreter Dokumente und die Validierung der Ergebnisse durch technische Rahmenbedingungen vorgegeben oder durch außerhalb der DH liegenden Theoriebildung beeinflusst werden oder die Theoriebildung und Methodenentwicklung selbst vorantreiben.
         
         
            Theoriebildung
            Bereits 1994 wies Sperberg-McQueen auf die theoretischen Implikationen der Textauszeichnung, analog dazu: des Gebrauchs einer Wissenschaftssprache, hin: „Like any notation, the TEI Guidelines inevitably make it easy to express certain kinds of ideas, and concomitantly harder to express other kinds of ideas, about the texts we encode in electronic form. Any notation carries with it the danger that it must favor certain habits of thought --- in the TEI's case, certain approaches to text --- at the expense of others. No one should use TEI markup without being aware of this danger --- any more than we should use the English language, or any other, without realizing that it favors the expression of certain kinds of ideas, and discourages the expression, and even the conception, of other ideas.“ (Sperberg-McQueen 1994) Die TEI-Community versucht allerdings dennoch, diesen Gefahren mit der offenen Diskussion über die semantischen Dimensionen des Markups, mit Best-Practice-Beispielen für die Anwendung entgegen zu wirken. Die Community beweist immer wieder die Fähigkeit, den etablierten Standard im Fall erweiterter Anforderungen an neue Aufgaben anzupassen. Paradigmenwechsel in der Editionsphilologie können dadurch adaptiert, in der Auszeichnungspraxis angewendet und somit wissenschaftlich nutzbar gemacht werden, ohne deshalb vorhandene Dokumente ungültig werden zu lassen oder die bisherige Anwendung des Standards zu konterkarieren. Beispiele hierfür sind die Inkorporation von Markup-Subsystemen für genetische Editionen, zur Beschreibung von Handschriften oder auch zur Dokumentation von Kommunikationsvorgängen, etwa in Briefen, mit der Einführung von . Das System der TEI wurde dabei prinzipiell erweitert als grundlegend verändert. Die Abschaffung von Elementen oder Attributen, die etwa die Falsifikation nach Popper gleich zu setzen wären, ist daher sehr viel seltener als der Proof of Concept, mit welchem zunächst die Tauglichkeit von Markup zur Repräsentation bestimmter Phänomene getestet wird, bevor die Aufnahme in den Standard erfolgt und die Angebote durch die Community weiter genutzt werden können.
                
            Gleichzeitig bestimmen die Anforderungen der inhaltlichen bzw. theoretischen Weiterentwicklung eines Faches die technische und theoretische Weiterentwicklung der TEI mit. Ein rezentes Beispiel hierfür ist die theoretische Ausrichtung des 
                    Material Turns in der Editionsphilologie und den historischen Wissenschaften. Die Hinwendung zum Objekt wird in der TEI mit der Einführung von 
                     und dem Modul für genetische Editionen gespiegelt. Auch Überlegungen zur Verallgemeinerung des Beschreibungsstandards von Dokumenten und Objekten mittels der Strukturen von  wären hier zu nennen.
                
         
         
            Methodenbildung
            Ein Beispiel für die Anwendung neuer Methoden der DH ist die Anreicherung von Texten um bestimmte Kontexte. Wenn in einem Text benannte Entitäten wie Personen, Orte, Objekte oder Ereignisse ausgezeichnet werden, dann entspricht dies zunächst der Registerarbeit traditioneller Publikationsverfahren. Wenn diese Entitäten allerdings mit Normdaten angereichert und diese somit zu nachnutzbaren Bestandteilen im Sinne der Linked Open Data (LOD) werden, darf man wohl von der Anwendung einer neuen Methode sprechen. Die entstandenen Dokumente verändern ihren Charakter von traditionell erstellten und händisch ausgewerteten Objekten zu konzeptionell gestalteten und automatisiert nutzbaren. Die Dokumente werden in die Lage versetzt, auch außerhalb bestimmter, inhaltlich vorgegebener Auswertungskontexte mit anderen Methoden ausgewertet zu werden.
                
            Die Konformität zu den TEI-Richtlinien spielt in der Anwendung der neuen Methode eine wesentliche Rolle. Im System der TEI ist die 
                    Customisation als Normalfall vorgesehen. Unter
                    Customisation wird die kontextabhängige Auswahl von Modulen, Elementen und Attributen oder die Vorgabe von Wertemengen für Attribute verstanden. Diese Vorgaben können in der TEI in sogenannten „One Document Does it all“-Dateien (ODD) definiert und dokumentiert werden, um dann anschließend daraus eigene Datenstrukturdefinitionen in Form von Schema-Dokumenten zu generieren. Zunehmend werden hierbei neben den klassischen Schemasprachen zur Validierung von Datenstrukturen (DTD, RelaxNG, XML Schema) auch Regelwerke definiert, welche eine Validierung des Inhalts eines Dokumentes ermöglichen. (Schematron) ODD sind durch die Dokumentationsleistung und eine normierte Beschreibungssprache ein starkes Hilfsmittel, um die Verwissenschaftlichung von textuellem Markup und dem unterliegenden Textverständnis zu erreichen. Wie aber der Grad der TEI-Konformität zu messen und zu beschreiben sei, ist in der TEI bereits seit Längerem Gegenstand von Diskussionen.
                
         
         
            Tool-Entwicklung
            Wo nun mehr Texte in TEI-konformer Auszeichnung vorliegen, umso wichtiger wird die Existenz von Tools, um diese Daten zu nutzen. Wo Text- und Image-Digitalisierung Quellen einfacher zugänglich macht, werden diese Materialien potentiell als Gegenstand der Digital Humanities nützlich. Ähnlich wie bei der Theorie- oder Methodenbildung befruchten sich zur Verfügung stehende Materialien und daran anzulegende Fragestellungen gegenseitig. Die Kritik der digitalen Methoden wird hier ansetzen müssen, wo das Markup vom Ende her zu denken ist, weil bestimmte Funktionalitäten gewünscht sind: Dokumente sollen nach bestimmten Kriterien sortiert werden? Was bedeutet dies für die Aufbereitung der Daten? – Dokumente sollen im Rahmen des LOD genutzt werden? Welche Eigenschaften müssen sie hierfür haben?
                
         
         
            DH, eine Wissenschaft wie jede andere?
            Die in einer Wissenschaft zur Verfügung stehenden Quellen und deren Verarbeitungsmechanismen haben sich immer schon gegenseitig sowie die Theorie- und Methodenbildung beeinflusst. An den Beispielen der Untersuchung soll gezeigt werden, dass sich dies in den DH nicht anders ausnimmt.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Lou Burnard / Sebastian Rahtz
                         (2004): "RelaxNG with Son of ODD", in:
                        Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages 2004.
                        
               
               
                  Lou Burnard / C. Michael Sperberg-McQueen
                         (1995): "The Design of the TEI Encoding Scheme", in: 
                        Computers and the Humanities 
                        29 (1) p. 17–39. 10.1007/BF01830314
                    
               
                  Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, edited by TEI Consortium. 1990-, P1--P5.
                        , 
                        
               
               
                  Patrick Sahle
                         (2013):
                        Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels.
                         3 Bde. Norderstedt: BoD.
                        
               
               
                  C. Michael Sperberg-McQueen 
                        (1994):
                        Textual Criticism and the Text Encoding Initiative
                        . (First draft of a paper presented at MLA, San Diego, 1994)
                        
               
               
                  C. Michael Sperberg-McQueen / Henry Thompson 
                        (2000):
                        XML-Schema.
                        
               
               
                  Jörg Wettlaufer 
                        (2016): "Neue Erkenntnisse durch digitalisierte Geschichtswissenschaft(en)? Zur hermeneutischen Reichweite aktueller digitaler Methoden in informationszentrierten Fächern", in:
                        Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften. 
                        DOI: 10.17175/2016_011.
                    
               
                  RelaxNG
                         (2008):
                        ISO/IEC 19757-2:2008. Information technology -- Document Schema Definition Language (DSDL) -- Part 2: Regular-grammar-based validation -- RELAX NG. 
                  
               
               
                  Schematron
                         (2016):
                        ISO/IEC 19757-3:2016. Information technology -- Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) -- Part 3: Rule-based validation – Schematron.
                  
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Kontext und Zielsetzung
            Die Modellierung textueller und transbiblionomer Relationen mithilfe von Semantic Web-Technologien bildet mittlerweile eines der zentralen Forschungsfelder der Digital Humanities. Die Struktur und Funktionsweise literarischer Texte erfordern in Bezug auf die formale Beschreibung, Erklärung und Kategorisierung von semantischen Strukturen ein besonders differenziertes Vorgehen: Interne und externe textuelle Beziehungen bestehen in Form komplexer, häufig ambiger Zeichenrelationen, die plurale, sich auf verschiedenen Ebenen überlagernde Bedeutungsangebote stiften. Letztere können zudem nicht auf verortbare Ereignisse, stabile Relationen zwischen (bibliografischen, historischen) Artefakten oder ein konkretes argumentatives Ziel bezogen werden. Die Kategorisierung literarischer ‚Daten‘ erfolgt deshalb systematisch im Spannungsfeld zwischen dem Text als linguistisch-materieller Zeichenformation und deren interpretierender Auffassung. Die Aktualisierung bestimmter Codes hängt hierbei immer auch von kulturellen und historischen Faktoren, methodologischen Vorannahmen sowie der Kontingenz interpretativer Schlussfolgerung ab. Die daraus resultierende Bedingtheit und potentielle Vielfalt semantischer Zuschreibungen muss daher in einer Modellierung transparent abbildbar sein.
                     Dieser Herausforderung begegnet das Projekt, welches in dem Beitrag vorgestellt wird, indem auf der Basis eines situationstheoretischen Formalismus (Barwise/Perry 1983, Devlin 1990) ein mehrstufiges Modell zur Abbildung und Beschreibung komplexer intertextueller Relationen zwischen literarischen Texten entwickelt wird.
                
            Das Projekt möchte damit in zweierlei Hinsicht einen Beitrag zur methodologischen Reflexion leisten: Zum einen streben wir mit dieser zunächst auf das genauere Verständnis intertextueller Phänomene gerichteten stufenweisen Modellierung
                     einen literaturtheoretisch reflektierten Einsatz digitaler Methoden an. Zum anderen trägt das Vorgehen bei der Modellierung ebenso zu einer Schärfung der literaturwissenschaftlichen Perspektive auf Intertextualität und zur fundierten Beschreibung hierbei wirksamer Faktoren bei. Ziel des Projekts ist eine maschinenlesbare Systematisierung intertextueller „Schreibweisen“ (Verweyen/Wittig, S. 38)
                     sowie der Kriterien zur Isolierung und Charakterisierung der Schreibweisen. Diese soll eine computergestützte Erschließung literarischer Intertextualität ermöglichen.
                
            Der Beitrag diskutiert zum einen konkrete Probleme, welche sich im Spannungsfeld zwischen literarischer Polysemie, der Literaturwissenschaft inhärenter Perspektivenvielfalt und technischer Normierung ergeben, denn das Projekt dient nicht zuletzt auch der Reflexion der Möglichkeiten zur Formalisierung literaturwissenschaftlicher Erkenntnisse sowie dem Ausloten der Grenzen für den Einsatz formaler Beschreibungssprachen im Hinblick auf literaturwissenschaftliche Forschungsfragen.
            Zum anderen wird dargestellt, wie durch die spezifische Anlage der Modellierung auf verschiedenen Ebenen Desideraten bisheriger Ansätze begegnet und gleichzeitig ein Beitrag zum literaturtheoretisch fundierten Einsatz von DH-Methoden geleistet werden kann.
            Erste Ergebnisse werden in dem vorgeschlagenen Beitrag anhand konkreter Beispiele wie etwa des intertextuellen Netzes um Matthias Claudius’ 
                    Rheinweinlied präsentiert, welches aufgrund der dem Netz inhärenten Vielzahl intertextueller Phänomene bei gleichzeitig relativ kurzen Texten hierfür besonders geeignet erscheint.
                
         
         
            Stand der Forschung und Abgrenzung
            In vielen bisherigen Projekten zur Erfassung literarischer Beziehungen schränkt die Konzentration auf automatisierbare Analysevorgänge das heuristische Potential digitaler Modellierung für die literaturwissenschaftliche Forschung in verschiedener Hinsicht ein:
            Erstens werden Modelle zur Beschreibung (innertextueller) literarischer Strukturen an stark Plot-lastigen Texten entwickelt,
                     was die Herausforderung der vielfältigen Bedeutungsebenen komplexerer literarischer Texte deutlich reduziert. Die Modelle erscheinen deshalb kaum auf den Großteil der literaturwissenschaftlich relevanten Beispiele übertragbar.
                
            Zweitens erfolgt eine Modellierung intertextueller Beziehungen anhand einer „historische[n] Positivtät von Kontext-Dokumenten“ (Wagner/Mehler/Biber 2016, S. 90 mit Bezug auf das Projekt Wikidition), deren Verknüpfungen auf linguistischer Ebene modelliert werden. Auf diese Weise werden zwar viele Probleme im Hinblick auf die Intersubjektivierbarkeit der Modellierung und die Differenzen zwischen verschiedenen Intertextualitätskonzepten vermieden, gleichzeitig wird aber aus literaturwissenschaftlicher Sicht die Aussagekraft der Ergebnisse stark eingeschränkt, indem der literaturwissenschaftlich relevante Fokus auf die Kategorisierung, Funktion und Wirkung von Intertextualität und die hierbei produktiven Schreibweisen und Markierungen (vgl. Kocher 2007, 179) zugunsten einer eher enzyklopädischen Perspektive verloren geht.
                    
            
            Unser Projekt richtet sich hingegen weder auf die automatisierte Textanalyse noch beschränkt es sich auf die linguistische Ebene konkreter Wortäquivalenz. Vielmehr steht die Entwicklung eines formalisierten Vokabulars zur semantischen Repräsentation literarischer Intertextualität im Zentrum des Forschungsinteresses. Die Isolierung und formale Beschreibung intertextueller Phänomene dient der Beobachtung und Darstellung des Zusammenwirkens jener Schreibweisen und Markierungen bei der Erzeugung von Intertextualität. Die intertextuellen Beziehungen werden dabei also nicht deduktiv im Sinne einer Qualifizierung als Parodie, Kontrafaktur, Nachahmung, Hommage etc. modelliert, da derartige ‚Gattungszuschreibungen‘ in systematischen literaturwissenschaftlichen Untersuchungen zur Typisierung von Intertextualität oftmals den Blick für die spezifischen, bei der Erzeugung von Intertextualität wirksamen Faktoren verstellen. Die angeführten literarischen Beispiele dienen dann eher der selektiven Untermauerung der jeweils präfigurierten Typologie (vgl. einschlägig Broich/Pfister 1985; Genette 1993). Im Gegensatz dazu bildet die Modellierung von Beziehungen zwischen konkreten Schreibweisen den Ausgangspunkt unseres Projekts, welcher im Anschluss Schlussfolgerungen über die Relationen der verschiedenen Ebenen, auf denen intertextuelle Verknüpfungen stattfinden, sowie über die jeweils erzeugten Wirkungen ermöglichen soll.
         
         
            Methodik
            Für das angestrebte Forschungsziel stellt die mehrstufige Modellierung einen expliziten heuristischen Gewinn gegenüber bisherigen Ansätzen der Systematisierung dar, indem die umfassende induktive Erfassung und Beschreibung sowie die anschließend abgeleiteten strukturellen Konstanten nicht unverbunden nebeneinander stehen, sondern Mikro- und Makrostrukturen durch das Modell in ihrem Zusammenhang beobachtbar gemacht werden (s. Abbildung 1).
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Konzeptuelle Darstellung des Modells
            
            Indem zunächst Einzeltextphänomene modelliert, darauf aufbauend deren Funktionen im Sinne ihres Beitrags zur „Bedeutungskonstitution“ (Hempfer 1991, S. 19) erfasst und daraus übergreifende Kategorien abgeleitet werden, können zwei bislang getrennt voneinander verhandelte Bereiche der Untersuchung von Intertextualität in einer ganzheitlichen Modellierung verbunden werden: die ‚Entwirrung‘ des intertextuellen Gefüges eines einzelnen Textes (vgl. hierfür exemplarisch Bauer Lucca 2001; Dudzik 2017) sowie die übergeordnete Suche nach gemeinsamen Strukturen und Funktionsweisen intertextueller Verweise. Das vorgestellte Modell verknüpft also die in der Literaturwissenschaft seit den 1980er Jahren unternommenen Bestrebungen zur Typologisierung intertextueller Strukturen und Funktionsweisen mit einer umfassenden Detailuntersuchung literarischer Texte. Die Differenzierung in Phänomenbeschreibung und ‑bewertung, welche der eingesetzte Formalismus unterstützt (s. u.), sieht explizit die Modellierung funktionaler Überlagerungen und alternativer Forschungsmeinungen vor, sodass im Rahmen der Formalisierung sowohl der Multifunktionalität intertextueller Schreibweisen (vgl. Kocher 2010, S. 179) als auch der maßgeblich auf produktivem Dissens basierenden Dynamik des literaturwissenschaftlichen Diskurses Rechnung getragen wird.
            Als Ausgangspunkt zur formalen Beschreibung intertextueller Phänomene dient ein situationstheoretischer Ansatz, welcher die Brücke zwischen literaturwissenschaftlicher Analyse und technischer Modellierung darstellt. Die Situationstheorie bietet sich an, da sie im Sinne der angestrebten Beschreibung der Intertextualität einen mehrstufigen Formalismus zur Verfügung stellt, welcher Informationen und Informationsflüsse in Kontextabhängigkeit beschreibt: Basale Phänomene werden durch basale Informationseinheiten (sog. „Infone“) beschrieben, welche wiederum „Situationen“ als Phänomene einer höheren Ordnung aus der Perspektive eines oder mehrerer „Agenten“ zu bilden erlauben.
            Somit kann formal unterschieden werden zwischen der Modellierung konkreter (sprachlicher, inhaltlicher, stilistischer) Texteigenschaften und -relationen (beschrieben als Infone) und der Klassifizierung der modellierten Informationseinheiten im Sinne ihrer Funktion sowie einer durch sie indizierten, Kontext-abhängigen Wirkung (beschrieben als Situationen). Im Gegensatz zu technischen Beschreibungssprachen (wie etwa RDF oder OWL) liefert die Situationstheorie einen Formalismus, welcher zunächst frei von umsetzungsspezifischen Einschränkungen (wie etwa festgelegten Datentypen oder Objekthierarchien) ist, die sich ungewollt perspektivierend auf die Modellierung auswirken können.
                     Für die Beschreibung literarischer Texte erweist sich der situationstheoretische Formalismus also als besonders geeignet, da er Modellierungsfreiheit mit der für die technische Umsetzung notwendigen formalen Strenge vereint.
                
         
         
            Ausblick
            Das Modell wird sukzessive unter Einbezug literarischer Texte verschiedener Textsorten und Publikationszeiträume getestet und weiterentwickelt. An diese sukzessive formale Strukturierung anknüpfend wird geprüft, inwieweit etablierte Beschreibungssprachen bei einer technischen Umsetzung des Modells Anwendung finden können. Insbesondere etablierte Sprachen aus dem Umfeld elektronischer Publikation sollen auf ihre Anwendbarkeit bzw. Möglichkeiten der Erweiterung hin betrachtet werden. Dies sind im Rahmen der durch das W3C beschriebene Standards für Verweisstrukturen Sprachen wie XPath, XLink oder XPointer (vgl. einschlägig Wilde/Lowe 2003), für semantische Auszeichnungen die Sprachen des Semantic Web wie RDF oder OWL. Dies schließt – unabhängig von der konkreten Sprache – die Berücksichtigung unterschiedlicher Auszeichnungskonzepte wie bspw. Standoff- in Abgrenzung zu Inline-Markup ein (vgl. Banski 2010).
                    
            
         
      
      
         
             Meister 2012, S. 112 betont aufgrund der Dynamik und historisch-kulturellen Dependenz von Sprache zurecht, dass „[t]he problems posed by the interpretation of literary texts are thus not an exceptional, but rather an exemplary case“. Dennoch erfolgt literarische (bzw. allgemein künstlerische) Kommunikation im Rahmen einer spezifischen „Kommunikationslogik“, die sich von der alltagssprachlicher Kommunikationssituationen unterscheidet (vgl. Spoerhase 2007, S. 414–418).
             Vgl. zur Unterscheidung zwischen „modeling for understanding“ und „modeling for production“ Eide 2014.
            „Schreibweisen“ ist hierbei nicht intentionalistisch, sondern im Sinne von Textstrukturen mit Verweisfunktion zu verstehen.
             Vgl. hierzu u. a. die Ausführungen zur visuellen Analyse in John u. a. 2016. Einen komplexeren, narratologisch ausgerichteten Ansatz verfolgt das Projekt heureCLÉA (vgl. hierzu Gius/Jacke 2015). Das Projekt ist daher in seiner Orientierung an konkreten literaturwissenschaftlichen Methoden beispielhaft, verfolgt aber mit seiner Ausrichtung auf innertextuelle Strukturen ein grundsätzlich anderes Ziel als unser Projekt.
             Wagner/Mehler/Biber 2016, S. 90 verstehen ihr Projekt daher auch eher im Sinne einer Vorstufe für die „Erschließung des intertextuellen Potentials eines je gegebenen literarischen Texts“. Ihr methodischer Ansatz „zielt nicht auf die 
                            Implementierung literarischer Intertextualität“.
                        
             Im Gegensatz dazu ist bspw. der in Heßbrüggen-Walter 2015 dargestellte Ansatz unmittelbar RDF-basiert gedacht.
             Zahlreiche rechnergestützte, aber proprietäre Anwendungen wurden im Verlauf der Entwicklung der Situationstheorie vorgestellt (vgl. einschlägig etwa Tin/Akman 1994). Neuere Ansätze schlagen die Verwendung etablierter Sprachen, wie insb. durch das Semantic Web gegeben, vor (Kokar/Matheus/Baclawski 2009).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Banski, Pjotr (2010): “Why TEI stand-off annotation doesn't quite work: and why you might want to use it nevertheless”, in: 
                        Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2010.
                    
               
                  Barwise, Jon / Perry, John (1983): 
                        Situations and Attitudes. Cambridge: Bradford Book, MIT Press.
                    
               
                  Bauer Lucca, Eva (2001): 
                        Versteckte Spuren: eine intertextuelle Annäherung an Thomas Manns Roman “Doktor Faustus”. Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitätsverlag.
                    
               
                  Broich, Ulrich / Pfister, Manfred (eds.) (1985): 
                        Intertextualität. Formen, Funktionen, anglistische Fallstudien. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
                    
               
                  Devlin, Keith J. (1990): Logic and Information. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
               
                  Dudzik, Yvonne (2017): 
                        Geschichten bereichern die Geschichte: Intertextualität als Untersuchungskategorie in Uwe Johnsons “Jahrestage”. Göttingen: V&R unipress.
                    
               
                  Eide, Øvind (2014): “Ontologies, Data, and TEI”, in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8: 1–22.
                    
               
                  Genette, Gérard (1993): 
                        Palimpseste. Die Literatur auf zweiter Stufe. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp.
                    
               
                  Gius, Evelyn / Jacke, Janina (2015): “Informatik und Hermeneutik. Zum Mehrwert interdisziplinärer Textanalyse”, in: Baum, Constanze / Stäcker, Thomas (eds.): 
                        Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities. (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 1) 10.17175/sb001_006.
                    
               
                  Hempfer, Klaus W. (1991): „Intertextualität. Systemreferenz und Strukturwandel: Die Pluralisierung des erotischen Diskurses in der italienischen und französischen Renaissance-Lyrik (Ariost, Bembo, Du Bellay, Ronsard)“, in: Titzmann, Michael (ed.): 
                        Modelle des literarischen Strukturwandels. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 7–43.
                    
               
                  Heßbrüggen-Walter, Stefan (2015): “What People Said: The Theoretical Foundations of a Minimal Doxographical Ontology and Its Use in the History of Philosophy”, in: Baum, Constanze / Stäcker, Thomas (eds.): 
                        Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities. (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 1). DOI: 10.17175/sb001_001 
                    
               
                  John, Markus / Lohmann, Steffen / Koch, Steffen / Wörner, Michael / Ertl, Thomas (2016): „Visual Analytics for Narrative Texts. Visualizing Characters and their Relationships as Extracted from Novels”, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and Applications. Rom, Italien: SciTePress [Preprint: 
                        http://www.visualdataweb.org/publications/2016_IVAPP_VA-for-Narrative_preprint.pdf].
                    
               
                  Kocher, Ursula (2007): “Im Gewirr der Fäden: Intertextualitätstheorie und Edition”, in: Falk, Rainer / Mattenklott, Gert (eds.): 
                        Ästhetische Erfahrung und Edition. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, 175–185.
                    
               
                  Kokar, Mieczyslaw M. / Matheus, Christopher J. / Baclawski, Kenneth (2009): „Ontology-based situation awareness“, in: 
                        Information Fusion 10, 1. St. Louis, MO, USA: Elsevier, 83–98.
                    
               
                  Tin, Erkan / Akman, Varol (1994): „Computational Situation Theory”, in: Hoebel, Louis J. / Powers, David (eds.): 
                        SIGART Bulletin 5, 4. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 4–17.
                    
               
                  Meister, Jan-Christoph (2012): „Crowdsourcing ‚True Meaning‘: A Collaborative Markup Approach to Textual Interpretation“, in: Deegan, Marilyn (ed.): 
                        Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities. A Volume in Honour of Harold Short, on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday and his Retirement. Farnham: Ashgate 2012, 106–122.
                    
               
                  Spoerhase, Carlos (2007): 
                        Autorschaft und Interpretation. Methodische Grundlagen einer philologischen Hermeneutik. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Verweyen, Theodor / Wittig, Gunther (2010): 
                        Einfache Formen der Intertextualität: Theoretische Überlegungen und historische Untersuchungen. Paderborn: mentis.
                    
               
                  Wagner, Benno / Mehler, Alexander / Biber, Hanno (2016): “Transbiblionome Daten in der Literaturwissenschaft. Texttechnologische Erschließung und digitale Visualisierng intertextueller Beziehungen digitaler Korpora“, in: 
                        Konferenzabstracts DHd 2016 Modellierung, Vernetzung, Visualisierung. Die Digital Humanties als fächerübergreifendes Forschungsparadigma
                  http://dhd2016.de/boa.pdf, 88–94.
                    
               
                  Wilde, Erik / Lowe, David (2003): 
                        XPath, XLink, XPointer, and XML: A Practical Guide to Web Hyperlinking and Transclusion. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Der vorliegende Beitrag enthält methodische Überlegungen und Experimente zu “Zeta”, einem von John Burrows (2007) vorgeschlagenen Maß für die Distinktivität oder “keyness” von textuellen Merkmalen (Wortformen, Lemmata, etc.). Mit solchen Maßen werden Merkmale ermittelt, die für eine bestimmte Gruppe von Texten gegenüber einer Vergleichsgruppe charakteristisch sind.
            Das Exposé gibt einen Überblick zu solchen Maßen, bevor die Funktionsweise von Zeta erläutert wird. Aufbauend auf einer Neu-Implementierung in Python (“pyzeta”, https://github.com/cligs/pyzeta) und Vorarbeiten (Schöch im Druck) liegt der spezifische Forschungsbeitrag dann in den folgenden Schritten: erstens werden mehrere Varianten von Zeta vorgeschlagen und implementiert; zweitens werden Verfahren zum Vergleich und der Evaluation der Ergebnisse erprobt. Ziel ist es, Zeta in seiner Funktionsweise und in seiner Beziehung zu vergleichbaren Maßen besser zu verstehen und vorhandene Nachteile des Maßes durch gezielte Modifikationen zu beheben.
         
         
            Überblick und Stand der Forschung
            Die vergleichende, kontrastierende Analyse zweier Gruppen von Texten ist ein in den Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaften weit verbreitetes Verfahren. Entsprechend wurden zahlreiche Maße der Distinktivität oder “keyness” von Merkmalen entwickelt und für vielfältige Fragestellungen eingesetzt. Die grundlegende Annahme solcher Maße ist, dass ein Merkmal nicht schon durch seine reine Häufigkeit in einer Textgruppe für diese charakteristisch ist, sondern dass dies auch davon abhängt, wie häufig das Merkmal in einer Vergleichsgruppe ist. Diejenigen Merkmale bekommen einen besonders hohen Wert zugewiesen, die in der einen Gruppe sehr häufig sind und zugleich in der Vergleichsgruppe sehr selten sind (Scott 1997, 236). Man kann vier Arten von Verfahren unterscheiden: 
            
               Verfahren, welche erwartete und beobachtete Werte vergleichen (wie “log-likelihood-ratio”; siehe Rayson und Garside 2000);
               Verfahren, die eine Gewichtung der Häufigkeiten vornehmen (wie “tf-idf”, “term frequency / inverse document frequency”; siehe Robertson 2004);
               Statistische Hypothesentests, die Verteilungseigenschaften vergleichen (wie “Welch’s t-Test”; siehe Bortz und Schuster 2010); 
               Dispersionsmaße, die nicht die Häufigkeit, sondern den Grad der konsistenten Verwendung von Merkmalen in Beziehung setzen (wie “deviation of proportions”; Gries 2008). 
            
            Die praktische Bedeutung von Distinktivitätsmaßen ist daran erkennbar, dass Korpusanalyse-Software meist eine entsprechende Funktion anbietet, so “keyness” in WordCruncher (Scott 1997) oder “spécificity” in TXM (Heiden et al. 2012). Kilgariff 2004 und Lijfijt et al. 2014 sind wichtige Arbeiten zur Evaluation von Distinktivitätsmaßen. 
         
         
            Was ist Zeta?
            Das von John Burrows (2007) vorgeschlagene “Zeta” beruht auf einem Dispersionsmaß. Vor der Berechnung werden die Texte in kleinere Segmente gesplittet, wobei die Segmentlänge ein wichtiger Parameter ist. Dann wird für jedes Merkmal der Anteile der Segmente erhoben, in denen das Merkmal mindestens einmal vorkommt (die “document proportion”). Von diesem Anteil in der untersuchten Gruppe wird der entsprechende Anteil in der Vergleichsgruppe subtrahiert, woraus sich ein Zeta-Wert zwischen -1 und 1 ergibt.
            Ein Effekt dieser Berechnungsweise ist, dass Zeta Inhaltswörter als distinktive Wörter favorisiert, Funktionswörter sowie Eigennamen hingegen penalisiert. Daraus ergibt sich eine hohe Interpretierbarkeit der Ergebnisse, die Zeta im Vergleich zu anderen Maßen für die (digitalen) Literaturwissenschaften besonders attraktiv macht. Ein Nachteil ist, dass Merkmale durch die Subtraktion niemals einen Zeta-Wert bekommen können, der höher ist als ihre “document proportion” in der untersuchten Textgruppe, selbst wenn sie gegenüber der Vergleichsgruppe deutlich überrepräsentiert sind (Abbildung 1, Wörter in den roten Rahmen; Schöch im Druck).
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 1: Scatterplot der Wörter in zwei Textgruppen (französische Komödien und Tragödien): “document proportions” der Wörter in zwei Textgruppen (x- und y-Achse) und resultierende Zeta-Werte (Distanz von der Diagonale).
               
               Eine bekannte Implementierung von Zeta existiert im stylo-Paket für Rin der Funktion "oppose()" (Eder et al. 2016). Abbildung 2 zeigt für ein Beispiel die Ergebnisdarstellung in der hier verwendeten “pyzeta”-Implementierung. 
            
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 2: Positive und negative Keywords für französische Komödien (rechts) im Vergleich mit Tragödien (links). Zeta-Werte auf der horizontalen Achse.
               
            
            Anwendungsbeispiele von Zeta gibt es in der Shakespeare-Forschung (Craig und Kinney 2009), der modernen englischsprachigen Literatur (Hoover 2010; Weidman und O’Sullivan 2017) und der Romanistik (Schöch im Druck). In der zuletzt genannten Arbeit zum französischen Theater der Klassik und Aufklärung konnte nicht nur die erwartbare, klare Differenzierung von Komödien und Tragödien gezeigt werden. Vielmehr wurde auch die spezifische Verortung der Tragikomödien deutlich, die nicht als Mischform zwischen Komödien und Tragödien zu verstehen sind, sondern eine besondere Affinität zur Tragödie aufweisen (Abbildung 3). 
            
               
               Abbildung 3: Hauptkomponentenanalyse auf Grundlage der 50 Wörter, die für Komödien und Tragödien die höchsten Zeta-Werte erhalten. Komödien in rot, Tragödien in blau, Tragikomödien in grün. Quelle: Schöch im Druck.
            
         
         
            Varianten von Zeta
            Ausgehend von der ursprünglichen Formulierung von Zeta durch Burrows als Subtraktion der “document proportions” lassen sich mehrere Faktoren identifizieren, die zur Formulierung von Varianten von Zeta geeignet erscheinen: 
            
               Statt “document proportions” werden relative Häufigkeiten verwendet; 
               Statt der Subtraktion erfolgt eine Division;
               Statt nicht-transformierter Werte wird eine log2-Transformation der Werte vorgenommen.
            
            Die Kombination dieser Faktoren ergibt 8 Varianten von Zeta (Tabelle 1). 
         
         
            
               
               document proportions
               relative Häufigkeiten
            
            
               
               keine Transformation
               log2-Transformation
               keine Transformation
               log2-Transformation
            
            
               Subtraktion
               sd0
               sd2
               sr0
               sr2
            
            
               Division
               dd0
               dd2
               dr0
               dr2
            
         
         Tabelle 1: Übersicht über die getesteten Varianten von Zeta. Die Variante mit Label „sd0“ entspricht Burrows‘ Zeta. 
         Einige der Varianten sind mathematisch gut motivierbar und versprechen, den oben genannten Nachteil der begrenzten Werte für bestimmte Wörter auszugleichen und damit Zeta zu verbessern, es wurden aber alle implementiert und auf zwei Datensätzen evaluiert.
         
            Datensätze
            Es wurden zwei unterschiedliche Korpora verwendet. Erstens ein Korpus aus der textbox-Sammlung (Schöch et al. 2017), das Romane enthält, die zwischen 1880 und 1940 veröffentlicht wurden: jeweils 24 Texte aus Spanien und aus Lateinamerika (ca. 2,8 Millionen Tokens). Zweitens, ein Teil der Sammlung 
                    Théâtre classique (Fièvre 2007-2017) mit französischen Dramen: 134 Tragödien und 158 Komödien aus Klassik und Aufklärung (ca. 4,9 Millionen Tokens).
                
         
         
            Evaluation
            Die 8 Varianten führen zu unterschiedlichen Wortlisten, geordnet nach absteigenden Zeta-Werten. Vergleicht man den Beginn der Wortlisten für zwei Varianten, fällt auf, dass es wie erwartet zu Verschiebungen im Rang der distinktivsten Wörter kommt. 
            
               Ähnlichkeit der Varianten
               Um den Grad der Abweichung der Ergebnisse für alle Varianten zueinander auf der Grundlage längerer Wortlisten zu erheben, ist ein quantifizierendes Verfahren unerlässlich. Ein Ansatz ist, ein Clustering der Maße auf Basis der Zeta-Werte ihrer Wörter vorzunehmen (Abbildung 4). 
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 4: Dendrogramm auf Grundlage einer Cluster Analyse der Zeta-Werte für die 8 Zeta-Varianten (Théâtre-classique-Datensatz; 500 distinktive Wörter; Ward-Verfahren).
                  
                  Abbildung 4 zeigt, dass der wichtigste Faktor für die Unterschiedlichkeit der Varianten ist, ob subtrahiert oder dividiert wird (zwei Haupt-Cluster). Die beiden anderen Variablen spielen eine viel kleinere Rolle. (Die Ergebnisse weiterer Analysen, u.a. auf Basis der RBO-Ähnlichkeit (“ranked biased order”, Webber et al. 2010), werden aus Platzgründen hier nicht diskutiert.)
               
            
            
               Evaluation mit Klassifikationstask
               Unabhängig von den Beziehungen der Varianten zueinander stellt sich die Frage, welche der Varianten von Zeta besonders gut distinktive Wörter identifiziert. Dabei kann zur Evaluation nicht auf einen Goldstandard zurückgegriffen werden: eine händische Annotation der Wörter nach dem Grad ihrer Distinktivität ist nicht möglich, weil niemand das zugrunde liegende Korpus überblicken kann. Die Qualität eines Distinktivitätsmaßes kann aber evaluiert werden, indem es als Merkmalsselektor für einen Klassifikationstask verwendet wird.
               Wenn die durch Zeta am höchsten bewerteten Wörter als Features für einen Klassifikator verwendet werden, sollte dieser Klassifikator eine höhere Genauigkeit erreichen als bei einfacher Verwendung der häufigsten Wörter. Tatsächlich lässt sich dieser Effekt auf dem Korpus der spanisch-sprachigen Romane nachweisen (Tabelle 2). Zur Ermittlung einer Baseline wurde für die Klassifikation in spanische und lateinamerikanische Romane ein linearer SVM-Classifier auf den häufigsten 80, nach TF-IDF gewichteten Wörtern (ohne Stoppwörter) trainiert. Dieser Classifier erreichte lediglich eine Klassifikationsgüte (F1-Score) von 0.49, ist also nicht vom Zufall zu unterscheiden.
               Trainiert man stattdessen auf den 40 distinktivsten Wörtern nach Zeta (oder einer der Varianten), lassen sich Genauigkeiten von deutlich über 90% erzielen. Diese Genauigkeit kann nicht als tatsächliches Klassifikationsergebnis gesehen werden, da die distinktivsten Merkmale auf dem gesamten Korpus extrahiert wurden, ohne Aufteilung in Trainings- und Testdaten. Dennoch zeigt das Ergebnis, dass die von Zeta selektierten Merkmale tatsächlich sehr nützlich für eine Klassifikation sind. Zudem zeigen sich deutliche Unterschiede in der Performanz je nach verwendeter Variante: während mit “sd0” (=Burrows Zeta) 81% Genauigkeit erreicht wird, erhöht sich dieser Wert bei der Variante mit log2-Transformation, “sd2”, auf 98%. 
               
                  
                     baseline
                     sd0
                     sd2
                     sr0
                     sr2
                     dd0
                     dd2
                     dr0
                     dr2
                  
                  
                     0.49
                     0.81
                     0.98
                     0.48
                     0.83
                     0.79
                     0.85
                     0.75
                     0.79
                  
               
               
                  Tabelle 2: Klassifikationsergebnisse bei Verwendung einer linearen SVM, trainiert auf den 40 am höchsten gerankten Wörtern verschiedener Maße im Vergleich zur Baseline. Alle Werte sind der Durchschnitt einer dreifachen Kreuzvalidierung.
               
            
         
         
            Fazit
            Wichtigste Ergebnisse dieses Beitrags sind ein differenziertes Verständnis davon, wie Zeta im Kontext anderer Distinktivitätsmaße einzuordnen ist und wie bestimmte mathematischen Parameter sich auf die Ergebnislisten auswirken: als ein auf dem Grad der Dispersion der Merkmale beruhendes Maß, dessen entscheidende Eigenschaft die Subtraktion der Werte ist. Ein weiteres wesentliches Ergebnis sind die beiden vorgeschlagenen Strategien zum Vergleich und der Evaluation von Distinktivitätsmaßen, wenn eine direkte Evaluation auf Goldstandard-Daten nicht möglich ist.
            Nächste Schritte: Wir möchten als weitere Evaluationsstrategie künstliche Texte generieren, in denen wir kontrolliert einzelne Wörter mit unterschiedlich stark abweichender Verteilung einfügen. So können verschieden Zeta-Varianten direkt dahingehend evaluiert werden, wie gut sie diese Wörter korrekt identifizieren. Zudem möchten wir neben der “document proportion” von Zeta ein weiteres Dispersionsmaß, die von Gries (2008) vorgeschlagene “deviation of proportions” als Grundlage für eine weitere Zeta-Variante verwenden. Schließlich möchten wir untersuchen, ob die hohe Interpretierbarkeit des Original-Zeta bei den Varianten mit noch höherer Klassifikationsgüte erhalten bleibt.
            Eine separate Untersuchung ist in Vorbereitung zu zwei eng zusammenhängenden Fragen: wie sich unterschiedliche Segmentlängen einerseits auf die Ergebnisse auswirken, und wie sich die Ergebnisse verändern, wenn unterschiedlich lange Texte nicht mit allen Segmenten in die Berechnung eingehen, sondern aus jedem Einzeltext zufällig eine identische Anzahl von Segmenten gesampelt wird. 
            Übergeordnetes Ziel all dieser Arbeiten zu Zeta ist es letztlich weniger, ein perfektes Distinktivitätsmaß zu identifizieren, als ein justierbares Maß vorzuschlagen, bei dem in Abhängigkeit von Daten und Forschungsfragen dynamisch Parameter verändert und die resultierenden Verschiebungen in den Ergebnissen visualisiert werden können. 
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bortz, Jürgen, and Christof Schuster (2010). 
                        Statistik für Human- und Sozialwissenschaftler. 7. Auflage. Berlin: Springer.
                    
               
                  Burrows, John (2007). “All the Way Through: Testing for Authorship in Different Frequency Strata.” 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 22, no. 1: 27–47. doi:10.1093/llc/fqi067.
                    
               
                  Craig, Hugh, and Arthur F. Kinney, eds. (2009). 
                        Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of Authorship. 1st ed. Cambridge University Press.
                    
               
                  Eder, Maciej, Mike Kestemont, and Jan Rybicki(2016). “Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis.” 
                        The R Journal 16, no. 1: 1–15.
                    
               
                  Fièvre, Paul, ed. (2007-2013). “Théâtre classique.” Paris: Université Paris-IV Sorbonne. http://www.theatre-classique.fr.
                    
               
                  Gries, Stefan Th. (2008). “Dispersions and Adjusted Frequencies in Corpora.” 
                        International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 13, no. 4: 403–37. doi:10.1075/ijcl.13.4.02gri.
                    
               
                  Heiden, Serge (2010). “The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme.” In 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation - PACLIC24, edited by Ryo Otoguro, Kiyoshi Ishikawa, Hiroshi Umemoto, Kei Yoshimoto, and Yasunari Harada, 389–98. Sendai: Waseda University. https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00549764/en.
                    
               
                  Hoover, David L. (2010). “Teasing out Authorship and Style with T-Tests and Zeta.” In 
                        Digital Humanities Conference. London: ADHO. http://dh2010.cch.kcl.ac.uk/academic-programme/abstracts/papers/html/ab-658.html.
                    
               
                  Kilgarriff, Adam (2001). “Comparing Corpora.” 
                        International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 6, no. 1: 97–133. doi:10.1075/ijcl.6.1.05kil.
                    
               
                  Lijffijt, Jefrey, Terttu Nevalainen, Tanja Säily, Panagiotis Papapetrou, Kai Puolamäki, and Heikki Mannila (2014). “Significance Testing of Word Frequencies in Corpora.” 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 31, no. 2: 374–97. doi:10.1093/llc/fqu064.
                    
               
                  Rayson, Paul, and R. Garside (2000). “Comparing Corpora Using Frequency Profiling.” In 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Comparing Corpora, 1–6. Hong Kong: ACM.
                    
               
                  Robertson, Stephen (2004). “Understanding Inverse Document Frequency: On Theoretical Arguments for IDF.” 
                        Journal of Documentation 60, no. 5 : 503–20.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof (im Druck). “Zeta für die kontrastive Analyse literarischer Texte. Theorie, Implementierung, Fallstudie.” In 
                        Quantitative Verfahren in der Literaturwissenschaft. Von einer Scientia Quantitatis zu den Digital Humanities, edited by Andrea Albrecht, Sandra Richter, Marcel Lepper, Marcus Willand, and Toni Bernhart. Berlin: de Gruyter. https://cligs.hypotheses.org/files/2017/09/Schoech_2017-preprint_Zeta-fuer-die-kontrastive-Analyse.pdf.
                    
               
                  Schöch, Christof, José Calvo Tello, Ulrike Henny-Krahmer, and Stefanie Popp (angenommen). “The CLiGS Textbox: Building and Using Collections of Literary Texts in Romance Languages Encoded in XML-TEI.” 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative http://cligs.hypotheses.org/files/2017/09/Schoech-et-al_2017_Textbox.pdf.
                    
               
                  Scott, Mike (1997). “PC Analysis of Key Words and Key Key Words.” 
                        System 25, no. 2: 233–45.
                    
               
                  Webber, William, Alistair Moffat, and Justin Zobel (2010). “A Similarity Measure for Indefinite Rankings.” 
                        ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 28, no. 4: 20:1–20:38. doi:10.1145/1852102.1852106.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            I. Motivation 
            In den textbasierenden Geisteswissenschaften ist eine optimale Beschaffenheit der zu Grunde liegenden Texte eine wesentliche Bedingung für wissenschaftliches Arbeiten. Wie sehr sich die Bedeutung eines Textes schon durch scheinbar minimale Unterschiede wie die der Interpunktion verschieben kann, hat sich einer breiteren Öffentlichkeit zuletzt in der Diskussion über einen Punkt in einer Abschrift der amerikanischen Unabhängigkeitserklärung gezeigt (The Atlantic 7/2014).
            Während die historische Diskussion über digitale Editionen vielfach mit dokumentarischen Editionstypen bzw. der Frage nach dem Dokumentcharakter der Grundlagen einer Edition (Manuskripte etc.) und der Frage nach der Essenz des Textbegriffes beschäftigt ist (P. Sahle 2013), ergibt sich insbesondere für diejenigen historischen und altertumswissenschaftlichen Disziplinen, die weiterhin auf die klassische Form kritischer Texteditionen angewiesen sind, ein anderes Problem: Da sie traditionell in hohem Maße mit Texten beschäftigt sind, die notwendig als Interpretationen und Rekonstruktionen gelten müssen (West 1973,32), ist hier vor allem die Frage nach der Beschaffenheit und Begründung der zum Teil massiven editorischen Eingriffe nicht nur in die Lesart, sondern auch in den Umfang und die Zuschreibung von Texten, etwa im Falle sogenannter „Fragmente“, von vorrangiger Bedeutung. Der Workshop soll in diese allgemeine Problematik einführen und sich im Hinblick auf das Thema der Konferenz dem Bereich Kritik der digitalen Geisteswissenschaften (traditionelle Fächer und DH) zuordnen. Den Teilnehmenden soll dies praktisch anhand der Anwendung der Software eCOMPARATIO vermittelt werden. eCOMPARATIO bietet eine einfache Möglichkeit der Kollationierung verschiedener Varianten eines Textes und ermöglicht eine digitale, auf dem automatischen Textvergleich beruhende Form des kritischen Apparates.
            Dazu sind einzelne Use Cases ausgearbeitet worden (anhand der Fragmentsammlung der Vorsokratiker von Diels/Kranz [griechisch], der Res Gestae des Augustus [lateinisch], des Genfer Gelöbnisses [deutsch], der Gettysburg Address von Abraham Lincoln [englisch]), anhand derer den Teilnehmern die Funktionalitäten demonstriert werden.
         
         
            II. Die Software
            Im Projekt eCOMPARATIO, das von 2014 bis 2016 von der DFG gefördert wurde und in Leipzig am Lehrstuhl für Alte Geschichte in Kooperation mit dem Center of E-Humanities in History and Social Sciences (ICE) am Max-Weber-Kolleg für kultur- und sozialwissenschaftliche Studien durchgeführt wurde, ist vor dem Hintergrund dieser Problematik ein einfach zu bedienendes Tool für den Vergleich prinzipiell beliebig vieler und beliebig langer digitalisierter Editionen vorrangig griechischer und lateinischer, technisch gesehen aber auch sämtlicher anderer in einem UNICODE-Format zugänglicher Texte entstanden. Der Textvergleich arbeitet auf der Basis der Identifikation von Ungleichheiten. Hierbei reicht die Spanne der programmiertechnisch unterscheidbaren Differenzen von Ungleichheiten innerhalb von Wörtern und Buchstabenfolgen bis hin zu vertauschten Passagen. Im Unterschied zu anderen Vergleichsprogrammen benötigen Anwender weder eine Installation von Python, eine Levenshtein Bibliothek oder ein Java-Plugin, sondern erhalten eine für die Anwender ohne Vorkenntnisse sofort im Browser nutzbare und mit Copy-and-Paste einfach zu bedienende Oberfläche. Auch Fallbeispiele, eine Textdokumentation sowie Videoanleitungen stehen zur Verfügung. In zwei derzeit (2016-17) von der DFG und der Andrew W. Mellon Foundation geförderten Projekten an der Universität Leipzig in Kooperation mit Christopher Blackwell von der Furman University in Greenville, SC/ USA, erfolgt eine Einbindung des Vergleichstools in ein Interface (zu dem Protokoll Canonical Text Services (CTS) als Teil der CITE Architecture: http://cite-architecture.github.io/cts/), dessen Ziel nicht nur die Bereitstellung möglichst vieler digitalisierter Editionen einzelner Texte, sondern damit auch erweiterte Möglichkeiten des Textvergleiches, der Suche nach Parallelstellen und weiterer Formen des sog. „Text-Mining“ ist.
            
               Die Texteingabemaske
               Die eigenständige Version der Vergleichssoftware (unter http://ecomparatio.net/~khk/instanzen/ecompp/ ist ein Beispiel frei zum Gebrauch bereitgestellt) ermöglicht weiterhin eine browserbasierte oder auch offline verwendbare Anwendung für Texte nach dem Copy-and-Paste-Prinzip: Hier können beliebig viele Versionen eines Textes eingefügt werden.
            
            
               Die Darstellung
               Das Tool ermöglicht verschiedene Ausgaben des Vergleiches:
            
            
               
               Abbildung 1, Detail-Vergleich
            
            
               
               Abbildung 2, Synopse
            
            
               
               Abbildung 3, Buch-Darstellung mit digitalem Apparat zum Textvergleich
            
            
               Ausgabe/Export der Ergebnisse
               Die Ausgabe der Ergebnisse kann zur weiteren Integration in den Arbeitsprozess als TEI XML oder LaTeX Code erfolgen. Will man die Vergleichsdaten abfragen, so steht ein JSON Interface zur Verfügung, über das weitere Software angebunden werden kann. 
            
         
         
            III. Ziele und Zielgruppe
            Ziel des Workshops ist eine Einführung in die Anwendung der eCOMPARATIO Vergleichssoftware, auch in Abgrenzung zu bereits verfügbarer Software (collateX, Juxta) mit ähnlichen Anwendungsbereichen. Dazu soll zunächst eine Einführung in die Relevanz der Frage nach scheinbar marginalen textlichen Unterschieden anhand prägnanter Beispiele aus verschiedenen historischen Epochen und in verschiedenen wissenschaftlichen Diskurssprachen gegeben werden (anhand griechischer, lateinischer, englischer und deutscher Texte).
            Darüber hinaus soll den Teilnehmenden die Möglichkeit gegeben werden, auch Texte aus den eigenen Disziplinen oder beliebige im Internet verfügbare Versionen von Texten selbst miteinander zu vergleichen und sich so mit den Funktionen der Software vertraut zu machen.
            Zielgruppe des Workshops sind prinzipiell alle Interessierten aus dem Bereich der textbasierten Geisteswissenschaften. Dabei sind diejenigen, die, wie oben angesprochen, vor allem mit der Vielzahl digitalisierter Editionen arbeiten, ebenso angesprochen wie solche, die selbst an der Erstellung von Editionen etc. arbeiten, und für die eCOMPARATIO ein hilfreiches Mittel bei der Sichtung und Kollationierung von Textzeugnissen sein kann.
            Besondere technische Kenntnisse sind nicht erforderlich, da sich eCOMPARATIO bewusst an Anwender richtet, die entweder selbst an einer kritischen Edition arbeiten oder auf der Grundlage mehrerer kritischer Editionen wissenschaftliche Fragestellungen verfolgen.
         
         
            IV. Ablauf und Teilnehmerzahl
            Im Workshop soll die browsergestützte Version zur Anwendung kommen, ein Download der Software wird aber auch möglich sein. Neben der bereits beschriebenen Einführung in die wissenschaftliche Grundproblematik erfolgt zunächst eine kurze Präsentation eigener Ergebnisse im Zuge der Forschung mit eCOMPARATIO.
            Hauptsächlich soll im praktischen Teil den Teilnehmenden die Möglichkeit gegeben werden, auf ihren eigenen Rechnern in der browsergestützten Version selbst Vergleiche der für sie relevanten Texte vorzunehmen, die mitgebracht werden sollten oder vor Ort aus Onlinedatenbanken heruntergeladen werden können.
            Während des Workshops soll dann von Seiten der Organisatoren auf eventuelle individuelle Probleme und Schwierigkeiten eingegangen werden. Die Organisatoren des Workshops erhoffen sich hiervon einen eigenen Erkenntnisgewinn auch im Hinblick auf die Anwendungsmöglichkeiten und notwendige Ergänzungen im Hinblick auf die Arbeit gerade mit nicht-lateinischen oder nicht-griechischen Texten.
         
         
            V. Ablauf
            Die TeilnehmerInnen erhalten vorab eine detaillierte Anleitung (Handbuch eCOMPARATIO).
            Im eigentlichen Workshop werden die jeweiligen Arbeitsschritte von einem der Organisatoren live vorgeführt (dafür wird ein leistungsstarker Beamer benötigt). Die konkreten Inhalte orientieren sich dabei an den bisher von den Organisatoren ausgearbeiteten Use Cases (s.o.), die von den Organisatoren präsentiert werden.
            Während des Workshops werden wir bei auftretenden Fragen und Problemen den Teilnehmenden helfend zur Seite stehen, da sie auch die Möglichkeit haben sollen, anhand eigener Texte zu arbeiten. Um eine möglichst gute Betreuung der TeilnehmerInnen gewährleisten zu können, sollte die Teilnehmerzahl 25-30 nicht überschreiten.
         
         
            VI. Organisatoren
            Charlotte Schubert ist Althistorikerin, hat zu Themen der Mentalitätsgeschichte, Medizin- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte sowie zu verschiedenen Bereichen der griechischen Geschichte gearbeitet; seit 2006 verantwortliche Koordinatorin in verschiedenen DH-Projekten, die vom BMBF (eAQUA, eXChange), der DFG (eCOMPARATIO, CTS, Etablierung eines Open Access Online eJournals: Digital Classics Online), der VolkswagenStiftung (Digital Plato) und der Andrew W. Mellon Foundation (CTS) gefördert wurden und werden.
            Hannes Kahl ist Informatiker, Berufserfahrung aus diversen DH-Projekten, Entwickler von eCOMPARATIO, arbeitet an der Weiterentwicklung von CTS und an einer Dissertation zu dem Thema „Form und Formalisierung – mit Anwendung innerhalb automatischer Ermittlung von Buchstabenwerten aus digitalen Abbildungen griechischer Lettern innerhalb wissenschaftlicher Editionen sowie deren digitaler Formatierung“ (Betreuer: Prof. Ch. Schubert, Alte Geschichte/Universität Leipzig/ Prof. O. Arnold, Informatik/FH Erfurt).
            Friedrich Meins ist Althistoriker und hat eine Dissertation zum Thema „Literarische Kritik, rhetorische Theorie und historische Methode bei Dionysios von Halikarnassos“ geschrieben. Im Bereich der eHumanities hat er in den Projekten „eAQUA“ und „eAQUA Dissemination“ an der Uni Leipzig sowie im Projekt „eCOMPARATIO“ am ICE der Universität Erfurt mitgearbeitet. Derzeit arbeitet er im von der Andrew W. Mellon Foundation geförderten Kooperationsprojekt der Universität Leipzig und der Furman University (Greenville, SC/ USA) „Annotating and Editing With Canonical Text Services (CTS)“.
            Oliver Bräckel ist Althistoriker und arbeitet an einer Dissertation zu Politischen Flüchtlingen im Römischen Reich. Im Bereich der eHumanities hat er im Projekt „eCOMPARATIO“ am ICE der Universität Erfurt sowie im Projekt eXChange an der Uni Leipzig mitgearbeitet. Derzeit arbeitet er im von der Andrew W. Mellon Foundation geförderten Kooperationsprojekt der Universität Leipzig und der Furman University (Greenville, SC/ USA) „Annotating and Editing With Canonical Text Services (CTS)“.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  A. Olheiser, Have We Been Reading the Declaration of Independence All Wrong?, 
                        
                            https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2014/07/typo-could-mean-weve- been-reading-the-declaration-of-independence-all-wrong/373915/
                         (letzter Zugang 7.7.2017).
                    
               
                  P. Sahle, Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels, Norderstedt 2013, 3 Bde. (Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik Bd. 7).
               
                  M.L. West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, Stuttgart 1973.
               
                  Links:
               
               The Atlantic: https://www.theatlantic.com/entertain
                        ment/archive/2014/07/typo-could-mean-weve-been-reading-the-declaration-of-independence-all-wrong/373915/
                        (letzter Zugang 7.7.2017)
                    
               http://www.eaqua.net
               
                  http://www.ecomparatio.net/
               
               
                  http://www.ecomparatio.net/~khk/instanzen/ecompp/ (letzter Zugang17.9.2017)
               http://digital-plato.org
               http://digital-classics-online.eu
               
                  http://cite-architecture.github.io/cts/
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            
               Ein DH-Lehr-Lernprojekt zu den Gründungsurkunden der Jesuitenuniversität Paderborn
               Die „digitale Revolution“ greift zunehmend in komplexer Weise auf alle Lebensbereiche über. Im „digitalen Zeitalter“ ist auch ein Wandel in der Geschichtsschreibung zu beobachten, der schon bei der Unterscheidung analoger von digitalen Quellen sichtbar wird (Pfanzelter 2016: 85). Die Arbeitsweise von HistorikerInnen wird durch die Verfügbarkeit von Quellen in digitaler und digitalisierter Art verändert (Bernsen 2017: 295, Kelly 2013). Daraus ergibt sich nicht nur das Desiderat nach entsprechenden Kompetenzen im Umgang mit digitalen sowie digitalisierten Quellen, sondern auch nach einer „der digitalen Welt angepassten, technikgestützten Quellenkritik“ (Pfanzelter 2016: 93). Herausforderungen hinsichtlich des Umgangs mit Quellen lassen sich für alle Ebenen der Gesellschaft ableiten – von einer Schülerschaft, die zur Partizipation in der Gesellschaft befähigt werden soll, über (Lehramts-) Studierende, die dieses ermöglichen sollen, bis zu den FachwissenschaftlerInnen und Lehrenden an den Universitäten. Dementsprechend hoch ist die Relevanz, das im folgenden vorgestellte Projekt im Kontext der „Kritik der digitalen Vernunft“ zu diskutieren und einen besonderen Fokus darauf zu legen, welche und wie stark ausgeprägte digitale Kompetenzen HistorikerInnen benötigen, um dem „digitalen Zeitalter“ gerecht zu werden und den kritischen Anforderungen der Geisteswissenschaften zu genügen. Dies gilt in besonderem Maße mit Blick auf zukünftige GeschichtslehrerInnen, die in ihrer Position als gesellschaftliche Multiplikatoren einer adäquaten Ausbildung bedürfen.
               Das Lehrkonzept des Forschenden Lernens eröffnet die Möglichkeit, Studierende mit Projekten, Methoden und Werkzeugen der Digital Humanities kritisch und reflektiert vertraut zu machen. Die aus (Lehramts-)StudentInnen und DozentInnen des Historischen Instituts der Universität Paderborn zusammengesetzte Projektgruppe ‚TEI-Editionswerkstatt‘ will zugleich wichtige Kompetenzen der Digital Humanities wie auch Fachwissen vermitteln. Dies geschieht außerhalb des Curriculums auf freiwilliger Basis, sodass die Motivation aller Beteiligten sehr hoch ist. Das gemeinsame Ziel ist es, vier Urkunden über die Gründung der Jesuitenuniversität Paderborn um 1600 (Meyer zu Schlochtern 2014) in einer digitalen Quellenedition der Forschung online zur Verfügung zu stellen (Sahle 2013). 
               Organisiert ist die Arbeitsgruppe in vier Teilgruppen, die jeweils eine Urkunde bearbeiten, woraus einerseits eine zeitökonomische Arbeitsweise für die heterogene Projektgruppe resultiert und andererseits sichergestellt ist, dass jedes Gruppenmitglied sämtliche Arbeitsschritte auf dem Weg zur digitalen Quellenedition selbstständig durchführt. Diese Vorgehensweise ist einer effektiveren Arbeitsweise dienlich und fördert im Sinne eines sekundären Erkenntnisinteresses die Kompetenzen der Arbeitsgruppe hinsichtlich des Umgangs mit den entsprechenden Tools und Methoden sowie einen elaborierten Erkenntnisgewinn hinsichtlich der erarbeiteten Inhalte. Die Ausdifferenzierung der Vorgehensweise und die gruppeninterne Organisation der Arbeitsschritte erfolgen bei regelmäßigen Treffen, bei denen die Ziele immer wieder dem aktuellen Stand des Projekts angepasst sowie Fragen und Ideen diskutiert werden.
               Die Arbeitsschritte im Detail:
               
                  Transkription: Es wurde eine eigenständige Transkription der Originaldokumente in ein digitales Format angefertigt.
                  TEI-Encoding: Die Quelle wurde in XML nach den Richtlinien der TEI ausgezeichnet. Hier liegt eine der Hauptaufgaben der Arbeitsgruppe.
                  TEI-Schema: Um sicher zu stellen, dass die gleichen Standards eingehalten werden, wurde ein für das Projekt maßgeschneidertes TEI-Schema erarbeitet. 
                  Übersetzung: Da die Urkunden in lateinischer Sprache vorliegen, soll eine deutsche Übersetzung angeboten werden, die eigens angefertigt werden muss. 
                  Historische Einleitung: Der Edition soll eine Einleitung vorangestellt sein, in welcher Informationen (u.a. zur Überlieferung) enthalten sind, die dem Leser eine Quellenkritik erleichtern und den historischen Kontext präsentieren. 
                  HTML-Darstellung: Die Urkunden-Edition soll online zugänglich gemacht werden. Der Benutzer soll die Möglichkeit erhalten, bestimmte Versionen (Original, TEI-Edition, Übersetzung) der Quelle zu vergleichen.
               
               Es wird in unserem Lehr-Lernkontext bewusst TEI – und nicht das textsortenspezifischere CEI – als Auszeichnungssprache eingesetzt, um den Projektmitgliedern möglichst generische Methoden der Textauszeichnung zu vermitteln und ein größtmögliches Spektrum an Anwendungsbereichen hinsichtlich der erlernten Fähigkeiten zu ermöglichen. Für die kollaborativen Arbeiten an den Dokumenten, am TEI-Schema und den Transformationsskripten ist bei GitHub eine entsprechende Gruppe inkl. eines öffentlichen Repositories (https://github.com/gedigiupb/urkunden_upb) eingerichtet worden, wodurch sichergestellt wird, dass alle Beteiligten mit der aktuellen Dateiversion arbeiten. Die TEI-Auszeichnung findet mithilfe des XML-Editors Oxygen statt.
               Im Kontext von „Kritik der digitalen Vernunft“ ist das Projekt als praktisches Beispiel im Rahmen der digitalen Angebote, Projekte und Werkzeuge zu verorten. Dabei liegt nicht nur die Erstellung einer „zeitgemäßen“ Quellenedition im Fokus der Arbeitsgruppe. Darüberhinausgehend wird im Rahmen des Projektes der digitale Horizont der (angehenden) HistorikerInnen erweitert sowie bereits vorhandene Kompetenzen im Sinne historischen Denkens und wissenschaftlichen Arbeitens gefördert. Dem kritischen Anspruch der Geisteswissenschaften wird insofern Rechnung getragen, als dass die permanente Reflexion und Ausdifferenzierung der Vorgehensweise und das kritische Hinterfragen der Sinnhaftigkeit des Einsatzes angewandter Tools eine reflektierte Vereinbarkeit der „daten-, algorithmen- und werkzeuggetriebenen“ Wissenschaft mit geisteswissenschaftlichen Ansprüchen generieren. Das praktische Beispiel der „Editionswerkstatt“ ermöglicht die Diskussion gesellschaftlicher Dimensionen der konkret in diesem Kontext wirksamen Digitalisierungsprozesse besonders unter Berücksichtigung heterogener Begrifflichkeiten wie Interaktionsformen, Partizipation und Bildung – es postuliert geradezu die Diskussion ihrer Konsequenzen in Wissenschaft und Gesellschaft.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bernsen, Daniel (2017): 
                        “Arbeiten mit digitalen Quellen im Geschichtsunterricht“, in: Bernsen, Daniel / Kerber, Ulf (eds.): Praxishandbuch Historisches Lernen und Medienbildung im digitalen Zeitalter, Opladen/ Berlin/ Toronto: Verlag Barbara Budrich 295-303.
               
               
                  Kelly, T. Mills (2013): 
                        “Teaching History in the Digital Age“, Ann Arbor: MI: University of Michigan Press, 
                  
                     http://dx.doi.org/10.39
                     
                     
                     98/dh.12146032.0001.001
                  
                   [letzter Zugriff: 08. September 2017].
               
               
                  Meyer zu Schlochtern, Josef (2014): 
                        “Die Academia Theodoriana. Von der Jesuitenuniversität zur Theologischen Fakultät Paderborn 1614-2014“, Paderborn: Schöningh.
               
               
                  Pfanzelter, Eva (2017): 
                        “Analoge vs. digitale Quellen: eine Standortbestimmung“, in: Bernsen, Daniel / Kerber, Ulf (eds.): Praxishandbuch Historisches Lernen und Medienbildung im digitalen Zeitalter, Opladen/ Berlin/ Toronto: Verlag Barbara Budrich 85-94.
               
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): 
                        “Digitale Editionsformen. Teil I: Das typografische Erbe, Teil II: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik, Teil III: Textbegriffe und Recodierung.“ Norderstedt: Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 7-9, 
                  
                     urn:nbn:de:hbz:38-53510
                  
                  , 
                  
                     urn:nbn:de:hbz:38-53523
                  
                  , 
                  
                     urn:nbn:de:hbz:38-53534
                  
                   [letzter Zugriff: 08. September 2017].
               
            
         
      
   



      
         Mittlerweile versprechen zahlreiche Tools eine mehr oder minder problemlose Lemmatisierung und Annotierung mit Part-of-Speech-Tags von Texten; viele sollen auch für historische (oder andere nicht-standardisierte) Sprachdaten nutzbar sein.
                 Dabei birgt die Verarbeitung historischer Sprachdaten des Deutschen zahlreiche Probleme aufgrund des hohen Grads an Variation, insbesondere auf den Ebenen Phonologie und Graphematik, aber auch in den Bereichen der Morphologie, Syntax und Lexik. Bei einer automatischen Verarbeitung solcher Daten stellen vor allem die Variationen in Phonologie, Graphematik und Morphologie ein besonderes Hindernis dar.
            
         Das Poster stellt verschiedene Werkzeuge überblicksartig vor und befasst sich genauer mit zwei Tools, deren Anwendung auf Texte nicht-standardisierter Sprachstufen exemplarisch anhand zweier Textsorten aufgrund bestimmter Kriterien verglichen wurde. Zum einen handelt es sich um gedruckte deutschsprachige Rechtstexte der Frühen Neuzeit, also aus der Rezeptionszeit des römischen Rechts in Deutschland, deren Sprache in einem Projekt erforscht werden soll, zum anderen um Fürstinnen-Briefe aus einem an der Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena erstellten digitalen Korpus.
                 In beiden Fällen weisen die Quellen frühneuhochdeutschen Sprachstand auf. Anhand ausgewählter Beispiele aus den vorliegenden Texten sollen zwei gängige elektronische Werkzeuge miteinander verglichen werden – EXMARaLDA und LAKomp.
            
         EXMARaLDA wurde für das computergestützte Arbeiten mit überwiegend mündlichen Korpora entwickelt, wird aber regelmäßig auch für schriftliche Sprachdaten verwendet, so auch bei den 
                Frühneuhochdeutschen Fürstinnenkorrespondenzen im mitteldeutschen Raum. Das Tool besteht im Wesentlichen aus einem Transkriptions- und Annotationseditor, einem Werkzeug zum Verwalten von Korpora und einem Such- und Analysetool.
                
         
         Das Werkzeug LAKomp
                 wurde im Projekt SaDA (Semiautomatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten)
                 entwickelt und dient der Aufbereitung eines historischen Korpus. Nach der Transkription können die Texte hier lemmatisiert und annotiert werden. Aufgrund der Besonderheiten bei frühneuhochdeutschen Handschriften und Drucken wird der Lemmatisierungs- und Annotationsvorgang komplett manuell durchgeführt. Dabei ist dem Benutzer mit LAKomp ein Werkzeug an die Hand gegeben, das ihn sehr schnell und präzise große Textmengen bearbeiten lässt und damit den Mehraufwand händischer Annotation nahezu ausgleicht. 
            
         Damit wurden zwei Werkzeuge ausgewählt, bei denen manuell annotiert werden muss, die aber dennoch bestimmte Unterschiede aufweisen, die für Nutzerinnen und Nutzer, die mit nicht-standardisierten Sprachdaten arbeiten, je nach Arbeitsziel vor- oder nachteilig sein können. So sind etwa bei LAKomp die halbautomatische Annotation auf der Grundlage des DWB und die Ausgabefunktion besonders gelungen, leider kann hier aber bisher nur lemmabasiert annotiert werden; bei EXMARaLDA ermöglichen die flexiblen Annotationskriterien eine besondere Breite von möglichen Annotationen, eine automatische oder halbautomatische Annotation des frühneuhochdeutschen Textmaterials ist jedoch bislang auch mit Hilfsmitteln wie dem Treetagger
                 nicht ohne weiteres möglich. 
            
         Die beiden genannten Tools werden auf dem Poster hinsichtlich ihrer Anwendbarkeit auf Texte historischer Sprachstufen anhand folgender Kriterien verglichen: Funktionalitäten, Nutzerfreundlichkeit (Technischer Support, Qualität des Handbuchs, Verständlichkeit der Benutzeroberfläche, Verfügbarkeit eines Editors, Umgang mit Metadaten, Exportmöglichkeiten …) und Nachnutzbarkeit. Das Poster wird diesen Tool-Vergleich anhand ausgewählter Beispiele aus einem Rechtsbuch sowie einem Fürstinnenbrief aus der Mitte des 16. Jahrhundert präsentieren und stellt somit Überblick und Evaluation der Werkzeuge gleichermaßen dar.
      
      
         
             In Auswahl: CATMA, CorA, EXMARaLDA, GATE, LAKomp, WebAnno.
            
               https://archive.thulb.uni-jena.de/hisbest/content/below/index.xml?XSL.DisplayComponentBrowse=true; 
                        http://www.laudatio-repository.org/repository/corpus/LAUDATIO%3AFuerstinnenkorrespondenz/TEI-header_version4_Schema7_2017-03-06T08%3A38%3A
                            26%3A247Z
            
             Für genauere Informationen vgl. 
                        http://exmaralda.org/de/ueber-exmaralda/ und 
                        http://exmaralda.org/de/exmaralda-nutzer/. 
                    
             LAKomp steht für 
                        Lemmatisierung, 
                        Annotation, 
                        Komparation.
                    
             http://www.informatik.uni-halle.de/ti/forschung/ehumanities/sada/
             http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger/
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  B. Aehnlich / S. Kösser (2016): „Das Tool LAKomp und seine Anwendung auf Texte nichtstandardisierter Sprachstufen“. In: DHd 2016. Konferenzabstracts, Leipzig, S. 263–264.
               
                  V. Faßhauer (2017): „Compilation, Transcription, Multi-Level Annotation and Gender-oriented Analysis of a Historical Text Corpus:Early Modern Ducal Correspondences in Central Germany“. In: Advances in Digital Scholarly Editing: Papers presented at the DiXiT conferences in The Hague, Cologne, and Antwerp, hg. v. Peter Boot, Anna Cappellotto, Wout Dillen, Franz Fischer, Aodhán Kelly, Andreas Mertgens, Anna-Maria Sichani, Elena Spadini & Dirk van Hulle. Leiden, S. 269–274.
               
                  A. Medek (*Gießler) / M. Pöckelmann / T. Bremer / H.-J. Solms / P. Molitor / J. Ritter (2015): „Differenzanalyse komplexer Textvarianten - Diskussion und Werkzeuge“. In: Informationsmanagement für Digital Humanities, hg. v. G. Heyer und A. Henrich. In: Datenbank-Spektrum 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13222-014-0173-y.
               
                  A. Leipold / J. Ritter / H.-J. Solms: „Neue Wege zu Textzeugenvergleich und Edition am Beispiel der Wundarznei des Heinrich von Pfalzpaint“. In: Jahrbuch für Germanistische Sprachgeschichte 2014, Band 5, Heft 1, S. 335-358.
               
                  D. Prutscher / H. Seidel (2012): „Mehrebenenannotation frühneuzeitlicher Fürstinnenkorrespondenzen“. In: G. Brandt (Hg.): Bausteine weiblichen Sprachgebrauchs. X. Texte – Zeugnisse des produktiven Sprachhandelns von Frauen in privaten, halböffentlichen und öffentlichen Diskursen vom Mittelalter bis in die Gegenwart. Stuttgart, S. 109–124.
            
         
      
   



      
         Der Aufbau von digitalen (Musik)-Editionen und den entsprechenden Online-Publikationen hat sich im wissenschaftlichen Umfeld etabliert und damit Fakten und Muster geschaffen, die nicht notwendigerweise mit den zeitlich parallel entwickelten Theorien kongruent gehen. Das mag zum einen daran liegen, dass die zeitgenössische Theoriebildung selbst nicht einheitlich ist – man vergleiche nur die Idee einer „sozialen Edition“ (Siemens 2011) mit der Debatte um „documentary editing“ (Robinson 2013; Gabler 2010; Pierazzo 2011) oder mit einem „multiplen Textbegriff“ als Grundlage der Edition (Sahle 2013) – zum anderen aber auch an den ganz praktischen Rahmenbedingungen der allermeist als drittmittelgeförderten, zeitlich begrenzten Projekte. 
         Es gilt daher, kritisch rückzublicken und zu reflektieren, in welcher Weise die Art der digitalen Erschließung die Erkenntnismöglichkeiten des Nutzers steuert, und ob sich die mit solchen Webpublikationen häufig verbundenen Ideen von „Offenheit“, „Erweiterbarkeit“, „Vernetzung“ und „Nutzerbeteiligung“ in der täglichen Arbeit der Projekte überhaupt realisieren lassen – oder ob diese Ideen nicht sogar teilweise auf zu sehr simplifizierten Voraussetzungen beruhen? 
         Innerhalb der Musikwissenschaft decken die digitalen Projekte des Detmold/Paderborner Virtuellen Forschungsverbunds Edirom und des Zentrums Musik – Edition – Medien sowie die damit assoziierten Vorhaben einen weiten Bereich der digitalen Aktivitäten im Fach ab. Es handelt sich einerseits um Projekte im Bereich der Musikedition (u.a. 
                Weber-Gesamtausgabe,
            Freischütz Digital, 
                Bargheer-Fiedellieder, 
                Beethovens Werkstatt), andererseits um Methoden- und Softwareentwicklung (
                Edirom, 
                ZenMEM, 
                VideApp, 
                WeGA-WebApp), sowie um neuartige Erschließungskonzepte (
                Detmolder Hoftheater) bzw. Beiträge zur Entwicklung von Codierungsstandards (TEI, MEI). Vor allem in Rückbindung an TEI und MEI sind dabei Publikationen entstanden, die weit über eine schlichte Digitalisierung hinausgehen: Metadaten, die wissenschaftlichen Ansprüchen gerecht werden, extensive Verknüpfungen und inhaltliche Auszeichnungen der Dokumente sind selbstverständlich. Ferner sind unterschiedliche Annotationspraktiken erprobt.
            
         Das Bemühen der bisherigen Arbeiten war vor allem darauf gerichtet, die wissenschaftlichen Standards der „klassischen“ Edition und Informationsbereitstellung zu halten und „digitale“ Möglichkeiten wie Verknüpfungen zu externen Quellen und die Vereinheitlichung von Angaben durch Normdaten zu integrieren.
         Aber genügt eine solche „Aufbereitung“ der gesammelten Daten und wie kommt dabei der „Nutzer“ ins Spiel bzw. wie kann seinen Erwartungen entsprochen werden? Mit Blick auf solche Fragen stellte Jeffrey T. Schnapp 2013 fest:
         „Herein resides the challenge that I am referring to as storied collections and that I associate with the need to give rise to a humanistic culture of critical engagement with data and data architectures themselves as well as with the tools that analyze and translate them into argumentative or narrative forms.“ (Schnapp 2013)
         D. h. es ist zu fragen:
         
            Wie bestimmen die verwendeten Schemata unsere Erschließung?
            Was verstehen wir unter und wie ermöglichen wir Partizipation der Nutzer?
            Wie verhält sich Partizipation zu unserem wissenschaftlichem Anspruch? 
            Welche technischen Probleme stehen Partizipation (noch?) entgegen?
            Wie erreichen wir einen kritischen Umgang mit den bereitgestellten Daten?
            Wie erreichen wir durch bloße Informationsbereitstellung kritisches Wissen?
            Kann der Nutzer ohne Vorwissen solche Portale / Editionen effektiv nutzen?
            Inwiefern nehmen wir überhaupt auf verschiedene Erkenntnisinteressen Rücksicht?
         
         Wenn dies auch Fragen sind, die z. T. alle Geisteswissenschaften betreffen, so sollen sie doch in dem vorgeschlagenen Panel aus Sicht der speziellen Anforderung der Musikwissenschaft betrachtet werden. Hierzu werden drei verschiedene musikwissenschaftliche digitale Projekte (Weber-Gesamtausgabe, Hoftheater-Projekt und Beethovens Werkstatt) ihren bisherigen Umgang mit den Standards und den digitalen Möglichkeiten kritisch erläutern. Ergänzt werden diese Überlegungen durch die kritische Reflexion der technischen Bedingungen von Partizipation und Konsistenz der Daten (Zentrum Musik – Edition – Medien). 
         
            Weber-Gesamtausgabe
            Die digitale Edition der Schriften, Tagebücher und Schriften Carl Maria von Webers wurde 2011 der Öffentlichkeit vorgestellt und seitdem – sowohl in der TEI-Auszeichnung als auch in der HTML-Darstellung – kontinuierlich weiterentwickelt und angepasst. Erst im letzten Jahr z.B. wurden dabei „Themenkommentare“ ergänzt als Versuch, die inzwischen über 27.000 verfügbaren Dokumente stärker narrativ einzubetten bzw. zu verknüpfen. Grundsätzlich bleibt aber das Dilemma, dass ein starker Fokus auf der Standardisierung und Normalisierung der Auszeichnung liegt – das ermöglicht zwar auf einer globalen Ebene das Vernetzen mit anderen Repositorien z.B. durch GND-Beacon oder correspSearch und demonstriert somit die Möglichkeiten und Anschlussfähigkeiten digitaler Editionen, aus dem Blick geraten dabei aber oft die Besonderheiten (und Unsicherheiten) lokaler Phänomene.
         
         
            Hoftheater-Projekt
            Das sog. Hoftheater-Projekt („Entwicklung eines MEI- und TEI-basierten Modells kontextueller Tiefenerschließung von Musikalienbeständen am Beispiel des Detmolder Hoftheaters im 19. Jahrhundert (1825–1875)“) stellt einerseits in traditioneller Weise Informationen zu sehr heterogenen Beständen bereit und verknüpft diese andererseits untereinander in einer Form, die erst durch digitale Mittel möglich ist. D. h. neben der Präsentation von Digitalisaten, Metadaten, Incipits und Textübertragungen, werden die einzelnen Objekte durch die Auszeichnung nicht nur mit Elementen, sondern mit key-Attributen (und wenn möglich mit Normdaten) für Personen, Werke und Rollen miteinander in Verbindung gesetzt.
            Es entsteht so ein Informationsnetz
                    , das unterschiedliche Forschungsinteressen zulässt. Neben den „traditionellen“ Informationen zu den Quellen können Angaben zur Organisation des Theaterbetriebs, zur finanziellen Situation einzelner Personen, zur Theatersituation in den verschiedenen Spielorten etc. abgefragt werden. Die Daten können aber auch Basis soziologischer/historischer Studien werden, indem z. B. die Gehälter am Theater mit denen anderer Berufsgruppen in Beziehung gesetzt werden.
                
            Es ergeben sich u. a. folgende Fragen für einen kritischen Umgang mit diesen Daten:
            
               die bisher verwendeten Auszeichnungselemente sind fachspezifisch gewählt
               Zweifel in der Übertragung werden ausgezeichnet [aber nicht angezeigt]. Bei den Auszeichnungen wird hingegen auf diese Angabe verzichtet bzw. bleiben Lücken, da das grundsätzliche Problem, wie inhaltliche Argumente „dargestellt“ werden können, noch nicht gelöst ist
               die XML-Dateien stehen innerhalb der Anwendung zur Verfügung, können aber nicht frei heruntergeladen werden
            
         
         
            
               Beethovens Werkstatt
                
            Die Zielsetzung der in „Beethovens Werkstatt“ entwickelten VideApp ist es, die Erkenntnisse und Beobachtungen des Projekts zur Textgenese ausgewählter Werke Beethovens möglichst direkt sichtbar zu machen, also eine Vermittlungsform zu finden, die jenseits verbaler Erläuterungen einen möglichst unmittelbaren und nachvollziehbaren Zugang zu den Inhalten bietet. Dabei zeigt sich, dass die Menge der zu treffenden Aussagen, verbunden mit der Neuartigkeit dieser Vermittlungsformen, leicht zu Orientierungsschwierigkeiten des Benutzers führt: Nicht immer erschließen sich gut gemeinte Funktionen so schnell wie erhofft, und besonders spannende Beobachtungen gehen in der Fülle an Details unter. Eine vor Jahren im Kontext des Edirom-Projekts entstandene, aber nie umgesetzte Idee aufgreifend versucht das Projekt daher inzwischen, dem Benutzer besonders relevante Aspekte der Editionen über geführte „Touren“ nahezubringen, ohne dessen eigenständige vertiefende Auseinandersetzung mit den Materialien einzuschränken.
         
         
            ZenMEM
            Im Verbundprojekt „Zentrum Musik – Edition – Medien“ (ZenMEM) beschäftigen sich Wissenschaftler/-innen der Universität Paderborn, der Hochschule für Musik Detmold und der Hochschule Ostwestfalen-Lippe mit den Veränderungen und den neuen Möglichkeiten beim Übergang von analogen zu digitalen Musik- und Medieneditionen. 
            Unbestritten sind an dieser Stelle die vielen Vorteile und Mehrwerte einer digitalen Edition gegenüber der klassischen, analogen Edition in Buchform. Die Digitalisierung von Musikeditionen schafft aber gleichzeitig auch ganz neue Problemstellungen und Herausforderungen. Im Projekt durchgeführte problemzentrierte Leitfadeninterviews mit Editoren zeigten bspw. deutlich das Spannungsfeld zwischen Offenheit und Abgeschlossenheit insbesondere bei der (Nach-)Nutzung:
            
               Wie erreicht man eine Form der Abgeschlossenheit bei der Publikation digitaler Musikeditionen, welche die ‚Wertigkeit‘ einer gedruckten Edition besitzt?
               Wie bringt man die gewünschte offene (Nach-)Nutzung einer digitalen Musikedition durch ein breites Publikum (neben Editoren auch Dirigenten, interessierte Laien, Studierende) in Einklang mit dem Wunsch nach Abgeschlossenheit?
               Wie gestaltet sich die Wertschöpfung im Bereich (offener) digitaler Musikeditionen und wie ist das Verhältnis von Editoren, Verlagen, Forschungs- und Gedächtnisinstitutionen zueinander?
               Wie stellt man eine dauerhafte Verfügbarkeit und Referenzierbarkeit (insbesondere im Hinblick auf eine offene, sich weiterentwickelnde) digitale Musikedition sicher?
               Wie geht man mit Autorschaft in einer gemeinschaftlich erarbeiteten Edition um? Bereits auf Annotationsebene?
               Wie geht man mit den Rechten an (externem) Quellenmaterial um?
               Wie kann man Nachhaltigkeit gewährleisten?
            
            Die genannten Problemfelder ergeben sich zum Teil zwar schon direkt oder indirekt aus dem Übergang von analogen zu digitalen Musikeditionen und haben bereits Auswirkungen auf den Prozess des Edierens selbst, doch eine breitgefächerte (Nach)Nutzung muss frühzeitig mitbetrachtet werden, da zusätzliche Akteure mit unterschiedlichen Interessen in Einklang gebracht werden müssen.
            Zusätzlich implizieren viele der Probleme auch sehr technische Herausforderungen, wie bspw. eine Revisionssicherheit (insbesondere: Berechtigungen, Schutz vor Veränderung und Verfälschung, Sicherung vor Verlust, Dokumentation von Prozessen und Nachvollziehbarkeit) sowie Versionierung und Referenzierung von Arbeits- und Publikationsständen. Hier gilt es nun den nächsten Paradigmenwechsel von einzelnen digitalen Musikeditionen hin zu Editionsinfrastrukturen forschungsbegleitend zu vollziehen, um die genannten Herausforderungen überhaupt adäquat adressieren zu können.
         
      
      
         
             Siehe das Modell auf der Website: 
                        .
                    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Gabler, Hans Walter (2010): „Theorizing the Digital Scholarly Edition“, in: Literature Compass 7/2 (2010): 43–56
                    
               
                  Pierazzo, Elena (2011): „A Rationale of Digital Documentary editions“. Literary and Linguistic Computing 26/4 (2011): 463–77
                    
               
                  Robinson, Peter (2013): „Towards a Theory of Digital Editions“, in: Variants 10 (2013): 105–131
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): „Digitale Editionsformen, Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels“, Norderstedt 2013
                    
               
                  Schnapp, Jeffrey T. (2003): „Knowledge Design. Incubating new knowledge forms / genres / spaces in the laboratory of the digital humanities.“ Keynote delivered at the Herrenhausen Conference „Digital Humanities Revisited – Challenges and Opportunities in the Digital Age“ (Dez. 2013)
                    
               
                  Siemens, Ray / Timney, Meagan / Leitch, Cara / Koolen, Corina / Garnett, Alex (2011): „Toward Modelling the 
                        Social Edition: An Approach to Understanding the Electronic Scholarly Edition in the Context of New and Emerging Social Media“, in: Literary and linguistic computing 27/4 (2012): 445–461
                    
               
                  Wiering, Frans / Crawford, Tim / Lewis, David(2006): „Digital Critical Editions of Music. A Multidimensional Model“, Methods Network Expert Seminar „Modern Methods for Musicology“, online unter 
                        
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ausgangslage
            Virtuelle Rundgänge, virtuelle Ausstellungen oder virtuelle Touren: Die Begriffe bezeichnen oft ähnliche Vorgehensweisen. Zusätzlich zu strukturierten Suchzugängen werden sie auf den unterschiedlichsten Portalen für digitalisiertes Kulturerbe in der Regel als Ergänzung angeboten. Dazu gehören prominente Beispiele wie die Europeana
                    , die Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek
                     oder zahlreiche Regionalportale im deutschsprachigen Raum (stellvertretend sei Bavarikon
                     oder Kulturerbe Niedersachsen
                     genannt). Doch auch kommerziellen Anbietern ist das Konzept nicht fremd, wie Google zeigt.
                     Am häufigsten wird die Bezeichnung (Virtuelle/Digitale) Ausstellung ((
                    virtual/digital) exhibition) verwendet.
                
            Unabhängig von der Begrifflichkeit teilen sich die Umsetzungen meist folgende Merkmale (vgl. auch INDICATE 2012, 17):
            
               es handelt sich um Sammlungen von Informationen und Quellen/Objekten zu einem bestimmten Thema, einer Periode oder einer Person (oft auch anlassbezogen zu Jubiläen, z.B. Reformation
                        , Weltkrieg
                        , etc.)
                    
               die Quellen werden von Fachleuten kontextualisiert und beschrieben
               verschiedene Inhalte (Text, Bild, Audio, Video) werden miteinander verbunden
               die Objekte können aus einem oder mehreren digitalisierten Sammlungen oder Beständen kommen
               meist gibt es einen vorgegebenen (zumindest bevorzugten) Ablauf der Informationen
            
            So vielfältig wie die möglichen Themen der Rundgänge sind die technischen Umsetzungen und Visualisierungen. Zahlreiche Werkzeuge sind für die Erstellung und Darstellung von Virtuellen Ausstellungen verfügbar.
                     Bei der Auswahl des Werkzeuges sind die gewünschte Funktionalität, Kompatibilität mit bestehender Infrastruktur, Unabhängigkeit von äußeren Quellen wie auch eine möglichst geringe Einarbeitungszeit wichtige Kriterien. Eine Wahrung der Prinzipien der Digital Humanities (vor allem mit Hinblick auf open source Software) ist ebenso wünschenswert.
                
            Ein Vorbildprojekt ist AthenaPlus, das nicht nur theoretische und methodische Vorarbeit im Bereich Virtuelle Ausstellungen geleistet hat, sondern mit Movio auch ein open source Tool entwickelt hat.
         
         
            Umsetzung im Portal „Kultur- und Wissenschaftserbe“ Steiermark
            Auch im Webportal „Kultur- und Wissenschaftserbe Steiermark“, einem Ergebnis des Projektes „Repositorium Steirisches Wissenschaftserbe“, ergänzen Virtuelle Rundgänge den strukturierten Suchzugang. Das Konzept zu den Touren wurde gemeinsam mit den Datenlieferanten erarbeitet. Die kuratierten Rundgänge erlauben eine spielerische Auseinandersetzung mit den Objekten und ein „Virtuelles Schlendern“ durch Bestände.
            Für die Umsetzung wurde die JavaScript-Bibliothek StoryMapJS verwendet, die in Form eines eigenen Objektmodells in die dem Webportal zu Grunde liegende Infrastruktur GAMS integriert wurde. Die Wahl fiel deswegen auf StoryMapJS, weil es sich aus den zahlreich verfügbaren Werkzeugen am besten in das bestehende System implementieren ließ. Viele Werkzeuge bieten ein Rundumpaket von Content Management System bis Präsentation, für die Integration in GAMS war ein reines Disseminationswerkzeug zu bevorzugen. Das Objektmodell kapselt den Inhalt der Ausstellung (Text, Medienreferenzen, Ablauf) und übergibt die Daten an die Javascript-Bibliothek, die die Darstellung übernimmt. So sind alle verwendeten Daten unabhängig von der Anwendung Teil des digitalen Archivs und können somit dauerhaft adressiert sowie gemeinsam verwaltet und (langzeit)archiviert werden. Eine persistente Identifikation der Ausstellung ist auf Basis von Handle möglich.
            Derzeit wird der für StoryMapJS verlangte JSON Input eins zu eins aus einer XML Datei konvertiert. Das bringt eine teilweise Vermischung von Form und Inhalt mit sich. Um dem entgegen zu wirken, wäre ein spezielles Set zur Beschreibung der Meta(Daten) der Virtuellen Ausstellung sinnvoll. Teilweise wird das durch DEMES (
                    Digital Exhibition Metadata Element Set) ermöglicht, allerdings werden hier stets die Metadaten der gesamten Ausstellung beschrieben, eine Metabeschreibung der einzelnen Elemente, des Inhalts wie auch von Ablauf und Zusammenhang ist hier nicht möglich.
                
         
         
            Fazit
            Die gewählte Bibliothek StoryMapJS erfüllt den Zweck der Visualisierung der Rundgänge für dieses Projekt gut. Ein Nachteil liegt in der relativ eingeschränkten Reihenfolge der einzelnen Stationen; NutzerInnen können nur begrenzt eigene Wege durch das Material finden. Die Einarbeitungszeit ist gering, die Integration in die eigene Infrastruktur funktionierte problemlos.
            Ein Desiderat ist jedoch die bessere Strukturierung und Standardisierung der Daten und Metadaten. Hier wäre eine einheitliche Beschreibung nicht nur der gesamten Ausstellung (wie durch DEMES ermöglicht, oder vielleicht begrenzt auch mit Dublin Core oder TEI umsetzbar), sondern der einzelnen Stationen und deren Zusammenhang sinnvoll. Zusätzlich könnten durch Anreicherung Anknüpfungspunkte für die Vernetzung der erzeugten Daten entstehen, beispielsweise GeoNames-Referenzen, wenn moderne Karten als Hintergrund verwendet werden. Die vollständige Trennung von Darstellung und Inhalt ist auch für die Weiternutzung und Archivierung zentral.
            Insgesamt wird die wissenschaftliche Auseinandersetzung mit Virtuellen/Digitalen Ausstellungen/Rundgängen oft vernachlässigt, weil sie in erster Linie als Verschönerung bzw. nachrangiges Angebot von Suchportalen verstanden werden. Ganz im Gegenteil sind diese Einstiegspunkte aber für das Publikum oft leichter verständlich und können einen besseren Überblick über die zu vermittelnde Thematik geben als hochstrukturierte Interfaces und rein textuelle Beschreibungen.
         
      
      
         
            
               http://www.europeana.eu/portal/en/exhibitions/foyer (2017-08-09)
                        
            
               https://www.deutsche-digitale-bibliothek.de/content/ausstellungen (2017-08-09)
                        
            
               https://www.bavarikon.de/topics (2017-08-09)
                        
            
               http://kulturerbe.niedersachsen.de/viewer/kontexte/ (2017-08-09)
                        
             https://www.google.com/culturalinstitute (2017-08-17)
            
               https://bavarikon.de/object/bav:BSB-CMS-0000000000001151 (2017-08-09)
                            
            
               http://wk1.staatsarchiv.at/ (2017-08-09)
                            
             Siehe bspw. 
                            http://oedb.org/ilibrarian/5-free-and-open-source-tools-for-creating-digital-exhibitions/ (2017-08-09)
                        
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  AthenaPlus (2015): Digital storytelling and cultural heritage: stakes and opportunities. 
                        http://www.athenaplus.eu/index.php?en/207/digital-storytelling [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  AthenaPlus (2016): Metadata for the description of digital exhibitions: the DEMES element set. Version 1.0. 
                        http://www.athenaplus.eu/index.php?en/206/demes [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  AthenaPlus: Movio. 
                        http://www.athenaplus.eu/index.php?en/211/movio) 
                    
               
                  Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System – GAMS. 
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  INDICATE (2012): Handbook on virtual exhibitions and virtual performances. Version 1.0. 
                        http://www.indicate-project.org/getFile.php?id=412 [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  Kultur- und Wissenschaftserbe Steiermark. 
                        http://www.kulturerbe-stmk.at [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  Repositorium Steirisches Wissenschaftserbe. 
                        https://wissenschaftserbe.uni-graz.at/ [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
               
                  StoryMapJS. 
                        https://storymap.knightlab.com/ [letzter Zugriff 22. August 2017]
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Ausgehend von thesenförmigen Impulsreferaten (jeweils 10 Min., die PPT-Folien werden nach der Tagung publiziert) sollen editionstheoretische und -technische Fragen diskutiert werden.
            
         
            Block 1 Impulse (90 Minuten) 14:00 – 15:30 Uhr
            
               Begrüßung und Einführung (Thomas Bürger und Jochen Strobel)
               Offenheit und institutionelle Schließung (Patrick Sahle)
               Kommentierung – ein Auslaufmodell? (Anne Bohnenkamp)
               Versionierung/Zitation (Joachim Veit)
               Hemmnisse und Katalysatoren digitaler Brief-Infrastrukturen (Thomas Stäcker)
               Schnelle Wege zu den Briefen (Stefan Dumont)
               DARIAH-Services für Briefeditionen (Mirjam Blümm)
               Akteure und Rollen (Jochen Strobel)
            
         
         
            Block 2 Diskussion, Fazit, Ausblick (90 Minuten) 16:00 – 17:30 Uhr
            Diskussion der Impulsreferate und der fachlichen und förderpolitischen Schlussfolgerungen (Moderation: Thomas Bürger, Jochen Strobel)
            
               Block 1: 14:00 – 15:30 Uhr
            
            
               1. Einführung (Thomas Bürger, Jochen Strobel)
            
            Ob es nun zutrifft, dass die Edition zu den Kerngeschäften der Geisteswissenschaften gehört und sogar die Königsdisziplin der Digital Humanities sei, bleibe dahingestellt – nutzerseitig handelt es sich bei den Forschungsergebnissen dieser Disziplin um diejenigen mit der längsten Halbwertszeit. Die Aussicht, dass gut gemachte Editionen zu den unverzichtbaren Grundlagen der wissenschaftlichen Praxis gehören, setzt die an Editionen Beteiligten aber auch unter Druck. Editionen sind langwierig und teuer, sie müssen im fachlichen und technischen Sinne zuverlässige Daten vorhalten, sie müssen dauerhaft verfügbar und doch auf der Höhe der Zeit sein. Dazu bedarf es fachlich und technisch versierter Bearbeiter. Tagungen und Publikationen zur Digitalen Editionverdeutlichen das Bedürfnis nach Orientierung, Standardisierung, Weiterentwicklung und transparenterer Vernetzung. Eine pragmatische Ausrichtung schließt diese Ziele ein:
            
               die Orientierung der Usability an Forschungsfragen der Nutzer*innen, insbesondere eine Optimierung der Durchsuch- und Findbarkeit und eine gute Lesbarkeit der Texte
               die zeitgemäße Einbettung der Edition in stabile virtuelle Forschungsumgebungen 
               die Anschlussfähigkeit in Infrastrukturen 
               Sparten und Institutionen übergreifende Projektvernetzung.
            
            Die Briefedition ist ein prominentes Paradigma: In analoger Form ist sie besonders zeitraubend und kostspielig. Als Zeugnis historischer Netzwerke und Kommunikations-strukturen und wegen der vergleichsweise fortgeschrittenen Standardisierung bietet sie sich als Avantgarde digitaler Projektvernetzung und Daten-Aggregierung geradezu an. 
            Patrick Sahle hat für Editionen plausibel zwischen der Repräsentation der eigentlichen Daten („Inhalt“) und der Präsentation („Form“) unterschieden. Unumstrittene Geltung besitzen Kriterien, wie sie auch durch Roland Kamzelak benannt wurden, also z. B. XML-Standard, Open Source-Software und Open Access, Nachnutzbarkeit, persistente URL, Langzeitarchivierung. Ein faktischer Standard besteht mit den von der DFG herausgegebenen Förderkriterien für Wissenschaftliche Editionen. Komplementär hierzu und um ein Vielfaches differenzierter bietet der vom IDE bereitgestellte Kriterienkatalog für die Besprechung digitaler Editionen Anhaltspunkte. Mit RIDE besteht ein Rezensionsjournal für Editionen. Thomas Stäcker, Thomas Burch u.a. verweisen auf innovative multiple Analyse- und Darstellungsmöglichkeiten (Distant Reading, Mapping the Republic of Letters), die neue Fragestellungen und Vermittlungsformen erlauben und zu neuen Verständigungen (z.B. über Remediatisierung, über innovative Vermittlungswege der wissenschaftlichen und kulturellen Überlieferung, das Potential graphorientierter Datemodelle) anregen. 
            
               2. Offenheit und institutionelle Schließung (Patrick Sahle)
            
            Die Digitale Edition verheißt ewige Unabgeschlossenheit und technische wie fachliche Offenheit – was aber bedeutet dies: Paradies oder Inferno? Bei allen Vorzügen der Korrigier- und Ergänzbarkeit durch das Editorenteam oder auch durch User: editorische Daten müssen zuverlässig sein – wir wollen nicht ewig auf Baustellen leben. Was bedeutet dies im Hinblick auf mögliche Schließungsregeln für ein offenes Medium (s. u.: Zitation/Versionierung)? Was folgt etwa in puncto Nachnutzbarkeit hieraus? Ist zu unterscheiden zwischen gesicherten Forschungsdaten und solchen, die als Forschungsergebnisse zwar intersubjektiver Nachprüfbarkeit unterliegen, in ihrer Thesenhaftigkeit wie auch Kontextabhängigkeit aber zugleich diskussionswürdig und revidierbar sind, wie etwa Interpretamente?
            In der Praxis sind es institutionelle und finanzielle Zwänge, die die Begrenzung und Schließung von an sich offenen Projekten erforderlich machen. Hieraus ergeben sich grundlegende Fragen nach der gebündelten Kuratierung abgeschlossener Projekte.
            
               3. Kommentierung – ein Auslaufmodell? (Anne Bohnenkamp)
            
            Ist der „Stellenkommentar“ überflüssig, ein in der Editionsphilologie zwischen Redundanz- und Interpretationsverdikt immer schon umstrittenes Element, das gleichwohl der Profilierung der Editor*innen wie vor allem der Usability diente? Ist über Tagging und Verlinkung hinaus ein editionsspezifisches kommentierendes Angebot sinnvoll – und wie sollte es sich zu den zuhauf existenten externen Informationsressourcen technisch und sachlich verhalten? Ist die Kommentierung vielleicht sogar jenseits der scheinbar mechanischen und objektiven digitalen Repräsentation jener letzte Ort, an dem das Fachwissen und die interpretatorische Leistung die Unverzichtbarkeit des Editors als eigentlichem Experten und bestem Kenner der Materie belegt?
            
               4. Versionierung/Zitation (Joachim Veit)
            
            Die Herstellung von beliebig vielen, zitationsfähigen Versionen eines edierten Texts oder Textabschnitts ist technisch kein Problem, die Zuweisung persistenter Identifier ebenso wenig. Wie sollten Forschungsdaten jenseits der Text(präsentations)ebene zitiert werden? Was sind die (Haupt-?)Bestandteile der Editionen, wo liegen ihre Grenzen? Nach der verbindlichen Veröffentlichung eines Textes müssen editorische Veränderungen als unterschiedliche Versionen markiert werden. Hierzu dienlich ist ein Versionierungssystem. Präzise Zitierfähigkeit ist ein unverzichtbares Merkmal von Editionen – doch wie bleibt sie unter digitalen Auspizien praktikabel? Hierzu zählt z. B. die nicht triviale Frage nach der Länge des Zitatnachweises, der ganz oder teilweise zugleich Link in einer Online-Publikation ist. 
            
               5. Hemmnisse und Katalysatoren digitaler Brief-Infrastrukturen (Thomas Stäcker)
            
            Es besteht seit langem Einigkeit darüber, dass die Verwendung normierter Metadaten sowie die Codierung gemäß den Regeln des TEI-Konsortiums eine Garantie für Qualität und Nachhaltigkeit bietet. GND, VIAF – inzwischen verwenden Digitale Editionen bibliothekarische Normdaten zur Referenzierung von Personen, Orten u.a. Die Standardisierung von Werktiteln schreitet eher langsam voran. In der Praxis ist aber ebenso bekannt, dass von Projekt zu Projekt kleinere oder größere Abweichungen zu verzeichnen sind. Welche Folgerungen sind aus dieser Inkongruenz zu ziehen, wie ist mit einer unterschiedlichen Nutzung von Standards umzugehen?
            Mit dem Verlassen der Zweidimensionalität des gedruckten Textes findet nicht nur durch das Verschwinden des Substrates ein Verlust an Stabilität statt, sondern es treten durchaus andere stabile Konstituentien an dessen Stelle. Welche Entwicklungen sind zu erwarten bzw. zu organisieren?
            
               6. Schnelle Wege zu den Briefen (Stefan Dumont)
            
            CorrespSearch will verbesserte Voraussetzungen für die Vernetzung von Briefeditionen schaffen. Damit sollen Briefmetadaten über das bisherige Basis-Set hinaus verarbeitet und auch die Erstellung von digitalen Briefverzeichnissen aus gedruckten Publikationen unterstützt werden. Über Schnittstellen zu anderen Diensten ist der Webservice in die existierende und zu entwickelnde Infrastrukturlandschaft tiefer einzubetten. Wie lassen sich nutzer- und forschungsfreundlich die Zugänge zu Briefen und insbesondere zu den Volltexten vereinfachen? In welchem Verhältnis steht CorrepSearch zu den vielen anderen Angeboten (Deutsche Digitale Bibliothek, Europeana, Kalliope u.a.)?
            
               7. DARIAH-Services für Briefeditionen (Mirjam Blümm)
            
            DARIAH.DE ist eine Informations- und Technikinfrastruktur für Lehre, Forschung, Forschungsdaten und technische Werkzeuge. Welchen Stand hat die Infrastruktur zur Einbindung digitaler Editionen erreicht und welche kollaborativen Strukturen und Ziele sollten angestrebt werden? 
            
               8. Akteure und Rollen (Jochen Strobel)
            
            Die Digital Humanities fördern kollaboratives Arbeiten und generell eine Diversifizierung und Verflüssigung von Rollen und Verantwortlichkeiten. Zu den Rollen einer digitalen wissenschaftlichen Autor- und Beiträgerschaft zählen u.a. Hauptherausgeber*in, Kurator*in, Programmierer*in, Kodierer*in, Tagger*in, wissenschaftliche Hilfskraft, Crowdsourcer*in. Einige dieser und weitere Rollen sind so neu nicht, manche dürften vom bisherigen Urheberrecht nicht hinreichend abgedeckt sein. Editionen sind seit langem kollaborative Projekte, die Rollen der Beteiligten sind dementsprechend vielfach ausdifferenziert. Welche Folgerungen ergeben sich für die digitale Edition einerseits und für die akademische Karriereplanung zwischen Forschung und Informationsinfrastruktur andererseits?
            
               Block 2: 16:00 – 17:30 Uhr
            
            
               9. Diskussion, Fazit, Ausblick (Moderation: Thomas Bürger, Jochen Strobel)
            
            In der Schlussdiskussion sollen die Impulsreferate diskutiert und ein Fazit gezogen werden. Dabei sind auch forschungspolitische Schlussfolgerungen zu thematisieren. Editionen und insbesondere Briefeditionen sind in der Regel langfristige Projekte und deshalb vor allem an Akademien angesiedelt. Durch die sich verbreiternde Retrodigitalisierung und verfügbare digitale Werkzeuge können Projektlaufzeiten perspektivisch weiter verkürzt und Projektfortschritte transparent in Forschung und Lehre eingebunden werden. Wie groß ist der Bedarf an digitalen Editionen und wie können sie Teil einer Nationalen Forschungsdateninfrastruktur werden? Welche drängenden Fragen sind zeitnah in weiteren Workshops zu besprechen?
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Roland Kamzelak: Empfehlungen zum Umgang mit Editionen im Digitalen Zeitalter, in editio 26 (2012), S. 202–209.
               
                  Patrick Sahle: Digitale Editionsformen. 3 Bände. Norderstedt 2013.
               
                  http://www.mww-forschung.de/blog/blogdetail/wie-sieht-die-digitale-edition-der-zukunft-aus-herr-kamzelak/?tx_news_pi1%5Bcontroller%5D=News&tx_news_pi1%5Baction%5D=detail (30.8.2017)
                    
               
                  http://dhd-wp.hab.de/?q=ag-text#abschnitt4 (30.8.2017)
                    
               
                  http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/grundlagen_dfg_foerderung/informationen_fachwissenschaften/geisteswissenschaften/foerderkriterien_editionen_literaturwissenschaft.pdf (30.8.2017)
                    
               
                  https://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/kriterien-version-1-1/ (30.8.2017)
                    
               
                  http://ride.i-d-e.de/ (30.08.2017)
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das Korpus
            Das ausgewählte Korpus besteht aus zwei Hauptwerken Dimitrie Cantemirs, eines Universalgelehrten des 17. Jahrhunderts und Mitglied der „Kurfürstlich –Brandenburgischen Societät der Wissenschaften“. Die zwei Werke wurden ursprünglich auf Lateinisch verfasst, die Originale sind aber verloren aber Kopien davon wurden im späten 20. Jh. wiederentdeckt. Im Umlauf waren lange Zeit nur Übersetzungen ins Englische, Deutsche (Cantemir 1771), (Cantemir 1745), und Französische, die mindestens bis Mitte des 19. Jh. Referenzwerke für die Geschichte des osmanischen Reichs und der historischen Provinz Moldawien waren. Durch seinen langen Aufenthalt in Istanbul, hatte Cantemir Zugang zu vielen Quellen die er zitiert. Daneben zitiert er auch Sagen und Legenden und versucht immer durch geschickte sprachliche Redewendungen zu vermitteln, was seiner Meinung nach historisch gesichert ist. Daher ist das Korpus besonders illustrativ für das Problem der Vagheitsannotation.
         
         
            Erste Schritte zur Vagheitsannotation
            Das Projekt HerCore versucht durch gezielte Annotation von Vagheit drei geisteswissenschaftliche Fragestellungen in Bezug auf die Cantemir-Forschung zu lösen:
            
               Der erstmalige Vergleich aller historischen Übersetzungen, da seit geraumer Zeit die Vermutung formuliert wurde, dass diese relativ stark von den Originalen abweichen.
               Die Untersuchung der Zuverlässigkeit von Äußerungen Cantemirs. Hierbei werden vor allem Quellen von turkologischen Fachwissenschaftlern einbezogen.
               Die Konsistenz von Cantemir über dieselben Personen und Ereignisse in den zwei Werken. 
            
            Die Annotation von Vagheit wird auf drei Ebenen untersucht:
            
               Linguistisch,
               In Metadaten und Editorik,
               im Fachwissen.
            
            
               Für die Linguistische Ebene wurde als Startpunkt die Klassifizierung von (Pinkal 1981)
            
            benutzt. Für die Laufzeit des Projekts haben wir aus dem o.g. Schema wegen besonderer Angemessenheit für das zu analysierende Korpus folgende mögliche Vagheitsindikatoren ausgewählt: 
            Auf lexikalischer Ebene: Non-Intersectives, Adjektive, Hecken, inexakte Maße, Modalverben (Attitudes), Komplexe Quantoren, Zitiereinleitungen, zeitliche Ausdrücke.
            Auf syntaktische Ebene: Subjunktiv-Konstruktionen 
            Zusätzlich werden Named Entities untersucht: Personen, Zeitangaben, Orte etc. und mit einem entsprechenden Vagheitsgrad versehen ("Konstantinopel" ist nur wahr zwischen 337 und 1930).
            Als Vorbereitung wird das Korpus zuerst einer linguistischen Ananlyse unterzogen, um Lemmas und Wortarten, sowie die Textstruktur (Sätze, Paragraphen) zu markieren. Diese wird dann die Basis für die semi-automatische Annotation von Vagheitsausdrücken (Vertan et al 2017).
            Die Annotation von vager Information wird dann in einem ersten Schritt manuell von Fachwissenschaftlern in einem Korpus-Ausschnitt vorgenommen. In einem zweiten Schritt wird versucht diese Annotation automatisch im Korpus zu propagieren. Ein dritter Schritt soll die Ergebnisse von Inferenzen zwischen vagen Ausdrücken erzeugen, um sich nicht dem Vorwurf auszusetzen man schreibe mit einem spezifischen Erkenntnis leitendem Interesse zunächst Annotationen in den Text um sie dann nur wörtlich wieder auszulesen.
         
         
            Zusammenfassung
            Der Beitrag wird die gesamte Systemarchitektur, sowie die einzelnen Schritte zur Annotation von Linguistischer Vagheit illustrieren.
            Um dem Wissenschaftler am Ende eine hermeneutische Interpretation zu erlauben, muss ihm zu jedem annotierten Objekt ein Vagheits-Profil sowie Metadaten über Autoren, Genres und Inferenzergebnisse gezeigt werden können.
            Hierzu eine Erweiterung von TEI und ein entsprechendes GUI zu entwickeln, sind wichtige Ziele des Projekts. 
            Außerdem muss die multilinguale Struktur der Cantemir-Texte mit Zitaten aus dem Griechischen, Lateinische und teilweise dem Türkischen annotiert und weiter erforscht werden.
            Das Projekt soll zeigen, dass die Einbeziehung von Vagheit und Unschärfe in die Annotierung, in die Inferenz-Komponente und die hermeneutische Interpretationen durch den Wissenschaftler, einen erheblichen Gewinn an Funktionen und Glaubwürdigkeit für die DH bringt.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Cantemir, Dimitrie, (1771) Beschreibung der Moldau, Faksimiledruck der Originalausgabe von 1771, Frankfurt und Leipzig 
                    
               
                  Cantemir, Dimitrie, (1745) Geschichte des osmanischen Reichs nach seinem Anwachse und Abnehmen, 1745, Herold, Hamburg
                    
               
                  Pinkal, Manfred,(1981) Semantische Vagheit: Phänomene und Theorien, Teil I/II. In: Linguistische Berichte Nr. 7/72, Wiesbaden 1980/1981.
                    
               
                  Vertan, Cristina / von Hahn, Walther / Dinu, Anca (2017) On the annotation of vague expressions: a case study on Romanian historical texts, Proceedings of the first Workshop on Language Technology for Digital Humanities in Central and (South-) Eastern Europe, in association with RANL 2017, Varna
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         In diesem Posterbeitrag beschreiben wir die Erstellung eines Thesaurus für das österreichische Strafrecht des 18. Jahrhunderts und gehen auf die damit verbundenen Herausforderungen ein, sowohl seitens des Themengebietes aber auch seitens der Quellen.
         Als Quellen dienen kaum erforschte Flugblätter zur Bekanntmachung von Hinrichtungen im 18. Jahrhundert (vgl. Ammerer/Adomeit 2010), die derzeit mit einem modernen Methodeninventar als XML-Dokumente nach den Richtlinien der TEI annotiert und auf ihre digitale Verfügbarkeit im Netz vorbereitet werden. Die Darstellung der Sachverhalte, die zur Hinrichtung führen, sind zwar medial überformt (vgl. Peil 2002, Kosenina 2005, Wiltenburg 2009, Dainat 2009, Härter 2010), beruhen allerdings auf den Entscheidungen des damaligen Stadtgerichts. 
         Bei der Erschließung zu berücksichtigen ist, dass im Laufe des 18. Jahrhunderts unterschiedliche Strafrechtsbestimmungen in Kraft waren. Vor 1768 gab es in den Ländern Österreichs und Böhmens kein einheitliches Straf- und Strafprozessrecht, jedoch galten die “Constitutio Criminalis Carolina Peinliche Gerichts- oder Peinliche Halsgerichtsordnung Kaiser Karls V.” und daneben unterschiedliche Landgerichtsordnungen, etwa die “Land-Gerichts-Ordnung. Deß Ertz-Hertzogthumbs Oesterreich unter der Ennß”. Erst im Jahre 1768 wurde durch die Constitutio Criminalis Theresiana, auch “Theresiana” genannt, ein einheitliches Straf- und Strafprozessgesetz eingeführt, welches aber bereits 1787 vom Allgemeines Gesetzbuch über Verbrechen und derselben Bestrafung, dem sogenannten “Strafgesetzbuch Josephs II” oder “Josephina” abgelöst wurde.
         All diesen Strafrechtsbestimmungen ist gemein, dass sie unterschiedliche Tatbestände definieren, die mit der Todesstrafe belegt sind. Im Laufe der Zeit wurden aber zum Teil neue Tatbestände ergänzt und mit neuen Definitionen versehen und stattdessen andere Delikte abgeschafft. Diese Delikte werden auch in den zu erschließenden Quellen beschrieben: Wie erwähnt, handelt es sich dabei nicht eigentlich um Rechtstexte, sondern um Flugblätter, die über öffentliche Hinrichtungen im 18. Jahrhundert berichten. Die Quellen werden zwar als “Todesurteile” bezeichnet, aber da sich die Flugblätter an ein breites Publikum wenden, werden die Delikte allgemeinverständlich beschrieben, kaum aber unter Verwendung der damals zeitgenössischen Rechtsterminologie. DelinquentInnen werden als 
                UrphedsbrecherInnen oder 
                DiebInnen bezeichnet, ohne aber den eigentlichen Tatestand zu nennen - eine Referenz auf die jeweilige Gesetzesstelle fehlt oft gänzlich. Im gesamten Quellenmaterial konnte nur ein einziger Beleg gefunden werden, bei dem direkt auf den Gesetzestext referenziert wurde. 
            
         Ein weitere Herausforderung für die Erschließung der Quellen stellen die Schreibvarianten dar, vgl. etwa 
                Diebstahl vs. 
                Diebstall oder 
                Urfehde vs. 
                Urphed, 
                Vrphed oder 
                Vrphedt. Aus diesen Gründen ist die toolgestützte Analyse und die Zuordnung der Flugblätter zu den einzelnen Straftatbeständen erschwert. In ähnlich gelagerten Projekten, wie z.B. den “Proceedings of the old Bailey online”, die eine Zeitspanne von ca. 240 Jahren abdecken, wurden die Delikte für die Erschließung des Materials bewusst nicht nach den gesetzlichen Bestimmungen definiert (vgl. Hitchcock, Tim et al.), sondern allgemeine Definitionen erarbeitet. In dem vorliegenden Projekt haben wir uns für eine quellennahe Definition entschieden. Aus diesem Grund ist es für den Thesaurus auch essentiell, nicht nur die Definitionen bereitzustellen, sondern auch die Angabe der Quelle, aus der die Definition stammt, sowie die Erfassung von Varianten. Als Framework für die Erstellung und mögliche Darstellung des Thesaurus im Semantic Web wird als formale Sprache auf SKOS (Simple Knowledge Organisation System) mit der Erweiterung SKOS-XL (SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System eXtension for Labels) zurückgegriffen. 
            
         Um eine verallgemeinernde Typologisierung aller in den Quellen vorkommenden Delikte zu vermeiden und eine quellennahe und differenzierte Zuordnung zu ermöglichen, möchten wir den von uns erstellten Thesaurus präsentieren, der auf der Web-Applikation eine von mehreren Möglichkeiten des Zugriffs darstellen wird (andere Zugriffsmöglichkeiten ergeben sich aus biographischen Angaben zu den DelinquentInnen wie Alter, Geschlecht, Familienstand, Religionszugehörigkeit, Herkunft bzw. der Volltextsuche im Text). 
         Anhand des Posterbeitrags wollen wir erörtern, wie die einzelnen Tatbestände aus den unterschiedlichen Rechtsnormen miteinander in Relation gesetzt werden können, wie weiters eine Verbindung zu den heutigen Tatbeständen hergestellt werden wird und worin letztlich der Mehrwert für zukünftige UserInnen innerhalb und außerhalb der Academia besteht. Schließlich sollen auch mögliche Nachnutzungsszenarien für den Thesaurus thematisiert werden. 
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Adebayo, Kolawole John / Di Caro, Luigi / Boella Guido (2016): “Annotating Legal Documents with Ontology Concepts, Conference” in: Jusletter IT 25. Februar 2016, Proceedings IRIS 2016.
                        https://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/services/login.html?targetPage=http://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/issues/2016/IRIS/annotating-legal-doc_77f5c9f8b8.html__ONCE&handle=http://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/issues/2016/IRIS/annotating-legal-doc_77f5c9f8b8.html__ONCE [letzterZugriff 22. September 2017]
                    
               
                  Ammerer, Gerhard / Adomeit, Friedrich (2010): „Armesünderblätter“ in: Härter, Karl / Sälter, Gerhard / Wiebel, Eva (eds.): Repräsentation von Kriminalität und öffentlicher Sicherheit. Bilder, Vorstellungen und Diskurse vom 16. bis zum 20. Jahrhundert. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann 271-308.
               
                  Dainat, Holger (2009): „Räuber im Oktavformat: Über die printmediale Aufbereitung von Kriminalität im 18. Jahrhundert“ in: Habermas, Rebekka / Schwerhoff, Gerd (Hrsg.): Verbrechen im Blick. Perspektiven der neuzeitlichen Kriminalitätsgeschichte. Frankfurt/New York: Campus Verlag 339-366.
               
                  Dirschl, Christian (2016): „Thesaurus Generation and Usage at Wolters Kluwer Deutschland GmbH“ in: Jusletter IT 25. Februar 2016, Proceedings IRIS 2016.
                        https://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/services/login.html?targetPage=http://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/issues/2016/IRIS/thesaurus-generation_da052418b5.html__ONCE&handle=http://jusletter-it.weblaw.ch/issues/2016/IRIS/thesaurus-generation_da052418b5.html__ONCE [letzterZugriff 22. September 2017]
                    
               
                  Härter, Karl (2010): „Criminalbilder: Verbrechen, Justiz und Strafe in illustrierten Einblattdrucken der Frühen Neuzeit“ in: Härter, Karl / Sälter, Gerhard / Wiebel, Eva (Hrsg.): Repräsentation von Kriminalität und öffentlicher Sicherheit. Bilder, Vorstellungen und Diskurse vom 16. bis zum 20. Jahrhundert. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann 25-88.
                    
               
                  Hitchcock, Tim / Shoemaker, Robert / Emsley, Clive / Howard, Sharon / McLaughin, Jamie et al. (2012) (eds.) The Old Bailey Proceedings Online, 1674-1913. http://
                        www.oldbaileyonline.org/ [letzter Zugriff: 22. September 2017]
                    
               
                  Košenina, Alexander (2015): „Recht – gefällig. Frühneuzeitliche Verbrechensdarstellung zwischen Dokumentation und Unterhaltung“ in: Zeitschrift für Germanistik. Neue Folge Band 15, Nummer 1 (2005) 28-47.
               
                  Peil, Dietmar (2002): „Strafe und Ritual. Zur Darstellung von Straftaten und Bestrafungen im illustrierten Flugblatt.“ in: Harms, Wolfgang / Peil, Dietmar (Hrsg.): Wahrnehmungsgeschichte und Wissenschaftsdiskurs im illustrierten Flugblatt der Frühen Neuzeit (1450-1700). Basel 265-486.
               
                  Wiltenburg, Joy (2009) „Formen des Sensationalismus in frühneuzeitlichen Kriminalberichten“ in: Habermas, Rebekka / Schwerhoff, Gerd (Hrsg.): Verbrechen im Blick. Perspektiven der neuzeitlichen Kriminalitätsgeschichte. Frankfurt/New York: Campus Verlag 323-338.
               
                  Wersig, Gernot (2016): Thesaurus-Leitfaden: Eine Einführung in das Thesaurus-Prinzip in Theorie und Praxis. Berlin / Boston: de Gruyter Saur Reprint.
               
                  W3C: SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System Reference. W3C Recommendation 18 August 2009 
                        https://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-20090818/) [letzter Zugriff: 22.09.2017]
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Dank 
                machine learning und 
                computer vision ist seit wenigen Jahren die automatisierte Handschriftenerkennung möglich. Obwohl aktuell einzelne Handschriften bzw. sehr ähnliche Handschriftentypen noch trainiert werden müssen, wird es in absehbarer Zeit allgemeine Modelle geben, die Rohtranskriptionen mit einer Fehlerquote unter 10% ausgeben. Paläographische Kenntnisse werden vor allem zur Korrektur und kritischen Begutachtung der Technik nötig sein.
            
         Im Rahmen des Projekts READ (Recognition and Enrichment of Archival Documents) werden unterschiedliche Aufgaben der Automatisierung (weiter-)entwickelt, um qualitativ gute Ergebnisse mit optimalem Ressourceneinsatz zu erhalten. Ein speziell dafür entwickeltes Tool ist die Software Transkribus und die Transkribus Weboberfläche (für Transkription, Tagging/Annotation und Korrektur in der Layouterkennung). Beide Ansätze verkoppeln auf unterschiedliche Weise die Arbeit von Expertinnen und maschinelle Erkennleistung. Software und Webservice sind frei verfügbar unter 
                www.transkribus.eu. Darüber hinaus wurden im Rahmen von READ weitere Extraktions- und Annotationsmöglichkeiten entwickelt, die im Workshop zusammen mit Transkribus vorgestellt und durch die Teilnehmenden mit eigenen oder zur Verfügung gestellten Dokumenten getestet werden 
                können.
         
         Transkribus unterstützt alle Prozesse vom Import der Bilder über die Identifikation der Textblöcke und Zeilen, die zu einer detaillierten Verlinkung zwischen Text und Bild führt, sowie die Transkription und Annotation der Handschrift bis zum Export der gewonnen Daten in standardisierten Formaten. Darüber hinaus wurden aber noch weitere Tools und Algorithmen entwickelt, die zur Erkennung von graphischen Features genutzt werden können und Tabellen als solche aufbereiten.
         Transkribus als Arbeitsumgebung 
         Die Erkennung von Texten bedingt den Upload digitaler Bilder und Prozessierung mit Layouterkennungswerkzeugen. Upload und Layoutanalyse können grosse Batches verarbeiten. Die Nachkorrektur von Layoutanalyse ist nur noch in wenigen Fällen nötig.
         Je nach Einsatzzweck könne Dokumente entweder automatisch mit bereits bestehenden ATR-Modellen (Automatic Text Recognition) erkannt oder händisch Transkriptionen erstellt werden. Um im erkannten Text und Variantenlesungen (sog. Keywordspotting) zu suchen reicht in den meisten Fällen die Anwendung von bestehenden Modellen.
         Einzig im Umgang mit Tabellen sind weiterhin diverse manuelle Schritte möglich, um eine hochwertige Identifikation zu gewährleisten. Der Workshop wird einen Fokus auf die Bearbeitung und Erkennung von Tabellenstrukturen legen, die halbautomatisch erfolgen kann.
         Korrekter Text – entweder durch Transkription oder Korrektur von erkanntem Text entstanden – kann danach zum Training von Handschriftenmodellen verwendet werden. Im Rahmen des Workshops wird das Trainieren von Handschriftenmodellen demonstriert und kann durch die Teilnehmenden selbst ausgetestet werden.
         Aufbauend auf den Transkriptionen ist es möglich Entitäten (Personen, Orte, Verweise) auszuzeichnen und textuelle Annotationen (Titel, Marginalien, Fussnoten) innerhalb des Textes, aber auch darüber hinaus für Einzeldokumente und ganze Dokumentenbestände anzulegen. Visuelle Features wie Seitenzahlen, Titel oder Marginalien lassen sich nach der Auszeichnung als Strukturmodelle trainieren und können für die Erkennung von grösseren Dokumentenmassen verwendet werden. Die Vorgehensweise wird im Rahmen des Workshops vorgeführt und kann selbst nachvollzogen werden. Daneben ist auch die Anreicherung der Dokumente mit 
                named entities (Personen, Orten und Organisationen) möglich, sodass simple digitale Editionen grösstenteils in Transkribus erstellt werden können.
            
         Ausgabeformate 
         Für den Export stehen unterschiedliche Formate und Ausgabeformen zur Verfügung. So ist es möglich XML-Dateien zu exportieren, die den Vorgaben der TEI entsprechen (auch ist es möglich die Standardumformung abzuändern und den eigenen Bedürfnissen anzupassen). Weiter sind auch Ausgaben als Druckdaten (PDF) oder zur Weiterbearbeitung für Textverarbeitungsprogramme (DOCX, TXT) implementiert. Schließlich ist auch ein Export im PAGE-Format (zur Anzeige in Viewern für OCR gelesene Dokumente, Pletschacher, 2010) sowie als METS (Metadata Encoding and Transmission) möglich. 
         Zielpublikum 
         Die Plattform Transkribus ist für unterschiedliche Gruppen konzipiert. Einerseits für Geisteswissenschaftler*innen, die selbst Transkriptionen und Editionen historischer Dokumente erstellen möchten. Andererseits richtet sich die Plattform an Archive, Bibliotheken und andere Erinnerungsinstitutionen, die handschriftliche Dokumente in ihren Sammlungen aufbewahren und ein Interesse an der Suchbarmachung des Materials haben. Angesprochen werden sollen auch Studierende der Geistes-, Archiv- und Bibliothekswissenschaften mit einem Interesse an der Transkription historischer Handschriften. 
         Das Ziel, eine robuste und technisch hochstehende Automatisierung von Layout- und Handschriftenerkennung, lässt sich nur durch die enge Zusammenarbeit zwischen Geisteswissenschaftler*innen und Informatiker*innen sowie anderen Computerspezialist*innen mit unterschiedlichen Voraussetzungen und Ansprüchen an Datenqualität und Herstellung von Transkriptionen erreichen. Die Algorithmen werden somit nicht nur bis zu einem Status als 
                proof-of-concept erarbeitet, sondern bis zur Praxistauglichkeit verfeinert und in größeren Forschungs- und Aufbewahrungsumgebungen getestet und verbessert. Die Informatiker*innen sowie Personen aus angrenzenden Fächern sind entsprechend ebenfalls ein wichtiges Zielpublikum, wobei bei ihnen weniger die Nutzung der Plattform als das Beisteuern von Software(teilen) anvisiert wird. 
            
         Die Speicherung der Dokumente erfolgt in der Cloud, gehostet auf Servern der Universität Innsbruck. Die importierten Daten bleiben auch während der Bearbeitung unverändert im Dateisystem liegen und werden ergänzt durch METS und PAGE XML. Alle bearbeiteten Dokumente und Daten bleiben somit in den unterschiedlichen Bearbeitungsstadien nicht nur lokal verfügbar, sondern können für andere Transkribusnutzerinnen und -nutzer freigegeben werden. Dank elaboriertem 
                user-management ist die Zuteilung von Rollen möglich. 
            
         Die eingespeisten Dokumente und Daten bleiben privat und vor dem Zugriff Dritter geschützt. Von Projektseite können vorgenommene Arbeitsschritte zwecks besserem Verständnis der ausgeführten Arbeiten und letztlich der Verbesserung der Produkte ausgewertet werden.
         Die Erkennprozesse werden serverseitig durchgeführt, sodass die Ressourcen auf den lokalen Rechnern nicht strapaziert werden. Transkribus ist mit JAVA und SWT programmiert und kann daher plattformunabhängig (Windows, Mac, Linux) genutzt werden. 
         Ein- und Ausblicke im Workshop 
         Der Workshop richtet sich sowohl an Geisteswissenschaftler*innen als auch an Computerwissenschaftler*innen, wobei vorwiegend die Tools und Möglichkeiten von Transkribus präsentiert werden. 
         Drei zentrale Forschungsaspekte aus READ können im Rahmen des Workshops neben Transkribus 
                hands-on ausgetestet werden:
            
         
            Max Weidemann: Das Training von Handschriftenmodellen (HTR+);
            Sofia Ares Oliveira 
                (in English): Identifikation von visuellen Features mit dh-segment;
                
            Markus Diem: Aufbereitung und Erkennung von Tabellen mit Transkribus und nomacs.
         
         Programm/Ablauf des Workshops 
         
            Begrüssung und Einführung in READ und Transkribus :45’
            Kurze Beschreibungen der vermittelten Forschungsaspekte (je 15’): 45’
            Kaffeepause: 30’
            Arbeit in Kleingruppen am jeweiligen Forschungsaspekt: 60’ (nach ca. 40 Minuten besteht die Möglichkeit die Gruppe zu wechseln)
            Diskussion der Resultate, weiterer Ausblick und Evaluation: (15-)30'
         
         Nach Interesse der Teilnehmenden können während der Gruppenarbeit weitere Tools und Ansätze, die im Rahmen von READ entwickelt wurden, kurz diskutiert werden: 1. Matching von Text und Bild (bspw. aus bestehenden Transkriptionen), 2. Transkribus Learn (e-Learningumgebung), 3. Crowdsourcing-Infrastruktur, 4. ScanTent und DocScan (Fotografieren von Dokumenten mit Android App). 
         Während des gesamten Workshops stehen vier wissenschaftliche Mitarbeitende des Projekts für Fragen und Auskünfte zur Verfügung.
         Tobias Hodel nimmt bereits im Vorfeld gerne Dokumente oder Projektideen an, damit sich die Veranstalter bereits vor dem Workshop Gedanken zu möglichen technischen Umsetzungen machen können. 
         Das Projekt READ und somit die Weiterentwicklung von Transkribus werden finanziert durch einen Grant der Europäischen Union im Rahmen des Horizon 2020 Forschungs- und Innovationsprogramms (grant agreement No 674943). 
         Zahl der möglichen Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer: Max. 30 Personen.
                 Benötigte technische Ausstattung: Beamer und Whiteboard. 
            
         Teilnehmende: Eigener Rechner (wenn möglich Installation von Transkribus; Hilfe zur Installation von Transkribus wird 15 Minuten vor der Veranstaltung angeboten).
         Rückfragen bitte an tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch 
         Kontaktdaten aller Beitragenden (inkl. Forschungsinteressen)
         Sofia Ares Oliveira, École Polytechnique de Lausanne, 
                CDH-DHLAB, 
                INN 116 / Station 14 / CH-1015 Lausanne / Switzerland; sofia.oliveiraares@epfl.ch (
                Electrical engineering, signal processing, computer vision).
            
         Markus Diem, Technische Universität Wien, Institute of Computer Aided Automation Computer Vision Lab, Favoritenstr. 9/183-2, A-1040 Vienna, Österreich; diem@caa.tuwien.ac.at (Computer Vision, Document Analysis, Layout Analysis/Page Segmentation, Cluster Analysis, Automated Flow Cytometry Analysis).
         Tobias Hodel, Staatsarchiv des Kantons Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 170, CH-8057 Zürich, Schweiz; tobias.hodel@ji.zh.ch (Digital Humanities; Automatic Text Recognition; eArchiving; Information Retrieval).
         Max Weidemann, Institut für Mathematik, Ulmenstraße 69, Universität Rostock, 18051 Rostock, Deutschland; max.weidemann@uni-rostock.de; (Deep Learning, Information Retrieval und Natural Language Processing). 
      
      
         
            
                    Einführend siehe die online Tutorials: 
                    https://read.transkribus.eu/transkribus/. Als 
                    hands-on Anleitung wird der Beitrag von Martin Prell empfohlen: »ps: ich bitt noch mahl umb ver gebung meines confusen und üblen schreibens wegen« – Frühneuzeitliche Briefe als Herausforderung automatisierter Handschriftenerkennung. Online: https://doi.org/10.22032/dbt.34849.
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Leifert, Gundram / Strauß, Tobias / Grüning, Tobias / Wustlich, Welf / Labahn, Roger (2016): „Cells in Multidimensional Recurrent Neural Networks” in: Journal of Machine Learning Research 17, 1-37.
                    
               
                  Prell, Martin (2018): „»ps: ich bitt noch mahl umb ver gebung meines confusen und üblen schreibens wegen« – Frühneuzeitliche Briefe als Herausforderung automatisierter Handschriftenerkennung“. Online: https://doi.org/10.22032/dbt.34849.
                    
               
                  READ (2018): „Tutorials and How To Guides“. Online: https://read.transkribus.eu/transkribus/.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Das Projekt ZuMult – „Zugänge zu multimodalen Korpora gesprochener Sprache – Vernetzung und zielgruppenspezifische Ausdifferenzierung“ (zumult.org) – hat sich zum Ziel gesetzt, eine Architektur zu entwickeln, die einen einheitlichen Zugriff auf verschiedene Korpora gesprochener Sprache (Audio- und Videoaufzeichnungen mündlicher Interaktion mit zugehörigen Metadaten, Transkripten, Annotationen) an verschiedenen Standorten ermöglicht, und auf deren Basis Zugangswege gestaltet werden können, die für die Bedarfe spezifischer Nutzergruppen (z.B. Sprachlehrforschung, Variationslinguistik) optimiert sind. Mit unserem Poster stellen wir das technische Konzept und eine prototypische Implementierung einer solchen Basisarchitektur vor.
         Ausgehend von einer vergleichenden Analyse vorhandener Plattformen (u.a. Datenbank für Gesprochenes Deutsch, Schmidt 2016; GeWiss-Korpus-Interface, Fandrych, Meißner & Wallner 2017; Repositorium des Hamburger Zentrums für Sprachkorpora, Hedeland et al. 2014; sowie mehrere Lösungen, die außerhalb des deutschsprachigen Raums entwickelt wurden, z.B. Eshkol-Taravella et al. 2012, Komrsková et al. 2018) und einer Bestandsaufnahme existierender Standards im Bereich multimedialer Daten (vgl. dazu auch Schmidt 2014 und Schmidt et al. 2010) haben wir eine Dreiebenen-Lösung entwickelt, die so weit wie möglich auf etablierte (De Facto-)Standards aufbaut und anschlussfähig an existierende Lösungen ist. Damit wird eine transferfähige Basis für einen flexiblen Zugriff auf multimodale Korpora geschaffen. 
         Kern der Architektur ist zum einen eine objektorientierte Modellierung der Korpus-Bestandteile (Aufnahmen, Metadaten zu Sprechereignissen und Sprechern, Transkripte, Annotationen und Zusatzmaterialien) und ihrer Beziehungen zueinander. Für deren digitale Repräsentation (Serialisierung) werden Standards verwendet, soweit sie existieren. Für Medienobjekte können wir auf industrielle Standards insbesondere aus dem Kontext der Moving 133_final-* Expert Group (MPEG) zurückgreifen. Die Repräsentation von Transkripten und Annotation folgt dem in ISO (2016) definierten und auf den Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) basierenden Format für „Transcriptions of Spoken Language“. Metadaten werden grundsätzlich in XML repräsentiert; in Ermangelung eines echten Standards, der in der Lage wäre, der Bandbreite und Komplexität von Metadaten im Bereich multimodaler Korpora vollständig gerecht zu werden, orientieren wir uns in diesem Bereich an CMDI-Profilen, die im CLARIN-Kontext für solche Korpora entwickelt wurden (z.B. Hedeland & Wörner 2012).
         Zum anderen beinhaltet die Architektur ein vereinheitlichtes Konzept zur Query auf Transkriptions- und Annotationsdaten. Dieses baut auf Überlegungen zu einer „Corpus Query Lingua Franca“ (Banski et al. 2016, ISO 2018) auf und berücksichtigt somit in der Korpuslinguistik verbreitete Suchsprachen wie CQP, ANNIS-QL, Poliqarp und weitere, die allerdings für die Besonderheiten angepasst werden müssen, die spontansprachliche Daten gegenüber schriftsprachlichen Korpora aufweisen. 
         Die Basisarchitektur besteht somit aus zwei gleichberechtigten Komponenten: Aus der Modellierung der Korpus-Bestandteile ergeben sich Zugriffs- und Navigationsmöglichkeiten für ganze Objekte bzw. Objekthierarchien, die auf Nutzerseite vor allem für ein exploratives Browsing auf den Daten eingesetzt werden. Die Query-Komponente ermöglicht hingegen eine gezielte Auswahl von (Teilen) von Objekten und damit systematische Recherchen im Sinne einer korpuslinguistischen Methodik. Beide Komponenten werden technisch als „Locators“ bzw. „Filters“ in einer REST API umgesetzt. Diese wird in der weiteren Projektarbeit die Basis darstellen, um zielgruppenspezifisch optimierte Zugänge zu den Daten zu entwickeln.
         Neben einem Überblick über diese Basis-Architektur wird unser Poster auch auf die konkrete Implementierung eingehen, die am Institut für Deutsche Sprache für den Zugriff auf die Daten aus dem Archiv für Gesprochenes Deutsch entwickelt wurde. Diese setzt auf ein vorhandenes Backend auf, das die Grundlage für die Datenbank für Gesprochenes Deutsch bildet und XML-basierte Daten in einer objektrelationalen Oracle-Datenbank hält. Für die Arbeiten in ZuMult wird dieses Backend für die im Projekt definierten Bedarfe angepasst und erweitert. Prototypische Applikationen, die den Einsatz der REST API illustrieren, werden als Software-Demonstrationen die Posterpräsentation ergänzen.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Banski, Piotr / Frick, Elena / Witt, Andreas (2016): "Corpus Query Lingua Franca (CQLF)". Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016), Portorož, Slovenia 2804-2809.  https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-50405
               
               
                  Eshkol-Taravella, I. / Baude, O. / Maurel, D. / Hriba, L. / Dugua, C. / Tellier, I., (2012): "Un grand corpus oral ,disponible’ : le corpus d’Orléans 1968-2012. " In: Ressources linguistiques libres, TAL. 52,3/2011, 17-46.
                    
               
                  Fandrych, Christian / Meißner, Cordula / Wallner, Franziska (eds.) (2017): "Gesprochene Wissenschaftssprache – digital Verfahren zur Annotation und Analyse müdlicher Korpora." Deutsch als Fremd- und Zweitsprache. Tübingen: Stauffenburg.
                    
               
                  Hedeland, Hanna / Wörner, Kai (2012): "Experiences and Problems creating a CMDI profile from an existing Metadata Schema". Proceedings of LREC-Workshop Describing LRs with Metadata: Towards Flexibility and Interoperability in the Documentation of LR, Istanbul, European Language Resources Association (ELRA) 37-40.http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/workshops/11.LREC2012%20Metadata%20Proceedings.pdf
               
               
                  Hedeland, Hanna / Lehmberg, Timm / Schmidt, Thomas / Wörner, Kai (2014): "Multilingual Corpora at the Hamburg Centre for Language Corpora". In: Ruhi, Şükriye/Haugh, Michael/Schmidt, Thomas/Wörner, Kai (Hrsg.): Best Practices for Spoken Corpora in Linguistic Research. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014. S. 208-224.
                    
               
                  ISO (ed.) (2016): ISO 24624:2016 Language resource management – Transcription of spoken language.
                  https://www.iso.org/standard/37338.html
               
               
                  ISO (ed.) (2018): ISO 24623-1:2018 Language resource management – Corpus query lingua franca (CQLF) -- Part 1: Metamodel.
                  https://www.iso.org/standard/37337.html
               
               
                  Komrsková, Zuzana / Kopřivová, Marie / Lukeš, David / Poukarová, Petra / Goláňová, Hana (2018): “New Spoken Corpora of Czech: ORTOFON and DIALEKT.” Journal of Linguistics 68:2, 219-228. 
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas (2014): "(More) Common Ground for Processing Spoken Language Corpora?" In: Ruhi, Şükriye/Haugh, Michael/Schmidt, Thomas/Wörner, Kai (eds.): Best Practices for Spoken Corpora in Linguistic Research. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014 249-265. http://pub.ids-mannheim.de/autoren/divers/3119.html
               
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas (2017): "DGD – Die Datenbank für Gesprochenes Deutsch. Mündliche Korpora am Institut für Deutsche Sprache (IDS) in Mannheim." In: Zeitschrift für Germanistische Linguistik 45(3), S. 451-463. 
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas / Elenius, Kjell / Trilsbeek, Paul (2010): "Multimedia encoding and annotation". In: Hinrichs, Erhard (ed.): Interoperability and standards. Utrecht: Utrecht University, 2010 121-124. http://www.exmaralda.org/files/CLARIN_Standards.pdf
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung
            In diesem 
                Beitrag wird das Redewiedergabe-Korpus (RW-Korpus) vorgestellt, ein historisches Korpus fiktionaler und nicht-fiktionaler Texte, das eine detaillierte manuelle Annotation mit Redewiedergabeformen enthält. Das Korpus entsteht im Rahmen eines laufenden DFG-Projekts und ist noch nicht endgültig abgeschlossen, jedoch ist für Frühjahr 2019 ein Beta-Release geplant, welches der Forschungsgemeinschaft zur Verfügung gestellt wird. Das endgültige Release soll im Frühjahr 2020 erfolgen. Das RW-Korpus stellt eine neuartige Ressource für die Redewiedergabe-Forschung dar, die in dieser Detailliertheit für das Deutsche bisher nicht verfügbar ist, und kann sowohl für quantitative linguistische und literaturwissenschaftliche Untersuchungen als auch als Trainingsmaterial für maschinelles Lernen dienen.
                
         
         
            Motivation und verwandte Forschung
            Redewiedergabe ist sowohl für die Linguistik als auch die Literaturwissenschaft ein interessanter Untersuchungsgegenstand. Die Repräsentation der Figurenstimme in Erzähltexten hat in der Narratologie viel Aufmerksamkeit erfahren und wurde in zahlreichen Kategoriesystemen abgebildet (vgl. z.B. Genette 2010; Martínez / Scheffel 2016). In der Linguistik besteht ein Interesse an sprachlichen Formen der Redewiedergabe, sowie an Redeeinleitungsverben (vgl. z.B. Hauser 2008, Engelberg 2015).
            Detaillierte, manuell annotierte Korpora mit diesem Themenschwerpunkt sind bislang vor allem für das Deutsche sehr rar. Ein Vorbild mit detaillierter, literaturwissenschaftlich motivierter Annotation mehrere Redewiedergabetypen für das Englische ist das Korpus von Semino/Short 2004. Das ebenfalls manuell annotierte DROC-Korpus hat seinen Schwerpunkt auf Figurenreferenzen in Romanen, enthält in diesem Kontext allerdings auch Annotationen direkter Wiedergabe mit Sprecherzuordnung (Krug et al. 2018b). Unser Korpus ist eine direkte Weiterentwicklung des aus 13 Erzähltexten bestehenden Korpus aus Brunner 2015, unterscheidet sich jedoch von diesem vor allem in folgenden Aspekten: Es enthält neben fiktionalen auch nicht-fiktionale Texte, die Annotationen sind durch Mehrfachannotation wesentlich verlässlicher und es ist deutlich umfangreicher (für das Beta-Release ca. 350.000 Tokens vs. 57.000 Tokens in Brunner 2015).
         
         
            Korpuszusammensetzung
            Das RW-Korpus umfasst Textmaterial aus dem Zeitraum 1840-1920. Es beruht auf den folgenden drei Textquellen, aus denen jeweils nur die Texte ausgewählt wurden, die in den Untersuchungszeitraum passen: 
            
               Erzähltexte aus der Digitalen Bibliothek, in TEI-Format konvertiert vom Projekt TextGrid (https://textgrid.de/digitale-bibliothek)
               Texte der Zeitschrift „Die Grenzboten”, digitalisiert durch die Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Bremen und in TEI-Format konvertiert durch das Deutsche Textarchiv (http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/)
               Das Mannheimer Korpus Historischer Zeitungen und Zeitschriften (MKHZ, https://repos.ids-mannheim.de/mkhz-beschreibung.html), bereitgestellt vom Institut für Deutsche Sprache und in TEI-Format konvertiert durch das Deutsche Textarchiv
            
            Bei der Korpuszusammenstellung sollte eine möglichst große Diversität der enthaltenen Texte erzielt werden. Um dies zu erreichen, setzt sich das Korpus aus Textausschnitten (Samples) zusammen. Diese haben mindestens 500 Wörter für fiktionale Texte bzw. 200 Wörter für nicht-fiktionale Texte – mit dieser großzügigeren Grenze war es möglich, auch kurze, abgeschlossene Artikel aufzunehmen, die für Zeitungen/Zeitschriften typisch sind. Die Samples wurden mit folgenden Besonderheiten randomisiert aus dem vorhandenen Textmaterial gezogen: Bei den Texten der Digitalen Bibliothek wurde erzwungen, dass jeder vertretene Autor innerhalb einer Dekade gleichermaßen berücksichtigt wird. Entsprechend wurde beim MKHZ erzwungen, dass alle in einer Dekade vertretenen unterschiedlichen Zeitungen/Zeitschriften gleichermaßen berücksichtigt werden. Damit wurde verhindert, dass Autoren bzw. Zeitungen/Zeitschriften mit wenig Material beim Sampling-Prozess vollkommen herausfallen. Das Beta-Release enthält Texte von etwa 140 unterscheidbaren Autoren und aus 20 unterschiedlichen Zeitungen/Zeitschriften.
            Die Quelltexte wurden größtenteils in ihrem Ursprungszustand belassen, mit zwei Ausnahmen: Da für die Zeitschrift „Die Grenzboten” nur automatische OCR-Erkennung durchgeführt wurde, wurden die Samples aus dieser Textquelle manuell nachkorrigiert. In den Texten aus den beiden anderen Quellen wurden häufige Sonderzeichen, wie das Schaft-S, durch moderne Äquivalente ersetzt, jedoch weisen die Texte dennoch in unterschiedlichem Maße altertümliche Schreibungen und z.T. auch Sonderzeichen auf. Insgesamt ist festzuhalten, dass die Textformen im RW-Korpus sehr divers sind, so sind z.B. Texte im Dialekt enthalten, sowie Zeitungsausschnitte, die reine Listen sind. Wir haben uns bewusst dagegen entschieden, solch ungewöhnliches Material herauszufiltern, um eine realistische Repräsentation des Textmaterials aus den untersuchten Dekaden zu erhalten. 
            Beim RW-Korpus wurde eine Ausgewogenheit in der zeitlichen Dimension (Textmaterial pro Dekade) sowie zwischen fiktionalen und nicht-fiktionalen Texten angestrebt.
            Entgegen ursprünglicher Annahmen stellte es sich als nicht sinnvoll heraus, die Trennung fiktional - nicht-fiktional rein aufgrund der Textquelle zu treffen: Es liegt in der Natur der Textsorte Zeitung/Zeitschrift, dass dort auch fiktionale Texte abgedruckt werden (im Feuilleton, als Fortsetzungsromane u.Ä.). Somit wurde das Kriterium ‚fiktional’ für jedes Sample individuell festgelegt. Unsere Definition für ‚Fiktion’ ist dabei angelehnt an Gabriel 2007: „Ein erfundener (‚fingierter’) einzelner Sachverhalt oder eine Zusammenfügung solcher Sachverhalte zu einer erfundenen Geschichte” (Gabriel 2007: 594). Bei der Identifizierung wurde besonderer Wert auf paratextuelle Merkmale (z.B. Untertitel, Rubriken u.Ä.) gelegt. Von den Samples aus dem MKHZ und den „Grenzboten” wurden auf diese Weise ca. 12% als fiktional eingestuft. 
            Die folgende Tabelle zeigt die wichtigsten Metadaten des RW-Korpus, welche nach dem Sampling und der Textkorrektur vergeben werden.  
            
               
                  Metadatum
                  Werte
                  Beschreibung
               
               
                  year
                  Zahl zwischen 1840 und 1919
                  Erscheinungsjahr des Textes (bei digBib-Texten: Ersterscheinungsjahr, falls verfügbar)
               
               
                  decade
                  Zahl in 10er Schritten
                  Erscheinungsdekade des Textes
               
               
                  source
                  digBib, grenz, mkhz
                  Textquelle; bei mkhz wird noch ein Kürzel für die jeweilige Zeitung/Zeitschrift beigefügt
               
               
                  title
                  String, undefined
                  Titel des Textes, falls bekannt
               
               
                  author
                  String, undefined
                  Autor des Textes, falls bekannt
               
               
                  fictional
                  yes, no 
                  Ist der Textausschnitt fiktional?
               
               
                  text_type
                  Erzähltext, Kommentar, Anzeige, Reportage, Nachrichten, Biographie, Rezension, Reisebericht/Brief, unsure 
                  Texttyp; wenn ein Ausschnitt mehrere Texttypen enthält (z.B. Kommentar und Anzeigen), wird nach dem dominanten Typ klassifiziert oder ansonsten ‚unsure’ vergeben
               
            
            Aufgrund der Diversität der in Zeitungen/Zeitschriften vertretenen Texte wurde für jedes Sample eine nähere Klassifikation des Texttyps vorgenommen, so dass auch dessen Einfluss auf die Verteilung der Redewiedergabetypen untersucht werden kann. Die folgende Abbildung gibt einen ersten Eindruck, welch deutliche Abweichungen hier erkennbar sind. Gezeigt werden nur die Texttypen, für beim Korpusstand vom 25.09.2018 mehr als 10 Samples vorlagen. Die Y-Achse zeigt Prozent der Tokens im Text.
            
               
            
         
         
            Annotationssystem
            Wir unterscheiden die vier Typen direkte, indirekte, frei indirekte (‚erlebte’) und erzählte Wiedergabe, sowie die drei Medien Rede 
                (speech), Gedanke 
                (thought) und Schrift 
                (writing), so dass sich insgesamt zwölf Annotationsmöglichkeiten ergeben.
                
            Außerdem annotieren wir die Rahmenformel, die eine direkte oder eine indirekte Wiedergabe einleiten kann. In den Rahmenformeln sowie den Instanzen von erzählter Wiedergabe wird das zentrale Wort markiert, das auf die Sprech-/Gedanken-/Schreibhandlung verweist 
                (z.B. sagte, Gedanke). Zudem wird für alle Wiedergabetypen der Sprecher markiert, falls vorhanden.
                
            Während die Unterscheidung der drei Medien nur in Ausnahmefällen problematisch ist, bedürfen die vier Typen genauerer Definitionen.
            Die direkte Wiedergabe 
                (direct) ist eine wörtlich zitierte Äußerung einer Figur. Sie kann von einer Rahmenformel eingeleitet werden und als einziger Wiedergabetyp Anführungszeichen verwenden.
                    
               Er fragte: 
               „Wo ist das Mittagessen?”
            
            Die indirekte Wiedergabe 
                (indirect) ist eine nicht-wörtliche Wiedergabe einer Äußerung. Sie ist in unserem Annotationssystem formal definiert und besteht aus einer Rahmenformel und einem abhängigen Nebensatz, der häufig im Konjunktiv steht. Dies kann ein Nebensatz mit Verbzweitstellung sein, mit 
                    dass, 
                    ob oder 
                    w-Fragewort oder ein (erweiterter) Infinitivsatz. 
                    
               Er fragte, 
               wo das Mittagessen sei.
            
            Die freie indirekte Wiedergabe 
                (free indirect) – in der Literatur oft ‚erlebte Rede‘ genannt – definiert sich über die Überlagerung von Figuren- und Erzählerstimme und ist daher eine typische Form fiktionaler Texte. Sie weist keine Rahmenformel und keine sonstigen formalen Markierungen wie Anführungszeichen auf. Finden sich Elemente der Erzählerstimme wie das Tempus Präteritum oder Personalpronomen der dritten Person und gleichzeitig Elemente der Figurenstimme wie Deiktika, Subjektivität, Ausrufe oder figurentypischer Wortschatz, sind dies Indikatoren für freie indirekte Wiedergabe.
                    
               Woher sollte er denn jetzt bloß ein Mittagessen bekommen?
            
            Die erzählte Wiedergabe 
                (reported) ist die Erwähnung eines Sprech-, Denk oder Schreibakts, aus der man nicht auf den eigentlichen Inhalt schließen kann. Hinweise auf erzählte Wiedergabe geben Wiedergabewörter, die Thematisierung einer Wiedergabehandlung sowie der Inhalt derselben.
                    
               Er sprach über das Mittagessen.
            
            Ein Sonderfall sind uneingeleitete Konjunktivsätze, die zur Wiedergabe verwendet werden. Diese werden als Mischform zwischen indirekter und frei indirekter Wiedergabe markiert. 
                    
               Sie stellte viele Fragen. 
               Wo sei das Mittagessen?
            
            Darüber hinaus gibt es zusätzliche Attribute, die Besonderheiten bei der Wiedergabe markieren und in der folgenden Tabelle dargestellt werden:
            
               
                  level
                  Verschachtelungstiefe der Wiedergabe
               
               
                  non-fact
                  nicht-faktische Wiedergaben (z.B. Negationen, zukünftigen Aussagen oder Absichten)
               
               
                  border
                  Fälle, die an der Grenze von Rede-, Gedanken- oder Schriftwiedergabe liegen, also nicht alle prototypischen Kriterien der jeweiligen Wiedergabeart erfüllen
               
               
                  prag
                  sprachliche Wendung, die das Muster einer Wiedergabe aufweist, pragmatisch aber einen anderen Zweck erfüllt (z.B. Höflichkeitsfloskeln)
               
               
                  metaph
                  Metaphern in Form von Wiedergaben 
                        (z.B. Die Klugheit riet mir davon ab.)
                        
               
            
            Die detaillierten Annotationsrichtlinien können unter http://redewiedergabe.de/richtlinien/richtlinien.html eingesehen werden.
         
         
            Annotationsprozess
            Die genaue Identifizierung und Klassifizierung der Redewiedergaben auf der Grundlage des detaillierten Annotationssystems ist eine schwierige Aufgabe.
            Jedes Sample des RW-Korpus durchläuft darum einen mehrschrittigen Prozess. Zunächst wird es von zwei Annotatoren unabhängig voneinander annotiert. Danach vergleicht ein weiterer Experte die Annotationen und erstellt, falls notwendig, eine Konsens-Annotation, die dann ins finale Korpus aufgenommen wird. Jedes Sample wird also von drei Personen bearbeitet, um größtmögliche Konsistenz zu gewährleisten.
            Die Annotatoren arbeiten mit dem eclipse-basierten Annotationswerkzeug ATHEN (entwickelt von Markus Krug im Projekt Kallimachos, www.kallimachos.de), für das im Projekt eine spezielle Oberfläche für die Redewiedergabe-Annotation implementiert wurde (für eine detaillierte Beschreibung vgl. auch Krug et al. 2018a). Das Werkzeug ist frei verfügbar unter der Adresse 
                    http://ki.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/nappi/release/.
                
         
         
            Verfügbarmachung und Ausblick
            Das Beta-Release wird in einem standardisierten und dokumentierten Textformat im Langzeitarchiv des Instituts für Deutsche Sprache zur freien Nutzung zur Verfügung gestellt 
                (https://repos.ids-mannheim.de/). Spätestens für das finale Release im Frühjahr 2020 garantieren wir ein TEI-kompatibles XML-Format. Zudem wird weiteres im Kontext des Redewiedergabe-Projekts entstandenes Material zur Verfügung gestellt, wie nur einfach annotiertes Textmaterial und annotierte Volltexte. Im Jahr 2020 werden auch Werkzeuge fertiggestellt sein, die es erlauben, in Texten verschiedene Formen der Redewiedergabe automatisch zu erkennen.
                
            Nutzungsszenarien für das Korpus sind vielfältig: Aus NLP-Perspektive kann es als Test- und Trainingsmaterial für automatische Redewiedergabeerkenner verwendet werden. Aus linguistischer Perspektive bieten sich Korpusstudien zu sprachlichen Eigenheiten der Redewiedergabe an, wie z.B. die laufenden Studien zu Redewiedergabeeinleitern von Tu. Aus literaturwissenschaftlicher Perspektive erlaubt das Korpus z.B. Untersuchungen zu der Häufigkeit und Form von Wiedergaben in Erzähltexten in ihrer Relation zur Figurencharakterisierung.
         
      
      
         
            
                    Die ersten beiden Autoren haben zu gleichen Teilen an der Erstellung dieses Beitrags mitgewirkt.
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Brunner, Annelen (2015): Automatische Erkennung von Redewiedergabe. Ein Beitrag zur quantitativen Narratologie (=Narratologia 47). Berlin: De Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Engelberg, Stefan (2015): „Quantitative Verteilungen im Wortschatz. Zu lexikologischen und lexikografischen Aspekten eines dynamischen Lexikons“, in: Eichinger, Ludwig M. (eds.): Sprachwissenschaft im Fokus. Positionsbestimmungen und Perspektiven. Jahrbuch 2014 des IDS. Tübingen: Narr 205-230.
                    
               
                  Gabriel, Gottfried (2007): „Fiktion“, in: Fricke, Harald et al. (eds.): Reallexikon der deutschen Literaturwissenschaft. Bd. 1: A-G. Berlin / New York: De Gruyter 594-598.
                    
               
                  Genette, Gérard (2010): Die Erzählung. 3., durchges. und korrigierte Aufl. Paderborn: Fink.
                    
               
                  Hauser, Stefan (2008): „Beobachtungen zur Redewiedergabe in der Tagespresse. Eine kontrastive Analyse“, in: Lüger, Heinz-Helmut / Lenk, Hartmut E.H. (eds.): Kontrastive Medienlinguistik. Landau: Verlag Empirische Pädagogik 271-286.
                    
               
                  Krug, Markus / Tu, Ngoc Duyen Tanja / Weimer, Lukas / Reger, Isabella / Konle, Leonard / Jannidis, Fotis / Puppe, Frank(2018a): „Annotation and beyond – Using ATHEN Annotation and Text Highlighting Environment“, in: Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum – Konferenzabstracts 19-21.
                    
               
                  Krug, Markus / Weimer, Lukas / Reger, Isabella / Macharowsky, Luisa / Feldhaus, Stephan / Puppe, Frank / Jannidis, Fotis (2018b): Description of a Corpus of Character References in German Novels - DROC [Deutsches ROman Corpus]. DARIAH-DE Working Papers Nr. 27, Göttingen: DARIAH-DE, 2018, URN: urn:nbn:de:gbv:7-dariah-2018-2-9.
                    
               
                  Martínez, Matías / Scheffel, Michael (2016): Einführung in die Erzähltheorie. 10. Auflage. München: C.H.Beck.
                    
               
                  Semino, Elena / Short, Mick (2004): Corpus stylistics. Speech, writing and thought presentation in a corpus of English writing. London / New York: Routledge.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Die Arbeit zur digitalen historischen Semantik in Frankfurt am Main erreicht mit der neuen webbasierten Plattform und Datenbank „Latin Text Archive“ 
                (LTA) im Rahmen der Dateninfrastrukturen der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (BBAW) ein neues Level. Nach über zehn Jahren Entwicklungsarbeit an den Datenbanken „Historical Semantics Corpus Management 
                (HSCM)“, „Frankfurt Latin Lexicon (FLL)“ sowie an der Webseite 
                „www.comphistsem.org“ ergaben sich drei grundlegende Herausforderungen: (1) Nachhaltigkeit und Verfügbarkeit der geleisteten Arbeit mussten gesichert, (2) Benutzerfreundlichkeit und Funktionalität verbessert sowie (3) Akzeptanz und Verankerung innerhalb der Fachwissenschaft gesteigert werden. Das LTA antwortet auf diese Herausforderungen und führt mit historischen Referenzkorpora neue Arbeitsinstrumente ein. Das LTA ist auch das Ergebnis einer neuen strategischen Partnerschaft, um die bisherige Arbeit aus der stets zeitlich begrenzten Projektentwicklung an der Universität in einen dauerhaften Betrieb an einer Akademie zu überführen. 
                
            Zur Standortbestimmung der Frankfurter Arbeit lässt sich Michael Piotrowskis Definition von 
                    digital humanities (Piotrowski 2018: 2) anwenden: Danach ist sie den 
                    applied digital humanities zuzuorten, da ein konkretes geschichtswissenschaftliches Forschungsziel mit digitalen Techniken verfolgt wird. Der Historiker Bernhard Jussen hat zur Umsetzung seines Postulates einer „kulturellen Semantik“ nach Wegen gesucht, wie computerlinguistische Methoden helfen können, Bedingungen, Mittel und Formen multimedialer Sinnproduktion in vergangenen Gesellschaften zu erforschen (Jussen 2000: 24ff.). Es geht um die kontrollierte Analyse von semantischem Wandel innerhalb der lateinischen Textproduktion in poströmischer Zeit. Ein Anwendungsgebiet ist die politische Geschichte. So lässt sich mittels der computergestützten Semantik danach fragen, welche impliziten politischen Ordnungsmodelle in Texten sichtbar werden, bevor mit der Wiederentdeckung der Politik des Aristoteles der Begriff des Politischen aufkommt? Außerdem kann die Begriffs- und Ideengeschichte Verwendungszusammenhänge von zentralen Vokabeln untersuchen (Geelhaar 2015; Schwandt 2018). Am Ende sollen aber nicht nur Forschungsergebnisse und -methoden, sondern auch Arbeitsinstrumente und Forschungsdaten einem breiten fachwissenschaftlichen Publikum ohne Programmierkenntnissen zur Weiterverwendung bereitstehen. Hierzu hat Bernhard Jussen den Computerlinguisten Alexander Mehler und dessen Text Technology 
                    Laboratory für eine Kooperation gewonnen, in der die texttechnologische und die geschichtswissenschaftliche Seite ihre jeweiligen Agenden verfolgen und vom interdisziplinären Austausch profitieren. Aus dieser Konstellation ergibt sich, dass die Vorstellung des LTA aus geschichtswissenschaftlicher Perspektive den Fokus nicht auf technische bzw. technologische, sondern auf programmatische und anwenderbezogene Aspekte legt.
                
         
         
            Das Latin Text Archive: Teil des DTA-Markenstamms
            Das LTA ist eine frei zugängliche, webbasierte Plattform zu Korpusaufbau und Korpusanalyse sowie auch eine Datenbank. Technisch baut es auf den am Deutschen Textarchiv (DTA, DFG-gefördert zwischen 2007 und 2016, siehe Geyken et al. 2018) entwickelten Komponenten zur Textpräsentation auf und erweitert somit den Markenstamm des DTA um eine lateinische Textkomponente. Diese umfasst die Textproduktion im lateinischsprachigen Europa von (zunächst) 400 bis 1500. Die versammelten Texte basieren auf kritischen und somit für die Geschichtswissenschaft validen Editionen, soweit sie in Open Access verfügbar sind. Sie werden zum Zweck des Text Mining um den kritischen Apparat 
                gekürzt, im TEI-P5-Format nach dem für HSCM entwickelten Datenmodell aufbereitet, vollständig lemmatisiert und mit einer aufwändigen Metadaten-Annotierung angereicht, die zugleich die Vernetzung zu anderen digitalen Ressourcen herstellt – nicht zuletzt zu den textgebenden Institutionen 
                selbst. Hierbei handelt es sich u. a. um die 
                    Monumenta Germaniae Historica (MGH). Dieses wichtige deutsche Editionsunternehmen für mittelalterliche Texte stellt seine Editionen im „openMGH“-Projekt unter Creative-Commons-Lizenz in TEI-konformen Versionen zur 
                    Verfügung. Doch erst durch die Datenintegration ins LTA können auch reine Anwender vom openMGH-Projekt profitieren, da die Editionen nun erst wortstatistisch vergleichend analysiert werden können. Des Weiteren ist das LTA auf kontrollierte Datenerweiterung durch die gezielte Aufbereitung und Übernahme aus projektexternen Quellen ausgelegt, um in Zukunft ein repräsentatives Korpus historischer, lateinischer Textproduktion analysierbar zu machen. Hierzu können die Daten entweder als Gesamtkorpus und nach freier Auswahl durch den Anwender an Analysemodule weitergereicht werden, von denen die Voyant Tools bereits verfügbar 
                    sind. Die in den Vorgängerprojekten entwickelten Analysetools werden als weiteres, externes Modul zugänglich gemacht. Dabei handelt es sich um Konkordanz- und Kookkurrenzanalysen sowie die Berechnung semantischer Netzwerke. 
                
         
         
            Zusammenhang zwischen LTA und HSCM
            Das LTA unterscheidet sich in mehrfacher Hinsicht von seinen Vorgängeranwendungen. Die Überführung des Datenbestandes aus HSCM in das LTA als Teil der von der BBAW betreuten Dateninfrastruktur dient dem Zweck der nachhaltigen Verfügbarkeit. Zudem wird das LTA als explizites Parallelangebot zum DTA vom Renommee der BBAW profitieren, die durch eigene Datenprojekte nicht nur eine ausgezeichnete Expertise in den DH vorweisen kann, sondern auch bereits hohe Anerkennung in den Geisteswissenschaften genießt. Zudem gewinnt das LTA durch die Anlehnung an das DTA, da es einen Wiedererkennungseffekt in der Benutzerführung gibt, der das Arbeiten mit dem LTA erleichtert. Die wesentlichen Neuerungen gegenüber HSCM bestehen aber nicht nur in der verbesserten Benutzerführung; wichtiger noch ist die Trennung der Primärdatenaufbereitung von der Datenverwaltung, indem die Daten in HSCM kuratiert und im LTA zur Verfügung gestellt werden. Das Preprocessing neuer Texte wird weiterhin über HSCM als Teil des eHumanities-
                Desktops laufen und über den eigens vom Text Technology Lab entwickelten TT Lab Tagger (vor der Brück/Mehler 2016; Eger/Gleim/Mehler 2016) für die automatische Lemmatisierung lateinischer Texte, über das dafür nötige morphologische Lexikon („Frankfurt Latin Lexicon“) sowie über Editoren zur kontrollierenden, manuellen Nachlemmatisierung und zur nachträglichen Korrektur des TEI-Codes. Die vollständig bearbeiteten Texte werden anschließend in das LTA überführt, wo es nicht mehr möglich sein wird, in den jeweiligen Source-Code des Textes einzugreifen. Dies erlaubt eine feste Indexierung (auch der Lemmatisierungsinformationen), wodurch die Schnelligkeit bei der Verarbeitung von Suchanfragen bedeutend gesteigert wird. Darüber hinaus ist durch den Datentransfer die Analyse des Materials nicht mehr auf die in HSCM vorhandenen Tools beschränkt, sondern können im Grunde von allen denkbaren Toolkits wie eben den Voyant Tools oder 
                Diacollo weiterverwendet werden. 
                
         
         
            Geschichtswissenschaftliche Referenzkorpora
            Die dritte wesentliche Neuerung sind die unter geschichtswissenschaftlichen Aspekten kontrollierten 
                Referenzkorpora, um Veränderungen im Sprachgebrauch zeitlich wie genrespezifisch berechnen und visualisieren zu können. Wie die DTA-Referenzkorpora beinhalten diese Referenzkorpora ganze Werke und nicht nur Samples wie linguistische Korpora (z. B. das British National Corpus). Das Clustering von Texten wird nach Vierteljahrhunderten und nicht nach Zehn-Jahres-Schritten wie im DTA 
                geschehen, weil eine präzisere zeitliche Zuordnung aufgrund fehlender Datierungen und mitunter komplizierten Überlieferungsgeschichten nicht möglich ist. Dieser Arbeitsschritt erforderte zudem eine erneute klassische Quellenkritik zur Chronologie einzelner Texte. Die Textmengen pro Zeiteinheit sollen quantitativ nicht zu sehr voneinander abweichen, was angesichts der teilweise eklatanten Disparität historischer Schriftproduktion eine große Herausforderung darstellt. Außerdem wird, soweit möglich, der Verbreitungsgrad handschriftlicher Überlieferung berücksichtigt, wenngleich das LTA ansonsten an der Idee des Textes als abstrakter Größe aus konzeptionellen Gründen festhalten 
                muss. Das erste Referenzkorpus besteht aus narrativen Texten, die aus den Scriptores-Reihen der MGH stammen und historiographische wie hagiographische Texte beinhalten. Künftige Korpora werden Briefe bzw. Urkunden und vor allem auch theologische bzw. juristische Traktate umfassen, um somit Sprachgebrauch in verschiedenen Genres vergleichen zu können.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               http://lta.bbaw.de
            
            
                    Jussen/Mehler/Ernst 2007; Cimino/Geelhaar/Schwandt 2015. HSCM wurde zwischen 2008 und 2014 aus den Mitteln des Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz-Preises der DFG sowie aus den Mitteln des LOEWE-Schwerpunktes „Digitale Humanities“ finanziert, um im BMBF-Projekt „Computational Historical Semantics“ (2013-2016) weiterentwickelt zu werden.
                
            
                    Eine Präsentation der Frankfurter Projekte für das CCeH 2017 findet sich unter: 
                    http://www.geschichte.uni-frankfurt.de/43013259/geelhaart (alle folgenden Links wurden eingesehen am 6.10.2018)
                
            
               https://www.texttechnologylab.org/
            
            
                    Kritisch hierzu Fischer 2017: S266.
                
            
                    Es gibt Verlinkungen, soweit möglich, zum Repertorium Fontium Mediae Aevi 
                    (www.geschichtsquellen.de), zu VIAF (Personen und Werke) und zum Katalog der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin für bibliographische Angaben.
                
            
               http://www.mgh.de/dmgh/openmgh/
            
            
               https://voyant-tools.org/ Zu dessen Anwendung in der Geschichtswissenschaft siehe Schwandt 2018: 125-133.
                
            
                    HSCM ist ein Modul der VRE „eHumanities Desktop 2.2“ 
                    (www.hudesktop.hucompute.org) des Text Technology Laboratory.
                
            
               https://clarin-d.de/de/kollokationsanalyse-in-diachroner-perspektive
            
            
                    Zu den Schwierigkeiten mit historischen Korpora und von Historikern organisierten Korpora siehe Geelhaar 2015: 11f.
                
            
                    Unser Kooperationspartner IRHT/CNRS verfolgt im Corpus-Building-Project VELUM 
                    (http://www.agence-nationale-recherche.fr/Project-ANR-17-CE27-0015) eine sehr viel gröbere Stratifikation.
                
            
                    Eine Korpusanreicherung mittels digital edierter Handschriften ist technisch in HSCM/LTA realisierbar, würde aber zu Inkonsistenzen im Materialbestand führen. Hierzu auch Fischer 2017: S280.
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Vor der Brück, Tim / Mehler, Alexander (2016): „TLT-CRF: A Lexicon-supported Morphological Tagger for Latin Based on Conditional Random Fields”, in: “Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation”.
                    
               
                  Eger, Steffen/ Gleim, Rüdiger / Mehler, A. (2016): „Lemmatization and Morphological Tagging in German and Latin: A comparison and a survey of the state-of-the-art”, in: “Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation”.
                    
               
                  Cimino, Roberta / Geelhaar, Tim / Schwandt, Silke (2015): “Digital Approaches to Historical Semantics: new research directions at Frankfurt University”. In: Storicamente 11. http://storicamente.org/historical_semantics [letzter Zugriff 12.10.2018] 7. DOI: 10.12977/stor594 
               
               
                  Fischer, Franz (2017): „Digital Corpora and Scholarly Editions of Latin Texts: Features and Requirements of Textual Critism”, in: Speculum 92/S1: S266-S287. https://doi.org/10.1086/693823
                    
               
                  Geelhaar, Tim (2015): “Talking About christianitas at the Time of Innocent III (1198–1216): What Does Word Use Contribute to the History of Concepts?” in: Contributions to the history of concepts 10/2: 7–28. https://doi.org/10.3167/choc.2015.100202
                    
               
                  Geyken, Alexander / Boenig, Matthias / Haaf, Susanne / Jurish, Bryan / Thomas, Christian / Wiegand, Frank (2018): „Das Deutsche Textarchiv als Forschungsplattform für historische Daten in CLARIN“, in: Lobin, Henning/ Schneider, Roman / Witt, Andreas (Hgg.): Digitale Infrastrukturen für die germanistische Forschung (= Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft um 2020, Bd. 6). Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 219–248. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110538663-011
                    
               
                  Jussen, Bernhard, Mehler, Alexander / Ernst, Alexandra (2007): „A Corpus Management System for Historical Semantics. Sprache und Datenverarbeitung“, in: International Journal for Language Data Processing 31/2: 81-87. 
                    
               
                  Jussen, Bernhard (2000): Der Name der Witwe. Erkundungen zur Semantik der mittelalterlichen Bußkultur. (VMPIG, Bd. 158). Göttingen.
                    
               
                  Piotrowski, Michael (2018): „Digital Humanities – An explication”, in: Burghardt, Manuel, Müller-Birn, Christian (eds.): INF-DH 2018 – Workshopband, 25. Sept. 2018, Berlin https://doi.org/10.18420/infdh2018-07
               
               
                  Schwandt, Silke (2018): „Digitale Methoden für die Historische Semantik. Auf den Spuren von Begriffen in digitalen Korpora“, in: Geschichte und Gesellschaft 44: 107-134. https://doi.org/10.13109/gege.2018.44.1.107
               
               
                  Mehler, Alexander / vor der Brück, Tim  / Gleim, Rüdiger / Geelhaar, Tim (2015): „Towards a Network Model of the Coreness of Texts: An Experiment in Classifying Latin Texts using the TTLab Latin Tagger”, in Text Mining: From Ontology Learning to Automated text Processing Applications, C. Biemann and A. Mehler, Eds., Berlin/New York: Springer, 2015, pp. 87-112. 
					
               
                  Mehler, Alexander / Schwandt, Silke / Gleim, Rüdiger / Jussen, Bernhard: „Der eHumanities Desktop als Werkzeug in der historischen Semantik: Funktionsspektrum und Einsatzszenarien”", Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics (JLCL), vol. 26, iss. 1, pp. 97-117, 2011.
					
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Obwohl sich infrastrukturell einiges getan hat, sieht ein typischer Operationsmodus der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft immer noch so aus, dass eine bestimmte Forschungsmethode auf ein oft nur ephemeres Korpus angewandt wird. Im besten Fall ist das Ergebnis 
                    irgendwie reproduzierbar, im schlechtesten Fall gar nicht. Im besten Fall gibt es ein offen zugängliches Korpus in einem Standardformat wie TEI, einer anderen Markup-Sprache oder zumindest als txt-Datei. Im schlechtesten Fall ist das Korpus gar nicht zugänglich, d. h., die Forschungsergebnisse müssen einfach hingenommen werden.
                
            Doch seit kurzem gibt es Anzeichen, dass sich dies ändert. Einige Digital-Humanities-Projekte stellen Schnittstellen zu stabilen Korpora zur Verfügung, über die man mannigfaltige Zugriffsmöglichkeiten bekommt und reproduzierbar arbeiten kann. Eines dieser Projekte ist DraCor, eine offene Plattform zur Dramenforschung, die in diesem Vortrag vorgestellt werden soll (zugänglich unter 
                    bzw. über die Repos und verschiedene Schnittstellen). DraCor transformiert vorliegende Textsammlungen zu ›Programmable Corpora‹ – ein neuer Begriff, den wir mit diesem Vortrag ins Spiel bringen möchten.
                
         
         
            Die Bausteine
            
               Vanillekorpora
               Ähnlich wie die COST Action zu europäischen Romanen (Schöch et al. 2018), versucht das DraCor-Projekt als Basis für eine digitale Komparatistik einen Stamm an multilingualen Dramenkorpora aufzubauen, die in basalem TEI kodiert sind. Ein selbst betriebenes russischsprachiges 
                    () und ein deutschsprachiges Korpus 
                    () dienen dabei als Einstieg. Diese Korpora sind, ähnlich wie die Sammlung »Théâtre classique« von Paul Fièvre, im weitesten Sinne als Vanillekorpora angelegt, die über das notwendige Markup hinaus zunächst kaum weitere spezielle Auszeichnungen enthalten, allerdings frei zur Verfügung stehen und damit fork- und erweiterbar sind. Zur Demonstration, dass auch andere, reicher kodierte Korpora dazugebunden und sofort alle bereits bestehenden Extraktions- und Visualisierungsmethoden der Plattform angeboten werden können, wurden das Shakespeare Folger Corpus sowie das schwedische Dramawebben-Korpus geforkt und angedockt 
                    (bzw. 
                        ). Dramenkorpora in weiteren Sprachen sollen folgen; einzige Voraussetzung dabei ist jeweils, dass diese in TEI vorliegen.
                    
               Die Vorteile von frei auf GitHub gehosteten Korpora liegen auf der Hand. Unabhängig von den letztlich durch die Plattform zur Verfügung gestellten Schnittstellen können die Korpora alternativ durch Klonen oder andere Downloadmethoden, etwa über den SVN-Wrapper von GitHub, direkt bezogen und individuell weiterverarbeitet werden. Ein offen zugängliches GitHub-Repositorium heißt auch, dass Pull Requests zur Fehlerkorrektur und Forks für Erweiterungen möglich und erwünscht sind.
            
            
               XML-Datenbank (eXist-db) und Frontend
               DraCor als Plattform setzt auf die eXist-Datenbank, um die TEI-Dateien zu verarbeiten und Funktionen zur Beforschung der Korpora zur Verfügung zu stellen. Das Frontend wurde mit ReactJS gebaut, ist responsiv und einfach erweiterbar. Der Schwerpunkt liegt aber nicht auf der GUI, sondern auf der API (vgl. generell zur Unterscheidung zwischen beiden Schnittstellenansätzen Bleier/Klug 2018).
            
            
               API und Entwicklungsumgebung
               Um dem Ideal und der Möglichkeit nahe zu kommen, auf einfache Weise »alle Methoden auf alle Texte« anwenden zu können (Frank/Ivanovic 2018), braucht es mehr als offene Korpora. Der zitierte Text von Frank/Ivanovic macht sich hinsichtlich dessen für SPARQL-Endpunkte stark; auch DraCor bietet einen solchen an, besitzt darüber hinaus aber eine reiche API, die über Swagger dokumentiert und erläutert wird 
                    (). In einem Teilbereich der Korpusphilologie, den Digital Scholarly Editions, hat die Diskussion um eine proaktivere Nutzung von APIs bereits begonnen (zur Vorgeschichte vgl. wiederum Bleier/Klug 2018), als Beispiel hierfür diene die Folger Digital Texts API 
                    (), über die man sich spezifische Querys zusammenbauen kann. Der Vorteil einer moderneren Lösung wie Swagger besteht darin, dass API-Querys live und direkt ausgeführt und die Outputs genauer kontrolliert und gesteuert werden können.
                    
               Ein einfaches Use-Case-Szenario sieht dann so aus, dass man etwa im RStudio mit zwei, drei Zeilen Code einen Blick in ein Korpus werfen kann, etwa über die zeitliche Entwicklung der Anzahl der Charaktere im russischen Drama zwischen 1740 und 1940, die in der Metadatentabelle festgehalten sind 
                    (). Diese Datei, beziehbar im JSON- oder CSV-Format, wird in eine Data.Table eingelesen, woraufhin die Werte zweier Spalten (Erscheinungsjahre und Number of Speakers) einfach über ggplot visualisiert werden können (Abb. 1).
                    
               
                  
                     
                     Abbildung 1: Anzahl der Charaktere pro Drama in chronologischer Ordnung (Quelle: RusDraCor).
                  Anhand dieses sehr simplen Beispiels zeigt sich dann recht deutlich, dass sich mit Puschkins an Shakespeare angelehntem historischen Drama »Boris Godunow« (1825), in dem Sprechakte von 79 Charakteren vorkommen, eine strukturelle Diversifizierung der russischen Dramenlandschaft Bahn bricht.
                    
               Die Möglichkeiten beschränken sich aber nicht darauf, vorgefertigte API-Funktionen zu benutzen. Neue Forschungsideen zeitigen immer auch neue Bedarfe an einfach bezieh- und reproduzierbaren Daten und Metriken; die API kann dementsprechend erweitert werden. Dies wird dadurch erleichtert, dass über Apache Ant die gesamte Entwicklungsumgebung auf dem eigenen System nachgebaut werden kann.
               Durch bereits implementierte Funktionen können neben Struktur- und Metadaten etwa auch Volltexte ohne Markup bezogen werden (auch Untermengen von Volltexten wie Regieanweisungen), etwa wenn Methoden wie die Stilometrie oder das Topic Modeling der Endzweck sind, also Methoden, die nach dem »bag of words«-Prinzip arbeiten, für das kein Markup vonnöten ist.
               Insgesamt wird durch den Aufbau und die Dokumentation offener APIs die bisher oft aufwendige Reproduzierbarkeit von Forschungsergebnissen erheblich erleichtert.
            
            
               Shiny App
               Ein Beispiel für die vielseitigen Nutzungsmöglichkeiten der DraCor-API ist die Shiny App, die Ivan Pozdniakov aufgesetzt hat 
                    (). Shiny ist ein auf R basierendes Framework, das es ermöglicht, interaktive Visualisierungen im Browser darzustellen. Die DraCor-Shiny-App tut genau dies und setzt dabei vollkommen auf die DraCor-API für den Datenbezug. So kann zu Lehr- und Forschungszwecken, aber auch zur einfacheren Datenkorrektur, auf Visualisierungen des aktuellen Datenbestandes zugegriffen werden.
                    
            
            
               Didaxe
               Das Markup oder andere Formalisierungen literarischer Texte sind nicht selbsterklärend. Zwar gibt es einige Standards, aber die jeweilige Operationalisierungslösung hängt von der Forschungsfrage ab. Allein das Extrahieren von Figurennetzwerkdaten ist auf viele Arten und Weisen möglich, was dazu führt, dass etwa alle von verschiedenen Forschungsgruppen extrahierten Netzwerke aus Shakespeares »Hamlet« zu leicht verschiedenen Ergebnissen kommen. Selbst für Dramen ist dies also schon ein nicht-trivialer Akt, von Romanen dann ganz zu schweigen (beispielhaft seien Grayson et al. 2016 genannt, die verschiedene Extraktionsmethoden für Romane durchtesten und die Ergebnisse vergleichen). Um diese Erkenntnis schon in der Lehre zu fördern, wurde das Tool »Easy Linavis« 
                    () entwickelt und in die DraCor-Toolchain integriert. Per Hand können Netzwerkdaten aus Texten extrahiert und dabei das Bewusstsein für die Kontingenz dieses Vorgangs geschärft werden, eine wichtige Vorstufe zur Operationalisierung.
                    
               Neben einem Ansatz zur Gamifizierung des TEI-Korrekturvorgangs (Göbel/Meiners 2016) haben wir für Lehrzwecke auch ein Dramenquartett entwickelt, um spielerisch das Verständnis von Netzwerkwerten zu trainieren (Fischer at al. 2018).
               Die aufgezählten, um die Plattform herumgruppierten didaktischen Mittel sind integraler Bestandteil des ganzen Projekts, da sie auf dessen Daten und Operationalisierungen aufsetzen. Wichtig dabei war die Erkenntnis, dass Daten mehrere Gestalten annehmen und für Forschung und Lehre gleichermaßen von Bedeutung sein können.
            
            
               Linked Open Data (LOD)
               Im TEI-Code sind PND- bzw. Wikidata-Identifier sowohl für Autor*innen als auch für die Werke hinterlegt. Auf diese Weise lassen sich verschiedene Realien, die außerhalb der eigenen Korpusarbeit liegen, hinzufügen. Eine automatisch erstellte Autor*innengalerie hat dabei noch eher illustrativen Charakter (de la Iglesia/Fischer 2016).
               Darüber hinaus kann man aber zum Beispiel feststellen, ob es nicht einen unbewussten regionalen Bias im Korpus gibt. Dafür lässt man sich über die Wikidata-Identifier die Verteilung der Geburts- und Sterbeorte der Autor*innen auf einer Karte anzeigen. So konnte dann für das deutschsprachige Korpus GerDraCor ausgeschlossen werden, dass es einen solchen Bias gibt, da sich die Orte relativ gleichmäßig über die (historisch) deutschsprachigen Gebiete verteilen (Göbel/Fischer 2015).
               Ebenso lässt sich über die Wikidata-ID der Stücke herausfinden, wo diese uraufgeführt worden sind (Beispiel-Query: 
                        ), d. h., Aspekte der Aufführungsgeschichte lassen sich zuschalten, obwohl diese gar nicht im Fokus des Kernprojekts liegen. Programmable Corpora verbinden sich also auch mit der Welt um sie herum, was sie u. a. von den nach innen gerichteten Workbenches der Korpuslinguistik unterscheidet.
                    
            
            
               Infrastruktur statt Rapid Prototyping
               Projekte wie DraCor versuchen nichts anderes als den digitalen Literaturwissenschaften eine verlässliche und ausbaufähige Infrastruktur zu geben, damit sie sich stärker auf eigentliche Forschungsfragen konzentrieren und reproduzierbare Ergebnisse hervorbringen können.
               Eine wichtige Folgerung für uns war, dass wir die Weiterentwicklung unserer seit vier Jahren entwickelten all-in-one Python-Skriptsammlung 
                        dramavis aufgeben und uns lieber der Arbeit an der API widmen. 
                        Dramavis (Kittel/Fischer 2014–2018 sowie Fischer et al. 2017) folgte dem in den Digital Humanities nicht untypischen Rapid Prototyping mit direkter Verarbeitung literarischer XML-Daten (Trilcke/Fischer 2018) und einer mittlerweile stark gewachsenen Codebasis, die alles auf einmal kann, deren Maintenance aber immer schwieriger geworden ist und oft genug von den eigentlichen Forschungsfragen weggeführt hat.
                    
            
         
         
            
               Fazit
                
            In Anlehnung an das Projekt »ProgrammableWeb« – das eine Datenbank von offenen APIs unterhält und dessen Slogan lautet: »APIs, Mashups and the Web as Platform« (zugänglich unter 
                    ) – schlagen wir für infrastrukturell-forschungsorientierte, offene, erweiterbare und LOD-freundliche Korpora den Begriff ›Programmable Corpora‹ vor.
                
            Programmable Corpora erleichtern es, Forschungsfragen auf viele Arten und Weisen um Korpora herum programmieren zu können. Es steht zu erwarten, dass sich infrastrukturelle Anstrengungen dieser Art für die gesamte Community auszahlen mit Effekten, wie sie John Womersley in seiner Präsentation auf der ICRI2018 in Wien aufgezählt hat: a) dramatically increase scientific reach; b) address research questions of long duration requiring pooled effort; c) promote collaboration, interdisciplinarity, interaction.
            Der Anschlussmöglichkeiten sind viele, egal ob man gar nicht programmieren möchte, sondern nur eine GEXF-Datei für Gephi benötigt, ob ein Korpus über seine Verbindungen zur Linked Open Data Cloud beforscht oder einfach aus R oder Python heraus bestimmte Daten bezogen werden sollen, ohne dass man sich mit dem Korpus und dessen Maintenance und Reproduzierbarkeit selbst kümmern muss (all dies bleibt natürlich aber eine Option). Programmable Corpora erleichtern die Entscheidung, auf welcher Ebene der eigene Forschungsprozess einsetzt.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bleier, Roman / Klug, Helmut W. (2018): Discussing Interfaces in Digital Scholarly Editing. In: Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces. BoD, Norderstedt, S. V–XV. URL: 
               
               
                  de la Iglesia, Martin / Fischer, Frank (2016): The Facebook of German Playwrights. URL: 
               
               
                  Fischer, Frank / Dazord, Gilles / Göbel, Mathias / Kittel, Christopher / Trilcke, Peer (2017): Le drame comme réseau de relations. Une application de l‘analyse automatisée pour l’histoire littéraire du théâtre. In: Revue d'historiographie du théâtre. № 4. URL: 
               
               
                  Fischer, Frank / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Schultz, Anika / Trilcke, Peer / Wolf, Jana (2018): Dramenquartett – Eine didaktische Intervention. In: Konferenzabstracts zur DHd2018, Universität zu Köln. S. 397 f. DOI: 
               
               
                  Göbel, Mathias / Fischer, Frank (2015): The Birth and Death of German Playwrights. URL: 
               
               
                  Göbel, Mathias / Meiners, Hanna-Lena (2016): Play(s): Crowdbasierte Anreicherung eines literarischen Volltext-Korpus. In: Konferenzabstracts zur DHd2016, Bern/CH. S. 140–143. URL: http://www.dhd2016.de/abstracts/vortr%C3%A4ge-007.html
               
               
                  Grayson, Siobhán / Wade, Karen / Meaney, Gerardine / Greene, Derek (2016): The Sense and Sensibility of Different Sliding Windows in Constructing Co-Occurrence Networks from Literature. In: 2nd IFIP International Workshop on Computational History and Data-Driven Humanities. Trinity College Dublin 2016. PDF: 
               
               
                  Kittel, Christopher / Fischer, Frank (2014–2018): dramavis. Python-Skriptsammlung. Repo: 
               
               
                  Schöch, Christoph et al. (2018): Distant Reading for European Literary History. A COST Action [Poster]. In: DH2018: Book of Abstracts / Libro de resúmenes. Mexico: Red de Humanidades Digitales A. C. URL: https://dh2018.adho.org/en/?p=11345
               
               
                  Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank (2018): Literaturwissenschaft als Hackathon. Zur Praxeologie der Digital Literary Studies und ihren epistemischen Dingen. In: Wie Digitalität die Geisteswissenschaften verändert: Neue Forschungsgegenstände und Methoden. Hrsg. von Martin Huber und Sybille Krämer (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 3). DOI: 
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In unserem Vortrag fassen wir Ergebnisse einer laufenden, interdisziplinären Kooperation im Bereich digitaler Epigraphie zwischen dem Akademieprojekt "Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya" (TWKM, Universität Bonn, Prager) und einem auf Schriftforschung spezialisierten Team am Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR Heidelberg, Mara, Bogacz und Feldmann) zusammen (vgl. Bogacz, Feldmann, Prager, Mara 2018). Im Mittelpunkt der Kooperation zwischen Schriftforschung und angewandter Informatik steht die vollautomatische Erkennung von Zeichen der Hieroglyphenschrift der Klassischen Mayakultur in 3D (Zeitraum: 250 - 900 n.Chr., Region: südliches Mexiko, Guatemala, Belize und Honduras). Am IWR in Heidelberg wird dieses Verfahren seit mehreren Jahren erfolgreich bei der automatischen Erkennung und Transliteration von Keilschriftzeichen auf Tontafeln angewendet, die mittels eines hochauflösenden 3D-Scanners dokumentiert wurden (Bogacz, Gertz und Mara 2015; Bogacz, Klingmann, Mara 2017) (Abbildung 1) .
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 1. Ergebnisauswahl einer automatisierten Abfrage des akkadischen Keilschriftzeichens /ta/ in einem Textkorpus. Korrekte Erkennungen sind grün markiert (Bogacz, Gertz und Mara 2015, Abb. 4).
                    
            
            Im Zuge der Arbeit für die Textdatenbank und das digitale Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya hat das Projekt Mayainschriften in 3D dokumentiert und zusammen mit den Projektpartnern am IWR Möglichkeiten getestet, ob die aus rund 1000 Elementen bestehende Hieroglyphenschrift der Maya ebenfalls dazu geeignet ist, automatisiert erkannt zu werden. Der wesentlichste Unterschied zu aktuellen Vorgehensweisen in der digitalen Epigraphie, denen typischerweise die manuelle Kodierungen und Verlinkung der Texte (z.B. mit Hilfe von XML TEI, RDF), sowie darauf aufbauende korpuslinguistische Analysen zu Grunde liegen (vgl. Diehr et al. 2018 zum Klassischen Maya; Chiarcos et al. 2018 am Beispiel des Sumerischen Textkorpus), ist der weitgehend vollautomatische Ansatz auf Bilddaten (Abbildung 2). In der konkreten Anwendung handelt es sich um Krümmungsvisualisierungen, die aus 3D-Messdaten berechnet werden. In diesem Sinne entsteht eine Optical Character Recognition (OCR) für Schrift in 3D. Ein Ziel der Kooperation ist es mit Hilfe dieses automatisierten Verfahrens einen auf der Zeichenmorphologie basierenden Katalog der Mayaschriftzeichen einschließlich ihrer Varianten automatisiert zu erstellen. 
            
               
            
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 2. Beispiel für automatische Zeichenerkennung der Hieroglyphe /chi/ aus der Dresdner Mayahandschrift mit Hilfe eines 
                        Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) (Feldmann, Bogacz, Prager, Mara 2017, Abb. 3).
                    
            
            Wir präsentieren Methoden, Herausforderungen und Ergebnisse und zeigen am Material auf, wo wir Fortschritte und Durchbrüche, aber auch (aktuell) Grenzen bei der (voll)automatisierten Erkennung von Maya-Schriftzeichen festgestellt haben. Fokussierend auf Differenzen zwischen manueller und automatischer Zeichenbestimmung ziehen wir Schlussfolgerungen für die Erforschung der Maya-Schrift und die angewandte Informatik.
         
         
            Geburtsstunden und -wehen der digitalen Epigraphie des Klassischen Maya
            Die digitale Epigraphie des Klassischen Maya erlebte ihre Geburtsstunde zu Beginn des Kalten Krieges, als sowjetische Forscher elektronische Rechenmaschinen einsetzten um das Rätsel der Mayaschrift zu lösen. Wenige Jahre zuvor veröffentlichte ein damals führender deutscher Experte für die Maya-Hieroglyphen, die Entschlüsselung der Mayaschrift sei nach über fünfzig Jahren vergeblicher Arbeit ein unlösbares Problem (Schellhas 1945). Nur fünfzehn Jahre später verkündeten sowjetische Mathematiker und Archäologen, dass ihnen gemeinsam mit Hilfe eines Elektronenmaschinenrechners innerhalb von vierzig Stunden die vollständige Entzifferung und Übersetzung der Maya-Handschriften gelungen sei (Sobolev 1961; O'Kane 1962). Für die maschinelle Verarbeitung übertrug man die Texte von zwei erhaltenen Maya-Handschriften mit Hilfe von Nummernschlüsseln in ein maschinenlesbares Format und speicherte sie über Lochkarten in der Rechenmaschine. In Minutenschnelle prozessierte der Rechner das Datenmaterial und erzeugte Häufigkeits-, Vorkommens- und Kookkurrenzanalysen der Schriftzeichen, Zeichenkombinationen, Wörter und ganzen Wortfolgen. Die Ergebnisse der lexikometrischen Erhebung wurde mit Häufigkeiten von Silben, Silbenkombinationen, Wörtern und Sätzen aus yukatekisch-sprachigen und in lateinischer Schrift aufgezeichneten Texten und Wörterbüchern aus dem 16. und 17. Jahrhundert verglichen und korreliert. Die Grundannahmen des Forscherteams waren jedoch falsch, der Versuch das Problem der Mayaschrift maschinell zu lösen, galt schon kurz nach seiner Veröffentlichung als gescheitert (Schlenther 1964). 
         
         
            Digitaler Dornröschenschlaf oder wie das Rätsel doch gelöst wurde
            Weitere Versuche die Mayaschrift digital zu erforschen folgten Mitte 1960 (Rendón 1965), dann erst wieder in den 1980er Jahren (Ringle und Smith-Stark 1996). Beide Projekte beschränkten sich darauf Konkordanzen einzelner Hieroglyphen zu kompilieren. Keines der Projekte hatte jedoch einen nennenswerten Impakt für die Forschung: die Anfang der 1960er Jahre begonnene digitale Epigraphik des Klassischen Maya fiel in einen Dornröschenschlaf, aus der sie erst wieder durch das Forschungsprojekt Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya erweckt wurde (Prager et al. 2016). Die Entzifferung der Mayaschrift gelang in den vergangenen 50 Jahren gänzlich ohne komputationelle Hilfsmittel. Wegweisend dazu waren Arbeiten des Ägyptologen Juri Knorozov (1956). Aufgrund der Zeichenzahl schloss er daraus, dass es sich bei der Mayaschrift um ein dem Altäyptischen vergleichbares Schriftsystem handelte und hatte dadurch den logo-syllabischen Charakter des Mayaschriftsystems erkannt. Die Entzifferung der Mayaschrift ist bis heute im Prozess, wir kennen etwa von 60% der rund 1000 verschiedenen Schriftzeichen den Lautwert. Obschon die Ergebnisse des sowjetischen Teams Anfang der 1960er Jahre die Forschung nicht nachhaltig beeinflusste, war es aus heutiger Sicht das erste Projekt, das nicht nur interdisziplinär zusammenarbeitete, sondern EDV zur Lösung eines epigraphisch-linguistischen Problems herangezogen hatte.
         
         
            Herausforderungen beim Verständnis des Maya-Schriftsystems: Graphematische und graphetische Herausforderungen für die Erkennung von Schriftzeichen
            Bedeutend für den Durchbruch bei der Entzifferung war die Entdeckung des Prinzips der Zeichensubstitution, die auch den großen Variantenreichtum in der Mayaschrift erklärt. Abbildung 3 zeigt drei morphologisch unterschiedliche Graphe des Zeichens /pa/, die lediglich das gemeinsame, diagnostische Merkmal einer schraffierten Fläche aufweisen.
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 3. Sogenannte Standard-, Kopf- und Körpervariante des Zeichens für die Silbe /pa/ in der Mayaschrift (Marc Zender, 1999).
                    
            
            Heute kennen wir eine Bandbreite an Schreib- und Gestaltungsprinzipien, womit nicht nur das einzelne Graphem, sondern auch Wörter des Klassischen Maya variantenreich realisiert wurden. Die Schreiber strebten ein Höchstmaß an visueller Prachtentfaltung und formaler Variation an. Eintönigkeit, Konformität und Wiederholung sollten vermieden werden, kalligraphische Spielarten bestimmten das Werk des Schreibers und stellen heute eine immense Herausforderung für die automatische Erkennung dar.  
         
         
            Automatisiertes Suchen von Mayaschriftzeichen: erste Ergebnisse
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 4. Ähnlichkeitsnetzwerk von Zeichen der Mayaschrift, die der Algorithmus vollautomatisch erkannt und verlinkt hat (Bartosz Bogacz et al. 2018).
                    
            
            Mit dem heutigen Stand der Technik in Form von Rechenleistung und Methoden der Bildverarbeitung, Mustererkennung und Maschinellem Lernen konnten wir zeigen, dass die manuellen Entzifferungen der 1980er Jahre in Algorithmen abgebildet werden können. Dabei ist anzumerken, dass z.B. die berechneten Ähnlichkeitsmaße mit Arbeitsplatzrechnern innerhalb weniger Minuten bestimmt werden können. Dies ermöglicht das Testen verschiedener Hypothesen über Zeichenähnlichkeiten in Form von Änderungen an Parametern und Kombinationen von unterschiedlichen Algorithmen. Hierbei wird der bereits in der digitalen Erforschung von Keilschrifttafeln angewendete 
                    Multiscale Integral Invariant Filter (MSII) eingesetzt um Schriftzeichen in 3D-Objekten zu isolieren. Die 3D-Objekte werden in diesem Verfahren in 2D umgesetzt und mit Hilfe von Projektionsprofilen segmentiert, um ein Gitter aus Spalten und Zeilen zu erzeugen. Anschließend werden die Hieroglyphenblocks selbst nach dem Zufallsprinzip segmentiert, wobei Hintergrund und Vordergrund aufgrund der Oberflächenkrümmung der ursprünglichen 3D-Oberfläche getrennt werden. Die abgerufenen Zeichen werden zunächst nach ihrer Größe zu einem Satz gängiger Größen zusammengefasst. Für jede Glyphe wird ein auf dem Histogramm der Gradienten (HOG) basierender Merkmalsvektor berechnet und für ein hierarchisches Clustering verwendet (Abb. 3). Ein bemerkenswertes Ergebnis ist das Erkennen von Linienelementen komplexer Zeichen, die auch in gestauchter Form vorkommen können. Damit verhält sich die vollautomatische 
                    Machine Learning Pipeline sehr ähnlich zur Diagnostik, wie sie von Experten angewendet wird. Mit den jetzigen Parametern werden gedoppelte und gestauchte Elemente der Mayaschrift korrekt identifiziert. Dies wird in einer Visualisierung der Zeichen in einem Graphen bzw. Ähnlichkeitsnetzwerk besonders deutlich. Das System errechnet die Grenzen der Hieroglyphenblöcke (Abbildung 4) und kann zwischen Bild- und Textinformationen unterscheiden. 
                
            Das Datenmaterial für unsere Experimente stammt mit einer Tafel aus Cancuen und einer anderen Tafel aus dem Fundort La Corona zudem aus unterschiedlichen Epochen und Regionen. Durch die Verwendung von hoch-aufgelösten 3D-Messdaten handelt es sich hierbei um digitale Primärquellen im Unterschied zu (retro-)digitalisierten Handzeichnungen, die eine Interpretation beinhalten, und somit eher als interpretierte Sekundärquellen zu verstehen sind.
            Im erzeugten Ähnlichkeitsnetzwerk der Primärquellen ist klar zu erkennen, dass Übereinstimmungen bei konstanten Elementen wie Zahlzeichen verbunden werden, während komplexere Zeichen in geschlossenen Clustern gezeigt werden, die dem Inschriftenträger entsprechen. Bei erodierten Zeichen im gleichen Cluster wurden korrekte Vorschläge gemacht (Abbildung 4, links). Deutlich werden Verbindungen aufgezeigt zu denen bereits Vermutungen über Übereinstimmungen vorliegen (Abbildung 4, rechts). Bei sauber gearbeiteten Schreibungen ohne Abweichungen ist die Identifizierung immer perfekt und basiert auf den diagnostischen Elementen eines Zeichens. Dies entspricht der intuitiven Analyse durch einen Experten.
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 5. Korrekte Rekonstruktion des Silbenzeichens /na/, das im oberen Fall fast gänzlich verloren ist.
                    
            
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 6. korrekte Übereinstimmung identischer Zeichen. Grafik: Bartosz Bogacz, 2018.
                    
            
         
         
            Schlussfolgerung
            Aus der Sicht der angewandten Informatik ist die Erkennung von Mayaschriftzeichen eine interessante Herausforderung, da die Grundwahrheit nicht bekannt ist. Weil die digitale Beschreibung und Verarbeitung der Zeichen kontinuierlich verbessert wird, kann das Wissen über die Zeichen immer weiter an die Grundwahrheit angenähert werden. Damit entsteht ein Spannungsfeld in dem sich die Entwicklung von Algorithmen und die Entwicklung von geisteswissenschaftlichen Fragestellungen gegenseitig beeinflussen. Dabei kommt es immer wieder zu analytischen hermeneutischen Fragen über die Anwendbarkeit der neuesten Entwicklungen in der Informatik. Insbesondere die – in anderen Anwendungsgebieten – sehr erfolgreichen 
                    Convolutional Neural Networks bzw. 
                    Deep Learning scheinen auf Grund der relativ geringen Datenmengen zur Zeit nicht direkt anwendbar. Basierend auf den aktuellsten positiven Ergebnissen sind wir zuversichtlich, dass hier neue Methoden für die digitale Epigraphie in Arbeit sind und Synergien zwischen Gedächtnisleistung, klassischem 
                    Machine Learning und 
                    Deep Learning zu weiteren Verbesserungen führen werden.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bogacz, Bartosz / Gertz, Michael / Mara, Hubert (2015): "Character Retrieval of Vectorized Cuneiform Script", in: 13th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR2015) https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281781820_Character_Retrieval_of_Vectorized_ Cuneiform_Script [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Bogacz, Bartosz / Feldmann, Felix / Prager, Christian / Mara, Hubert (2018): "Visualizing Networks of Maya Glyphs by Clustering Subglyphs", in: Sablatnig, Robert et al. (eds): Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage. Geneva: The Eurographics Association 105-111 http://doi.org/10.2312/gch.20181346 [letzter Zugriff 12. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Bogacz, Bartosz / Klingmann, Maximilian / Mara, Hubert (2017): "Automatic Transliteration of Cuneiform from Parallel Lines with Sparse Data", in: 14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR2017) https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321491564_Automating_Transliteration_of_ Cuneiform_from_Parallel_Lines_with_Sparse_Data [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Chiarcos, Christian / Pagé-Perron, Émile / Khait, Ilya / Schenk Niko / Reckling, Lucas (2018): "Towards a Linked Open Data Edition of Sumerian Corpora", in: Calzolari, Nicoletta et al.: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2018, Miyazaki, Japan, May 7-12, 2018. Paris: European Language Resources Association 2437-2444. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2018/pdf/862.pdf [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Diehr, Franziska / Brodhun, Maximilian / Gronemeyer, Sven / Diederichs, Katja / Prager, Christian / Wagner, Elisabeth / Grube, Nikolai (2018): "Ein digitaler Zeichenkatalog als Organisationssystem für die noch nicht entzifferte Schrift der Klassischen Maya", in: Wartena, Christian et al. (eds): Knowledge Organization for Digital Humanities: Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Knowledge Organization WissOrg’17 of the German Chapter of the International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO). Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin 37–43 doi: https://doi.org/10.17169/FUDOCS_document_000000028863 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Feldmann, Felix / Bogacz, Bartosz / Prager, Christian / Mara, Hubert (2017): "Histogram of Oriented Gradients for Maya Glyph Retrieval", in: Schreck, Tobias et al. (eds): Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage. Geneva: The Eurographics Association 115–118 http://dx.doi.org/10.2312/gch.20171301 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Knorozov, Yuri (1956): "New Data on the Maya Written Language", in: Journal de la Société des Américanistes 45: 209–217 https://www.persee.fr/doc/jsa_0037-9174_1956_num_45_1_961 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  O'Kane, Lawrence (1962): "Computers Solve Mayan Writings; Soviet Mathematicians Use Devices for Translation Original Writing System Glossaries Developed Samples of Translations Expert Reserves Judgment", in: The New York Times, 15 April http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9800EEDA143DE532A25756C1A9629C946391D6CF [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Rendón, Juan / Spescha, Amalia (1965): "Nueva clasificación plástica de los glifos mayas", in: Estudios de Cultura Maya 5: 189-252 http://dx.doi.org/10.19130/iifl.ecm.1965.5.668 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Ringle, William M. / Thomas C. Smith-Stark (1996): A Concordance to the Inscriptions of Palenque, Chiapas, Mexico (= Middle American Research Institute Publication 62) New Orleans, LA: Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University.
                    
               
                  Schellhas, Paul (1945): "Die Entzifferung der Mayahieroglyphen: ein unlösbares Problem?", in: Ethnos 10(1): 44–53 https://doi.org/10.1080/00141844.1945.9980637 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Schlenther, Ursula (1964): "Kritische Bemerkungen zur kybernetischen Entzifferung der Maya-Hieroglyphen (mit 10 Abbildungen und 3 Tabellen", in: Ethnographisch-archäologische Zeitschrift 5(5): 111-139.
                    
               
                  Sobolev, Sergei L'vovich (1961): "Die vollständige Entzifferung der Maya-Handschriften durch mathematische Methoden", in: Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Humboldt Universität 10(4–5): XVII–XXI.
                    
               
                  Zender, Marc (1999): Diacritical Marks and Underspelling in the Classic Maya Script: Implications for Decipherment. M.A. Thesis. Department of Archaeology, University of Calgary http://dx.doi.org/10.5072/PRISM/19313 [letzter Zugriff 28. September 2018].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Projektübersicht
            Ziel des an der Universität Jena durchgeführten Projekts ist die Entwicklung eines uneingeschränkt zugänglichen Onlineportals zur Publikation digitaler historisch-kritischer Editionen von vorrangig handschriftlichen Quellen der Neuzeit. Es wird an der Thüringer Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek (ThULB) gehostet und in Zusammenarbeit mit zahlreichen Partnern (darunter READ/Transkribus, Deutsches Textarchiv, Herzog August Bibliothek Wolfenbüttel, Landesarchiv Thüringen, Sammlungs- und Forschungsverbund Gotha und viele weitere) realisiert. Mit TEI-basierten Meta- und Volltextdaten, Digitalisaten, Registern, Paratexten, Visualisierungen, gezielten Such-, Sortierungs- und Filteroptionen wird das Editionsportal Thüringen eine wissenschaftlich hochwertige digitale Publikations- und Rechercheumgebung anbieten. Das Portal spricht in erster Linie Projekte an, die ihre Edition dauerhaft verfügbar und intuitiv zugänglich machen wollen, aber kein eigenes Onlineportal entwickeln und nachhaltig betreiben können oder möchten. Damit diese Projekte den Heraus- und Anforderungen exzellenter digitaler Editionen [s. bspw. Sahle 2014] entsprechen, legt das Portal Schwerpunkte auf die nachfolgend erläuterten Aspekte.
         
         
            Fokus Nachnutzung und Langzeitverfügbarkeit
            Um die im Portal befindlichen Editionen nachnutzen und in andere digitale Wissensbasen einbinden zu können, liegt ein Fokus auf der Bereitstellung von Datenschnittstellen, der Verwendung offener und standardisierter Datenformate und der Nachnutzung bewährter Open-Source-Software. So basiert nicht allein das technische Backend-System MyCoRe auf entsprechenden Technologien (Abb. 1). Auch das eigens für das Editionsportal entwickelte TEI-Basisformat (ThULBBf) ist eng an das TEI-Subset des Deutschen Textarchivs (DTABf) angelehnt und erweitert dieses handschriftenspezifisch (bspw. in den Bereichen Normdatenanreicherung, Materialität, Textzeugen-Wiedergabe, Transkriptions- und Auszeichnungsrichtlinien, auto-generierte Register etc., Abb. 2.), um die Ausspielung der Portaldaten in das DTA zu ermöglichen. Damit geht sowohl die Speicherung und Verwendung der Forschungsdaten in der CLARIN-D-Infrastruktur als auch die Nachnutzung etablierter linguistischer DTA-Tools einher, ohne dass (ggf. redundante) Neuentwicklungen erforderlich werden.
            Damit ist bereits ein weiteres zentrales Portalmerkmal, die Langzeitverfügbarkeit der darin dargebotenen Informationen, benannt. Wenngleich die Frage der Langzeitspeicherung noch ungelöst ist [Carusi / Reimer 2010: 42], so folgt das Portal doch derzeitigen 
                Nachhaltigkeitsempfehlungen. Dazu gehört unter anderem, dass die nachhaltige Speicherung der Portaldaten im Rahmen der von EFRE geförderten Langzeitarchivierungsplattform des Landes Thüringen auf Grundlage des Digitalen Archives NRW (Kooperation mit dem Landschaftsverband Rheinland) erfolgt [Mutschler 2017: 316].
                
            
               
               MyCoRe-Architektur (
                        http://www.mycore.de/features/index.html)
                    
            
            
               
               Das TEI-Basisformat des Editionsportals (ThULBBf)
            
         
         
            Fokus multimodale editorische und fachwissenschaftliche Benutzung
            Das Portal verfolgt einen generischen Ansatz mit fest definiertem Arbeitsworkflow (Abb. 3), um Editionen projektübergreifend multimodal recherchier-, visualisier- und erforschbar zu machen. Zugleich wird jede Edition des Portals als eigenständige Forschungsleistung in Form einer projektspezifischen Publikation sichtbar und zitierbar. Editoren können zudem zwischen verschiedenen Werkzeugen zur Editionserstellung wählen. Je nach Ziel und Kenntnisstand können Microsoft Word, die Trierer Editionsforschungsumgebung FuD oder ein beliebiger XML-Editor eingesetzt werden. Für NutzerInnen bietet das Portal multimodale Recherche- und Visualisierungsinstrumente für disziplinübergreifende Fragestellungen (Netzwerke, Zeitleisten, Diagramme, Karten etc.). Durch die Einbettung des Editionsportals in ein umfassenderes 
                Cultural-Heritage-Internetportal können die Quellenbestände dutzender Thüringer Institutionen und Partner außerhalb Thüringens in die Recherche und Analyse unmittelbar einbezogen werden.
                
            
               
               Der verbindliche Workflow für Editionsprojekte des Portals
            
         
         
            Verortung innerhalb der editorischen Portallandschaft
            Innerhalb der editorischen Portallandschaft verortet sich das Editionsportal Thüringen zwischen Einzeleditionsprojekte weitestgehend nivellierenden Textsammlungen wie bspw. dem Deutschen Textarchiv oder dem TextGrid-Repository einerseits und Einzeleditionsportalen mit zu projektspezifisch ausgerichteten Eigenschaften und Funktionalitäten ohne editionsübergreifende Such- und Analysemöglichkeiten andererseits. Zu letzteren sind bspw. die Editionen der Wolfenbütteler Digitalen Bibliothek oder des Geisteswissenschaftlichen Asset Management Systems (GAMS) zu rechnen. Auch die Repositorien (trans)nationaler Infrastrukturen wie bspw. DARIAH oder CLARIN bleiben aufgrund ihrer wiederum zu unspezifischen Forschungsdatenausrichtung hinter den anwendungsorientierten Datenmodellen und Funktionalitäten des Editionsportals Thüringen zurück. Zum Novum des Editionsportals gehört ferner seine betont breite Ausrichtung auf möglichst zahlreiche Handschriftengattungen, unterschiedliche Zielgruppen, disparate Editionswerkzeuge und eine priorisierte Softwarenachnutzung.
            Das Portal wird in einem ersten Schritt die bereits existierenden und in Arbeit befindlichen Editionen der digitalen ThULB-Bibliothek UrMEL aufnehmen und an diesen evaluiert. Es ist aber als Plattform konzipiert, die zur digitalen Aufbereitung von Quellenbeständen verschiedenster, auch kleinerer Einrichtungen (Archive, Bibliotheken, Museen, Vereine) anregen soll und keinesfalls an Thüringer Quellen, Institutionen o.ä. gebunden ist. 
         
         
            Zielgruppenorientierung
            Das Portal versteht sich in erster Linie als wissenschaftliches Angebot, das schwer zugängliche Handschriften aus fünf Jahrhunderten verfügbar macht und hochwertige Volltexte für die computergestützte Weiterverarbeitung liefert. In editionswissenschaftlicher Hinsicht leistet es einen Forschungsbeitrag zu der Frage, wie ein generisches Editionsportal sowohl projektspezifische, aus der Heterogenität der Quellen und den Erwartungen der Edierenden, Rezipienten und Förderer resultierende, als auch gesamtportalische, editionsübergreifende Interessen und Ansprüche gleichermaßen verbinden kann [s. bspw. Dogunke 2017]. Das Editionsportal richtet sich aber nicht ausschließlich an die Wissenschaft, sondern auch an Schulen und Bildungseinrichtungen und die interessierte Öffentlichkeit. Diesen wird mit der Integration des e-Learning-Tools „TranskribusLearn“ ein Werkzeug zum Erlernen altdeutscher Schrift angeboten sowie die Möglichkeit gegeben, das Portal mit eigenen Transkriptionen anzureichern. Eine hohe Qualität der Editionsinhalte und -daten wird durch Empfehlungen und Anleitungen, Reviewing, verbindliche Workflows (Abb. 3) und Dateneingaben sowie verschiedene technische Validierungsinstanzen gewährleistet.
         
         
            Projektgenese und Arbeitsstand
            Das Projekt ist aus einem Editionsprojekt [Prell / Schmidt-Funke 2017] hervorgegangen, für das nur sehr geringe Ressourcen zur Verfügung standen. Da dies eine häufig zu beobachtende Rahmenbedingung von Editionen darstellt, werden die im Editionsprojekt entwickelten Lösungen ausgebaut, institutionalisiert und anderen ForscherInnen kostenfrei zugänglich gemacht. Aktuell befindet sich das Portal in der zweiten Förderphase, nachdem in den Jahren 2017 und 2018 konzeptuelle und anpassende Maßnahmen des Backend-Systems vorgenommen worden. Derzeit findet die Entwicklung des TYPO3-Frontends statt.
         
      
      
         
            
                Vgl. beispielsweise die durch Sustainability-Zertifikate wie das Data Seal of Approval bzw. CoreTrustSeal formulierten Kriterien für nachhaltige Datenrepositorien (
               
                  https://www.coretrustseal.org/
               
               , 
               
                  https://www.datasealofapproval.org
               
                (letzter Zugriff 27.09.2018) sowie Buddenbohm et al. 2014.
            
            
                Das „Digitale Kultur- und Wissensportal Thüringen“ wird im 1. Quartal 2019 online geschaltet.
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Buddenbohm, Stefan / Enke, Harry / Hofmann, Matthias / Klar, Jochen / Neuroth, Heike / Schwiegelshohn, Uwe (2014): „Erfolgskriterien für den Aufbau und nachhaltigen Betrieb Virtueller Forschungsumgebungen“. Göttingen. http://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/pub/mon/dariah-de/dwp-2014-7.pdf [letzter Zugriff 27.09.2018].
                    
               
                  Carusi, Annamaria / Reimer, Torsten (2010): “Virtual Research Environment Collaborative Landscape Study. A JISC funded project.” Oxford/London: JISC http://www.jisc.ac.uk/publications/reports/2010/vrelandscapestudy.aspx [letzter Zugriff 27.09.2018].
                    
               
                  Dogunke, Swantje (2017): „Tagungsbericht: Editionsportale, 03.08.2017 – 04.08.2017 Jena“, in: H-Soz-Kult, 10.10.2017,  [letzter Zugriff 28.09.2018].
                    
               
                  Mutschler, Thomas (2017): „Neue Wege der Kulturgutdigitalisierung in Thüringen“, in: Bibliotheksdienst 51, 310-321.
                    
               
                  Prell, Martin / Schmidt-Funke, Julia (Hg.) (2017): „Digitale Edition der Briefe Erdmuthe Benignas von Reuß-Ebersdorf (1670-1732)“. Jena http://erdmuthe.thulb.uni-jena.de [letzter Zugriff 28.09.2018].
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2014): „Kriterienkatalog für die Besprechung digitaler Editionen, Version 1.1“ (unter Mitarbeit von Georg Vogeler und den Mitgliedern des IDE) https://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/kriterien-version-1-1/ [letzter Zugriff 27.09.2018].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung ist schon seit langem eine auch digitale Praxis. Dies spiegelt sich u. a. in den Methoden der Ergebnissicherung wider: Präsentationssysteme, interaktive Visualisierungen, Recherche-Datenbanken und nicht zuletzt Digitale Editionen haben sich neben der klassischen Publikation längst als digitale Instrumente der Ergebnissicherung etabliert. Während für die Persistenz statischer Daten wie z. B. digitaler Dokumente bereits gut etablierte Strategien und Standards wie TEI-XML (TEI 2018) oder OASIS-DITA (OASIS 2018) existieren, stellt Forschungssoftware im Hinblick auf die langfristige Ergebnissicherung noch immer eine besondere Herausforderung dar. 
            Dies äußert sich in erster Linie in einem Mangel an konkreten Nachhaltigkeitsstrategien und erwächst u. a. aus einem als „Software-Aging“ (Parnas 1994) bekannten Problem, dem Forschungsanwendungen als „Lebende Systeme“ (Sahle/Kronenwett 2013) grundsätzlich unterworfen sind, da sie, wie jede Software, nicht unabhängig von ihrer Laufzeitumgebung bzw. ihrem digitalen Ökosystem gedacht werden können. Die kontinuierliche Evolution dieser Umgebungen sorgt dafür, dass Softwaresysteme, die nicht stetig an diese veränderten Umweltbedingungen angepasst werden, mit der Zeit veralten und letztendlich unbenutzbar werden.
            In dem von der DFG geförderten Kooperationsprojekt „SustainLife 
                    – Erhalt lebender, digitaler Systeme für die Geisteswissenschaften“, das in einer Zusammenarbeit zwischen dem Data Center for the Humanities (DCH, siehe 
                    
                  http://dch.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de)
                     der Universität zu Köln und dem Institut für Architektur von Anwendungssystemen (IAAS, siehe 
                    
                  http://www.iaas.uni-stuttgart.de)
                     der Universität Stuttgart durchgeführt wird, arbeiten wir an einem Lösungsvorschlag für dieses Problem (vgl. dazu Barzen et al. 2018 sowie Neuefeind et al. 2018). Gegenstand des Projekts ist die Adaption und Weiterentwicklung von Verfahren und Technologien aus dem Cloud-Deployment für die Digital Humanities (DH) mit dem Ziel, Management und Provisionierung von DH-Anwendungen zu optimieren und deren Sicherung und nachhaltigen Betrieb zu realisieren. 
                
            Das Projekt setzt hierbei auf den OASIS-Standard TOSCA 
                (Topology and Orchestration Specification for Cloud Applications, siehe OASIS 2013, OASIS 2016) sowie dessen Open-Source-Implementierung OpenTOSCA (Binz et al. 2013, Breitenbücher et al. 2017). Mithilfe von TOSCA können (Forschungs-)Anwendungen mitsamt ihrer jeweiligen Laufzeitumgebung als Topologien von zusammenhängenden Software-Artefakten und Schnittstellen in standardisierter Weise modelliert werden. Daraufhin können diese Topologie-Modelle und damit alle benötigten Komponenten und Dateien der modellierten Applikation in sogenannten CSARs 
                (Cloud Service Archives) paketiert werden, so dass diese portablen Archive von jeder TOSCA-Runtime interpretiert und automatisiert bereitgestellt werden können.
                
         
         
            Methodisches Vorgehen
            Eine wesentliche Voraussetzung für eine Lösung, die eine standardisierte, TOSCA-konforme Beschreibung von Softwaresystemen vorsieht, ist ein möglichst genaues Bild der technologischen Landschaft innerhalb der Digital Humanities. Grundlage für den im Projekt verfolgten Ansatz ist daher eine ausführliche Bedarfs- und Anforderungsanalyse, anhand derer die Spezifikation häufig eingesetzter Systemkomponenten sowie die Identifikation von Schlüsselkomponenten zur Erstellung von Anwendungsvorlagen erfolgen kann. 
            Im Projekt setzen wir hierfür im Wesentlichen auf zwei Instrumente: Zum einen quantitativ angelegte Umfragen in der Community in Form von Fragebögen, zum anderen die qualitativ orientierte Untersuchung von ausgewählten Beispielanwendungen auf Basis von gezielten Codeanalysen. Letzteres zielt auf eine genauere Analyse der quantitativ erhobenen Daten bezüglich der eingesetzten Technologien, um konkrete Systemkomponenten identifizieren zu können, die im weiteren Projektverlauf u. a. für die Modellierung von Usecases auf Basis des TOSCA-Standards eingesetzt werden sollen.
            Eine erste Kurzumfrage wurde im Rahmen der DHd2018 in Köln unter den Teilnehmern der Konferenz durchgeführt (Barzen et al. 2018). Primäres Ziel des eingesetzten Fragebogens war es, eine explorative Typisierung von DH-Anwendungen vorzunehmen und das Spektrum der dabei eingesetzten Technologien zu konturieren. Die Umfrage ergab im Wesentlichen, dass sich Entscheidungen bezüglich der Technologienutzung vor allem am jeweiligen Anwendungstyp orientieren. Um eine möglichst zielgenaue Analyse typischer Technologien zu erreichen bietet es sich deshalb an, den Skopus der Befragung entsprechend auf einzelne Anwendungstypen hin einzugrenzen.
         
         
            Technologienutzung im Kontext Digitaler Editionen
            Nachdem sich der Zusammenhang zwischen der Art der Anwendung und den konkreten technologischen Entscheidungen besonders deutlich bei Digitalen Editionen zeigte, und da diese zugleich als besonders repräsentative Form digitaler Ergebnissicherung im Bereich der Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften angesehen werden können, haben wir uns dazu entschieden, hier den ersten Ausgangspunkt für eine gezielte Erhebung von Daten über die Technologienutzung zu setzen. Hierfür richteten wir gemeinsam mit dem Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH, siehe 
                    
                  http://cceh.uni-koeln.de)
                     sowie in Kooperation mit der Landesinitiative NFDI der Digitalen Hochschule NRW (siehe 
                    
                  https://fdm-nrw.de)
                     und der Nordrhein-Westfälischen Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Künste (AWK, siehe 
                    
                  http://www.awk.nrw.de
                einen Workshop zum Thema „Nachhaltigkeit Digitaler Editionen“ aus, der am 17.9.2018 in den Räumen der AWK stattfand (siehe 
                    ).
                
            Der Workshop hatte das Ziel, vorhandene Lösungsansätze und Aktivitäten, die der nachhaltigen Bereitstellung von Digitalen Editionen gewidmet sind, mit der Fachcommunity zu diskutieren. So wird bereits seit einigen Jahren an verschiedenen Stellen an Konzepten gearbeitet, die dieses Problem adressieren. Bspw. wird in der Schweiz derzeit eine „Nationale Infrastruktur für Editionen“ (NIE-INE, siehe 
                    
                  https://www.nie-ine.ch)
                     aufgebaut, die auf die Homogenisierung von Editionsprojekten zielt, und in Österreich wurde mit dem „Kompetenznetzwerk Digitale Editionen“ (KONDE, siehe 
                    
                  http://www.digitale-edition.at)
                     ein umfangreiches Verbundprojekt eingesetzt, das ebenfalls den Aufbau und die Weiterentwicklung einer nationalen Forschungsinfrastruktur für Digitale Editionen zum Ziel hat. Auch in Deutschland gibt es vergleichbare, wenn auch lokaler ausgerichtete Initiativen, die auf die Schaffung einer gemeinsamen Infrastruktur für Editionsprojekte und damit längerfristig auf eine Standardisierung von Digitalen Editionen zielen. Im Rahmen des Workshops hatten wir die Gelegenheit viele der maßgeblichen Akteure als Sprecher zu gewinnen. Unter den Teilnehmern fanden sich ebenfalls viele Personen, die selbst an Digitalen Editionen arbeiten oder an der Nachhaltigkeitsproblematik anderweitig interessiert waren, z.B. aus Perspektive der Drittmittelgeber.
                
         
         
            Begleitende Umfrage
            Im Vorfeld des Workshops führten wir unter den insgesamt 80 Teilnehmern (70 Gäste und 10 eingeladene Sprecher) eine Umfrage durch, mit dem Ziel, Informationen über die Technologielandschaft speziell in diesem Bereich der DH zu gewinnen. Die Umfrage enthielt Fragen zu persönlichen Vorerfahrungen in der Arbeit mit Digitalen Editionen, zu den formalen Charakteristika von Editionsprojekten sowie zu den dabei eingesetzten Technologien. Schon anhand einer ersten Auswertung der Umfrage, die unmittelbar vor dem Workshop vorgenommen wurde und bei der die Angaben zu 31 verschiedenen Editionsprojekten berücksichtigt wurden, ließen sich deutliche Tendenzen in Bezug auf die eingesetzten Nachnutzungs- und Nachhaltigkeitsstrategien ablesen. So zeigen die in Abbildung 1 wiedergegebenen Angaben bezüglich der Datenmodellierung sehr deutlich, dass mit TEI-XML mittlerweile ein weit verbreiteter Standard zur nachhaltigen Sicherung von Daten vorliegt, der für speziellere Bedarfe durch weitere standardisierte Formate ergänzt wird.
            
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 1: Nutzung von Standards für Metadaten und für die Modellierung von Primärdaten.
                        
               
            
            Aufseiten der Implementierungen dagegen fehlen solche Standards, was entsprechend zu einer deutlich höheren Heterogenität der eingesetzten Technologien führt (siehe Abbildung 2). Aus der Zusammenschau der verschiedenen Fragekategorien lässt sich ersehen, dass es zwar durchaus auch in Bezug auf die genutzten Technologien und Systemkomponenten Favoriten gibt, jedoch wird unsere Annahme einer technologischen und methodischen Heterogenität des Feldes dennoch klar bestätigt.
            
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 2: Technologienutzung im Kontext Digitaler Editionsprojekte.
                        
               
            
            Während sich also im Bereich der Primärdaten in Gestalt verschiedener TEI-Dialekte eine zunehmende Standardisierung abzeichnet, so gilt dies nicht für das Layout und die Präsentation von Editionen. Hinsichtlich Aussehen, Funktionalitäten und technischer Architekturen besteht hier weiterhin eine sehr große Heterogenität. Zudem deuten sich hier auch bereits verschiedene Technologie-Stacks an, die sich aus typischen Kombinationen von Systemkomponenten ergeben. Allerdings scheinen sich solche Stacks v. a. innerhalb verschiedener Trägerinstitutionen herauszubilden, was sich in Teilen auf personelle Überschneidungen zwischen Projekten oder auf institutionelle Lösungsansätze zur Bewältigung von Nachhaltigkeitsanforderungen zurückführen lässt. Diese Ergebnisse spiegelten sich auch in den Diskussionen auf dem Workshop wider. Während die Nachhaltigkeit der Daten weitestgehend gelöst zu sein scheint, brachte die Frage nach der Nachhaltigkeit der Software eine Reihe von Lösungsansätzen hervor. Die Vor- und Nachteile von verschiedenen Technologie-Stacks wurden kontrovers diskutiert. Weitestgehende Einigkeit bestand darin, dass eine Digitale Edition aus Daten plus Software besteht, dass also eine alleinige Konservierung der Daten für die Konservierung der Digitalen Edition an sich nicht ausreicht.
         
         
            Fazit und Ausblick
            In unserem Beitrag möchten wir die bisherigen Ergebnisse unserer Anforderungsanalyse an lebende Systeme in den Digital Humanities zur Diskussion stellen. Neben den hier gezeigten Kennzahlen fokussieren wir dabei verschiedene Technologie-Stacks, die typische Kombinationen von Systemkomponenten widerspiegeln. Die hier vorgestellten Ergebnisse der Anforderungsanalyse dienen uns als Basis für die weitere Projektarbeit. Unser Ziel ist es, häufig genutzte Schlüsselkomponenten und typische Anwendungsstrukturen digitaler Erkenntnisträger im Bereich der Digital Humanities zu identifizieren, sie anschließend in TOSCA zu modellieren und zu einer Komponentenbibliothek zusammenzufassen sowie in Form von Anwendungsvorlagen für weitere Modellierungen bereitzustellen, um dadurch konsistente und zukunftssichere Standards und Nachhaltigkeitsstrategien für Forschungssoftware zu etablieren. Über die konkrete Projektarbeit hinaus sind die hier vorgestellten Ergebnisse auch von generellem Interesse für die Community. So sind die erhobenen Daten u. a. auch für Datenzentren wie das DCH Köln von hohem Nutzen, um beispielsweise Strategien und Betreuungskonzepte für Forschungssoftware zu entwerfen.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Barzen, J. / Blumtritt, J. / Breitenbücher, U. / Kronenwett, S. / Leymann, F. / Mathiak, B. / Neuefeind, C. (2018): "SustainLife - Erhalt lebender, digitaler Systeme für die Geisteswissenschaften." In: Book of Abstracts der 5. Jahrestagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum (DHd 2018), Köln 26.2.–2.3.2018, S. 471–474. [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019].
                    
               
                  Binz, T. / Breitenbücher, U. / Haupt, F. / Kopp, O. / Leymann, F. / Nowak, A. / Wagner, S. (2013): “OpenTOSCA - A Runtime for TOSCA-based Cloud Applications“. In: ICSOC, 2013, S. 692–695.
                    
               
                  Breitenbücher, U. / Barzen, J. / Falkenthal, M. / Leymann, F. (2017): "Digitale Nachhaltigkeit in den Geisteswissenschaften durch TOSCA: Nutzung eines standardbasierten Open-Source Ökosystems", in: DHd 2017: Digitale Nachhaltigkeit, S. 235–238. [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019].
                    
               
                  Neuefeind, C. / Harzenetter, L. / Schildkamp, P. / Breitenbücher, U. / Mathiak, B. / Barzen, J. / Leymann, F. (2018): "The SustainLife Project – Living Systems in Digital Humanities". In: Proceedings of the 12th Advanced Summer School on Service-Oriented Computing, 2018 (IBM Research Report RC25681), S.101-112.
                    
               
                  OASIS (2013): „Topology and Orchestration Specification for Cloud Applications Version 1.0“. 25 November 2013. OASIS Standard. . [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019]
                    
               
                  OASIS (2016): „TOSCA Simple Profile in YAML, Version 1.0“. Edited by Derek Palma, Matt Rutkowski, and Thomas Spatzier. 21 December 2016. OASIS Standard. . [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019]
                    
               
                  OASIS (2018): „Darwin Information Typing Architecture (DITA) Version 1.3 Errata 02“. Edited by Robert D. Anderson and Kristen James Eberlein. 19 June 2018. OASIS Approved Errata.  [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019].
                    
               
                  Parnas, D. L. (1994): ”Software Aging“. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 1994). IEEE, Mai 1994, S. 279–287.
                    
               
                  Sahle, P. und Kronenwett, S. (2013): ”Jenseits der Daten: Überlegungen zu Datenzentren für die Geisteswissenschaften am Beispiel des Kölner ’Data Center for the Humanities’“. In: LIBREAS. Library Ideas 23, S. 76–96.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium, eds. (2018): “TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.” Version 3.4.0 vom 23.7.2018. [letzter Zugriff 8.1.2019].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            
               ”Auf der Konferenz [DHd 2018; d. Verf.] war zu jeder Zeit an jedem Ort genug Kompetenz versammelt, um in einer Kaffeepause eine digitale Publikation der Abstracts zu bauen, mit Inhaltsverzeichnis, Volltext- und Schlagwortsuche und anderen netten Features, die sonst zum Standard jeder Webpräsentation in den DH gehören.” So postuliert Fabian Cremer in seinem Blog-Post “Nun sag, wie hältst Du es mit dem Digitalen Publizieren, Digital Humanities?” (Cremer 2018). Nur, wie Cremer weiter ausführt, niemand habe es gemacht oder irrt der Autor in dieser Aussage, da die Aufgabe nicht so trivial ist, wie auf dem ersten Blick erscheint? Der hier vorgeschlagene Workshop “DHd 2019 Book of Abstracts Hackathon” soll der DHd-Community den Raum bieten, dieser Frage nachzugehen, eine gemeinsame digitale Publikation der Konferenz-Abstracts zu realisieren und so einen Diskussionsimpuls zur Zukunft des Digitalen Publizierens in den Digital Humanities zu geben.  
            
         
         
            Digitales Publizieren und Digital Humanities
            
               Das digitale Publizieren hat sich im Rahmen des Kanonisierungsprozesses zu einem etablierten Bestandteil der Digital Humanities entwickelt. Dies umfasst sowohl methodische Überlegungen (Kohle 2017) wie auch die praktische Umsetzungen (DHd-AG 2016). Längst existieren etablierte digitale Publikationsorgane der Digital Humanities, welche die Vielfalt und Potentiale der digitalen Publikationsformate demonstrieren und als Vorbild der Publikationspraxis und Wissenschaftskommunikation 
                    gelten.
               
                Diesen Entwicklungen zum Trotz werden in der Breite und Spitze der Digital Humanities Forschung diese Potentiale nicht ausgeschöpft und traditionelle Publikationspraktiken weiterhin gepflegt (Stäcker 2012). Dies gilt für die Ebene der Technologie, so liegt das Book of Abstracts der DHd 2018 als PDF ohne Strukturdaten vor (Vogeler 2018). Aber gleichfalls auch für die offene Zugänglichkeit, so wurde das deutschsprachige Standardwerk zu den DH nicht als Open Access publiziert (Jannidis et al. 2017 vgl. dazu Stäcker 2017). Die Anforderungen an digitale Publikationen sind schon seit längerem formuliert. “Digital publishing is not simply repackaging a book or article as a computer file, although even a searchable pdf has advantages over paper”, bemerkt Borgman in ihrem “Call to Action for the Humanities” und adressiert hier auch dezidiert die Digital Humanities (Borgman 2010: #p16).
            
            
               Neben den wissenschaftsökonomischen und wissenschaftspolitischen Vorteilen digitalen Publizierens eröffnen digitale Formate neue wissenschaftliche Methoden zur Weiterverarbeitung. Diese Potentiale sind sich insbesondere die mit digitalen Quellen und Daten arbeitenden  Geisteswissenschaftler*innen bewusst und Formulieren entsprechende Ansprüche an die Digitalisierung und Bereitstellung der Untersuchungsgegenstände, wie etwa Volltexte mit standardisierter Strukturierung und Interoperabilität sowie mit Entitäten und komplexen Strukturmerkmalen angereichert 
                    (Klaffki et al. 2018: 19-20).
               
                Diese Ansprüche müssten in den Geisteswissenschaften, in der die eigenen Texte in Form einer kritischen Rezeption und Iteration Teil der Informationsquellen sind, auch an die eigene Textproduktion gestellt werden. Folgerichtig lautet die Empfehlung der DHd-AG “Digitales Publizieren”, die semantischen Strukturen zu kodieren, die Dokumente maschinenlesbar und prozessierbar zu machen und PDF nicht als primäres Publikationsformat zu verwenden (DHd-AG 2016). Die TEI-basierten Veröffentlichungen der Digital Humanities Community demonstrieren das Potential der Publikationen als Untersuchungsgegenstand des Faches (Sahle/Henny-Krahmer 2018 und Hannesschläger/Andorfer 2018). Allein die Zusammenführung der strukturierten Datenbasis der Texte mit den vorhandenen Technologien und Methoden neuer Publikationsformate steht häufig noch aus. Diese Lücke adressiert das vorliegende Konzept.
            
         
         
            Konzeption des Workshops
            
               Ziele
               
                  Der Hackathon liefert einerseits ein Proof-of-Concept für die Implementierung digitaler Technologien in einen Publikationsprozess (der digitalen Geisteswissenschaften) und möchte andererseits ein partizipatives Format zur Unterstützung der DHd-Tagung durch die DHd-Community in kollaborativer Arbeitsform (Hackathon) darstellen. Der Einsatz vorhandener Frameworks aus der Community demonstriert die Leistungsfähigkeit und das vorhandene Potential. Die erarbeiteten Transformationsskripte und Workflows können die Basis für eine Weiterentwicklung und Nachnutzung in institutionellen Publikationsprozessen darstellen. Eine Analyse des Workshops, der Ergebnisse und der damit verbundenen Rezeption liefert die Grundlage für die Formulierung von Empfehlungen zum möglichen zukünftigen Umgang mit den DHd-Abstracts und deren stetig steigende Relevanz als Publikationsformat. Der Hackathon kann dabei sowohl technologische wie methodische Impulse für das Digitale Publizieren in der DHd-Community liefern.
               
            
            
               Vorbereitungen
               
                  Die Datengrundlage für den Workshop bilden die zur DHd 2019 eingereichten Abstracts im dhc-Format und idealerweise in einer harmonisierten TEI-Version. Die Workshopleiter vertrauen hier auf die wertvolle Redaktionsarbeit der DHd-Konferenzorganisation, wie es die DHd 2018 vorbildlich umgesetzt 
                        hat.
                  
                   Um die hier angestrebten Verarbeitungsprozesse und Methoden des Digitalen Publizierens umsetzen zu können, müssen die Daten weiter vorbereitet und angereichert werden. Die vorbereitende Prozessierung soll umfassen: 
               
               
                  Harmonisierung (Sichtung; Vereinheitlichung von Ambiguitäten, Setzen der Mindeststandards)
                  
                     Strukturdatenauszeichnung (Überschriften, Absatznummerierung, Metadaten)
                  
                  Verknüpfung mit Normdaten (Erkennung und Auszeichnung von zentralen Entitäten wie Personen, Orte, Institutionen, Werke)
                  Rahmenwerke (Generierung von Listen und Registern für Schlagworte, Titel, Namen)
               
               
                  Die Aufbereitung und Anreicherung der Datenbasis wird von den Organisatoren in Zusammenarbeit mit dem Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ACDH) im Vorfeld der DHd 2019 vorgenommen. Die Workshopleitung wird dahingehend mit der Konferenzorganisation und dem Programmkomitee eine enge Kooperation anstreben.
               
            
            
               Themen und Arbeitsgruppen
               
                  Die Entwicklungsphasen des Hackathons finden als Gruppenarbeit statt. Die parallel arbeitenden Gruppen widmen sich verschiedenen Repräsentationen und Verarbeitungsprozessen der gemeinsamen Datenbasis. Die hier skizzierten Themen und Arbeitsgruppen sind als Vorschläge von Seiten der Organisatoren zu verstehen und werden abhängig von den Kompetenzen und Interessen der Teilnehmenden zu Beginn des Workshops adaptiert. Die beiden Arbeitsbereiche “Transformation” und “Präsentation” werden für die Ziele des Workshops als zwingend notwendig erachtet und sind daher gesetzt. Weitere Themen und Arbeitsgruppen können von den Teilnehmenden ausgestaltet werden. Die Organisatoren moderieren die Bildung der Arbeitsgruppen und begleiten beratend die Entwicklungsphasen.
               
               
                  AG “Style und Sheet”: Transformation
                  
                     Die Transformation der Ausgangsdaten (XML/TEI) in verschiedene Zielformate bildet die Grundlage für die verschiedenen Nutzungs- und Rezeptionsformen. Als Zielformate der Stylesheets bieten sich u.a. an: HTML, LaTex, PDF, MS-Word, Markdown, JATS. Idealerweise können die Teilnehmenden eigene, bereits genutzte Transformationen in der Gruppe diskutieren, erweitern und optimieren.
                  
               
               
                  AG “Web und App”: Präsentation
                  
                     Der Zeitrahmen des Workshops erlaubt keine Neuentwicklung eines Frontends. Für die Realisierung verschiedener Präsentationschichten müssen die Basisdaten in vorhandene Publikationsframeworks integriert werden. Dabei sind generische Ansätze (z.B. eXist Webapp, GitHub pages, eLife Lens Viewer, Jupyter) ebenso möglich wie spezifische oder instiutionelle Lösungen der DH-Community.
                  
               
               
                  AG “Maschine und Modell”: Schnittstellen
                  Die Bereitstellung der Daten über standardisierte maschinenlesbare Schnittstellen (API) ist eine grundlegende Repräsentationsform zukünftiger Publikationspraktiken. Idealerweise wird hier prototypisch ein Protokoll oder eine Spezifikation implementiert (z.B. OAI-PMH, FCS, DTS).
               
               
                  AG “Wolke und Vektor”: Textanalyse
                  
                     Durch Tokenisieren, Lemmatisieren, Vektorisieren werden Wortlisten, Wortfrequenzen, Wortwolken, Topicmodelling realisiert. Die Strukturierungs- und Visualisierungsformen sind die Grundlage für alternative Rezeptionsformen und textinterne Analysen bis zu (korpus)linguistischen Methoden.
                  
               
               
                  AG “Beziehung und Geflecht”: Netzwerke
                  
                     Die mit Normdaten angereicherte Datenbasis bietet die Möglichkeit, die Beziehungen zwischen den Entitäten (Personen, Orte, Institutionen, Werke) zu extrahieren, zu visualisieren und zu analysieren. Zu den Anwendungsfällen gehören Netzwerkanalysen und explorative Navigationsformen.
                  
               
               
                  AG “Medial und Modular”: Multimedia
                  Die Verwaltung, Adressierung und Einbettung multimedialer Inhalte die sowie Erzeugung und Integration interaktiver Elemente, wie dynamische Visualisierungen, gehören zu den großen Herausforderungen des Digitalen Publizierens. Prototypische Umsetzungen können hierfür Impulse liefern oder Lücken in bestehenden Frameworks aufzeigen.
               
            
            
               Agenda:
               
                  15’
                   
                  Begrüßung, Organisatorisches, Vorstellungsrunde,
               
               
                  15’
                   
                  Vorstellung der Daten und Aufteilung auf Arbeitsgruppen
               
               
                  60’
                   
                  Entwicklungsphase I
               
               
                  30’
                   
                  Pause
               
               
                  45’
                   
                  Entwicklungsphase II
               
               
                  30’
                   
                  Vorstellung der Ergebnisse
               
               
                  15’
                   
                  Abschlussdiskussion
               
            
         
         
            Organisation
            
               
                  Ergebnissicherung und Outreach
               
               
                  Die ausgearbeiteten Ergebnisse der Arbeitsgruppen (Daten, Skripte, Anwendungen) werden offen lizensiert und frei zur Verfügung gestellt. Ein Workshopbericht fasst die Ergebnisse übersichtlich als Blogpost zusammen. Gemeinsam mit interessierten Teilnehmenden plant die Workshopleitung eine Ausarbeitung der Ergebnisse als Empfehlung für mögliche Umsetzungen der DHd-Abstracts. Die konkreten Implementierungen sollen während der Konferenz online verfügbar gehalten werden und werden von der Workshopleitung (und freiwillig Teilnehmenden) über soziale Medien bekannt gegeben und zur Diskussion gestellt. Weitere erwünschte Kommunikationskanäle (Website, Email) werden mit der Konferenzorganisation besprochen.
               
            
            
               Datenmanagement und Infrastruktur
               
                  Die Einrichtung einer dezidierten Organisation auf GitHub.com für den Workshop erlaubt das Management der verschiedenen Entwicklungen und kollaborative Arbeitsformen. Die Dokumentation und das Projektmanagement werden ebenfalls über git umgesetzt (GitHubWiki/  GitHub-Projects/Issues). Die Publikation der Ergebnisse erfolgt über GitHub-Repositories via Zenodo. Grundsätzlich stehen auch nichtkommerzielle Gitlab-Instanzen und das DARIAH-DE-Repository zur Sicherung zur Verfügung. Das ACDH kann für das kurz- und mittelfristige Hosting der im Rahmen des Workshops entwickelten Applikationen und Services die erforderliche Server-Infrastruktur zur Verfügung stellen. Weiter ist die Bereitstellung von mehreren Instanzen der Applikationen Voyant und eXistDB zur Nutzung im Workshop über DARIAH-DE vorgesehen.
               
            
            
               Teilnehmer*innen
               
                  Die praktischen Arbeitsphasen der Gruppenarbeit erlauben nur kleine Gruppengrößen. Die Zahl der möglichen Teilnehmer*innen beträgt daher maximal 25 Personen. Für die Workshopteilnahme werden zwar keine spezifischen technischen oder methodischen Grundlagen (jenseits des Umgangs mit den TEI/XML-Basisdaten) vorausgesetzt, jedoch erfordert ein Hackathon von den Teilnehmenden selbständiges Arbeiten und die Anwendung vorhandener Kompetenzen auf den Gegenstandsbereich. Der Workshop bietet den Rahmen und Raum für die gemeinsames Arbeiten und offenen Austausch.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
                    Dies zeigt sich am Beispiel der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften (ZfdG), die als Vorbild für die Zeitschrift Medieval and Early Modern Material Culture Online (MEMO) fungierte.
                
            
                    Siehe die Digitalisierungsklassen IV und V für Texte.
                
            
                    Die vielgestaltigen TEI-Kodierungen aus den Einreichungen und Transformationen wurden einheitlich angeglichen, dokumentiert auf: 
                    
                  https://github.com/GVogeler/DHd2018
               .
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Borgman, Christine L. (2010): “The Digital Future is Now. A Call to Action for the Humanities”, in: Digital Humanities Quarterly 3 (4): #p16, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/000077/000077.html [letzter Zugriff 26. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Cremer, Fabian (2018): “Nun sag, wie hältst Du es mit dem Digitalen Publizieren, Digital Humanities?”, in: Digitale Redaktion (Blog), 21.03.2018, https://editorial.hypotheses.org/113 [letzter Zugriff 26. September 2018].
                    
               
                  DHd-AG "Digitales Publizieren" (2016): “Digitales Publizieren”, Working Paper, 01.03.2016, http://diglib.hab.de/ejournals/ed000008/startx.htm [letzter Zugriff 26. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Hannesschläger, Vanessa / Andorfer, Peter (2018): Menschen gendern? Datenmodellierung zur Erhebung von Geschlechterverteilung am Beispiel der TEI2016 Abstracts App, DHd 2018, Köln,https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1182576
               
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis /  Kohle, Hubertus / Rehbein, Malte (2017)(eds.): Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung,  Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler.
                    
               
                  Kohle, Hubertus (2017): “Digitales Publizieren”, in: Jannidis, Fotis et al. (eds.): Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung,  Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler 199-205.
                    
               
                  Klaffki, Lisa / Schmunk, Stefan / Stäcker Thomas (2018): “Stand der Kulturgutdigitalisierung in Deutschland. Eine Analyse und Handlungsvorschläge des DARIAH-DE Stakeholdergremiums 'Wissenschaftliche Sammlungen'”, DARIAH-DE Working Papers 26, Göttingen, URN: urn:nbn:de:gbv:7-dariah-2018-1-3.
                    
               
                  Stäcker, Thomas (2012): “Wie schreibt man digital humanities?”, in: DHd-Blog, 19.08.2012, https://dhd-blog.org/?p=673 [letzter Zugriff 26. September 2018].
                    
               
                  Stäcker, Thomas (2017): “Digital Humanities : eine Einführung / Fotis Jannidis, Hubertus Kohle, Malte Rehbein (Hg.)”, in:  O-Bib. Das Offene Bibliotheksjournal 4(3): 142-148, https://doi.org/10.5282/o-bib/2017H3S142-148
               
               
                  Vogeler, Georg (2018)(ed.): DHd 2018. Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. Konferenzabstracts, Köln: Universität zu Köln 2018.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung
            Gegenstand des umliegenden Projekts ist die Umstellung eines Langzeitvorhabens der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ÖAW) auf eine XML-basierte digitale Edition nach den Maßgaben der Vorschläge der Text Encoding Initiative 
                (TEI). Der Ministerrat war das zentrale Organ der Regierungstätigkeit in der Habsburgermonarchie beziehungsweise (nach 1867) in 
                Österreich-Ungarn. Seine Sitzungsprotokolle präsentieren alle Facetten staatlichen Lebens, von Fragen der Struktur und der Organisation des Staates bis zu gesellschaftlichen, wirtschaftlichen und technischen Entwicklungen sowie kulturellen und sozialen Problemen. Die Edition der Ministerratsprotokolle, die seit den 1970er Jahren unter wechselnder editorischer Verantwortung erscheint und in der ersten Serie 28 gedruckte Bände mit rund 18000 Druckseiten vorzuweisen hat, wird aktuell am Institut für Neuzeit- und Zeitgeschichtsforschung der ÖAW auf ein TEI-basiertes Editionsverfahren umgestellt, das die zu edierenden Bände in einer Print- und einer Online-Komponente aus einer Quelle 
                speist.
            
            Die wissenschaftliche Edition der Ministerratsprotokolle zeichnet sich aus durch: 
            
               den Umfang der zu edierenden Quellen
                        
                     die große abzudeckende Zeitspanne von 1848 bis 1867 für die retrodigitalisierte erste Serie; von 1867 bis 1918 für die digitale Edition; 
                     als Folge des umfassenden Zeitraums die Varianz etwa in den Schreibungen (mit Konsequenzen für die Textkritik, aber auch für die Arbeit mit Named Entities)
                  
               
               die unterschiedliche Provenienz der Quellen
                        
                     teilweise durch den Justizpalastbrand 1927 beschädigte Protokolle („Brandakten“)
                     Ergänzungsmaterial aus verschiedenen Archivbeständen
                  
               
               vielfältige interne und externe Bezüge
                        
                     zwischen Tagesordnungspunkten und Sitzungen, aber auch z.B. bandübergreifend
                     zwischen ediertem Text und wissenschaftlichem Kommentar
                     zu den Registern und Verzeichnissen, ergänzt durch Normdaten und Linked (Open) Data
                  
               
            
         
         
            Scope der Posterdokumentation
            Das Poster präsentiert vor dem Hintergrund des Gesamtworkflows für die TEI-Edition eine Schlüsselstelle auf dem Weg zu einer digitalen Edition, die den mit dem Begriff verbundenen Anforderungen gerecht werden soll – die „Registerdaten“: 
            
               Einerseits werden die Register der bereits edierten Bände rückerschlossen und ergänzt um neue Editionsdaten als Named Entities in einer relationalen Datenbank abgelegt, die das 
                    APIS-Projekt als biographische, prosopographische und mit Start- und Enddaten versehene Entitäten modelliert;
                    
               andererseits werden die Sachregister in Form eines Thementhesaurus modelliert, der Politikbereiche sowie die administrative Gliederung der Habsburgermonarchie berücksichtigt.
            
            
               Herausforderungen
               Prüfsteine bestehen betreffend die Modellierung und Erstellung von notwendigen Auxiliardaten, wie etwa Named Entities mit diachroner Varianz (Beispiel: Namensänderung durch Personenstands- oder Standesänderungen; Umgang mit Mehrsprachigkeit bei Ortsnamen, wenn sie Zuordnungsveränderungen unterliegen), vor allem aber die Komplexität von Sachregister-Vokabularien und ‑Thesauri.
            
            
               Methoden und Werkzeuge
               Bei der Bearbeitung werden gängige Standards aus den Bereichen Semantic Web und Linked Open Data befolgt. Alle kontrollierten Vokabularien folgen dem Datenmodell von Simple Knowledge Organization System 
                    (SKOS), um Wiederverwendbarkeit und Interoperabilität mit Daten in anderen Projekten zu gewährleisten. Die generierten Daten werden mit Dublin Core-Metadaten versehen und in ARCHE 
                    (A Resource Centre for the HumanitiEs), dem geisteswissenschaftlichen Repositorium der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, archiviert.
                    
            
         
         
            Linked-Data-Anbindung
            Folgende Sets von Linked Open Data-Datensätzen werden, so vorhanden, zur Anreicherung der Ministerratsprotokolltexte verwendet:
            
               Orte: GeoNames-IDs
               
               Normdaten für Personen, Körperschaften, Ministerkonferenzen und Veranstaltungen, Geografische Entitäten, aus der Gemeinsamen Normdatei 
                    (GND)
               
               Sachregister: kontrollierte Vokabularien, nach Möglichkeit Anbindung an den GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus 
                    (GEMET)
               
               Prosopographische und biographische Daten: APIS-Datensatz zum Österreichischen Biographischen Lexikon (ab 2019 unter CC-Lizenz).
            
            Dokumentiert und im Poster zur Diskussion gestellt wird der zum Zeitpunkt der DHd 2019 aktuelle Stand der Arbeiten am Editionsprojekt, inklusive der bisherigen Recherchen zu parallel gelagerten Editionsprojekten 
                (u.a.: Die Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats 1945–1962 Online) und einer Einladung zur Nachnutzung der entstehenden Daten.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               . [XML: eXtended Markup Language]
                
            
                    Vgl. den Einleitungsband zur Serie 1, insbes. darin Rumpler, Helmut: Ministerrat und Ministerratsprotokolle 1848 bis 1867. Wien: ÖBV 1970, S. 11-108.
                
            
                    Zum aktuellen Stand bei der Edition vgl. 
                    .
                
            
                    Vgl. 
                    ; APIS steht für Austrian Prosopographical Information System; das 2019 auslaufende Projekt wurde in Kooperation zwischen dem Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ACDH), dem Institut für Stadt- und Regionalforschung (ISR) und dem Institut für Neuzeit- und Zeitgeschichtsforschung (INZ) – alle an der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften – entwickelt und bildete in einem ersten Schritt prosopographische Daten aus dem Österreichischen Biographischen Lexikon (ÖBL) als Set von Relationen zwischen persons, places, institutions, events und works ab. Modelliert als relationale Datenbank, ermöglicht APIS die Darstellung der Entitäten und Relationen in mehreren Exportformaten, die Linked-Open-Data-fähig sind, darunter neben diversen Serialisierungen auch RDF und [TEI]-XML.
                
            
                    Vgl. Miles/Bechhofer 2009.
                
            
               ; das Repositorium wird betrieben von ÖAW-ACDH und dem Rechenzentrum der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ARZ) und basiert auf Fedora Commons.
                
            
                    Vgl. 
                    . Vorgesehen ist auch eine Verknüpfung mit einem weiteren am ÖAW-ACDH angesiedelten Projekt, das geografische Informationsdaten mit einer historischen Tiefendimension erweitert: HistoGIS, siehe 
                    . 
                
            
                    Die von vielen überregionalen Bibliotheksverbünden des deutschsprachigen Raums betriebene Datei (verwaltet von der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek, 
                    ) bietet einerseits Ressourcen, andererseits ±eindeutige Identifikatoren zur Disambiguierung. Für den deutschsprachigen Raum des 19. Jahrhunderts sind in der Mehrzahl der Fälle auch für die zweite Reihe der administrativen Rangordnung bereits zumindest Rumpfdaten vorhanden, und auch das Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) der Library of Congress (ein Superset von GND) hätte diesen gegenüber keine Vorteile zu bieten. Eine Online-Abfrage bietet auch das Bibliotheksservicezentrum Baden-Württemberg, siehe 
                    . 
                
            
                    Online-Zugang siehe 
                    , Vorteile von GEMET sind die Verbreitung und die Verfügbarkeit (auch als SKOS/RDF).
                
            
                    Siehe 
                    .
                
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Viele Herausgeber und Bearbeiter (1970–2015): Die Protokolle des österreichischen Ministerrates 1848–1867. Wien: mehrere Verlage. [https://hw.oeaw.ac.at/ministerrat/].
                    
               
                  Viele HerausgeberInnen und BearbeiterInnen (1973–2018): Die Habsburgermonarchie 1848–1918, 12 Bände, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
                    
               
                  Bernád, Ágoston Zénó / Gruber, Christine / Kaiser, Maximilian (2017): Europa baut auf Biographien. Wien: new academic press.
                    
               
                  Fokkens, Antske / ter Braake, Serge / Ockeloen, Niels / Vossen, Piek / Legêne, Susan / Schreiber, Guus / de Boer, Victor (2017): „BiographyNet: Extracting Relations Between People and Events“, in: Europa baut auf Biographien, 193–223.
                    
               
                  Heath, Tom / Bizer, Christian (2011): Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space (1st edition). Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic Web: Theory and Technology, 1:1, 1-136. San Rafael: Morgan & Claypool
                    
               
                  Miles, Alistair / Bechhofer, Sean (eds.) (2009): SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System, W3C Recommendation, 18 August 2009, .
                    
               Eine ausführliche historiographische Literaturliste kann bei Bedarf zur Verfügung gestellt werden. 
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung    
                        
            
            Digitale Editionen gehören zu den „prominentesten Themen“ (Sahle 2017: 237) in den Digital Humanities. Sie leisten Grundlagenarbeit für die geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung und bilden ein eigenes Forschungsfeld in den Digital Humanities. Hier verortet sich auch das digitale Editions- und Forschungsprojekt „DER STURM. Digitale Quellenedition zur Geschichte der internationalen Avantgarde“ (https://sturm-edition.de). 
            Gegenstand ist das 1910 gegründete Berliner Kunstunternehmen „Der Sturm“ um den Publizisten, Komponisten und Kritiker Herwarth Walden, der zahlreichen Künstlerinnen und Künstlern unterschiedlicher Kunstgattungen eine Plattform bot. Das Unternehmen umfasste die Zeitschrift „Der Sturm“, die „Sturm“-Galerie, die „Sturm“-Bühne sowie den „Sturm“-Verlag. Neben den Veröffentlichungen des „Sturm“ selbst bezeugen die überlieferten Briefe an das Ehepaar Walden den internationalen Einfluss des Unternehmens.
            Unser Editionsprojekt, in dem bereits digital verfügbares Material aus dem „Sturm“-Kontext transkribiert, standardkonform nach XML/TEI P5 aufbereitet und mit Normdaten versehen wird, führt diese Quellen erstmals zentral zusammen und setzt sie mittels digitaler Methoden in Relation zueinander.
         
         
            Drei Forschungsansätze im STURM-Projekt
            Integraler Teil des Editionsprojektes ist die Forschung mit den STURM-Quellen. Auf dem Poster stellen wir neben der Quellenedition die folgenden drei Forschungsansätze vor, die sich explizit mit den im Projekt edierten Materialien beschäftigen.
            
               Modellierung der STURM-Domäne
               Ein Ansatz arbeitet mit den in der digitalen Quellenedition DER STURM zusammengeführten Quellen und modelliert deren Verknüpfungen und Beziehungen untereinander. Die Grundlage bildet hierbei das CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model als Domain-Ontologie im Bereich Cultural Heritage (Doerr 2009), die im Bereich der musealen Sammlungen und der bildenden Kunst weit verbreitet ist. Ergänzt wird diese Ontologie durch fachspezifische Vokabulare wie den Getty Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT). Die semantischen Verknüpfungen zwischen den einzelnen Quellen und Quellen-Typen beziehen sich auf die in den bereits edierten Quellen annotierten Entitäten (Personen, Orte und Werke) sowie auf weitere Entitäten, die noch in den Editionsprozess aufgenommen werden: auf Körperschaften, Ereignisse und Themen. In der digitalen Quellenedition des STURM sind für diese Entitäten bereits URIs vorhanden bzw. vorgesehen. Durch Anreicherung der Entitäten mit Normdaten werden Verknüpfungen mit weiteren Ressourcen ermöglicht.
               Die semantische Modellierung der STURM-Domäne – bestehend aus den Quellen der Edition und dem, was sie bezeugen – dient der Weiterentwicklung der digitalen Quellenedition DER STURM sowie perspektivisch der Weiternutzung der dabei gewonnenen Daten, denn sie bildet die Grundlage für eine Verfügbarmachung der Daten und ihrer Zusammenhänge in Form von Linked Open Data. In dieser Form können die Daten beim Ermitteln und Zeigen von Zusammenhängen helfen und somit die Basis bilden für weitere Forschungen in einzelnen Fachwissenschaften, insbesondere in der Kunst- und in der Literaturwissenschaft.
            
            
               Historische Netzwerkforschung zum „Sturm“
               Ein weiterer Ansatz im Projekt beschäftigt sich mit der historischen Netzwerkforschung (Düring et al. 2016). In der bisherigen „Sturm“-Forschung steht aufgrund der Komplexität und Dezentralität der Quellen eine dezidiert „kunsthistorische Beschäftigung mit dem 
                        Sturm“ aus (van Rijn 2013: 11). Insbesondere an einer ‚Gesamtschau‘ zum „Sturm“ fehlt es – ein Desiderat, an das hier mit der Methode der Historischen Netzwerkforschung angeknüpft werden soll. Dafür wird für das zu untersuchende Phänomen des historischen „Sturm“ ein Gesamtnetzwerk modelliert und anhand algorithmischer sowie hermeneutischer Methoden analysiert (Brandes et al. 2013: 4). Datengrundlage der Netzwerkerhebung bilden archivalische Metadaten und die im STURM-Projekt maschinenlesbar modellierten Quellen.
                    
               Das Netzwerk ist multimodal, bestehen die einzelnen zueinander in Relation stehenden Entitäten doch aus im Kontext des „Sturm“ aufkommenden Personen, multimedialen Werken, Briefdaten und einigem mehr. Diese Daten gilt es in der Visualisierung des erhobenen Netzwerkes anschaulich zu machen (Baillot 2018: 357). Darüber hinaus offenbart die computergestützte Historische Netzwerkforschung auch in der Analyse komplexer Netzwerke ihre Stärken. Durch eine rein klassische Untersuchung des facettenreichen „Sturm“-Netzwerkes, so die These, würden Darstellung und Analyse unübersichtlicher und damit fehleranfälliger werden.
               Die kritische Untersuchung der Quellen selbst – und damit einhergehend die Interpretation des erhobenen Gesamtnetzwerkes „Sturm“ – bildet einen weiteren wichtigen Schritt in der Gesamtanalyse des Kunstunternehmens hinsichtlich eines möglichen ‚gesamtgesellschaftlichen Spiegels‘. Ziele der historischen Netzwerkstudie sind das Ausmachen und die Analyse von 
                        broken ties (Jannidis 2017: 158) im komplexen „Sturm“-Netzwerk und die Einordnung des „Sturm“ in den zeitgenössischen kultur- und soziopolitischen Kontext.
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 1. Gerichtetes Korrespondenznetzwerk um Herwarth Walden (rot), Else Lasker-Schüler (gelb) und Nell Walden (grün); Layout: ForceAtlas 2; Knotengröße: 
                            outdegree; Knotenfarbe: 
                            indegree; Kantendicke: 
                            weight (Menge der überlieferten Briefe).
                        
               
            
            
               Diskursanalyse des Simultaneitätsbegriffs im „Sturm“         
               Ein Beispiel für die fachspezifische Nutzung digitaler Editionen gibt die Studie zu avantgardistischen Simultaneitätskonzepten im „Sturm“. Als ein die Avantgarde bestimmendes Strukturprinzip kommt Simultaneität in verschiedenen Kunstrichtungen vor, die innerhalb ihrer Programmatik mitunter konkurrierende Modelle entwickeln. F. M. Marinettis „Technisches Manifest der futuristischen Literatur“, die kubistischen „Fenster“-Bilder Robert Delaunays oder die Simultangedichte der Dadaisten ähneln sich im grundlegenden Bestreben, nach dem avantgardistischen Primat von „Transgression und Diffundierung“ (Asholt / Fähnders 2000: 17) beim Rezipienten gleichzeitig unterschiedliche Wirklichkeitsansichten und -ebenen zu erzeugen. Im medialen Komplex des „Sturm“, mit seinen vielfältigen Publikations- und Distributionswegen sowie seinen dezidiert antimimetischen Gestaltungsprinzipien, finden diese bildkünstlerischen wie literarischen Werke trotz Gattungs- und Stilunterschieden gleichermaßen eine adäquate Präsentationsform. Eingebettet in den spezifischen historischen Kontext des „Sturm“-Netzwerks werden sie von Para- und Metatexten begleitet, die ihre Rezeption lenken und kommentieren – und die nicht zuletzt in den privaten Korrespondenzen an Walden vorbereitet und verhandelt werden.
               Die webbasierte Zusammenführung der verschiedenen Quellen des „Sturm“ erlaubt es nun, wechselseitige Bezüge zwischen den unterschiedlichen Textsorten offenzulegen und so diskursiv etablierte sprachlich-rhetorische Muster zu rekonstruieren. Mit Hilfe korpuslinguistisch informierter diskursanalytischer Verfahren wird der Frage nachgegangen, inwiefern solche multimodalen Diskurspraktiken die Bedeutung von Gleichzeitigkeit im historischen „Sturm“-Netzwerk unterschiedlich konstituieren und auf diese Zeitkonstruktion als typisch avantgardistischen Diskurs verweisen. Um die entsprechenden „Diskursfragmente“ (Jäger 2012: 98ff.) im Netzwerkkontext situieren und den einzelnen Künstlern und Kunstrichtungen zuordnen zu können, sollen zusätzlich netzwerkanalytische Zugänge berücksichtigt werden. Schließlich zielt die Auswertung der im Projekt erarbeiteten Daten darauf ab, den Begriff der Simultaneität im Problemfeld von Scheitern (Habermas) und Überleben (Luhmann) der Avantgarde zu konturieren.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Asholt, Wolfgang / Fähnders, Walter (2000): „Einleitung“, in: Asholt, Wolfgang / Fähnders, Walter (eds.): Der Blick vom Wolkenkratzer. Avantgarde – Avantgardekritik – Avantgardeforschung. Amsterdam / Atlanta: Editions Rodopoi 9–27.
                    
               
                  Baillot, Anne (2018): „Die Krux mit dem Netz. Verknüpfung und Visualisierung bei digitalen Briefeditionen“, in: Bernhart, Toni / Willand, Marcus / Richter, Sandra / Albrecht, Andrea (eds.): Quantitative Ansätze in den Literatur- und Geisteswissenschaften. Systematische und historische Perspektiven. Open Access: De Gruyter 355–370.
                    
               
                  Brandes, Ulrik / Robins, Garry / McCranie, Ann / Wasserman, Stanley (2013): Editorial. What is network science? Network Science 1: 1–15.
                    
               
                  Chytraeus-Auerbach, Irene / Uhl, Elke (2013): „Vorwort“, in: Chytraeus-Auerbach, Irene / Uhl, Elke (eds.): Der Aufbruch in die Moderne. Herwarth Walden und die europäische Avantgarde. Berlin: LIT Verlag 7–11.
                    
               
                  Doerr, Martin (2009): „Ontologies for Cultural Heritage“, in: Staab, Steffen / Studer, Rudi (eds.): Handbook on Ontologies. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer Verlag 463–486.
                    
               
                  Düring, Marten / Eumann, Ulrich / Stark, Martin / Keyserlingk, Linda v. (2016) (eds.): Handbuch Historische Netzwerkforschung. Grundlagen und Anwendungen. Berlin: LIT Verlag.
                    
               
                  Jäger, Siegfried (2012): Kritische Diskursanalyse. Eine Einführung. 6. vollständig überarbeitete Aufl. Münster: Unrast.
                    
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis (2017): „Netzwerke“, in: Jannidis, Fotis / Kohle, Hubertus / Rehbein, Malte (eds.): Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler 147–161.
                    
               
                  Pirsich, Volker (1985): Der Sturm. Eine Monographie. Herzberg: Traugott Bautz 1985.
                    
               
                  Rijn, Maaike van (2013): Bildende Künstlerinnen im Berliner „Sturm“ der 1910er Jahre. Tübingen: TOBIAS-lib, http://tobias-lib.uni-tuebingen.de/volltexte/2013/6987.
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2017): „Digitale Edition“, in: Jannidis, Fotis / Kohle, Hubertus / Rehbein, Malte (eds.): Digital Humanities. Eine Einführung. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler 234–249.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung
            Für die Erstellung und Bearbeitung digitaler Editionen im Bereich der Digital Humanities werden vorzugsweise XML-basierte Lösungen verwendet. Eine der dabei am häufigsten benutzten Datenbanktechnologien ist eXist-db1. Dabei ist eXist-db nicht nur eine Lösung zum Bearbeiten und Speichern von XML-Daten, sondern bietet auch Möglichkeiten zur Programmierung von Webanwendungen auf Grundlage von XQuery. Im weiteren Programmierer*innen-Umfeld sind X-Technologie-Lösungen sowohl für die Datenhaltung als auch für das Erstellen von Webanwendungen eher eine Nischenlösung2.
            In den letzten Jahren werden verstärkt Frameworks wie Vue.js3 oder React4 für die Erstellung von Frontendmodulen in Webanwendungen verwendet.5 Ein großer Vorteil solcher Frameworks gegenüber herkömmlichen Lösungen ohne Framework oder mit jQuery6 ist die Möglichkeit, in sich geschlossene, reaktive User-Interface-Komponenten zu erstellen. Reaktiv heißt in diesem Fall, dass wenn sich das Datenmodell innerhalb einer Komponente ändert, ohne weiteren Aufwand sofort auch die Benutzeroberfläche entsprechend angepasst wird. Gleiches gilt umgekehrt, z.B. wenn eine Nutzerin ein Textfeld ausfüllt, auch das Datenmodell der Komponente sofort den entsprechenden Wert übernimmt, und so weitere Operationen im Hintergrund ausführen kann.
            Da diese JavaScript-Frameworks jedoch mit JSON statt mit XML arbeiten, soll der hier vorgeschlagene Workshop eine Einführung in die Verwendung von Vue.js in Verbindung mit eXist-db geben. Im Workshop soll konkret gezeigt werden, wie man mit eXist-db abgefragte Daten nach JSON serialisieren kann, um diese dann für die Erstellung einer Vue.js basierten, reaktiven Benutzeroberfläche einzusetzen. Grundsätzlich soll den Teilnehmenden hierdurch das Zusammenspiel zwischen einem beliebigen Backend - JSON-API - JavaScript-Frontend-Framework vermittelt werden.
         
         
            Workshop
            Als praktisches Beispiel für den Workshop werden die Daten und der Quellcode von quoteSalute7 zur Veranschaulichung benutzt. quoteSalute aggregiert Grußformeln aus verschiedenen digitalen Briefeditionen, bereitet diese auf, sodass NutzerInnen Briefabschlüsse von z.B. Alexander von Humboldt, Friedrich Schleiermacher oder Anna Gräfin von Lehndorff über einen Klick in ihre eigene E-Mail-Korrespondenz einfügen können. Die Daten dafür werden in einer eXist-db-Instanz als TEI-XML vorgehalten und die Benutzeroberfläche über Vue.js realisiert. Dabei kommuniziert die Benutzeroberfläche im Browser mit dem eXist-db-Backend, sodass auf Knopfdruck via XQuery in der Datenbank eine zufällige Grußformel ausgewählt und nach JSON serialisiert wird, sodass letztendlich die Nutzeroberfläche mit der neuen Grußformel angepasst werden kann. Um die passende Grußformel für die eigene E-Mail zu finden, können Nutzer*innenden Korpus nach Höflichkeitsstufe (formell, informell), Sprache (derzeit deutsch, englisch, französisch, italienisch, spanisch, griechisch, latein) oder nach Geschlecht des Absenders und Empfängers filtern.
            Sowohl der Datenkorpus, als auch der Quellcode sowie die Dokumentation sind als freie Software verfügbar. 8
            
            Der Workshop ist für zwei halbe Tage und für ca. 15-30 Teilnehmende ausgelegt. Dabei ist das Workshopprogramm in insgesamt vier Zwei-Stunden-Blöcke aufgeteilt, die inhaltlich aufeinander aufbauen. Im Folgenden werden die im Vorfeld des Workshops zu verteilenden Materialien, die zu erwartenden Voraussetzungen an die Teilnehmenden, sowie die Inhalte der einzelnen Blöcke und ihre Lernziele beschrieben.
            
               Voraussetzungen
               Von den Teilnehmenden wird erwartet, dass sie grundlegende Kenntnisse in der JavaScript- und Web-Programmierung (HTML, CSS) haben. Weiterhin wird darum gebeten, einen Computer mitzubringen und vorab eXist-db (kostenfrei) sowie einen Texteditor zum Programmieren wie Visual Studio Code oder Atom zu installieren.
            
            
               Materialien
               Vor dem Workshop stellen wir eine eXist-db-Applikation zusammen, die bereits alle benötigten Daten, Skripte und Datenbankabfragen enthält, um im Workshop sofort in die Arbeit einsteigen zu können, ohne selbst noch alles einrichten zu müssen. Die Teilnehmenden können dann diese App in ihrer eXist-db per Drag & Drop installieren. Eine entsprechende Anleitung wird bereitgestellt. 
               Sollte die Einrichtung der eXist-Instanz oder die Installation der App wider Erwarten nicht funktionieren, stellen wir auch eine eigene eXist-Instanz für den Workshop mit personalisierten Logins für die Teilnehmenden sowie eine JSON-REST-API bereit, sodass die weiteren Workshopinhalte in jedem Fall praktisch nachvollzogen werden können.
               Des Weiteren bereiten wir ein HTML- und VueJS-Code-Skelett vor, sodass auf JavaScript-Seite wenig Zeit auf die Einrichtung der Programmierungsumgebung verwendet werden muss. 
               Die hier aufgelisteten Daten werden auf Github bereitgestellt und dokumentiert.
            
            
               Inhalte
               
                  Block 1
                  Zu Anfang sollen die im Workshop verwendeten Tools und Konzepte, insbesondere das Zusammenspiel zwischen exist-db, JSON und Vue.js, vorgestellt werden. Es wird den Teilnehmenden noch etwas Zeit eingeräumt, die nötige Software herunterzuladen, zu installieren und ihre Entwicklungsumgebung einzurichten. Anschließend wird der Aufbau der quoteSalute-eXist-db-App inklusive des mitgelieferten Datenkorpus erklärt und gezeigt, wie innerhalb von eXist-db Daten abgefragt und ins JSON-Format serialisiert werden. Diese Schritte sind bereits voreingerichtet, sodass auch Teilnehmende ohne XQuery oder eXist-db-Kenntnisse den Ablauf nachvollziehen können. Aus praktischer Sicht werden die Teilnehmenden den quoteSalute-Grußformel-Korpus abfragen, eine zufällige Grußformel extrahieren und nach JSON serialisieren.
               
               
                  Block 2
                  Im zweiten Block sollen die Teilnehmenden anfangs versuchen, die vorgegebenen Beispiele für Datenbankabfragen und JSON-Serialisierungen anzupassen bzw. zu erweitern, um beispielsweise nur Grußformeln, die an Frauen adressiert waren, aus dem Datenbestand herauszufiltern. So soll die Arbeit mit eXist-db und JSON-Serialisierung geübt und gefestigt werden.
                  Um die aus der eXist-db gelieferten JSON-Daten client-seitig verwenden zu können, muss das JavaScript-Frontend-Framework Vue.js mit der JSON-REST-API kommunizieren. Dafür soll zuerst in die Grundprinzipien von Vue.js (data, templates, model-view-binding, methods, computed) anhand kleiner, aufeinander aufbauenden Code-Beispiele eingeführt werden. 
               
               
                  Block 3
                  In Block 3 sollen die in den ersten beiden Blöcken erarbeiteten Methoden und Abläufe miteinander in Verbindung gebracht werden. Über eine asynchrone Abfrage zum lokalen exist-db-Server (JavaScript-Skelett wird gestellt), soll die Vue.js-App eine neue Grußformel vom Server zu erfragen und diese dann im eigenen Datenmodell und so auch in der Benutzeroberfläche abbilden. Um asynchrone Operationen mit JavaScript nachvollziehen zu können, wird an dieser Stelle zusätzlich das Konzept von Promises vorgestellt und erläutert.
                  Die Teilnehmenden können die verbleibende Zeit in diesem Block dazu nutzen, ihre Vue.js-App zu programmieren und gegebenenfalls visuell anzupassen.
               
               
                  Block 4
                  Sollte die Zeit für die Programmierung der Vue.js-App nicht genügen, dient der vierte Block als zusätzlicher Puffer. Für bereits fertige Teilnehmer und Interessierte bieten wir noch ein optionales Programm mit zusätzlichen Aufgaben an. So soll das Zusammenspiel zwischen eXist-db und Vue.js noch an einem weiteren, konkreten Fallbeispiel für die Digital Humanities geübt werden. Die Teilnehmenden erhalten einen Auszug aus einer digitalen Edition und sollen mit den vorgestellten Technologien ein Personenregister erzeugen. Durch diese Transferleistungsübung sollen die erlernten Vue.js-Methoden und Prinzipien gefestigt werden.
               
               
                  Übersicht
                  Das Grundkonzept des Workshops lässt sich in folgender Tabelle zusammenfassen:
                  
                     
                        
                        Technologien & Konzepte
                        Lernziel
                     
                     
                        Block 1
                        Überblick eXist-db, VueJS & JSON
                        JSON-Serialisierung von XML-Daten mit eXist-db verstehen
                     
                     
                        Block 2
                        eXist-db, JSON, XPath, XQuery
                        eXist-db Datenbankanfragen modifizieren und Ergebnisse nach JSON serialisieren
                     
                     
                        VueJS
                        Grundkonzepte von VueJS verstehen und anwenden
                     
                     
                        Block 3-4
                        VueJS, Asynchrone Anfragen, Promises
                        VueJS-App programmieren und an JSON-REST-API anbinden
                     
                  
                  Nach dem Workshop sollen die Teilnehmenden in der Lage sein
                  
                     nachzuvollziehen, wie man mit eXist-db XML-Daten nach JSON serialisiert,
                     die Bedeutung von der Vue.js-Begriffe data, methods, model-view-binding und templates zu verstehen, anwenden und selbst erklären zu können,
                     eine einfache, reaktive Vue.js-Applikation zu programmieren,
                     diese Vue.js-Applikation an eine JSON-REST-Schnittstelle anzubinden, und
                     das grundlegende Prinzip im Zusammenspiel von Backend - JSON-API - JavaScript-Frontend auch auf andere Technologien und Frameworks übertragen zu können.
                  
               
            
            
               Technische Ausstattung
               Für die Durchführung des Workshops wird ein Beamer (vorzugsweise mit VGA-Anschluss) sowie Internetzugang benötigt. Aufgrund der Länge des Workshops wären mehrere Mehrfachsteckdosen zum Aufladen der Geräte der Teilnehmenden wünschenswert.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               http://exist-db.org
            
            
                In ProgrammiererInnen-Umfragen von JetBrains und StackOverflow oder Programmier- und Datenbank-Beliebheits-Indizes sind eXist-db, XQuery und verwandte Technologien nicht einmal genannt. 
               
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               
            
            
               
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  
                   
               
            
            
               
               
               
                  
                   
               
            
            
               
               
            
            
               
               
                  http://quotesalute.net
               
            
            
               
               
            
         
      
   



      
         Die computergestützte Erforschung einer nur teilweise erschlossenen Schrift und Sprache wie im Falle der Hieroglyphenschrift der klassischen Mayakultur steht vor zahlreichen Herausforderungen, insbesondere bei der Erfassung der Komplexität von Schrift- und Bildzeugnissen. Gerade historisierende Wissenschaftsdisziplinen sind auf diverse Informationsquellen angewiesen, um ihre Untersuchungsgegenstände nicht bloß in der historischen Vergangenheit sondern auch in der modernen Gegenwartskultur zu vergesellschaften: Informationen zu ursprünglichen Aufstellungsorten von mit Hieroglyphen reliefierten Stelen, Angaben zum aktuellen Aufbewahrungsort dekorierter und beschriebener Keramiken oder jahrzehntealte Zeichnungen monumentaler Tempelinschriften - das Wissen nicht bloß über die historischen Kontexte sondern auch über die wissenschaftliche Arbeit mit und an den antiken Schriftzeugnissen durch Forscher und Sammler bildet den essentiellen Rahmen, um wissenschaftliche Aussagen und Hypothesen zu formulieren, zu überprüfen und zu plausibilisieren.
         Die Grundlage dieses Rahmens bilden Modelle, die zum einen eine formalisierte Beschreibung der benötigten Informationen erlauben und zum anderen eben jene Informationen miteinander in Beziehung setzen. Hier stellen Ontologien und domänenspezifische (Daten-)Modelle unerlässliche Hilfsmittel und notwendige Werkzeuge dar, um Wissen über Objekte, die im Fokus des wissenschaftlichen Interesses stehen, einheitlich und vor allem aussagekräftig zu dokumentieren. Vor diesem Hintergrund verfolgt das Projekt ‘Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya’ (TWKM)1 das Konzept einer ontologisch-vernetzten Datenbeschreibung: Der antike Text als kulturgeschichtliches Artefakt und somit umfassendes Wissens- und Informationsobjekt wird in einzelne unterschiedliche Informationsbereiche unterteilt, die jeder für sich nach besonderen Anforderungen und eigenen Datenmodellen beschrieben aber aufeinander bezogen werden.
         Um den Informationsgehalt der antiken Textressourcen differenziert in maschinenlesbarer Form zu beschreiben, werden verschiedene Informationsbereiche auf unterschiedlichen Ebenen voneinander abgegrenzt: Zunächst werden die Schriftträger anhand eines ontologisch-basierten Metadatenschemas in RDF erfasst: Hier werden Kerninformationen zum Schriftträger (Bezeichnung, Zustand, Material und Technik, Maße etc.), seines archäologischen Kontexts sowie auch darüber hinausgehend historische Ereignisse und Persönlichkeiten der Maya-Kultur dokumentiert (Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya 2017). Die Auszeichnung der textlichen Informationen wird separat in TEI-P5 Dokumenten vorgenommen, die mit den entsprechenden in RDF dokumentierten Ressourcen über persistente URIs (Uniform Resource Identifier) verknüpft werden.
         Für die Auszeichnung der etwa 10.000 Maya-Texte dient ein projektspezifisches TEI-P5 Anwendungsprofil. Das TWKM unterscheidet hier zwischen den drei Informationsbereichen (1) Form, (2) Inhalt und (3) linguistische Analyse, die nach jeweils spezifischen Anforderungen separat erschlossen werden. So wird die Erschließung der Form bzw. der Texttopographie, d.h. der strukturellen Anordnung von Schrift- und Bildbereichen auf dem Schriftträger, unabhängig von der linguistischen Analyse und den in diesem Rahmen verwendeten Beschreibungskategorien durchgeführt. 
         Das TWKM bedient sich hier am Konzept des sog. Stand-off-Markups2: die individuierte Auszeichnung von Informationen, die durch Verweise auf andere ausgezeichnete Informationen virtuell3 in einen gemeinsamen Zusammenhang gebracht werden. Durch diesen Ansatz kann nicht nur die Komplexität der Auszeichnung einzelner Informationsbereiche individuell angehoben bzw. abgesenkt werden. Auch der direkte Einfluss struktureller Anforderungen des XML-Formats auf die Auszeichnung, die in der Praxis häufig zu Problemen und Herausforderungen führen (z.B. die Wohlgeformtheitsregel und die hiermit einhergehende Maßgabe, dass XML-Elemente sich nicht überschneiden dürfen), wird hierdurch minimiert.4
         
         Der Inhalt eines Textes lässt sich somit kohärent d.h. in einem logisch-thematischen Zusammenhang beschreiben, obwohl seine topographische formal-strukturelle Anordnung einer gänzlich anderen Logik folgt: z.B. kann ein Text topographisch in geflochtener Form arrangiert und dementsprechend maschinenlesbar beschrieben werden. Die inhaltlich-logische Struktur des Texts wird separat gemäß ihren eigenen Ordnungsprinzipien beschrieben aber mit den topographischen Strukturen in Beziehung gesetzt:
         
            
            
               Abbildung 1. Virtueller Zusammenhang zwischen Bildbereich (oben links), Texttopographie (oben rechts) und Inhalt (unten)
				
         
         Zunächst werden die texttopopgraphischen Eigenschaften des Schriftträgers 
            (tei:sourceDoc) beschreiben. In diesem Kontext werden unterschiedliche Oberflächen 
            (tei:surface) erfasst (z.B. die Flächen einer rechteckigen Stele, die Innen- und Außenseite einer Vase oder Vorder- und Rückseite eines Kodexblattes) und mit digitalen Faksimiles verbunden, die zuvor aus analogen Repräsentationen oder direkt vom Objekt, etwa über 3D-Scanning, erstellt wurden.5 Diese Oberflächen enthalten einen bis mehrere Textbereiche 
            (tei:zone), die mit Hilfe des Text-Bild-Link-Editors (TBLE) des TextGrid-Laboratorys (Neuroth / Rapp / Söring 2015) mit einzelnen Bereichen des Faksimiles assoziiert wurden. In diesem Rahmen können weitere Informationen, wie bspw. Orientierung oder Ausmaße erhoben werden. Die inhaltliche Erschließung der einzelnen Hieroglyphenblöcke und Schriftzeichen werden wiederum separat in 
                tei:body  erfasst. 
            
         Die Beschreibung des logo-sylabischen Schriftsystems des klassischen Maya ist aufgrund ihrer Eigenarten und Komplexität eine herausfordernde Aufgabe. Nicht nur aufgrund ihrer vergleichsweise jungen Entzifferungsgeschichte seit den 1950er Jahren gibt es noch eine Reihe von Desiderata bei Lesbarkeit und Verständnis des Schriftsystems. Trotz verschiedener Zeichenkataloge ist die genaue Anzahl von Zeichen noch immer nicht gesichert, damit auch nicht, wie viele Zeichen nicht oder nur unzureichend entziffert sind. Die Inventarisierung war auch bisher eine Herausforderung wegen multipler Klassifizierungsansätze der Schriftzeichen, etwa über die Form (Thompson 1962) oder die Ikonizität (Macri / Looper 2003). Das Projekt hat erstmals eine Systematik anhand einer taxonomischen Beschreibung der Bildung von Graphemvarianten entwickelt und trennt auf diesem Wege auch das bedeutungstragende Zeichen von seiner graphischen Repräsentation. Die wissenschaftliche Deutung des Zeichens, seine linguistische Information, wird dabei über ein System von Kriterien, die durch Aussagenlogik miteinander verbunden sind, qualitativ bewertet. Darauf basierend wird die Plausibilität der jeweiligen Entzifferungshypothese automatisiert eingestuft. Aufgrund der Dynamik der Entzifferungsarbeit ist es demnach nicht möglich, Transliterationen als Basis für die Textauszeichnung zu benutzen (Diehr et al. 2017: 1191-1192).
         Deshalb und wegen des Umstands, dass es innerhalb der Mayaforschung keinen Konsens zum Umgang mit den derzeitigen Unicode-Vorschlägen bzw. -Implementierungen zur Mayaschrift gibt (Pallan Gayol / Anderson 2018), verfolgt das TWKM einen eigenen Ansatz zur Schriftbeschreibung gemäß der TEI-P5 Richtlinien.6 Die Graphe 
            (tei:g) sind in nahezu rechteckigen Blöcken angeordnet 
            (tei:ab[@type=’glyph-block’]), die ungefähr einem Wort entsprechen. Jedes Zeichen wird mit einer URI-Referenz 
            (@ref) versehen, die auf die konkrete Graphrepräsentation im Zeichenkatalog verweist. Aufgrund der komplexen Graphematik können einzelne Graphe wiederum zu Gruppen im Block zusammengefasst werden 
            (tei:seg[@type=’glyph-group’]), z.B. bei einer Infigierung. Über weitere Attribute 
            (@corresp und 
                @rend) wird so die Position jedes einzelnen Graphs im Block und in Relation zu den anderen Graphen eindeutig beschrieben.
            
         So kann der hieroglyphische Inhalt eines Texts maschinenlesbar dokumentiert werden, wobei die Entzifferungsgeschichte und hiermit einhergehende Veränderungen und Reinterpretationen einzelner Schriftzeichen auf der Ebene des Zeichenkatalogs abgebildet werden: Sollte sich die Interpretation eines Zeichens beispielsweise hinsichtlich seiner Semantik im Verlauf der fortschreitenden Forschung ändern, so bleibt die hieroglyphische Auszeichnung aller im TWKM erschlossenen Mayatexte unangetastet. Die Veränderung muss lediglich im Zeichenkatalog dokumentiert werden und steht danach als Information für alle Texte zur Verfügung. Gleiches gilt für die Entzifferungsgeschichte eines spezifischen Texts: Sollte die Deutung eines Graphems in einem konkreten Maya-Text revidiert werden, so erfolgt diese Änderung im Zeichenkatalog. Neu klassifizierte Zeichen werden im Zeichenkatalog durch die Relation owl:sameAs7 mit den betreffenden falsch klassifizierten Zeichen verbunden. Damit ist garantiert, dass vormals falsch klassifizierte Zeichen weiterhin über deren URI auffindbar sind.8 Die im Korpus referenzierten URIs vormals falsch klassifizierter Zeichen müssen dadurch nicht geändert werden und das kodierte Korpus bedarf keiner nachträglichen Überarbeitung.
         
            
            
               Abbildung 2. Übergang der maschinenlesbaren Textauszeichnung zur linguistischen Analyse
				
         
         Während die Kodierung des Korpus und die Klassifikation der Zeichen  in TextGrid vorgenommen werden, findet die linguistische Analyse der Mayatexte  in einem separaten Analysetool statt.9 Über eine eigens entwickelte Schnittstelle liest das Programm  sowohl die TEI/XML-Dokumente als auch die in RDF gespeicherten Transliterationswerte aus TextGrid aus und bereitet sie für den folgenden mehrstufigen Annotationsprozess von Transliteration, Transkription und morphosyntaktischer Glossierung auf. Wo bisher nur vereinzelt Studien vorliegen (vgl. Wichmann 2006), besteht nun das Ziel, eine umfassende Grammatik für das Klassische Maya zu entwickeln. Durch ein Verfahren der mehrstufigen Annotation bei gleichzeitigem Anlegen paralleler Analysepfade, die sich jederzeit auf die entsprechende Belegstelle zurückverfolgen lassen, sind ideale Voraussetzungen zur Durchführung grammatikalischer Bestimmungen und Untersuchungen geschaffen.
         Im Fokus des TWKM steht die multiperspektivische Erforschung der Sprache und Schrift des Klassischen Maya. Die über die ganze Welt verstreuten und im Original größtenteils nicht zugänglichen Schriftzeugnisse der antiken Mayakultur werden mittels miteinander verknüpfter Ansätze digital erschlossen. In diesem Rahmen finden zahlreiche Technologien Anwendung, um das derzeitige Wissen über die Maya-Texte nach wissenschaftlichen Standards zu dokumentieren und sukzessive auszuweiten. Durch die kombinierte Verwendung von Ontologien zur Beschreibung und Verknüpfung einzelner Ressourcen auf Metadatenebene einerseits und TEI-P5 XML zur maschinenlesbaren Beschreibung der der Textressourcen andererseits ergibt sich ein engmaschiges Netz aus Informationen zu einem längst vergangenen Kapitel der Menschheitsgeschichte. Ein Netz, das unterschiedliche Zugänge für die wissenschaftliche Forschung sowie für die interessierte Öffentlichkeit bereithält, um tiefe Einblicke in einen vor dem Vergessen bewahrten Teil des kulturellen Erbes zu gewähren - frei, transparent und nachnutzbar.10
         
      
      
         
            
               http://mayawoerterbuch.de
            
             Siehe hierzu die Definition in http://uahost.uantwerpen.be/lse/index.php/lexicon/markup-standoff/. Die Methode wurde erstmalig beschrieben von Thompson / McKelvie (1997).
             “Virtuell” meint, dass der Zusammenhang nicht durch die hierarchische Struktur der Daten vorgegeben, sondern durch den Verweis strukturell entkoppelter Daten aufeinander hergestellt wird. Es ist dementsprechend ein Zusammenhang, der erst durch die Verarbeitung der verknüpften Daten in einem Informationssystem kultiviert wird, d.h. erst durch die Anwendung von Informationsprozessen wird aus den verknüpften Daten eine zusammenhängende Information erzeugt.
             Die TEI-Community führt eine anhaltende Diskussion über Vor- und Nachteile des Stand-Off Markups und dessen fortlaufender Entwicklung (vgl. Bański 2010 und Spadini / Turska / Broughton 2015). Dabei sind Flexibilität, Interoperabilität und Nachhaltigkeit der erzeugten Dokumente jene zentralen Faktoren, die in den Diskussionen immer wieder miteinander abzuwägen sind: Durch die Anwendung von Prozessierungsmechanismen, die benötigt werden, um die Daten der unterschiedlichen Dokumente zusammenzuführen, ergeben sich Probleme für die Nachhaltigkeit und Nachnutzung (vgl. Rehm et al. 2010). Dem gegenüber stehen die vielseitigen Möglichkeiten und Potenziale der Datenanreicherung und -verarbeitung: Separate Ressourcen können unabhängig voneinander bearbeitet und gleichzeitig flexibel ineinander verschränkt werden. Dadurch entstehen semantisch-reichhaltige Dokumente mit hoher Informationsdichte. Diese Vorteile zeigen sich insbesondere im Umgang mit (überlappenden) Hierarchien und Annotationen (z.B. Ide / Romary 2007 und Dipper 2005).
             Das Projekt bemüht sich um die Nachnutzung von digitalen Faksimiles, die aber für viele Bereiche noch nicht oder in nicht ausreichender Qualität vorliegen. Über Kooperationen werden daher Archive digitalisiert, so etwa die etwa 40.000 Objekte umfassende Fotothek von Prof. Karl Herbert Mayer, Graz, von denen bereits über 5.700 Digitalisate publiziert werden konnten ( https://classicmayan.kor.de.dariah.eu/). Für die Arbeiten zum 3D-Scanning siehe https://blog.sketchfab.com/from-the-rainforest-to-virtual-light-scanning-maya-hieroglyphs/.
             Diese Herausforderungen sind auch bei anderen antiken, nicht-alphabetischen Schriftsystemen gegeben (vgl. Rossi / De Santis 2019). Zu diesem Zweck wurde zur Vereinheitlichung von Auszeichnungen 2015 die interdisziplinäre Arbeitsgruppe EnCoWS (Encoding Complex Writing Systems) ins Leben gerufen.
             Zur Definition von owl:sameAs siehe: https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/#sameAs-def.
             Durch diese Methode werden unter anderem auch Untersuchungen zur Klassifikationsgeschichte der Schriftzeichen ermöglicht.
             Eine erste Beschreibung des sich in der Entwicklung befindenden Tools ‘ALMAH’ findet sich im Jahresbericht 2017 des Projekts (Grube et al. 2018: 5-7).
             Die erzeugten Daten werden sukzessive auf dem zukünftigen Projektportal https://www.classicmayan.org/ zugänglich gemacht werden. Des Weiteren werden die Korpusdaten auch frei zugänglich im TextGrid Repository veröffentlicht werden. Die im Projekt entstandenen Schemata sind im öffentlichen Bereich unseres Git-Repositoriums einsehbar und können unter einer CC BY-4.0 Lizenz genutzt werden: https://projects.gwdg.de/projects/documentations/repository.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Bańksi, Piotr (2010):
                  Why TEI stand-off annotation doesn't quite work and why you might want to use it nevertheless, 
                        in: Proceedings of Balisage 2010. Series on Markup Technologies  5 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol5.Banski01
                   [letzter Zugriff: 05.01.2019].
                    
               
                  Diehr, Franziska  / Gronemeyer, Sven  / Prager, Christian / Brodhun, Maximilian  / Wagner, Elisabeth / Diederichs, Katja / Grube, Nikolai (2017):
                  Modellierung eines digitalen Zeichenkatalogs für die Hieroglyphen des Klassischen Maya, 
                        in: 
                        Eibl, Maximilian / Gaedke, Martin  (eds.):
                  Proceedings der INFORMATIK 2017,
                         Bonn: Gesellschaft für Informatik, 1185–1196 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.18420/in2017_120
                   [letzer Zugriff 1.10.2018].
                    
               
                  Dipper, Stefanie (2005):
                  XML-based Stand-off Representation and Exploitation of Multi-Level Linguistic Annotation, 
                        in: Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage 2005 39–50.
                    
               
                  Grube, Nikolai / Prager, Christian / Diederichs, Katja / Gronemeyer, Sven / Grothe, Antje / Tamignaux, Céline / Wagner, Elisabeth / Brodhun, Maximilian / Diehr, Franziska (2018):
                  Arbeitsbericht 2017, 
                        in: Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya, Arbeitsstelle der Nordrhein-Westfälischen Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Künste an der Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn 
                        
                     http://dx.doi.org/10.20376/IDIOM-23665556.18.pr005.de
                   [letzter Zugriff: 05.01.2019].
                    
               
                  Ide, Nancy / Romary, Laurent (2007):
                  Towards International Standards for Language Resources, 
                        in: 
                        Dybkjaer, Laila / Hemsen, Holmer / Minker, Wolfgang (eds.):
                  Evaluation of Text and Speech Systems, 
                        Springer 263–284 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-5817-2_9
                   [letzter Zugriff: 05.01.2019].
                    
               
                  Macri, Martha J. / Looper, Matthew G. (2003):
                  The New Catalog of Maya Hieroglyphs: The Classic Period Inscriptions, 
                        in: The Civilization of the American Indian Series 247.  Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
                    
               
                  Neuroth Heike / Rapp,  Andrea / Söring, Sibylle (2015):
                  TextGrid: Von der Community – für die Community. Eine Virtuelle Forschungsumgebung für die Geisteswissenschaften,
                        Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.3249/webdoc-3947
                    [letzer Zugriff 1.10.2018].
                    
               
                  Pallan Gayol, Carlos / Anderson, Deborah (2018):
                  Achieving Machine-Readable Mayan Text via Unicode: Blending “Old World” Script-encoding with Novel Digital Approaches, 
                        in: 
                        Ortega, Élika / Worthey, Glen / Galina, Isabel / Priani, Ernesto (eds.):
                  Book of Abstracts Digital Humanities 2018, 
                        Puentes-Bridges 256–261.
                    
               
                  Rehm, Georg / Schonefeld, Oliver / Trippel, Thorsten / Witt, Andreas (2010):
                  Sustainability of linguistic resources revisited, 
                        in: Proceedings of the International Symposium on XML for the Long Haul: Issues in the Long-term Preservation of XML. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies 6 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol6.Witt01
                   [letzter Zugriff: 05.01.2019].
                    
               
                  Rossi, Irene / De Santis, Annamaria (2019):
                  Crossing Experiences in Digital Epigraphy: From Practice to Discipline,
                        Berlin: De Gruyter.
                    
               
                  Spadini, Elena / Turska, Magdalena / Broughton, Misha (2015):
                  TEI Standoff Markup - A work in progress, 
                        in: TEI Members Meeting 2015 
                        
                     urn:nbn:nl:ui:17-f4d0afe1-5c62-4999-8271-7e8cadcd4805
                   [letzter Zugriff: 05.01.2019].
                    
               
                  Textdatenbank und Wörterbuch des Klassischen Maya (2017): Ontology of the Sign Catalogue for Classic Mayan
                  
                     https://classicmayan.org/documentations/idiomschema.html
                   [letzter Zugriff 1.10.2018].  
                    
               
                  Thompson, J. Eric S. (1962):    
                        A Catalog of Maya Hieroglyphs, 
                        in: The Civilization of the American Indian Series 62. Norman, OK.: University of Oklahoma Press.
                    
               
                  Thompson, Henry S. / McKelvie, David (1997):
                  Hyperlink semantics for standoff markup of read-only documents, 
                        in: Proceedings of SGML Europe.
                    
               
                  Wichmann, Søren (2006):
                  Mayan Historical Linguistics and Epigraphy: A New Synthesis, 
                        in: Annual Review of Anthropology 35: 279-294.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Seit der „Geburt des Zeitzeugen“ (Sabrow/Frei 2012) sind in Deutschland und Europa Hunderte von Oral History-Sammlungen entstanden. Zu den thematischen Schwerpunkten dieser „Era of the Witness“ (Wieviorka 2006) zählten neben der Zeit des Nationalsozialismus auch die Erfahrungen von DDR-Bürger/innen sowie die Geschlechter-, Migrations- und Minderheitengeschichte (Klingenböck 2009, Leh 2015). Vor allem seit den 1980er Jahren entstanden neben groß angelegten Dokumentationsprojekten mit jeweils Hunderten von Interviews auch zahlreiche kleine Sammlungen im Bereich von Geschichtswerkstätten, Museen und Gedenkstätten.
         Audio-visuell aufgezeichnete lebensgeschichtliche Interviews sind zu einer wichtigen Quelle der Geschichtswissenschaft und ihrer Nachbardisziplinen geworden (Andresen/Apel/Heinsohn 2015). Allerdings ist der Status Quo der Sicherung, Erschließung und Bereitstellung von Oral History-Sammlungen an den verschiedenen Einrichtungen noch unzureichend. 
         Andererseits sind mit der raschen Entwicklung der Video- und Webtechnologie seit der Jahrtausendwende große digitale Oral History-Archive entstanden, die neue Analysemöglichkeiten bieten (Apostolopoulos/Barricelli/Koch 2016). Einige der am besten erschlossenen Sammlungen stehen am Center für Digitale Systeme der Freien Universität Berlin bereit: Das „Visual History Archive“ der USC Shoah Foundation umfasst über 53.000 Interviews, von denen CeDiS 950 Interviews transkribiert hat (
                www.vha.fu-berlin.de, 
                www.zeugendershoah.de). Die 590 Interviews von „Zwangsarbeit 1939-1945“ wurden in einem spezialisierten Backend mit Workflow-Management wissenschaftlich erschlossen und in einem mehrsprachigen Online-Archiv mit timecodierten Transkripten, facettierter Suche, interaktiver Karte und Notizfunktion bereitgestellt (
                www.zwangsarbeit-archiv.de, Apostolopoulos/Pagenstecher 2013, Pagenstecher 2018b). Das über 90 Interviews umfassende Projekt „Erinnerungen an die Okkupation in Griechenland“ setzt den gesamten Prozess von der Interviewführung bis zur Online-Bereitstellung um (
                www.occupation-memories.org, Droumpouki 2016). Auch die 150 Video-Interviews der britischen Sammlung „Refugee Voices“ und die 4.500 Interviews des „Fortunoff Archives“ der Yale University stehen bereit. 
            
         In Vorbereitung sind Sammlungen zur deutsch-chilenischen sowie zur DDR-Geschichte sowie ein sammlungsübergreifender Katalog von Zeitzeugeninterviews. In Zusammenarbeit mit Sammlungsinhabern wie dem Archiv „Deutsches Gedächtnis“ an der FernUniversität Hagen und linguistischen Experten wie dem Bayerischen Archiv für Sprachsignale an der LMU München werden darüber hinaus zukunftsträchtige Wege der digitalen Archivierung, Aufbereitung und Analyse von Oral History-Interviews gesucht.
         
            Herausforderungen der digitalen Erschließung
            Digitale Interview-Archive wie „Zwangsarbeit 1939-1945“ stellen einen ersten Schritt der Oral History in Richtung Digital Humanities dar, aber noch nicht mehr: Die Archive konnten nur mit hohem manuellen Aufwand erstellt werden. Sie sind Einzelprojekte mit unterschiedlichen Erschließungssystemen, was eine sammlungsübergreifende Recherche erschwert. Für digitale Analysen sind die Daten noch unzureichend aufbereitet. Zum Schutz von Urheber- und Persönlichkeitsrechten unterliegen die Bestände unterschiedlichen Zugangsregelungen. 
            Damit sind einige der Herausforderungen angesprochen, die mit der digitalen Kuratierung von Oral History-Interviews verbunden sind: Spracherkennung, Alignment, Strukturierung, Interoperabilität, Forschungsethik. Die Digital Humanities können hier Lösungswege oder Anregungen anbieten. Gleichzeitig werfen die audiovisuellen, biografisch-narrativen Daten hier besondere technologische, methodische und ethische Fragen auf.
            Die audiovisuellen Medien bilden den Kern der Oral History; für Recherche, Analyse und Publikation sind aber textgebundene, timecodierte Transkriptionen von zentraler Bedeutung. Die automatische Spracherkennung hat in den letzten Jahren erhebliche Fortschritte gemacht, liefert aber für die oft dialektal und in mäßiger Aufnahmequalität vorliegenden Zeitzeugen-Interviews heute noch keine Transkripte in lesefähiger Qualität. Immerhin kann sie aber die Volltextsuche in nicht transkribierten Interviews unterstützen (Stanislav/Švec/Ircing 2016). 
            Um die Transkripte mit den mehrstündigen Audio- oder Videoaufnahmen zu koppeln, müssen Timecodes in die Texte eingefügt werden. Erst diese Segmentierung erlaubt eine Volltextsuche in der Audiodatei und eine synchrone Untertiteldarstellung. Verschiedene Programme unterstützen eine manuelle Transkription und Segmentierung, die aber zeitaufwändig ist. Die in der Linguistik genutzten Werkzeuge wie ELAN sind den meisten Oral Historians zu komplex, so dass in der Transkriptionspraxis meistens unstrukturierte Textdokumente erstellt werden. Erst jüngst sind automatische Alignment-Werkzeuge wie WebMAUS (
                    https://clarin.phonetik.uni-muenchen.de/BASWebServices
               ) so leistungsfähig geworden, dass auch mehrstündige Oral History-Interviews damit bearbeitet werden können. Ein nutzerfreundliches Transkriptionsportal für die Oral History ist in Vorbereitung (
                    https://www.phonetik.uni-muenchen.de/apps/oh-portal/). 
                
            Bisher werden Interviews nach unterschiedlichen Richtlinien und Methoden transkribiert und indexiert. Anzustreben ist dagegen eine sammlungsübergreifend standardisierte, maschinenlesbare Auszeichnung der Interviews und ihrer timecodierten Transkripte, die oft auch weitere Auszeichnungselemente, z. B. Sprecherwechsel oder Ortsnamen, enthalten. Damit über die reine Textsuche hinaus auch strukturnutzende Suchverfahren möglich sind, müssen die Transkriptionen mit diesen verschiedenen Annotations-Ebenen strukturiert abgebildet werden. Dafür empfiehlt sich ein auf den TEI-Guidelines der Text Encoding Initiative (
                    http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/de/html/TS.html) basierendes Schema, das derzeit für die an der FU Berlin erschlossenen Interviewsammlungen erarbeitet wird. Aus linguistischer Sicht wurde dafür der ISO-Standard 24624:2016 entwickelt (Schmidt 2011). 
                
            Eine interoperable Erschließung wird erschwert durch die unterschiedlichen Communities, in denen Oral History-Bestände beheimatet sind. Je nach Anbindung der Interview-Sammlungen an ein Archiv, eine Bibliothek, ein Museum oder ein sprachwissenschaftliches Zentrum kommen unterschiedliche Metadatenstandards zur Verwendung. In der Archivwelt ist EAD verbreitet, die angelsächsischen Bibliotheken nutzen MARC21, CLARIN setzt auf das CMDI-Framework. Übergreifende Crosswalks und Discovery-Systeme fehlen, was eine sammlungsübergreifende Recherche erschwert.
            Schließlich sind die Persönlichkeitsrechte der Interviewten besonders zu beachten. Angesichts der kollaborativen Produktion sensibler Daten im Interviewprozess hat die Oral History-Community schon früh über forschungsethische Verantwortung diskutiert (Leh 2000). Für die digitale Bereitstellung und Analyse von Interviews ist daher große Sensibilität und ein abgestuftes Rechtemanagement erforderlich, oft auch eine Anonymisierung der Interviews. Dies stellt – zusammen mit Fragen der Langzeitarchivierung und persistenten Auffindbarkeit von Audio- und Videodateien – eine weitere Herausforderung dar. 
         
         
            Forschungsfragen und Analysemöglichkeiten
            Während sich die Linguistik verstärkt für die umfangreichen Datenkorpora der Oral History interessiert (Kasten/Roller/Wilbur 2017, Armaselu/Danescu/Klein 2018), bleiben viele Historiker/innen skeptisch gegenüber quantifizierenden, womöglich dekontextualisierenden Analysemethoden. Hier dominieren hermeneutische und textbasierte Zugänge in der Auswertung weniger, oft selbst geführter Interviews anhand der Transkriptionen. Nun aber erleichtern die digitalen Interview-Archive die Sekundäranalyse vorhandener Interviews unmittelbar anhand der Ton- und Videoaufnahmen. Damit entstehen neue Forschungsfragen, einerseits in Bezug auf Multimodalität und Interaktion in der Gesprächssituation, andererseits auf komparative und korpuslinguistische Auswertungsmöglichkeiten.
            Eine Fallstudie untersuchte Erzählmuster und Ausdrucksweisen, Intonation und Mimik in zwei Interviews aus dem „Visual History Archive“ und dem Online-Archiv „Zwangsarbeit 1939-1945“. In den beiden Aufnahmen von 1998 und 2006 berichtet die gleiche Zeitzeugin über ihr Leben: Anita Lasker-Wallfisch, britische Cellistin, Holocaust-Überlebende und Breslauer Jüdin. Im Vergleich zeigt das spätere Interview einen klareren Anspruch auf epistemische Autorität sowie eine gewachsene narrative Erfahrung und performative Leistung (Pagenstecher 2018a). Dabei fällt besonders die nonverbale Interaktion auf: Gerade in kritischen Momenten schmiedet die Erzählerin eine visuell-argumentative Allianz mit dem Interviewer. Diese narrativen Muster blieben unbemerkt bei einer konventionellen Interview-Analyse anhand des Transkripts. Digitale Methoden helfen auch, die im Zentrum jedes Interviews stehende Arbeitsallianz zwischen Erzähler/in und Interviewer/in besser zu verstehen. Dieser mehr oder weniger versteckte Dialog ist zwar aus Sicht der praktischen Interviewführung vielfach empfehlend beschrieben, gelegentlich auch selbstkritisch reflektiert, aber noch kaum vergleichend analysiert worden (Pagenstecher/Pfänder 2017).
            Quantitative Ansätze können helfen, spezifische Erinnerungs- und Erzählmuster in großen Interviewsammlungen zu erkennen. Als Pilotstudie wird hier die Nutzung von Begriffen wie „Sklaverei“, „Sklavenarbeit“ oder „versklavt“ in den Interviews untersucht. Da die Daten für korpuslinguistische Tools noch nicht ausreichend exportierbar sind, werden hier nur die Analysemöglichkeiten des Online-Archivs „Zwangsarbeit 1939-1945“ genutzt. Seit den Nürnberger Prozessen wurde die nationalsozialistische Zwangsarbeit immer wieder in den historischen Kontext der Sklaverei gestellt. Im Laufe der Zeit bekam der Begriff „Sklavenarbeit“ in den verschiedenen Öffentlichkeiten der betroffenen Länder sehr unterschiedliche Konnotationen (vgl. Pagenstecher 2010). 
            Wie aber sprechen ehemaligen Zwangsarbeiter/innen 2005/2006, also kurz nach der Entschädigungsdebatte, geführten Interviews über ihre Erfahrung der „Sklavenarbeit“? Eine Volltextsuche nach dem Wortteil „*sklav*“ liefert Treffer in 140 von 477 Interviews. Der insgesamt in 29% aller Interviews auftauchende Sklaven-Begriff wird besonders häufig in italienischen (78%) und englischen (66%) Interviews verwendet. Dem entspricht die Verteilung auf Erfahrungsgruppen: Italienische Militärinternierte (60%) und jüdische Überlebende (42%) nutzen den Terminus häufiger, Religiös Verfolgte (14%) sowie Sinti und Roma (16%) seltener als der Durchschnitt. 
            Entscheidend ist dabei offensichtlich weniger die gruppenspezifische Erfahrung als der landesspezifische Erinnerungsdiskurs. So sprechen jüdische Überlebende in Israel oder Osteuropa seltener über Sklaventum als die im englischen Sprachraum Interviewten. Dass in angelsächsischen Ländern mehr über Sklaven gesprochen wird, liegt vermutlich an der dem Interviewprojekt vorausgehenden, längeren öffentlichen Debatte über die Zwangsarbeiter-Entschädigung, die vor allem dort stark vom Terminus Sklavenarbeit geprägt war. Typisch dafür war etwa die Schlagzeile „Nazi slaves take case to US“ (BBC 1999). Offenbar reagieren die Interviewten auf diese Diskurse, teilweise auch direkt auf sprachliche Vorgaben der Interviewer/innen. 
            Die Art der Zwangsarbeit spielt dagegen eine geringere Rolle; allerdings wird Sklaventum bei Erfahrungen im gemeinhin besonders schweren Einsatzbereich Bau/Steine/Erden (40%) häufiger erwähnt. Hier ist also eine genauere Untersuchung der Verwendungskontexte erforderlich. Zu prüfen ist beispielsweise, ob mit der „Sklaven“-Referenz eher eine damalige (Arbeits-, Gewalt- oder Diskriminierungs-)Erfahrung wiedergegeben oder eher aus heutiger (biografischer oder politischer) Sicht über eigene Erfahrungen reflektiert wird. Für solche Fragestellungen reicht der von der Korpus-Software angebotene Kontext von einigen Wörtern links und rechts der Fundstelle nicht aus. Hier ist ein Close Reading oder Viewing des Interviews erforderlich. 
         
         
            Resümee
            Anhand der digitalen Interview-Sammlungen an der Freien Universität Berlin skizzierte dieser Beitrag die Potentiale und Herausforderungen des Zusammenwirkens von Digital Humanities und Oral History in der Kuratierung und Analyse. 
            Digitale Technologien ermöglichen die softwaregestützte Sicherung, Erschließung und Bereitstellung von Zeitzeugen-Interviews sowie ihre sammlungsübergreifende Recherche und quellennahe Analyse. In Zukunft können auch quantitative Analysen genutzt werden, um individuelle und kollektive Muster des Erfahren, Erinnerns und Erzählens zu entdecken.
            Gewiss verliert das digital aufbereitete Zeugnis im Zeitalter der technischen Reproduzierbarkeit ein Stück seiner Aura. Seiner fundierten Analyse und sorgsamen, kontextualisierenden Interpretation sollte dies freilich keinen Abbruch tun. Die Digital Humanities eröffnen der Oral History jedenfalls faszinierende neue Forschungsperspektiven.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andresen, Knud / Apel, Linde / Heinsohn, Kirsten (eds.) (2015): 
                  Es gilt das gesprochene Wort. Oral History und Zeitgeschichte heute, 
                        Göttingen.
                    
               
                  Apostolopoulos, Nicolas / Pagenstecher, Cord (eds.) (2013): 
                  Erinnern an Zwangsarbeit. Zeitzeugen-Interviews in der digitalen Welt, 
                        Berlin.
                    
               
                  Apostolopoulos, Nicolas / Barricelli, Michele / Koch, Gertrud (eds.) (2016): 
                  Preserving Survivors' Memories. Digital Testimony Collections about Nazi Persecution: History, Education and Media, 
                        Berlin: Stiftung „Erinnerung, Verantwortung und Zukunft“ (EVZ), URL:
                        http://www.stiftung-evz.de/fileadmin/user_upload/EVZ_Uploads/Handlungsfelder/Auseinandersetzung_mit_der_Geschichte_01/Bildungsarbeit-mit-Zeugnissen/Testimonies_Band3_Web.pdf [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
               
               
                  Armaselu, Florentina / Danescu, Elena / Klein, Francois (2018):
                  Oral History and Linguistic Analysis. A Study in Digital and Contemporary European History,
                        in: CLARIN Annual Conference 2018 Proceedings: 11-15, URL:
                        https://office.clarin.eu/v/CE-2018-1292-CLARIN2018_ConferenceProceedings.pdf [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
                    
               
                  BBC (1999):
                  Nazi slaves take case to US, 
                        12.10.1999, URL:
                        http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/472104.stm [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
               
               
                  Droumpouki, Anna Maria (2016):
                  Erinnerungen an die Okkupation in Griechenland. Entstehung, Entwicklung und gesellschaftliche Bedeutung eines deutsch-griechischen Dokumentationsprojekts,
                        in: BIOS. Zeitschrift für Biographieforschung und Oral History, 29/1: 141-151. 
                        https://doi.org/10.3224/bios.v29i1.09 [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
               
               
                  Kasten, Erich / Roller, Katja / Wilbur, Joshua (eds.) (2017):
                  Oral History Meets Linguistics, 
                        Fürstenberg: SEC, 185-207, URL: 
                        http://www.siberian-studies.org/publications/orhili_E.html
                        [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
                    
               
                  Klingenböck, Gerda (2009): 
                  Stimmen aus der Vergangenheit. Interviews von Überlebenden des Nationalsozialismus in systematischen Sammlungen von 1945 bis heute, 
                        in: 
                        Daniel Baranowski (eds.): 
                  „Ich bin die Stimme der sechs Millionen“. Das Videoarchiv im Ort der Information,
                        Berlin: Stiftung Denkmal für die ermordeten Juden Europas, 27-40
                    
               
                  
                  
                  Leh, Almut (2000): 
                  Forschungsethische Probleme in der Zeitzeugenforschung, 
                        in: BIOS. Zeitschrift für Biographieforschung und Oral History, 13: 64-76
                    
               
                  Leh, Almut (2015):
                  Vierzig Jahre Oral History in Deutschland. Betrag zu einer Gegenwartsdiagnose von Zeitzeugenarchiven am Beispiel des Archivs ‚Deutsches Gedächtnis‘, 
                        in: Westfälische Forschungen. Zeitschrift des LWL-Instituts für westfälische Regionalgeschichte, 65: 255-268
                    
               
                  Pagenstecher, Cord (2010):
                  ‘We were treated like slaves.‘ Remembering forced labor for Nazi Germany, 
                        in: 
                        Gesa Mackenthun, Raphael Hörmann (eds.), 
                        Human Bondage in the Cultural Contact Zone. Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Slavery and Its Discourses, 
                        Münster: Waxmann 275-291.
                    
               
                  Pagenstecher, Cord / Pfänder, Stefan (2017):
                  Hidden dialogues. Towards an interactional understanding of Oral History interviews, 
                        in: 
                        Kasten, Erich / Roller, Katja / Wilbur, Joshua (eds.): 
                  Oral History Meets Linguistics, 
                        Fürstenberg: SEC: 185-207
                    
               
                  Pagenstecher, Cord (2018a): 
                  Testimonies in digital environments: comparing and (de-)contextualising interviews with Holocaust survivor Anita Lasker-Wallfisch, 
                        in: Oral History Journal, 46 (2): 109-118
                    
               
                  Pagenstecher, Cord (2018b): 
                  Curating and Analyzing Oral History Collections, 
                        in: CLARIN Annual Conference 2018 Proceedings , ed. by Inguna Skadin and Maria Eskevich: 34-38, URL: 
                        https://office.clarin.eu/v/CE-2018-1292-CLARIN2018_ConferenceProceedings.pdf
                  [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
               
               
                  Sabrow, Martin / Frei, Norbert (eds.) (2012): 
                  Die Geburt des Zeitzeugen nach 1945,
                        Göttingen: Wallstein
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas (2011):
                  A TEI-based Approach to Standardising Spoken Language Transcription, 
                        in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 1, DOI:10.4000/jtei.142.
                    
               
                  Stanislav, Petr / Švec, Jan / Ircing, Pavel (2016):
                  An Engine for Online Video Search in Large Archives of the Holocaust Testimonies, 
                        in: Interspeech 2016: Show & Tell Contribution, 
                        https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/Interspeech_2016/pdfs/2016.PDF
                  [zuletzt abgerufen: 10. Januar 2019]
               
               
                  Wieviorka, Annette (2006): 
                  The Era of the Witness, 
                        New York.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Der Webservice correspSearch
            1
             wird an der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften entwickelt, um digitale und gedruckte Briefeditionen editionsübergreifend zu vernetzen und durchsuchbar zu machen. Darüber hinaus sollen die Briefmetadaten mit correspSearch für neue digitale Forschungsmethoden (wie z.B. aus der Historischen Netzwerkforschung) bereitgestellt werden. Mittlerweile sind über 44.000 edierte Briefe in correspSearch nachgewiesen.
         
         
            Ein wesentlicher Bestandteil von correspSearch ist die Möglichkeit, den Datenbestand mit Metadaten zu eigenen - digitalen oder gedruckten - Briefeditionen zu erweitern. Durch die damit einhergehende Standardisierung der Metadaten auf der Grundlage  der Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) werden Editionen für die digitale Vernetzung erschlossen. Je mehr Briefmetadaten bereitgestellt und  aggregiert werden, desto größer ist der Nutzen dieser Daten für die Recherche und Forschung. Mit dem CMIF Creator erfasste Daten werden im „Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format” (CMIF) kodiert, das von der TEI Correspondence Special Interest Group entwickelt und gepflegt wird. Anschließend werden die TEI XML-Daten auf Anbieterseite online verfügbar gemacht und vom Webservice per URL abgerufen. Die Metadaten der Briefeditionen werden somit dezentral aggregiert und erfordern nicht den Betrieb einer zentralen Speicherlösung. Der Webservice correspSearch, sowie das zugrundeliegende CMIF und das TEI-Elementset correspDesc wurden 2018 mit dem 
            Rahtz Prize for TEI Ingenuity
            2
             ausgezeichnet.
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 1. Oberfläche des CMIF Creator, Schritt 1: Metadaten.
				
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 2. Listenansicht der Briefdatensätze.
				
         
         
            War es bis vor kurzem nötig, das CMIF manuell zu kodieren, bietet der 
            CMIF Creator
            3
             nun eine benutzerfreundliche grafische Oberfläche, um eigene Brief-Metadaten in das nötige Format zu übertragen.
            4
             Der mittlerweile in seiner zweiten Version verfügbare CMIF Creator bietet eine einfach zugängliche Möglichkeit, online und browserbasiert Briefeditionen in TEI-konforme CMIF-Dateien zu übertragen. Diese können dann in das Datenbanksystem von correspSearch überführt werden. Durch die browserbasierte Anwendung, die nicht auf serverseitige Speicherroutinen angewiesen ist, können Nutzer*innen die gesamte Verarbeitung lokal ausführen. Das bedeutet, dass die Nutzer*innen jederzeit vollständige Kontrolle über ihre Daten haben, da diese ausschließlich lokal gespeichert werden. Das Zwischenspeichern und Laden begonnener CMIF-Dateien ermöglicht weiterhin eine Bearbeitung über einen längeren Zeitraum. Der CMIF Creator unterstützt die Abfrage von Normdaten der 
            Gemeinsamen Normdatei
             (GND) der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek
            5
             über die von 
            lobid
             bereitgestellte API
            6
            , sowie das Abrufen von ortsbezogenen Normdaten aus der Datenbank des Ortsnamendienstes 
            GeoNames
            7
            , und ermöglicht eine in das User Interface integrierte Auswahl und Zuweisung von Normdaten zu Korrespondent*innen und Orten. Die Unterstützung von Normdaten ist essentiell, da correspSearch  für die Auflösung der Ambiguitäten von Personen- und Ortsnamen wesentlich auf die Nutzung von eindeutigen Normdaten-IDs zurückgreift. Die Oberfläche des Editors ist bewusst einfach und gleichzeitig so flexibel wie möglich gestaltet, um das CMIF Format im Frontend möglichst gut abzubilden und auch für weniger technisch versierte Nutzer*innen verfügbar zu machen. 
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 3. Listenauswahl von Normdaten.
				
         
         
            In den letzten Jahren hat sich JavaScript durch die breite Verwendung von hochentwickelten JavaScript-Frameworks zu einer der zentralen Skriptsprachen im Bereich des Frontend-Development entwickelt. Das zugrundeliegende Datenformat JSON bietet seinerseits eine bewährte und einfache Möglichkeit der Datenspeicherung im Frontend. Da XML-Frameworks oder -Bibliotheken für einen browserbasierten Editor dieses Umfangs als weitestgehend veraltet
            8
             und unzureichend performant evaluiert wurden, erfolgte die Entscheidung schließlich zugunsten einer JavaScript- und JSON-basierten Anwendung. Durch die Crossplatform-Tauglichkeit von JavaScript bietet sich in der Perspektive darüber hinaus großer Spielraum für die Weiterentwicklung des CMIF Creators analog zum Format und den Bedürfnissen der Nutzer*innen.
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 4. Ansicht eines Briefdatensatzes.
				
         
         
            Während der Arbeit im Editor verbleiben die Daten im JSON-Format und ermöglichen so eine dynamische Nutzung im Kontext des dem Editor zugrundeliegenden reaktiven JavaScript-Frameworks 
            vue.js
            9
            . Durch die Verwendung von 
            vue.js 
            in Verbindung mit dem CSS-Framework 
            Bootstrap
            10
             wird jede Eingabe und Änderung der Nutzer*innen unmittelbar im JSON-Datenmodell abgebildet. Beim Speicherungsvorgang werden die JSON-Daten über die correspSearch-eigene API in valides XML serialisiert, das dann später von correspSearch abgerufen werden kann. Im Falle von invaliden Eingaben enthält der CMIF Creator interne Validierungsfunktionen, die sowohl nach der Eingabe in einzelnen Feldern, als auch vor dem abschließenden Speichervorgang, die Eingaben auf technische Korrektheit überprüft. Finden sich Fehler, so werden diese nicht nur lokalisiert, sondern auch verlinkt, sodass Nutzer*innen direkt zum entsprechenden Eintrag springen können. Beim Laden von validen XML-Dateien in den Editor findet die Umwandlung in JSON ebenfalls über die correspSearch-API statt. Der CMIF Creator wird als OpenSource-Software entwickelt und unter der GNU LGPL lizensiert. Die Quellen sind auf der GitHub-Seite von correspSearch
            11
             frei zugänglich.
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 5. Bei fehlerhaften Einträgen kann die CMIF-Datei nur als JSON-Entwurf gespeichert werden.
				
         
         
            
            
               Abbildung 6. Gibt es keine Fehler, können die Daten als valide .xml-Datei gespeichert werden.
				
         
      
      
         
            
               https://correspsearch.net/
            
            
               http://www.bbaw.de/presse/pressemitteilungen/pressemitteilungen-2018/Rahtz-Prize-for-TEI-Ingenuity-2018
            
            
               https://correspsearch.net/creator/index.xql
            
             Der CMIF Creator basiert auf der schon in Andert et al. 2015 geäußerten Annahme, dass die Eingabe von Briefmetadaten möglichst effizient gestaltet sein sollte. Im Gegensatz zu dem von Andert et al. skizzierten Tool arbeitet der CMIF Creator allerdings standardbasiert. Darüber hinaus überlässt der CMIF Creator die Daten in der Obhut ihrer Ersteller*innen, die jederzeit vollständige Einsicht in die und volle Kontrolle über die (lokal) gespeicherten XML-Daten haben.
            
               http://www.dnb.de/
            
            
               http://lobid.org/gnd/api
            
            
               http://www.geonames.org/
            
             So lief z.B. die Unterstützung für betterForm in existdb Anfang 2018 aus, siehe hierzu auch den Eintrag in der Mailingliste https://sourceforge.net/p/exist/mailman/message/36239166/ bzw. den entsprechenden Issue https://github.com/eXist-db/exist/pull/1736
            
            
               https://vuejs.org/
            
            
               https://bootstrap-vue.js.org/
            
            
               https://github.com/correspSearch
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andert, Martin / Frank Berger / Paul Molitor / Jörg Ritter (2015):
                  An Optimized Platform for Capturing Metadata of Historical Correspondence,
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing Advance Access 30 (4): 471–480.
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu027.
                  
               
               
                  Dumont, Stefan (2016):
                  CorrespSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters,
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Nr. Issue 10 (Dezember).
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.1742.
                  
               
               
                  Stadler, Peter (2012):
                  Normdateien in der Edition,
                        editio 26: 174–83.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium, Hrsg. o. J. 
                  TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.4.0 vom 23.07.2018.
                        TEI Consortium.
                        
                     http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/.
                  [zuletzt abgerufen: 12. Oktober 2018]
                    
               
                  TEI Correspondence SIG, Hrsg. (2015):
                  Correspondence Metadata Interchange Format (CMIF),
                        
                     https://github.com/TEI-Correspondence-SIG/CMIF.
                  
               
            
         
      
   



      
         In Kooperation der Universität Bern und des 
                Cologne Center for eHumanities CCeH entsteht seit August 2016 die Editions- und Forschungsplattform 
                hallerNet, die im April 2019 veröffentlicht werden soll. Eine Spezialität von 
                hallerNet sind die systematischen Verknüpfungen zwischen grossen Quellenkorpora und umfangreichen Metadaten, woraus sich ein grosses Analysepotenzial ergibt, das sich z.B. in explorativen Visualisierungen nutzen lässt.
            
         
            Metadaten aus drei Jahrzehnten
            In 
                    hallerNet integriert werden die umfangreichen prosopografischen und bibliografischen Strukturdaten, die in Form einer relationalen Verbunddatenbank seit anfangs der 1990er-Jahre im Rahmen der beiden SNF-Projekte zum Universalgelehrten Albrecht von Haller (1708-1777)1 und zur aufgeklärten Reformsozietät 
                    Oekonomische Gesellschaft Bern (gegr. 1759)2 erhoben worden waren. Ein mehrjähriges Transformationsprojekt (Kreditvolumen 1.18 Mio CHF) überführt diese untereinander vielfältig verknüpften Daten (vgl. Abb. 1) zu rund 48'000 Publikationen, 25'000 Personen, 20'000 Briefen, 3'000 Orten, 2'900 Pflanzenarten, 1'000 Versammlungen und 850 Institutionen in eine TEI-konforme XML-Datenstruktur (Recker-Hamm / Stuber 2015). Bemerkenswert ist dabei die grosse Tiefe der Metadatenerschliessung, die beispielsweise nicht nur biografische Eckdaten wie Geburts-/Sterbedatum und -ort oder die Hauptbeschäftigung umfasst, sondern die Ausbildungsstationen, Reiseziele, Ämter und Mitgliedschaften usw. einbezieht und auch das Beziehungsnetz (Verwandte, Briefpartner) soweit möglich erfasst.3 Während die prosopografische Erhebung weitgehend auf biografischen Werken sowie auf edierten Universitätsmatrikeln und Mitgliederlisten von Akademien und Sozietäten basiert, stützen sich die bibliografischen Daten in erster Linie auf zwei autoptisch erarbeitete Grundlagenwerke (Monti 1983-1994, Steinke / Profos 2004).
                
            
               
               
                  Abb. 1: Die rund 100'000 Metadatenobjekte sind vielfältig verknüpft, sowohl innerhalb des gleichen Entitätstyps als auch typenübergreifend.4
               
            
            Auf der Grundlage der entstehenden Plattform startete anfangs 2018 ein vom 
                    Schweizerischen Nationalfonds SNF unterstütztes Editions- und Forschungsprojekt, das im geplanten Projektzeitraum von sechs Jahren zum einen die Gesamtedition der rund 9'000 Buchbesprechungen Albrecht von Hallers erarbeitet. Zum anderen soll eine begründete Auswahl von inhaltlich damit zusammenhängenden rund 8'000 Briefen ediert werden, dies als Zwischenetappe zur längerfristig angestrebten Gesamtedition von Hallers Korrespondenz, die insgesamt rund 17'000 Briefe umfasst.5 In der systematischen Verknüpfung zweier komplementärer Quellenkorpora der privaten (und tw. im kleinen Kreis öffentlichen) Kommunikation (Briefe) und des öffentlichen Diskurses (Rezensionen) liegt eine erste Innovation der Plattform.6
            
         
         
            “Datenzentrierte” versus “textzentrierte” digitale Editionen
            Auf 
                    hallerNet werden die v.a. quantitativen und formalen Bezüge der älteren Forschungsdatenbank mit edierten Textinhalten in Verbindung gesetzt. Die über Jahrzehnte systematisch erhobenen und homogenisierten Metadaten erleichtern die Editionsarbeit erheblich, namentlich die Referenzierung von Entitäten wie Akteure, Orte, Publikationen und Institutionen. In dieser Verbindung tief erschlossener Strukturdaten mit edierten Textinhalten liegt die zweite Innovation der entstehenden Plattform. Bisher sind “datenzentrierte” digitale Editionen die Ausnahme gegenüber den vielen existierenden und sich in Entwicklung befindlichen “textzentrierten” digitalen Editionen. Wo es sie gibt, verfolgen sie zumeist ganz spezifische Forschungsfragen und legen dazu ein entsprechend verengtes Datenmodell zugrunde.7 Daneben existieren biografische, prosopografische oder bibliografische Datenbanken und Forschungsportale, die sich einzig auf Metadatenerhebung und -analyse konzentrieren.8 Und schließlich gibt es digitale Editionsportale wie das Nowa Panorama Literatury Polskiej,9 die relativ dichte biografische Daten erheben, diese aber nicht in strukturierter Form bereitstellen.
                
            Selbstredend lagen auch der Datenerfassung in den verschiedenen Projekten um Albrecht von Haller seit den 1990er-Jahren immer spezifische Forschungsinteressen zugrunde. So folgte auf eine erste Phase, welche die Gesamterschliessung von Hallers Korrespondenz (Boschung et al. 2002) mit einer umfassenden prosopografischen Strukturanalyse (Stuber et al. 2005) kombinierte, eine zweite Phase, in der Netzwerkanalysen im Vordergrund standen und die in den Blick genommenen Akteure über Hallers Korrespondenznetz hinaus erweitert wurden (Dauser et al. 2008, Stuber / Krempel 2013). Die dieser Forschung zugrundeliegenden Daten wurden von Anfang an in der gleichen Datenbankanwendung (FAUST) und mit möglichst viel struktureller Homogenität gepflegt, die Datenpublikation erfolgte allerdings fast ausschliesslich in aggregierter Form und auf traditionelle Weise (Druck). Im Zuge der Datentransformation wird durch weitere Homogenisierung und die semantische Auszeichnung nach TEI-Richtlinien eine weitergehende Öffnung der Daten angestrebt, so dass diese auch in anderen Kontexten nutzbar werden.10 Die Metadaten werden zu diesem Zweck über spezifische Formate wie das CMI-Format bzw. 
                    CorrespSearch zugänglich gemacht, daneben aber auch in vollem Umfang parallel im FAIR-Repositorium 
                    Zenodo veröffentlicht werden.11
            
         
         
            Referenzannotation im Zentrum
            Die Tatsache, dass die Briefe je nach Qualität der vorliegenden Grundlagen auf drei unterschiedliche Arten ediert werden – den Standards genügende Druckeditionen werden re-ediert, bei schlechteren Druckeditionen wird der Rohtext zur Arbeitserleichterung herangezogen, aber intensiv nachbearbeitet, und zuvor nicht edierte Dokumente werden ab dem Original neu ediert –, bedingte auch eine Reflektion über das Wesen der Fussnoten bzw. der Stellenkommentare beim Transfer vom Druck ins Digitale. Aus diesem Prozess resultierte ein Referenzsystem, das drei Annotationstypen vorsieht:
            
               Referenzannotationen: Referenzen auf Datenbankobjekte (``), deren lokales Auftreten in einer `` näher erläutert werden kann
               freie Annotationen zum Inhalt (``), d.h. inhaltliche Anmerkungen, die nicht in direktem Bezug zu einem bestimmten Datenbankobjekt stehen, sondern z.B. zu einem ganzen Absatz
               Annotationen zur Textkonstitution (``)
            
            Während für die letzten beiden Typen die digitale Umsetzung relativ nahe beim Druck bleibt (Anmerkungsziffer mit Tooltip bzw. Verweis zur Anmerkung), bieten die Referenzannotationen mehr Interaktivität und Zugangswege zu den Datenbankdaten. Wir erwarten, dass dieser Anmerkungstyp für künftige Editionen der 
                    hallerNet-Plattform noch an Bedeutung gewinnen wird. Es sind dann auch diese Referenzannotationen, die das Rückgrat der Entitätsauszeichnung bilden.
                
         
         
            Doppelter Zweck der systematischen Entitätsauszeichnung
            Innerhalb der Plattform verfolgt die Anbindung der digitalen Edition an die systematisierten Objekte der Datenbank einen doppelten Zweck: Zum einen macht sie die Quellentexte über plattformübergreifende Normdaten anschlussfähig zu anderen Ressourcen. Zum anderen lassen sich bei entsprechender Datenmodellierung aus solchen Referenzannotationen grosse Datenmengen für Netzwerkanalysen und räumliche Visualisierungen gewinnen. Diese Daten weisen erstens präzise Beziehungsqualitäten auf, so beispielsweise zum Verhältnis zwischen den Rezensenten und den Verfassern der rezensierten Publikationen. Zweitens sind die Nennungen der referenzierten Entitäten leicht den i.d.R. tagesdatierten Quellen Brief und Rezension zuzuordnen. Die generierten Forschungsdaten liefern damit Präzision sowohl in der raumzeitlichen Entwicklung als auch in der inhaltlichen Qualität der Netzbeziehungen und erlauben daher Antworten auf wichtige Postulate der aktuellen historischen Netzwerkforschung.12 Dies möchten wir an einigen konkreten Beispiel andeuten. Ausgangspunkt ist die auf 
                    hallerNet als Prototyp erstellte digitale Edition der Münchhausen-Haller-Korrespondenz von Otto Sonntag, die ein erweitertes Briefsample von rund 850 Briefen (inkl. Beilagen) umfasst (Sonntag 2019). Dabei werden die vorhandenen prosopografischen Forschungsdaten angereichert mit standardisierten Angaben über soziale Position und Aufenthaltsort sämtlicher in diesem Briefsample erwähnten rund 340 Personen (ca. 1'500 Nennungen) zum Zeitpunkt des entsprechenden Briefdatums. Damit wird diese Korrespondenz als zeitlich und sozial differenzierter Kommunikationsraum darstellbar. Diese Informationen lassen sich einerseits für einzelne edierte Dokumente nutzen, etwa um eine Brieftranskription um eine Akteursliste zu ergänzen, die auch die zum Briefdatum jeweils aktuelle Position der genannten Individuen aufführt. Sie sind aber andererseits vor allem auf aggregierter Ebene interessant, da sich mit verschiedenen Visualisierungsformen bestimmte Interaktionsmuster eruieren lassen.
                
            Die DHd-Konferenz fällt zeitlich direkt in die letzte Phase vor dem Launch der Plattform. Nachdem die Encodings der Münchhausen-Briefe in den letzten Monaten erstellt und mit den bestehenden und neuen Datenbankobjekten referenziert wurden, bietet sich bis dahin die Gelegenheit für erste analytische Auswertungen auf der neuen Datengrundlage.
            Den beschriebenen Visualisierungsformen kommen in vereinfachter Form auf 
                    hallerNet auch Navigations- und Filterfunktionen zu. Der Weg von der einzelnen Textstelle in der edierten Quelle zur Gesamtsicht in der Visualisierung ist also durchaus in beide Richtungen möglich.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Albrecht von Haller und die Gelehrtenrepublik des 18. Jahrhunderts (1991–2003); Leitung: Urs Boschung (Institut für Medizingeschichte der Universität Bern); siehe allg. zu Albrecht von Haller: http://www.albrecht-von-haller.ch.
            
               Nützliche Wissenschaft, Naturaneignung und Politik. Die Oekonomische Gesellschaft Bern im europäischen Kontext (1750–1850); Leitung: André Holenstein, Christian Pfister (Historisches Institut der Universität Bern).
             Siehe zum alten Haller-/OeG-Datenbankverbund: Flückiger / Stuber 2009, Steinke 2003.
             Die Visualisierung zeigt die Verlinkung und die Anzahl der Referenzen zwischen sechs Entitätstypen. Die Daten wurden im Rahmen von Forney et al. (2018) berechnet und die Grafik mit d3-chord erstellt: https://github.com/d3/d3-chord.
             Online-Edition der Rezensionen und Briefe Albrecht von Hallers. Expertise und Kommunikation in der entstehenden Scientific community. Leitung: André Holenstein (Historisches Institut), Hubert Steinke (Institut für Medizingeschichte), Oliver Lubrich (Germanistisches Institut).
             Siehe zur Grundidee: Stuber 2004.
             Beispiele hierfür sind etwa die Projekte Proceedings of the Old Bailey (https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/), buckhardtsource.org (http://burckhardtsource.org/), Intoxicants and Early Modernity (https://www.intoxicantsproject.org/), Jahrrechnungen der Stadt Basel 1535 bis 1610 (https://gams.uni-graz.at/context:srbas), Urfehdebücher der Stadt Basel (https://gams.uni-graz.at/context:ufbas), Sound Toll Registers (http://soundtoll.nl) oder das leider dem digitalen Zerfall anheimgefallene Alcalá account book.
             Als Beispiele zur Gelehrtenwelt lassen sich hier Amore Scientiae Facti sunt Exules (http://asfe.unibo.it) oder das Repertorium Academicum Germanicum (http://rag-online.org) nennen. Bemerkenswert sind auch die der Symogih-Plattform (Système modulaire de gestion de l'information historique, http://symogih.org) angegeliederten Projekte, die teilweise auch edierte Texte umfassen.
             Nowa Panorama Literatury Polskiej / New Panorama of Polish Literature; http://nplp.pl und spezifischer http://tei.nplp.pl.
             Zur Transformation ins TEI-Format vgl. Forney et al. 2018.
             Diese Strategie verfolgt zwei Ziele: die langfristige Zugänglichkeit der Forschungsdaten, aber auch die Auffindbarkeit über spezialisierte Suchmaschinen wie DataCite oder die Google Dataset Search.
             Siehe eine kritische Diskussion der Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Netzwerkanalyse aus literaturwissenschaftlicher Perspektive (Baillot 2018).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Baillot, Anne (2018):
                  Die Krux mit dem Netz. Verknüpfung und Visualisierung bei digitalen Briefeditionen, 
                        in: 
                        Bernhart, Toni et al. (eds.):
                  Quantitative Ansätze in den Literatur- und Geisteswissenschaften. Systematische und historische Perspektiven, 
                        Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter 355-370 .
                    
               
                  Boschung, Urs et al. (2002):
                  Repertorium zu Albrecht von Hallers Korrespondenz 
                        1724-1777. 2 Bde. Basel.
                    
               
                  Dauser, Regina et al. (2008):
                  Wissen im Netz. Botanik und Pflanzentransfer in europäischen Korrespondenznetzen des 18. Jahrhundert, 
                        Berlin.
                    
               
                  Flückiger, Daniel / Stuber, Martin (2009):
                  Vom System zum Akteur. Personenorientierte Datenbanken für Archiv und Forschung, 
                        in: 
                        Kirchhofer, André et al. (Hrsg.):
                  Nachhaltige Geschichte. Festschrift für Christian Pfister, 
                        Zürich, 253-269.
                    
               
                  Forney Christian et al. (2018):
                  Vom geschützt zugänglichen Datenbankverbund zur offenen Editions- und Forschungsplattform: kritischer Rückblick auf halber Strecke, 
                        DHd 2018 (Poster).
                    
               
                  Monti, Maria Teresa (1983-1994):
                  Catalogo del Fondo Haller della Biblioteca Nazionale Braidense di Milano, a cura di Maria Teresa Monti, 
                        13 Bde. Milano.
                    
               
                  Recker-Hamm, Ute / Stuber, Martin (2015):
                  Haller Online – Konzept für den Umbau, Ausbau und die langfristige Sicherung der Haller-/ OeG-Datenbank, 
                        25 Seiten (8.6.2015).
                    
               
                  Sonntag, Otto (2019):
                  The Albrecht von Haller-Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen Correspondence, 
                        hallerNet (in Vorbereitung).
                    
               
                  Steinke, Hubert (2003):
                  Archive databases as advanced research tools: the Haller Project, 
                        in: 
                        Antonio Vallisneri :
                  L`edizione del testo scientifico d`età moderna, a cura di Maria Teresa Monti, 
                        Firenze 2003, 191-204.
                    
               
                  Steinke, Hubert / Profos, Claudia (2004):
                  Bibliographia Halleriana. Verzeichnis der Schriften von und über Albrecht von Haller, 
                        Basel.
                    
               
                  Stuber, Martin (2004):
                  Journal and letter. The interaction between two communication media in the correspondence of Albrecht von Haller, 
                        in: 
                        Lüsebrink, Hans-Jürgen / Popkin, Jeremy (eds.):
                  Enlightenment, Revolution and the periodical press (Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century), 
                        114-141.
                    
               
                  Stuber, Martin et al. (2005):
                  Hallers Netz. Ein europäischer Gelehrtenbriefwechsel zur Zeit der Aufklärung, 
                        Basel.
                    
               
                  Stuber, Martin / Krempel, Lothar (2013):
                  Las redes académicas de Albrecht von Haller y la Sociedad Económica: un análisis de redes a varios niveles, 
                        in: REDES. Revista hispana para el análisis. De redes sociales, 24/1 (2013), 1-26: https://doi.org/10.5565/rev/redes.450 / REDES Online English: The Scholarly Networks of Albrecht von Haller and the Economic Society of Bern – a Multi-Level Network Analysis: http://revista-redes.rediris.es/webredes/novedades/Stuber_Krempel_scholarly_networks.pdf.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Beschreibung
            
               
               Briefeditionen sind ein Typus der digitalen Edition, in dem die Vorteile des digitalen Mediums bereits mit am intensivsten fruchtbar gemacht werden.
               1
                
               In der alltäglichen Arbeit des Edierens sowie der Software-Entwicklung richtet sich der Blick zum großen Teil meist auf den einzelnen Brief und seine Tiefenerschließung, weniger auf die Menge an Briefen eines Korrespondenzkorpus. Weiterführende quantitative Analysen auf Basis der Tiefenerschließung (vollständige Transkription, Modellierung in XML/TEI, Normdaten etc.) und mit digitalen Methoden, die gerade auch für korpusübergreifende Untersuchungen den Weg ebnen würden, sind traditionellerweise in Editionsprojekten (noch) nicht vorgesehen.
               2
                Mit dem 
               eintägigen 
               Workshop „Distant Letters“ möchten wir ein Panorama an quantitativ orientierten Analysemethoden und -praktiken für Daten digitaler Briefeditionen vorstellen, 
               vermitteln und diskutieren, um so neue Perspektiven 
               auf
                Briefkorpora 
               zu
                erproben.
               3
                
               Der Workshop gliedert sich in vier Abschnitte:
            
            
               Auswertung von Metadaten und Entitäten
               
                  
                  Auf der Grundlage von standardisiert kodierten Briefmetadaten in XML/TEI sollen mit der Abfragesprache XQuery zunächst Fragen formuliert werden wie: „Wie viel hat Sender A an Empfänger B insgesamt geschrieben? Wie viel in einem bestimmten Jahr?“ Im Anschluss sollen vergleichende Untersuchungen angestellt werden, denen Fragen wie „Wie viel hat Sender A an Empfänger B und Empfänger C geschrieben?“ oder „Wie gestaltet sich das Verhältnis von gesendeten und empfangenen Briefen in der Korrespondenz von A und B?“ zugrunde liegen. Auch Entitäten aus dem Brieftext können in die Untersuchung mit einbezogen werden („Wie häufig wird Person X im Verlauf der Korrespondenz erwähnt?“). Das Ergebnis von derlei Fragen sind statistische Werte, die, um sie interpretatorisch zugänglicher zu machen, weiter aufbereitet werden müssen, z.B. als Visualisierungen in Diagrammen, Kreisen und Kurven.
               
            
            
               Analyse linguistischer Merkmale
               
                  
                  Im zweiten Teil wendet sich die Untersuchung den Volltextdaten zu. In den Blick genommen werden dabei linguistische Merkmale auf Token-Ebene (z.B. Lemma und Wortart), die einfachen oder komplexen Abfragen (z.B. nach typischen Adjektiv-Anbindungen bestimmter Substantive, Häufungen einer bestimmten Wortart, festen Wendungen, Kollokationen) an den Text zugrunde gelegt werden können und so u.a. Aufschluss über inhaltliche und stilistische Gegebenheiten ermöglichen. Im Workshop werden Werkzeuge gezeigt und benutzt, die zum einen die automatische linguistische Analyse von Texten, z.B. deren Lemmatisierung und POS-Tagging, erlauben und zum anderen Möglichkeiten der Auswertung annotierter linguistischer Merkmale bieten, z.B. mittels leistungsstarker Suchanfragesprachen oder Möglichkeiten der Visualisierung. Genauer in den Blick genommen und z.T. benutzt werden TXM, Corpus Workbench, DTA und WebLicht.
                  4
               
            
            
               Topic Modeling
               
                  
                  Im dritten Teil des Workshops rücken die Inhalte der Briefkommunikation stärker in das Zentrum des Interesses, wenn Fragen aufgegriffen werden wie „Welche Themen werden 
                  behandelt und wie sind diese zeitlich verteilt?“ oder „Gibt es bestimmte Themen, die in einer bestimmten Personengruppe stärker verhandelt werden als in einer anderen?“. Analysiert wird dabei der Volltext der Briefe, zusätzlich können jedoch auch die Briefmetadaten in die Interpretation der Analyseergebnisse einfließen. Für die Modellierung 
                  der Topics
                   wird das Tool „Mallet“
                   
                  verwendet,
                  5
                   und es wird im Workshop gemeinsam ein Topic Model für ein Briefkorpus erstellt. Für die Auswertung in Kombination mit Metadaten und Visualisierungen wird der „Topic Modeling Workflow“ 
                  (TMW) verwendet.
                  6
                  
                  Diskutiert werden soll 
                  außerdem, wie sich die Konzepte ‚Topic‘ und ‚Thema‘ zueinander verhalten.
                  7
               
            
            
               Stilometrie
               
                  Im letzten Teil des Workshops soll mit Methoden und Tools der Stilometrie der Sprach- bzw. Schreibstil eines Briefkorpus genauer untersucht werden. Analysiert wird dabei erneut der Volltext, diesmal in orthografisch normalisierter Form. Mögliche Fragestellungen der Analyse sind: „Welche Rückschlüsse erlauben stilometrische Analysen hinsichtlich Sender und Empfänger der Briefe?“, „Korrelieren die stilistische Nähe bzw. Distanz mit Faktoren wie Zeit, Raum oder Empfänger?“. Auch Stilvergleiche werden beispielhaft auf Grundlage der Fragen „Ändert sich der Stil von Sender A in seinen Briefen an die Empfänger B und C?“ und „Variiert der Stil zwischen Geschäfts- und Privatkorrespondenz?“ unternommen. Für die stilometrischen Analysen nutzen wir das „Stylo“-Paket für R.8
                  
                  Auch für die stilistischen Analysen ist zu diskutieren, welches Konzept von Stil hinter den gewählten Methoden steht und wie es sich zu anderen Definitionen von Stil verhält.
                  9
               
            
         
         
            Ziele
            
               Ziel des Workshops ist es, ein Panorama quantitativer Analysemöglichkeiten für Briefkorpora vorzustellen, das eine Ergänzung zu den traditionellen ‚close reading‘-Verfahren in wissenschaftlichen Editionen darstellt und die Digitalität der Editionsdaten mit Methoden der Digital Humanities noch stärker für quellenimmanente Forschungsfragen fruchtbar macht. Die Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer sollen den Workshop am Ende des Tages mit einem Set an Skripten und Tools verlassen und in der Lage sein, diese auf andere (ggf. eigene) Datensätze anzuwenden. Neben der Vermittlung von technischen Fertigkeiten ist die Diskussion der Methoden und Ergebnisse mit den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmern fester Bestandteil des Workshops. 
                    
               Es soll dabei gemeinsam eruiert werden, auf welchen theoretischen Annahmen die Methoden jeweils basieren, wo ihre Stärken und Schwächen liegen und auch inwieweit die vermittelten Praktiken eine Chance haben könnten, zukünftig ein Bestandteil bei der Erstellung und Nutzung wissenschaftlicher digitaler Briefeditionen zu werden. 
            
         
         
            Daten
            Die Organisatorinnen und Organisatoren stellen XML/TEI und Plain Text Datensätze aus zwei verschiedenen Briefeditionen für den Workshop bereit: ca. 5500 Brieftexte und ebenso viele Metadatensätze aus „Jean Paul - Sämtliche Briefe digital“ (Bernauer / Miller / Neuber 2018) sowie ca. 400 Brieftexte und 3000 Metadatensätze der „edition humboldt digital“ (Ette 2017-). Darüber hinaus steht es den Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer frei, ihre eigenen Datensets (XML/TEI-kodiert und Plain Text) zu verwenden.
         
         
            Teilnehmerzahl und Vorkenntnisse
            Die Anzahl der Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer ist auf 25 begrenzt. Gewisse Grundkenntnisse in der Programmierung (z.B. XSLT/XQuery, Python, R) sind von Vorteil, die im Workshop verwendeten Skripte werden jedoch so vorbereitet, dass sich die Arbeit daran auf Modifikationen und Erweiterungen unter Anleitung der Lehrenden beschränkt. Im Vorfeld des Workshops werden Installationshinweise für die verwendeten Werkzeuge gegeben und die Übungsdaten zum Download bereitgestellt.
         
         
            Lehrende
            
               
               Stefan Dumont: Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter bei der TELOTA-Initiative der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, dort u.a. zuständig für die „edition humboldt digital”. Wissenschaftlicher Koordinator des DFG-Projekts „correspSearch - Briefeditionen vernetzen“. Co-Convener der TEI Special Interest Group „Correspondence“. Expertise u.a. mit Standardisierung von Briefkodierung und -metadaten und X-Technologien.
                
            
               Susanne Haaf: Wissenschaftliche Mitarbeiterin im Projekt CLARIN-D an der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, u.a. beteiligt am Auf- und Ausbau des Deutschen Textarchivs. Doktorandin im Bereich korpusbasierter Untersuchung von Textsortenspezifika. Spezialisierung in Korpusaufbau, Korpuslinguistik, Standards für Text- und Metadaten (insbes. TEI) sowie Textedition.
                
            
               Ulrike Henny-Krahmer: Wissenschaftliche Mitarbeiterin im Projekt „Computergestützte Literarische Gattungsstilistik” (CLiGS) an der Universität Würzburg. Studium der Regionalwissenschaften Lateinamerika in Köln und Lissabon, Doktorandin in Digital Humanities mit dem Thema „Topic and Style in Subgenres of the Spanish American Novel (1830-1910)“.
                
            
               Benjamin Krautter: Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter im Projekt “Quantitative Drama Analytics” (QuaDramA) an der Universität Stuttgart. Studium der Literaturwissenschaft (Germanistik) und Politikwissenschaft in Stuttgart und Seoul (Südkorea), Doktorand im Bereich Digital Literary Studies mit dem Thema “Quantitative Dramenanalyse - Operationalisierung aristotelischer Kategorien” (Arbeitstitel).
                
            
               Frederike Neuber: Wissenschaftliche Mitarbeiterin bei der TELOTA-Initiative der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, dort u.a. zuständig für die Briefedition “Jean Paul - Sämtliche Briefe digital”. Studium der Italianistik und Editionswissenschaft in Berlin und Rom, Doktorandin in Digital Humanities. Spezialisierung in Editionsphilologie, Datenmodellierung und Programmierung mit X-Technologien.
                
         
      
      
         
            
                Der webservice „correspSearch“ etwa illustriert die Bedeutung von standardisierter Metadatenerfassung mit Normdaten zur Vernetzbarkeit von Korrespondenzen, . 
            
                Vereinzelt werden quantitative Analysemethoden bereits auf Editionsdaten angewandt: Etwa wird im Kontext des Projekts “Mapping the Republic of Letters” (Stanford University 2013) zur Erschließung der Briefkommunikation und -verbreitung mit verschiedenen statistisch- und/oder netzwerkanalytisch-basierten Visualisierungen experimentiert; Andorfer (2017) erprobt Topic Modelling mit dem Korrespondenzkorpus Leo von Thun-Hohensteins.
            
                Nicht Teil dieses Panoramas ist die Netzwerkanalyse, auch wenn diese Form der Auswertung bzw. Visualisierung für Briefdatensätze oft die am naheliegendste scheint. Grundkompetenzen zur Netzwerkanalyse bzw. -visualisierung werden mittlerweile regelmäßig in Workshops vermittelt, z.B. im Rahmen der „Historical Network Research-Community“ (http://historicalnetworkresearch.org/). Der Fokus des Workshops richtet sich daher auf bisher weniger berücksichtigte Formen der Analyse von Briefkorpora.
            
               
                http://textometrie.ens-lyon.fr, , , .
            
               
               
            
            
               
               
            
            
                Zwar ist das Verfahren für die Ermittlung von Schlüsselwörtern und Themen entwickelt worden, je nach verwendetem Korpus ergeben sich aber auch andere Arten von Topics, z.B. sprachspezifische oder motivische. Vgl. dazu u.a. Rhody (2012) und Schöch (2017).
            
               
               
            
            
                Für einen Überblick zu verschiedenen Stilbegriffen in der Literatur- und Sprachwissenschaft siehe Herrmann et al. (2015).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Andorfer, Peter (2017):
                  Turing Test für das Topic Modeling. Von Menschen und Maschinen erstellte inhaltliche Analysen der Korrespondenz von Leo von Thun-Hohenstein im Vergleich, 
                        in: Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften; doi: 
                        
                     10.17175/2017_002
                  [zuletzt abgerufen 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Bernauer, Markus / Miller, Norbert / Neuber, Frederike (eds.) (2018):
                  Jean Paul – Sämtliche Briefe digital. 
                        In der Fassung der von Eduard Berend herausgegebenen 3. Abteilung der Historisch-kritischen Ausgabe (1952-1964), im Auftrag der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften überarbeitet und herausgegeben von Markus Bernauer, Norbert Miller und Frederike Neuber; 
                        
                     http://jeanpaul-edition.de
                   [letzter Zugriff 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  
                  Burrows, John (2002):
                  Delta’: a Measure of Stylistic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship, 
                        in: Literary and Linguistic Computing 17/3, S. 267–287.
                    
               
                  Dumont, Stefan (2016):
                  correspSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters, 
                        in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], Issue 10; 
                         [letzter Zugriff 7.Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Eder, Maciej / Rybicki, Jan / Kestemont, Mike (2016):
                  Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis, 
                        in: The R Journal 8/1 (2016), S. 107–121.
                    
               
                  Ette Ottmar (eds.) (seit 2016):
                  edition humboldt digital. 
                        Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin. Version 3 vom 14.09.2018; 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Graham, Shawn / Weingart, Scott / Milligan, Ian (2012):
                  Getting Started with Topic Modeling and MALLET, 
                        in: The Programming Historian 1;
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  
                  Heiden, Serge (2010):
                  The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme, 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, Nov 2010, Sendai, Japan. Institute for Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development, Waseda University, S.389–398. 
                    
               
                  
                  Herrmann, Berenike J. / van Dalen-Oskam, Karina / Schöch, Schöch (2015):
                  Revisiting Style, a Key Concept in Literary Studies, 
                        in: Journal of Literary Theory 9/1, S. 25–52.
                    
               
                  
                  Rhody, Lisa M. (2012):
                  Topic Modeling and Figurative Language, 
                        in:  Journal of Digital Humanities 2/1; 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  
                  Schöch, Christof (2017):
                  Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama, 
                        in: Digital Humanities Quarterly 11/2; 
                        
                        [letzter Zugriff 7. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Walmsley, Priscilla (2009):
                  XQuery: Search Across a Variety of XML Data.
                        O’Reilly Media.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In diesem Beitrag wird ein Verfahren vorgestellt, das Netzwerkvisualisierungen dramatischer Texte für eine spezifische Form der kommunikativen Interaktion zwischen Figuren fokussiert.
            Es wird gezeigt, inwiefern gewichtete, gerichtete und dynamische Figurennetzwerke narrative Informationsvermittlung in der Figurenrede visualisieren können und auf diesem Weg dramennarratologische Analysen bzw. Annotationen ausgewertet werden.
            Im Gegensatz zu literaturwissenschaftlichen Netzwerkanalysen, die um die automatisierte Analyse 
                    des „kompositorische[n] Grundgerüst[s]“ 
                    
                    (Trilcke 2013: 224) von großen Dramenkorpora 
                    
                    (Piper et al 2017; Trilcke et al. 2015) bemüht sind, steht in diesem Beitrag also die Visualisierung von manuellen Annotationen im Vordergrund.
                
            Darüber hinaus werden mit Rückgriff auf die ermittelten Netzwerkdaten Deutungspotenziale exemplarisch an Kleists 
                    Die Familie Schroffenstein (DFS) diskutiert.1 Das Erkenntnisinteresse zielt also auf zwei Aspekte: (1) Inwiefern lassen sich narrative Redebeiträge, die ein zentrales Element der inneren und äußeren Informationsvermittlung im Drama (Pfister 2001: 20-22) sind, durch Annotationen netzwerkgraphisch visualisieren? (2) Inwiefern stellt die literaturwissenschaftliche Netzwerkanalyse in diesem Kontext einen Mehrwert dar?
                
         
         
            Annotation narrativer Figurenrede
            Ausgangspunkt der vorgestellten Netzwerke ist eine Typologie narrativer Figurenrede bzw. von Binnenerzählungen, die zur Annotation der Dramen Heinrich von Kleists genutzt wurden.2 Dabei wurden über 800 Vorkommnisse narrativer Figurenrede in den Dramen manuell annotiert. In einem ersten Schritt unterscheidet die Typologie zwischen narrativen Äußerungen, mit denen Figuren über ihre eigene Wirklichkeit erzählen, und narrativer Figurenrede, bei der das nicht der Fall ist. Der erste Phänomentyp, die horizontalen Binnenerzählungen, können mit dem narratologischen Kategorieninventar zur Beschreibung anachronen Erzählens (Lahn & Meister 2008: 138-141) genauer beschrieben und annotiert werden:3
            
            
               
                  Binnenerzählungen
               
               
                  Horizontal
                  Analepsen
                  488
               
               
                  
                  Simullepsen
                  123
               
               
                  
                  Prolepsen
                  33
               
               
                  Vertikal
                  Pseudoanalepsen
                  33
               
               
                  
                  Pseudosimullepsen
                  6
               
               
                  
                  Pseudoprolepse
                  29
               
            
            Tabelle 1: Vorkommen narrativer Figurenrede in Kleists Dramen
            Diese manuellen Annotationen sind die Grundlage dafür, dass unterschiedliche Formen der Informationsvermittlung netzwerkgraphisch visualisiert werden können.
         
         
            Netzwerkerstellung
            Unter Rückgriff auf die Annotationen der narrativen Figurenrede und die TEI-Annotationen von Sprecherfiguren und Szenen- sowie Aktwechseln im TextGrid-Korpus wurden chronologisierte Sender-Adressaten-Kanten erstellt. Dazu wurden die vier Sprecherfiguren, die auf eine narrative Äußerung folgen oder ihr vorangehen, als Adressaten berücksichtigt, sofern keine Akt- oder Szenenwechsel zwischen narrativer Figurenrede und potenziellem Adressaten liegt und es sich um unterschiedliche Figuren handelt. Die Anzahl der erzeugten Kanten ist somit deutlich höher als die Anzahl der narrativen Äußerungen (siehe exemplarisch in Tabelle 2 die Kanten 4 und 5 sowie 8-10). 
            
               
                  Id
                  
                     Source (Sprecher)
                  
                  
                     Target (Adressat)
                  
                  
                     Label (Akt)
                  
                  
                     Timeset (Beginn & Ende)
                  
                  
                     Weight
                  
               
               
                  1
                  Rupert
                  Eustache
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  2
                  Rupert
                  Jeronimus
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  3
                  Rupert
                  Ottokar
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  4
                  Jeronimus
                  Ottokar
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  5
                  Jeronimus
                  Ottokar
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  2
               
               
                  6
                  Ottokar
                  Jeronimus
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  7
                  Jeronimus
                  Kirchenvogt
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  8
                  Kirchenvogt
                  Jeronimus
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  1
               
               
                  9
                  Kirchenvogt
                  Jeronimus
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  2
               
               
                  10
                  Kirchenvogt
                  Jeronimus
                  1
                  
                     ""
                  
                  3
               
            
            Tabelle 2: Auszug aus der Kantenliste zu DFS
            Das Kantengewicht 
                (Weight) zwischen einer Sender- und einer Adressatenfigur steigt mit jeder narrativen Äußerung, die eine Senderfigur im ‚Beisein‘ derselben Adressatenfigur äußert (siehe z.B. Kante 4 und 5). 
                
            Die Figurennetzwerke, die auf dieser Grundlage erstellt werden, illustrieren, welche Figuren sich zu welchem Zeitpunkt des Dramenverlaufs narrativ äußern, welche Figuren narrative Informationen bekommen und wie häufig Figuren an narrativem Informationsaustausch beteiligt sind.
         
         
            Visualisierungs- und Analysebeispiele
            Abbildung 1 zeigt dieses Potential der Netzwerkvisualisierung exemplarisch für 
                    Die Familie Schroffenstein.4
            
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 1.
                        Narrative Informationsvermittlung in DFS
               
            
            Die Größe der Knotenbeschriftung repräsentiert hier die betweenness centrality5 der Figuren und damit den Stellenwert bzw. Einfluss der Figur auf die narrative Informationsvermittlung innerhalb des Dramas.
                
            
               
                  Label
                  
                     betweenness centrality
                  
                  
                     weighted indegree
                  
                  
                     weighted outdegree
                  
                  indegree
                  outdegree
                  degree
               
               
                  Jeronimus
                  125,45
                  99
                  82
                  25
                  28
                  53
               
               
                  Gertrude
                  98,74
                  46
                  70
                  15
                  15
                  30
               
               
                  Sylvester
                  85,37
                  107
                  31
                  29
                  14
                  43
               
               
                  Rupert
                  74,47
                  145
                  17
                  36
                  10
                  46
               
               
                  Agnes
                  45,90
                  59
                  85
                  18
                  23
                  41
               
               
                  Eustache
                  17,25
                  37
                  73
                  14
                  19
                  33
               
               
                  Ottokar
                  5,11
                  180
                  51
                  33
                  14
                  47
               
               
                  Ursula
                  3,31
                  1
                  4
                  1
                  4
                  5
               
               
                  Santing
                  2,94
                  10
                  49
                  6
                  12
                  18
               
               
                  Johann
                  2,35
                  4
                  106
                  3
                  15
                  18
               
               
                  Kirchenvogt
                  0,00
                  1
                  80
                  1
                  14
                  15
               
               
                  Ein Diener
                  0,00
                  2
                  2
                  2
                  2
                  4
               
               
                  Sylvius
                  0,00
                  7
                  3
                  4
                  2
                  6
               
               
                  Gärtner
                  0,00
                  2
                  0
                  2
                  0
                  2
               
               
                  Aldöbern
                  0,00
                  1
                  0
                  1
                  0
                  1
               
               
                  Theistiner
                  0,00
                  5
                  15
                  4
                  5
                  9
               
               
                  Der Wanderer
                  0,00
                  0
                  1
                  0
                  1
                  1
               
               
                  Zweiter Wanderer
                  0,00
                  0
                  4
                  0
                  3
                  3
               
               
                  Die Kammerzofe
                  0,00
                  2
                  13
                  2
                  6
                  8
               
               
                  Barnabe
                  0,00
                  1
                  21
                  1
                  8
                  9
               
               
                  Ein Ritter
                  0,00
                  0
                  2
                  0
                  2
                  2
               
            
            Tabelle 3: Betweenness centrality, (weighted) in- und outdegree in DFS
            Schon anhand dieses Beispiels und der netzwerkmetrischen Daten in Tabelle 3 lassen sich einige Vorzüge einer netzwerkgraphischen Annotationsauswertung zeigen:
            
               Die Reichweite einer Figurenerzählung wird im Hinblick auf den Adressatenkreis ermittelt.
               Die narrativen Funktionen der Figuren werden durch ihre Netzwerkeigenschaften erkennbar:
                        
                     
                        Brückenfiguren: hohe betweenness centrality; Verbindung getrennter Netzwerkbereiche 
                                (Trilcke 2013: 217): z.B. Jeronimus (siehe hier und nachfolgend Tabelle 2).
                            
                     
                        Botenfiguren: Geringe betweenness centrality; mind. eine narrative Äußerung: 
                                
                           
                              Botenfiguren i.e.S., die 
                                        nach dem ersten Akt erzählend in Erscheinung treten: z.B. die Wanderer, der Ritter und Barnabe.
                                    
                           
                              Expositionsfiguren, die 
                                        im ersten Akt/Dramenteil erzählend in Erscheinung treten: z.B. der Kirchenvogt.6
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Zielfiguren: hohe betweenness centrality; hoher gewichteter Eingangsgrad; geringer gewichteter Ausgangsgrad: z.B. Sylvester und Rupert, die häufig die Adressaten, aber selten die Sprecher narrativer Figurenrede sind. (Die Handlung des hier gewählten Beispieltexts legt die These nahe, dass diese Figuren entscheidungsmächtige Figuren sind und daher zahlreiche Informationen bekommen.)
                            
                     
                        Figuren der Informationskontrolle: hohe betweenness centrality; sehr hoher Ausgangsgrad; Netzwerke mit geringer Kantendichte: z.B. Hermann in Kleists 
                                Hermannsschlacht.
                        7
                     
                  
               
               Es lassen sich Figurenpaare und Netzwerkbereiche identifizieren, zwischen denen es keinen oder nur vermittelten Informationsaustausch gibt. Hier sind natürlich Dyaden besonders interessant, bei denen die beiden Figuren eine hohe betweenness centrality aufweisen: z.B. Rupert und Sylvester.
               Die Informationsstrukturen geben Aufschluss über den allgemeinen Grad der Informiertheit der Figuren: z.B. die Kantendichte.8
               
            
            Zudem können unterschiedliche Formen der narrativen Figurenrede netzwerkgraphisch miteinander verglichen werden. Die Abbildungen 3 und 4 zeigen dies exemplarisch. In Abbildung 3 werden Figurenerzählungen visualisiert, in denen sich Figuren in Übereinstimmung mit der fiktionalen Wirklichkeit äußern. Abbildung 4 zeigt narrative Äußerungen, bei denen das Gegenteil der Fall ist. Es handelt sich also um narrative Falschaussagen. Der Vergleich ist in diesem Fall aufgrund der vorhandenen Parallelen 
                    und Unterschiede aufschlussreich. Bei beiden Netzwerken behält Jeronimus die zentrale Position im Netzwerk. Hier schlägt sich nieder, dass er für die Verbreitung von wirklichkeitsgemäßen Informationen ebenso verantwortlich ist, wie für die Verbreitung von falschen Verdächtigungen, Lügen und Vorurteilen. Agnes‘ Netzwerkposition verändert sich hingegen stark (Abb. 4). Sie ist innerhalb ihrer Familie und in der kommunikativen Interaktion mit Ottokar die zentrale Figur bei der Weitergabe falscher Informationen.
                
         
         
            Informationsvermittlung im Dramenverlauf: Dynamische Netzwerke
            Wie 
                    
                    Agarwal et al. (2012: 94) gezeigt haben, hat die Erstellung von dynamischen Netzwerken den Vorteil, die Veränderlichkeit der netzwerkmetrischen Eigenschaften einer Figur, einer Figurengruppe oder eines gesamten Netzwerks im Verlauf eines Roman- oder Dramengeschehens berücksichtigen zu können. Das bestätigen die netzwerkmetrischen Auswertungen der 
                    Familie Schroffenstein in Abbildung 2. Hier wird der gewichtete Ausgangsgrad für vier ausgewählte Figuren aktweise dokumentiert. So tritt der Kirchenvogt narrativ nur im ersten Akt in Erscheinung, was seine Funktion als Expositionsfigur unterstreicht. Auch Barnabes Funktion als Vermittlerin von Anagnorisis-Informationen zum Dramenende spiegelt sich wider. Jeronimus Bedeutung relativiert sich, weil ersichtlich wird, dass er – aufgrund seiner Ermordung am Ende des dritten Akts – nur in den ersten drei Akten als informationsvermittelnde Figur auftritt. Seine hohen Werte in Akt zwei und drei zeigen jedoch, dass er für den Handlungsverlauf entscheidende Informationen äußert. Bei Rupert bestätigt sich seine geringe narrative Aktivität (Tabelle 3) als ein relativ konstantes Verhalten. Der niedrige gewichtete Ausgangsgrad für das gesamte Drama ist also nicht darauf zurückzuführen, dass er nur in wenigen Szenen (erzählerisch) in Erscheinung tritt. 
                
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 2.
                        Gewichteter Ausgangsgrad im Dramenverlauf in DFS
               
            
         
         
            Schluss
            Solange die automatische Annotation narrativer Figurenrede nicht möglich ist, setzt das vorgestellte Verfahren einen relativ großen Annotationsaufwand voraus. Es ermöglicht somit keinen umfassenden Vergleich von Dramen, was unter anderem zur Einordnung der vorgestellten quantitativen Netzwerkanalysen wünschenswert wäre.
            In diesem Beitrag wurde jedoch exemplarisch gezeigt, inwiefern netzwerkgraphische Visualisierungen für die Auswertung narratologischer Annotationen einen analytischen Mehrwert haben können. Die formalen Annotationen können und sollen durch inhaltsbezogene Annotationen angereichert werden. Auf dieser Grundlage könnte netzwerkgraphisch der Informationsaustausch über bestimmte Themen oder Figuren visualisiert werden.
         
         
            Anhang
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 3. Narrative Informationsvermittlung (Horizontale Binnenerzählungen/Wirklichkeitserzählungen) in DFS 
            
            
               
               
                   Abbildung 4.
                        Narrative Informationsvermittlung (Pseudoanalepsen/Falschaussagen) in DFS
               
            
            
               
                  Label
                  
                     betweenness centrality
                  
                  
                     weighted indegree
                  
                  
                     weighted outdegree
                  
                  indegree
                  outdegree
               
               
                  Hermann
                  482,7
                  66
                  47
                  36
                  27
               
               
                  Thuiskomar
                  107,25
                  5
                  10
                  5
                  6
               
               
                  Thusnelda
                  69,62
                  28
                  25
                  13
                  9
               
               
                  Ventidius
                  61,95
                  7
                  27
                  5
                  14
               
               
                  Varus
                  57,8
                  10
                  9
                  6
                  8
               
               
                  Dagobert
                  27
                  3
                  3
                  2
                  3
               
               
                  Zweite Hauptmann
                  21
                  2
                  1
                  2
                  1
               
               
                  Gertrud
                  20
                  7
                  6
                  4
                  3
               
               
                  Marbod
                  16,2
                  11
                  5
                  7
                  4
               
               
                  Wolf
                  11,96
                  5
                  4
                  5
                  4
               
               
                  Aristan
                  8,5
                  1
                  5
                  1
                  4
               
               
                  Rinold
                  6
                  1
                  5
                  1
                  4
               
               
                  Erste Cherusker
                  6
                  1
                  5
                  1
                  4
               
               
                  Der zweite Cherusker
                  5,2
                  1
                  2
                  1
                  2
               
               
                  Gueltar
                  5
                  1
                  2
                  1
                  2
               
               
                  Der Mann
                  4
                  1
                  3
                  1
                  3
               
               
                  Das Volk
                  2
                  2
                  1
                  2
                  1
               
               
                  Erste Älteste
                  0,5
                  1
                  1
                  1
                  1
               
               
                  Scäpio
                  0,33
                  1
                  5
                  1
                  4
               
            
            Tabelle 4: Figuren mit höchster betweenness centrality in Kleist Hermannsschlacht
            
         
      
      
         
             Textgrundlage der Annotationen war Kleists Werkausgabe von Siegfried Streller, die durch das TextGrid Repositorium digital zur Verfügung steht: https://textgrid.de/en/digitale-bibliothek.
             Dazu wurde das Annotationstool CATMA (Meister et al. 2016) verwendet. CATMA bietet die Möglichkeit, mit selbstdefinierten literaturwissenschaftlichen Analysetaxonomien zu annotieren und ist damit für narratologische Forschungsprozesse besonders geeignet.
             Grundlegend für die Annotation ist ein Narrativitätskonzept, das berücksichtigt, dass Texte aller Gattungen narrative Elemente enthalten können, wie es u.a. Wolf (2002) beschreibt. Zu der narratologischen Terminologie vgl. Lahn/Meister 2016: 147-149.
             Alle Visualisierungen und Netzwerkanalysen wurden mit dem Tool GEPHI (Bastian et al. 2008) erstellt.
             Mit der betweenness centrality wird gemessen, für wieviele Knotenpaare ein Knoten den kürzesten Netzwerkpfad darstellt. Eine hohe betweenness centrality in Netzwerken, die Informationsflüsse abbilden, indiziert also einen großen Einfluss der Figur auf die Informationsvermittlung im Netzwerk, da sie als Brückenfigur fungiert.
             Vgl. zum Unterschied Pfister 2001: 280f.
             Kantendichte der Hermannsschlacht: 0,051; Kantendichte Die Familie Schroffenstein: 0,388. Siehe zur Hermannsschlacht Tabelle 4 im Anhang, in der sich Hermanns propagandistische „Überzeugungsarbeit“ (Müller-Salget 2009: 78) widerspiegelt.
             Hier ist zu berücksichtigen, dass die Kantendichte natürlich auch durch andere Faktoren beeinflusst wird (Trilcke 2013: 225).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Agarwal, A. / A. Corvalan / J. Jensen / O. Rambow (2012):
                  Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland, 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature: 88–96.
                    
               
                  
                  Bastian, M. / S. Heymann / M. Jacomy (2008):
                  Gephi: An open source sofware for exploring and manipulating networks. 
                        AVI 2008 – Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces.
                    
               
                  
                  Lahn, Silke/ J. C. Meister (2008):
                  Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse. Stuttgart: Verlag J.B. Metzler.
                    
               
                  Meister, J. C. / M. Petris / E. Gius / J. Jacke (2016): 
                  CATMA 5.0. software for text annotation and analysis.
                    
               
                  
                  Moretti, F. (2011):
                  Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets 2.
                    
               
                  
                  Müller-Salget, Klaus (2009):
                  Die Herrmannsschlacht, 
                        in: 
                        Ingo Breuer (Hg.):
                  Kleist-Handbuch. Leben – Werk – Wirkung. 
                        Stuttgart: Verlag J.B. Metzler. S. 76-79.
                    
               
                  Piper, Andrew / Mark Algee-Hewitt / Koustuv Sinha / Derek Ruths / Hardik Vala (2017):
                  Studying Literary Characters and Character Networks.
                        Digital Humanities 2017, Conference Abstracts.
                    
               
                  
                  Pfister, Manfred (2001):
                  Das Drama. 
                        München. Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
                    
               
                  Trilcke, P. / F. Fischer / D. Kampkaspar (2015):
                  Digital Network Analysis of Dramatic Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities 2015: Book of Abstracts.
                    
               
                  
                  Trilcke, Peer (2013):
                  Social Network Analysis (SNA) als Methode einer textempirischen Literaturwissenschaft. 
                        Empirie in der Literaturwissenschaft. Hrsg. von Christoph Rauen, Katja Mellmann und Philip Ajouri. Münster: 201–247.
                    
               
                  
                  Wolf, Werner (2002):
                  Das Problem der Narrativität in Literatur, bildender Kunst und Musik: Ein Beitrag zu einer intermedialen Erzähltheorie. 
                        Erzähltheorie transgenerisch, intermedial, interdisziplinär. Hrsg. von Vera Nünning und Ansgar Nünning. Trier: 23–104.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Situation
            Brief-Editionen sind in vielerlei Hinsicht ein unerlässliches Hilfsmittel für die (historische) Forschung. Gerade weil Briefe ein höchst subjektives Ausdrucksmedium sind, enthalten sie oftmals wertvolle Informationen, die für das Verständnis größerer Zusammenhänge essentiell sein können. Doch um ihr volles Potential entfalten zu können, müssten sie leicht zugänglich sein. Dabei liegen die allermeisten Editionen ausschließlich in gedruckter Form vor, nur neuere Vorhaben publizieren wenigstens teilweise digital. 
            Der Forscherin oder dem Forscher entgehen im Zweifelsfall wichtige Schriftzeugnisse, weil sie sie schlichtweg nicht finden. Oder um es mit Goethe zu sagen: „Man erblickt nur, was man schon weiß und versteht.“ Es stellt sich also die Frage, wie man diese zwischen Buchdeckel gepressten Schätze heben und der Forschung zugänglich machen kann. 
            OCR-gestützte Retrodigitalisierung von Volltexten kritischer Editionen ist hier qualitativ zumeist noch nicht ausreichend. Erschwerend kommt hinzu, dass diese nicht-semantisch ist – und bei urheberrechtlich geschützten Werken in aller Regel völlig unmöglich. 
         
         
            Lösungsansatz
            Als möglicher Lösungsansatz wäre eine sogenannte semantische Minimal-Retrodigitalisierung vorzuschlagen, um gedruckte Editionen zu erschließen und online auffindbar zu machen. Hierbei werden ausschließlich die Metadaten der Briefe digitalisiert, das heißt die Namen des Schreibers und des Empfängers sowie das Datum des Briefes. Weitere Informationen, beispielsweise zu den Orten, sind wünschenswert, jedoch nicht notwendig. Versieht man diese Metadaten mit Normdaten und stellt sie im TEI-Austauschformat 
                    CMIF 
                    (Correspondence Metadata Interchange-Format) bereit, könnten sie auch im Kontext von vielen tausend weiteren Briefen im Webservice 
                    
                  correspSearch.net
                sichtbar werden, der von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften bereitgestellt wird.
                
            Der große Vorteil hierbei ist, dass auch jüngste Publikationen erschlossen werden können, da auf den notwendigen Metadaten kein Urheberrechtsschutz liegt. Nicht selten enthalten solche Editionen sogar ein tabellarische Korrespondenzregister, das relativ einfach gescannt und aufbereitet werden kann. Generell scheint es allerdings nicht ratsam die Brief-Metadaten direkt in XML zu kodieren, da ein solches Vorgehen relativ fehleranfällig und zeitaufwändig ist. Aufgrund des hohen Grades an Strukturiertheit ist es sinnvoller sie gleichsam in Tabellen zu erfassen; dies erhöht die Übersichtlichkeit und reduziert die Fehlerquote. Wünschenswert ist natürlich eine Anreicherung mit Normdaten. Diese kann manuell oder auch halbautomatisch mit entsprechenden Tools erfolgen. Die kompilierten Daten können dann mit dem Programm 
                    
                  CSV2CMI
                automatisch in das entsprechende TEI-XML umgewandelt werden. Die resultierende Datei muss dann nur noch im World Wide Web bereitgestellt werden.
                
            Ein weiterer, charmanter Vorteil hierbei ist, dass in der Tabelle beliebig viele zusätzliche Informationen untergebracht werden können, die im CMIF nicht oder noch nicht kodiert werden können. So besteht folglich sogar die Möglichkeit zwei Dateien bereitzustellen, eine für den für den automatisierten und standardisierten Austausch 
                (machine-readable) und eine für Endbenutzer leicht lesbare Übersicht 
                (human-readable).
                
         
         
            Ausblick
            Gleichwohl das hier vorgestellte Verfahren vergleichsweise unkompliziert ist, macht sich die Arbeit dennoch natürlich nicht von allein. Für wen erscheint es also sinnvoll diese Daten aufzubereiten und bereitzustellen? 
            Zunächst kommen natürlich Bibliotheken in den Sinn, die – als Informations-Anbieter des 21. Jahrhunderts – ein höchst eigenes Interesse daran haben (sollten), Wissen zu und aus Ihren Beständen anzubieten. Des Weiteren kommen Forscher in den Sinn, die sowieso intensiv mit einem Korrespondenzkorpus arbeitet. Das Eigeninteresse an verbesserter Auffindbarkeit und Zugänglichkeit dort sollte ausreichen, die notwendigen Daten zu digitalisieren und vorrätig zu halten. Hinzu kommt in letzterem Falle natürlich die Möglichkeit, die so aufbereiteten Daten als Forschungsdaten zu publizieren. 
         
         
            Zusammenfassung
            Das Poster soll die hier skizzierte Idee der Semantischen Minimal-Retrodigitalisierung von Brief-Editionen vorstellen und den vorgeschlagenen Workflow sowie die bereit stehenden Software-Tools präsentieren. 
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Woesler, Winfried (1988):
                  Vorschläge für eine Normierung von Briefeditionen, in: 
                        
                        Editio 2, S. 8–18. doi: 
                        10.1515/9783110241938.8
               
               
                  Ball, Rafael (2014):
                  Bibliotheken im 21. Jahrhundert. Vom Leser zum Kunden, in: 
                        Ceynowa, Klaus / Hermann, Martin:
                  Bibliotheken: Innovation aus Tradition, 
                        Berlin: De Gruyter Saur 226–231, doi: 
                        10.1515/9783110310511.226
               
               
                  Stadler, Peter (2014):
                  Interoperabilität von digitalen Briefeditionen, in: 
                        Wolzogen, Hanna Delf von / Falk, Rainer:
                  Fontanes Briefe ediert, Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann 278–287.
                    
               
                  Dumont, Stefan (2016):
                  correspSearch – Connecting Scholarly Editions of Letters, in: 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 10, 
                         [letzter Zugriff 10. Oktober 2018].
                    
               
                  Rettinghaus, Klaus (2018):
                  saw-leipzig/csv2cmi (Version v1.6.2), Zenodo, doi: 
                        10.5281/zenodo.1461642 [letzter Zugriff 13. Oktober 2018].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
         
            Stand der Forschung und Problemaufriss 
            Im Zuge des anhaltenden Aufschwungs der Schreibprozessforschung geraten seit einiger Zeit Quellentypen in den Blick der literatur- und kulturwissenschaftlichen Forschung, die Prozesse der auktorialen Selbstorganisation, der Notation oder der Lektüre dokumentieren. Dazu gehören etwa Notizbücher (Hoffmann 2008, Efimova 2018), Zettelkästen (Gfrereis, Strittmatter 2013; Krajewski 2011; Schmidt 2016) oder auch Autor*innenbibliotheken. Während dabei für Notizbücher und Zettelkästen avancierte, auf Transkriptionen und TEI-Editionen basierende Techniken der digitalen Präsentation entwickelt werden (vgl. etwa Radecke 2018 für Notizbücher, Schmidt 2016 für Luhmanns Zettelkasten), beschränkt sich die digitale Präsentation von Autor*innenbibliotheken derzeit auf die Bereitstellung entweder von elektronischen Findmitteln, die bibliothekarische Metadaten zur Verfügung stellen (vgl. etwa die Bibliothek Paul Celans: 
                    https://www.dla-marbach.de/bibliothek/spezialsammlungen/bestandsliste/bibliothek-paul-celan/) oder von einfachen Digitalisaten, die in einem Viewer und/oder als PDF-Download angeboten werden (vgl. etwa die Grimm-Bibliothek 
                    https://www.digi-hub.de/viewer/browse/gelehrtenbibliotheken.grimmbibliothek/-/1/-/-/). Wenngleich diese Präsentationsformen dem bibliothekarischen Charakter der Bücher einer Autor*innenbibliothek durchaus gerecht werden, gelingt es ihnen nicht, den autographischen Charakter dieser Bücher zu erfassen, deren Besonderheit in den Lese- und Gebrauchsspuren liegt, die die Autorin oder der Autor (bzw. später die Erb*innen, Nachlassverwalter*innen, besitzenden Institutionen etc.) in ihnen hinterlassen haben. Zugleich erweist sich die Handhabung der Bücher einer Handbibliothek nach den Standards der Edition von Autographen als unverhältnismäßig, ist das Ziel ihrer Präsentation doch eben nicht ein edierter Text; vielmehr soll durch sie der Nachvollzug kreativer Lektüre- und Gebrauchspraktiken ermöglicht werden. 
                
            Dabei lassen sich für eine solche Präsentation, in Bezugnahme auf die Bedürfnisse der Forschung, drei Ziele formulieren: 1) die Bereitstellung möglichst der Gesamtheit der Bände einer Autor*innenbibliothek; 2) die Implementierung von Suchanfragen-basierten Findmitteln; 3) die Bereitstellung von Anwendungen, mit denen sich das Profil der Sammlung und die in ihr sich abzeichnenden Kreativitäts- und Lektüremuster entdecken, erkennen und erforschen lassen. 
            Für Ziel 1) stehen gängige Techniken zur Präsentation von digitalisierten Büchern (zumeist auf METS/MODS basierend) bereits zur Verfügung (DFG-Viewer, Visual Library o.Ä.); auch für Ziel 2) werden heute mit bibliothekarischen oder archivarischen Discovery-Tools oder mit einer auf den X-Technologien basierenden Umgebung bereits Lösungen angeboten. Für Ziel 3), das im Fokus unseres Projektes steht, liegen für den Spezialfall Autor*innenbibliotheken hingegen bisher weder Lösungsansätze noch Konzeptualisierungen vor, obwohl in den letzten Jahren Forderungen nach der Ergänzung von such-basierten Interfaces durch ›glückliche‹ Zufälle ermöglichende Konzepte laut wurden (Dörk et al. 2011, Thudt et al. 2012, Whitelaw 2015). Auch wenn die Etablierung sogenannter Explore-Modi zur Erfüllung dieser Ziele schon teilweise beigetragen hat, fehlt es in der digitalen Verfügbarmachung noch an flexibler Navigation entlang der Relationen zwischen den Objekten (Kreiseler et al. 2017).
         
         
            Projekt, Vorgehen und Korpus 
            Im Folgenden stellen wir einen im Verfahren des forschungsbasierten ›Rapid Prototyping‹ entwickelten Entwurf einer explorier- und skalierbaren Gesamtrepräsentation einer Autorenbibliothek vor. Dabei verbindet unsere Prototypenstudie die in der Regel als eine philologische und archiv- bzw. bibliothekswissenschaftliche Problematik adressierte Präsentation von Autor*innenbibliotheken mit der gestaltungsorientierten Forschung zur Visualisierung kultureller Sammlungen (Glinka et al. 2017; Dörk et al. 2017; Windhager et al. 2018). Im Fokus des Forschungsprojekts – das im Mai 2018 gestartet ist und bis März 2019 durchgeführt wird – steht ein in enger Koordination zwischen digitaler Archivwissenschaft, Literaturwissenschaft und informatischer Visualisierungsforschung entwickelter, webbasierter Software-Prototyp, der eine Idee realisiert, wie sich Autor*innenbibliotheken digital repräsentieren ließen. Das Projekt nimmt dabei zwei Impulse auf: Zum einen ist es dem ›Distant Reading‹ (Moretti 2013) verpflichtet, das nach Möglichkeiten einer Mustererkennung auf der Gesamtheit oder auf Teilen einer Autorenbibliothek sucht; zum anderen sollen die Repräsentationen skalierbar sein (Weitin 2017), was Fragen zu Übergängen zwischen verschiedenen Granularitäten aufwirft.
            Grundlage für die modellhafte Erschließung ist die ca. 155 Bände umfassende Handbibliothek Theodor Fontanes, die im Theodor-Fontane-Archiv der Universität Potsdam bewahrt und ergänzt wird. Die Bedeutung dieser überlieferten Autorenbibliothek ergibt sich in erster Linie aus ihrer Provenienz. Sie ist Teil der ›Schriftstellerwerkstatt‹, unersetzbar wegen der zahlreichen von Fontane verfassten Marginalien und wertvoll durch die verschiedenen Widmungsexemplare (Rasch 2005). Die Bände, die Fontane zur Abfassung von Essays und Rezensionen herangezogen hat, weisen beispielsweise besonders viele Bewertungen aus Fontanes Feder auf.
            Neben der vollständigen Verscannung des Bestandes nach archivarischen Standards und der Verzeichnung der Einzelbände nach bibliothekarischen Kriterien erfolgt eine Datenerfassung sowohl auf Seiten- wie auch auf Korpusebene. Die Daten zu Fontanes Handbibliothek sind gemäß relationalem Datenmodell in Tabellen verzeichnet, in denen die Verknüpfungen der Gegenstände abgebildet werden. Der Zugang zu den Daten erfolgt multiperspektivisch: auf Gesamtkorpus-, auf Objekt-, auf Seiten- und Einzelphänomenebene. Die Offenlegung der Zugänge im Rahmen einer Visualisierung zeigt beispielhaft die thematische und personelle Clusterbildung innerhalb der Sammlung oder die Verbindungen verschiedener Benutzungsspuren. 
         
         
            Visualisierungskonzept 
            Das im Projekt entwickelte Visualisierungskonzept legt einen besonderen Fokus auf die kontinuierliche, auf mehreren Granularitätsebenen zoom- und filterbare Navigation, welche die Erkundung einzelner Objekte ebenso zulässt wie deren Vergleich. Der interaktive Prototyp, der im März 2019 veröffentlicht wird, bietet drei grundlegende Ebenen, auf denen man sich durch den Bestand bewegt: Autor*innen, Bücher und Seiten.
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 1. Startseite/Buch-Ebene (Screenshot des Prototypen)
					
            
            Ausgangspunkt für die Exploration der Visualisierung ist die Buch-Ebene, die eine Übersicht aller Bücher der Handbibliothek, geordnet nach Autor*innen, darstellt (Abb. 1). Dies folgt einem bei Visualisierungsinterfaces typischen Prinzip, den ersten Zugang über einen Überblick zu schaffen (Shneiderman 1996, Whitelaw 2015).
            Jedes Buch wird durch einen vertikalen Balken dargestellt, in dem eine Seite wiederum durch ein abgegrenztes Segment repräsentiert wird, sodass sich eine Leseordnung der einzelnen Bücher von oben nach unten ergibt. Die Seitensegmente sind farblich entsprechend ihrer Lese- und Gebrauchsspuren kodiert. Während Seiten ohne Spuren weiß dargestellt werden, unterteilen sich die farbigen Lesespuren in die Kategorien: 1) Provenienzangaben (Grautöne), 2) Markierungen (Rottöne), 3) Marginalien (Blautöne) und 4) zusätzliches Material (Gelb). Mouseover über ein Segment zeigt eine Vorschau des jeweiligen Seiten-Scans und den Buchtitel an (Abb. 2).
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 2. Seiten-Ebene mit hervorgehobenen Marginalien und Mouseover über ein Element
					
            
            Ablesbar sind auf der Buch-Ebene, die einem individuellen Strichcode der Bücher ähnelt, zum einen der Umfang eines Buches (Gesamtlänge des Balkens), aber auch die Verteilung der Lesespuren in diesem (Farbkodierung). Die Filterleiste über der Visualisierung dient hierbei als Legende für die Farbkodierung und bietet die Möglichkeit zur Fokussierung auf bestimmte Lesespur-Typen. Die Auswahl eines Lesespur-Typs löst die Entfaltung der entsprechenden Unterkategorien in der Filterleiste aus. 
            Mit Hilfe eines Suchfeldes können spezifische Textstellen, die einer Suchanfrage entsprechen, hervorgehoben werden. Durch die Selektion eines Buches werden die anderen Bücher zusammengestaucht und eine Detailansicht des ausgewählten Buches wird entfaltet, die zusätzliche Meta-Informationen zum Werk bietet.
            Über die Scrollfunktion des Browsers können die Granularitätsebenen der Visualisierung erreicht werden. Dem Funktionsprinzip des Semantic Zoom folgend (Perlin & Fox 1993) führt Scrollen nach oben zu einer höheren Abstraktion und nach unten zu einem höheren Detailgrad – es erlaubt also einen Wechsel zwischen den drei Ebenen. Das Scrollen ermöglicht dabei kontinuierliche, sinnhafte Übergänge zwischen den Ansichten und bietet die Möglichkeit, in eigener Geschwindigkeit vor- und zurückzugehen, mit dem Ziel, die Ansichtswechsel nachvollziehbarer zu gestalten.
            
               
               
                  Abbildung 3.  Autor*innen-Ebene. Alle Filter-Kategorien sind entfaltet. Hier deutlich zu sehen ist z.B. die bei allen Büchern gleich stark ausgeprägten Provenienzangaben in grau zu Beginn der Bücher.
					
            
            Im Gegensatz zur mittleren Buch-Ebene sind auf der höheren Ebene (Abb. 3) alle Bücher eines Autors zusammengefasst, indem die Gesamtverteilung der Lesespuren in Form eines Flächen-Diagramms dargestellt wird. Hierdurch ist ein Vergleich von Fontanes Lesespuren, verteilt über die Werke unterschiedlicher Autor*innen, möglich, aber es lassen sich durch die höhere Abstraktion auch umfassende Muster nachvollziehen. Navigiert man von der mittleren Buch-Ebene in die andere Richtung auf die untere Ebene, wird die Visualisierung ins Detail entfaltet (Abb. 2), sodass für eine*n ausgewählte*n Autor*in einzelne Seiten gezielt ausgewählt werden können und Marginalien detailliert auch in der Transkription sichtbar werden. 
            Alle Selektionen, Filterungen und die ausgewählte Granularitätsebene werden in der URL kodiert, wodurch sowohl die Nutzung der Verlaufsfunktionen des Browsers als auch das Speichern unter Favoriten oder das Teilen und Referenzieren von Ansichten per Link möglich wird.
         
         
            Reflexion der Ergebnisse
            Die im Rahmen des Prototypen entwickelte, neuartige visuelle Annäherung an Autor*innenbibliotheken und die in ihnen bezeugten Lektürespuren verbindet gestaltungsorientierte Ansätze zur Visualisierung kultureller Sammlungen mit philologisch-, archiv- und bibliothekswissenschaftlichen Forschungsfragen.
            Anhand visueller Filter können Untermengen identifiziert sowie Kategorien gebildet werden, die Mustererkennungen in der Sammlung ermöglichen. Nutzer*innen sollen in die Lage versetzt werden, Begriffs- und Themenräume innerhalb dezidierter Kategorien und über deren Grenzen hinweg zu erfassen. Gefragt wurde nach der Integration von Suchfunktionen, Skalierung und Sichtbarmachung in Interfaces und wie durch attraktive Einstiege in einen Bestand weitergehende Explorationsmöglichkeiten eröffnet werden können.
            Die Entdeckung neuer Forschungsfragen während des Prototypingprozesses und die damit einhergehende Nachjustierung in der Erschließung beleuchtet die Wechselwirkungen zwischen visueller Forschung, Metadatenmanagement und Philologie. Deutlich wurde, dass die Sammlung als Konstrukt zu verstehen ist, das erst die (multimodale) Rückschau generiert. Dabei entsteht ›die‹ Sammlung aus der Verschränkung von Perspektive und Objekt. Die sich daraus ergebende Konsequenz, multiple Sichten auf ›das‹ und auf ›die‹ Objekt(e) anzubieten, schlägt sich in den verschiedenen Granularitätsebenen des Protoypen nieder und hat eine Ablösung der statischen Verzeichnung eines OPAC-Katalogs durch eine beobachtungsabhängige Visualisierung der verfügbaren Quelldaten zur Folge. Diese Sichtbarmachung fußt auf einem dynamischen Modell der Sammlungserfassung geleitet durch eine digitale Repräsentationsmodellierung.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Dörk, Marian / Carpendale, Sheelagh / Williamson, Carey (2011):
                  The Information Flaneur: A Fresh Look at Information Seeking, in: 
                        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1215-1224.
                    
               
                  Dörk, Marian / Pietsch, Christopher / Credico, Gabriel (2017): 
                  
                     One view is not enough: High-level visualizations of a large cultural collection
                  , in: 
                        Information Design Journal, 23:1, 39-47. 
                        
                     http://mariandoerk.de/papers/idj2017.pdf
                  
               
               
                  Efimova, Svetlana (2018): 
                  Das Schriftsteller-Notizbuch als Denkmedium in der russischen und deutschen Literatur. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink.
                    
               
                  Gfrereis, Heike / Strittmatter, Ellen (eds.) (2013): 
                  Zettelkästen. Maschinen der Phantasie. Ausstellungskatalog. Deutsche Schillergesellschaft. Marbach a.N.
                    
               
                  Glinka, Katrin / Pietsch, Christopher / Dörk, Marian (2017): 
                  
                     Past Visions and Reconciling Views: Visualizing Time, Texture and Themes in Cultural Collections
                  , in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 11.2. 
                        
                     http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000290/000290.html
                  
               
               
                  Haber, Peter (2010):
                  Autorenbibliotheken im digitalen Zeitalter, in: 
                        Quatro. Zeitschrift des Schweizerischen Literaturarchivs 30/31, 39-43.
                    
               
                  Höppner, Stefan / Jessen, Caroline / Münkner, Jörn (eds.) (2018):
                  Autorschaft und Bibliothek. Sammlungsstrategien und Schreibverfahren. Mit einem Vorwort von Reinhard Laube. Göttingen: Wallstein.
                    
               
                  Hoffmann, Christoph (2008):
                  Wie lesen? Das Notizbuch als Bühne der Forschung, 
                        in:
                        Birgit Griesecke (ed.): 
                  Werkstätten des Möglichen 1930-1936: L. Fleck, E. Husserl, R. Musil, L. Wittgenstein, Würzburg: 45-57.
                    
               
                  Knoche, Michael (ed.) (2015):
                  Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
                    
               
                  Krajewski, Markus (2011): 
                  Paper Machines. About cards & catalogs, 1548-1929. Cambridge: MIT Press.
                    
               
                  Kreiseler, Sarah / Brüggemann, Viktoria / Dörk, Marian (2017):
                  Tracing exploratory modes in digital collections of museum web sites using reverse information architecture, in: 
                        First Monday 22.4.
                    
               
                  Moretti, Franco (2013): 
                  Distant Reading. London: Verso.
                    
               
                  Perlin, Ken / Fox, David (1993):
                  Pad: an alternative approach to the computer interface, in: 
                        SIGGRAPH '93: Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 57-64.
                    
               
                  Rasch, Wolfgang (2005):
                  Zeitungstiger, Bücherfresser. Die Bibliothek Theodor Fontanes als Fragment und Aufgabe betrachtet, 
                        in: 
                        Ute Schneider (ed.): 
                  Imprimatur. Ein Jahrbuch für Bücherfreunde. N.F. [Bd.] XIX. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 103-144.
                    
               
                  Rohmann, Ivonne (2015):
                  Aspekte der Erschließung und Rekonstruktion nachgelassener Privatbibliotheken am Beispiel der Büchersammlungen Herders, Wielands, Schillers und Goethes, 
                        in: 
                        Michael Knoche (ed.):
                  Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 17-59.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Johannes (2016):
                  Niklas Luhmann´s Card Index: Thinking Tool, Communication Partner, Publication Machine, 
                        in: 
                        Alberto Cevolini (ed.): 
                  Forgetting Machines. Knowledge Management Evolution in Early Modern Europe. Leiden: Brill 289-311.
                    
               
                  Shneiderman, Ben (1996):
                  The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations, in: 
                        Visual Languages, 1996. Proceedings., IEEE Symposium. IEEE, 336-343.
                    
               
                  Thud, Alice / Hinrichs, Uta / Carpendale, Sheelagh (2012):
                  The bohemian bookshelf, in: 
                        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1461-1470.
                    
               
                  Weitin, Thomas (2017):
                  Scalable Reading, in: 
                        
                            Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik
                         47.1: 1-6. 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.1007/s41244-017-0048-4
                  
               
               
                  Wieland, Magnus (2015):
                  Materialität des Lesens. Zur Topographie von Annotationsspuren in Autorenbibliotheken, 
                        in: 
                        Knoche, Michael (ed.):  
                        Autorenbibliotheken. Erschließung, Rekonstruktion, Wissensordnung. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 147-173.
                    
               
                  Windhager, Florian / Federico, Paolo / Schreder, Günther / Glinka, Katrin / Dörk, Marian / Miksch, Silvia/ Mayr, Eva (2018):
                  
                     Visualization of Cultural Heritage Collection Data: State of the Art and Future Challenges.
                   in: 
                        TVCG: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
                        
                     http://mariandoerk.de/papers/tvcg2018.pdf
                  
               
               
                  Whitelaw, Mitchell (2015):
                  
                     Generous Interfaces for Digital Cultural Collections,
                   in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 9.1. 
                        
                     http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/1/000205/000205.html
                  
               
            
         
      
   



      
         Anhand der Aufgabe einer sprachenübergreifenden Kollationierung berichtet dieser Beitrag von “multimodalen” Analysen digitaler Texte: von einer statistischen über lexikalische bis zu wissensmodellierenden Perspektiven auf den Datensatz. Wir greifen auf diese Ansätze zurück, um verschiedene Überarbeitungsstufen und Übersetzungen eines Textes zu alignieren, und wir diskutieren, warum die Aufgabe noch immer keine in der Praxis zufriedenstellende Lösung gefunden hat. So hilft der Beitrag, eine offene Forschungsfrage der Digital Humanities genauer zu bestimmen.
         Das Projekt “Das Beichthandbuch des Martín de Azpilcueta und das Phänomen der Epitomierung” untersucht anhand der Entwicklung eines besonderen Texts und seiner Entwicklung den Wandel normativen Wissens in der Rückkopplung mit diversen Praxiszusammenhängen: Der spanische Kirchenrechtler Martín de Azpilcueta (1492-1586) publizierte 1549 sein “Manual de Confesores y Penitentes” mit Regeln für Verfahren und Beurteilung von Beichten. Die ursprüngliche Publikation erschien auf Portugiesisch, allein zu Azpilcuetas Lebzeiten folgten noch über 60 weitere Editionen, in denen der Autor selbst Übersetzungen und Anpassungen vornahm, etwa um auf Beschlüsse des Konzils von Trient einzugehen, oder um das Werk anderen Adressatenkreisen zu erschließen (vgl. Bragagnolo 2018).
         Unser Korpus umfasst zunächst 5 zwischen 1549 und 1573 gedruckte Editionen. Zwei auf portugiesisch: (A) Coimbra 1549, 8°, 720 Seiten umfassend, (B) Coimbra 1552, 8°, 1.000 S.; zwei auf spanisch: (C) Coimbra 1553, 4°, 588 S. und (D) Salamanca 1556, 4°, 813 S.; und auf Latein (E) Rom 1573, 4°, 1.136 S. Wir gehen von drei verschiedenen Transformationsmodi aus: Änderungen des Inhalts innerhalb einer Sprache (A → B, C → D); Übersetzung in eine andere Sprache ohne größere Änderungen des Inhalts (B → C); Übersetzung unter gleichzeitiger Änderung des Inhalts (D → E).
         
            
               
            
         
         Ein erster Beitrag digitaler Methoden zur Analyse dieser Entwicklungen besteht in der systematischen Alignierung von Texten der verschiedenen Versionen über Modifikationen und Übersetzungen hinweg. Wir diskutieren im Folgenden verschiedene Ansätze der automatischen Alignierung von sogenannten Bitexten und wie diese Ansätze sich in der Konfrontation mit den Besonderheiten des Projekts (historisches Vokabular, Orthographie und Grammatik, publizistische oder typographische Eigenheiten in den Texten, inhaltliche Überarbeitungen in den Übersetzungen usw.) bewähren. Ein wichtiger Gesichtspunkt sind dabei immer auch die Art, der Umfang und die Auswirkungen der nötigen manuellen/intellektuellen Vor- und Nachbereitungen.
         Für die Evaluation der verschiedenen Ansätze alignieren wir einen Teil der im Projekt als TEI XML transkribierten Texte in der LERA Umgebung1 manuell. Da die Texte zum Teil umfangreiche Überarbeitungen enthalten, wird zu sehen sein, ob automatische Methoden der Evaluation (wie Papineni et al. 2002 oder Lin/Och 2004) Verwendung finden können, oder ob doch auf eine manuelle Evaluation zurückgegriffen werden muss (ähnlich Darriba Bilbao et al. 2005).
            
         
            I. Statistische Modi
            Im ersten Teil diskutieren wir Algorithmen, die ausblenden, dass es sich bei unseren Daten um symbolische bzw. sprachliche Ausdrücke handelt. Sie werden gleichsam jeweils als “rohe” Datenmengen verstanden, die auf statistische Weisen vermessen werden können und es werden Übereinstimmungen in den Mustern oder in den Intervall-Längen zwischen spezifischen Datenpunkten gesucht.2 Obwohl in allen Fällen bestimmte Besonderheiten des historischen Forschungsgegenstands zu Komplikationen führen, ist die Leistungsfähigkeit dieser Ansätze nicht zu unterschätzen. Denn ihre Unzulänglichkeiten sind weitgehend mit jenen besonderen Zusammenhängen historischer Texte verschränkt, in denen ohnehin manuell nach- oder vorgearbeitet werden muss, und es ist nicht von vornherein auszuschließen, dass es sich lohnen könnte, mit manuellem Aufwand die Texte besser vorzubereiten, um dann mit diesen Ansätzen sehr gute Ergebnisse erzielen zu können.
                
            
               Für die meisten Methoden der computergestützten Übersetzung 
                    (Machine Translation) stellt der 
                        Satz die grundlegende Einheit der Übersetzung dar und es haben sich eine Reihe von Ansätzen etabliert, die zur Erkennung von Satzkorrelationen in Bitexten allein auf die bloße Satzlänge als eines der besten Maße für die Wahrscheinlichkeit abstellen, mit der ein Satz im zu untersuchenden Dokument die Übersetzung eines Referenz-Satzes aus dem Quell-Dokument ist.3 Die Unterschiede in den typischen Satzlängen zwischen zwei Sprachen schlagen sich offenbar in allen Sätzen eines Dokuments in ähnlicher Weise nieder, so dass sich in zwei Dokumenten die Verhältnisse der Satzlängen zueinander stark ähneln. Fälle, in denen allzu kurze Sätze beim Übersetzen verbunden, oder sehr lange Sätze aufgeteilt werden, werden mit geringerer Genauigkeit erkannt; wie häufig dieser Fall aber vorkommt, hängt von den involvierten Sprachen und Übersetzern ab.
                    
               Ein zweiter Ansatz aus dem 
                        Machine Translation-Umfeld sind geometrische Ansätze (vgl. Melamed 1999). Sie basieren auf der Annahme, dass es ausreichend sein müsste, sehr grob markierte “Kandidaten” für Satzkorrespondenzen in die richtige Reihenfolge zu bringen. Mit anderen Worten liegt der Fokus nicht auf der eigentlichen Übereinstimmung, sondern auf der Position im Text: Die Ausgangsannahme ist, dass die zu vergleichenden Texte synchron fortschreiten und der erste Satz im einen Text den ersten Satz im anderen übersetzt, der zweite den zweiten usw. Diese Annahme kann in einem durch den Fortschritt in beiden Texten aufgespannten Koordinatensystem als ansteigende Diagonale repräsentiert werden. In einer geometrischen Betrachtung wird dann versucht, durch Umsortierung der vorgefundenen Sätze, die Punkte an diese Diagonale anzunähern.
                    
               Da unsere Texte in eng verwandten Sprachen vorliegen – Portugiesisch, Spanisch und Latein –, erscheint es lohnenswert, auch mit Ansätzen, die Übereinstimmungen auf der Ebene von Wortstämmen oder -fragmenten untersuchen, einen Versuch zu unternehmen (vgl. Darriba Bilbao et al. 2005). Wir untersuchen also Ähnlichkeiten in den Vektorräumen für die vorkommenden 3- und 4-Gramme.4
               
            
         
         
            II. Lexikalische Modi
            Eine zweite Menge von Methoden der 
                    Machine Translation verarbeitet die Daten nur in sprachlogisch aufbereiteter Form, hebt insbesondere auf die übereinstimmende Bedeutung der sprachlichen Ausdrücke ab und setzt viele “klassische DH”-Ansätze ein (vgl. Ma 2006). Diese Ansätze setzen Arbeitsschritte wie Tokenisierung und Stemmatisierung oder Lemmatisierung voraus und in unseren Experimenten evaluieren wir verschiedene weitere, optionale Schritte, um zunächst zu einer treffenden Charakterisierung 
                    eines Textes zu gelangen. Dies wird für beide Sprachversionen vorgenommen, bevor dann diese “konzentrierten” oder “gefilterten” Charakterisierungen endlich auf der Basis eines Wörterbuchs 
                    miteinander verglichen werden.5
            
            Die von uns evaluierten optionalen Schritte zur Etablierung einer Charakteristik von Sätzen sind (a) “Filter” wie Stopwörter und TF/IDF-Topwerte und (b) “Booster” wie stärker gewichtete Zahlen, Zahlwörter und Named Entities. Offenkundig hängt allerdings das Ergebnis der Vergleiche in dieser zweiten Perspektive mindestens ebensosehr von der Qualität der Wörterbücher wie von der Leistung und der Auswahl der vorgeschalteten “Charakterisierungs”-Algorithmen ab. Daher legen wir ein besonderes Augenmerk auf das relative Gewicht der Qualität des Wörterbuchs und ihrer manuellen Verbesserung auf der einen, des Aufwands und Gewinns beim Einsatzes von Filtern und Boostern auf der anderen Seite.
         
         
            III. Wissensbasierte Modi
            Abschließend stellen wir mit der Graphanalyse eine Perspektive vor, die in aktuellen Diskussionen zur sprachübergreifenden Plagiatserkennung diskutiert wird und eine Modellierung des im Text beschriebenen Wissens unternimmt (vgl. Franco-Salvador/Rosso/Montes-y-Gómez 2016). Anstelle eines Wörterbuchs zur Überbrückung des Sprachunterschieds wird hier ein semantisches Netz – in unserem Beispiel BabelNet (Navigli/Ponzetto 2012) – verwendet, um die Wörter der Texte mit “sprachunabhängigen” Konzepten zu verbinden, die untereinander in taxonomischen, synonymen, kontradiktorischen u.a. Beziehungen stehen. Dabei wird durch die Texte jeweils ein Ausschnitt eines umfassenderen Begriffsgraphen instanziiert, um anschließend die resultierenden Teilgraphen miteinander zu vergleichen. Dies erlaubt die Disambiguierung der verwendeten Wörter und eine differenziertere Vergleichsbasis durch die Einbeziehung des semantischen Kontexts der verglichenen Textpassagen. Die Konstruktion und die Vergleiche der zahlreichen Teilgraphen sind offenkundig rechenintensivere Aufgaben, und im Übrigen setzt der Ansatz ebenfalls Schritte wie Tokenisierung und Lemmatisierung voraus, so dass der mögliche Gewinn in der Vergleichsgenauigkeit hier durch einen höheren Aufwand erkauft wird, der zu einem kaum verminderten Aufwand der Textaufbereitung (z.B. der Normalisierung) hinzu kommt.
         
         
            Diskussion
            Wir diskutieren im Rahmen des Beitrags insbesondere, welche Komplikationen sich in der Arbeit in der Folge von Besonderheiten unseres Fragezusammenhangs und Materials gezeigt haben, und wie diese sich auf die unterschiedlichen Ansätze jeweils auswirken. Als wichtige Faktoren konnten wir historische Orthographie und Abkürzungen, uneindeutige und inkonsistente Interpunktion sowie die Kodierung von Layout-Besonderheiten wie Fußnoten identifizieren und so versuchen wir zu bestimmen, welchen Gewinn entsprechende manuelle Vorarbeiten wie Satzsegmentierung, absatzweise Alignierung, Verbesserung des Wörterbuchs, Normalisierung von Schreibungen und Typographie erzielen können.
         
      
      
         
             Paul Molitor, Jörg Ritter et al.: LERA - Locate, Explore, Retrace and Apprehend complex text variants, eine im Rahmen des vom Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) geförderten Projekts SaDA - Semi-automatische Differenzanalyse von komplexen Textvarianten erstellte Arbeitsumgebung.
             Im linguistischen Kontext entspricht die Mustersuche des ersten Ansatzes etwa einer n-Gramm-Analyse, und wenn die herausgehobenen Datenpunkte des zweiten Ansatzes Repräsentationen von Interpunktionszeichen sind, entspricht dieser einer Analyse der Satzlängen. Obwohl die Auswahl der verwendeten Maße so durchaus durch sprach- und texttheoretische Überlegungen inspiriert und angeleitet ist, sind die Maße selbst von diesen Motiven doch im Grunde vollkommen unabhängig und könnten in gleicher Weise mit ganz anders gearteten Datenreihen angewandt werden. (In Sankoff/Kruskal 1983 etwa werden Anwendungen der Sequenz-Alignierung in ganz anderen Feldern beschrieben.)
             Die frühesten Versuche in dieser Richtung wurden wohl im IBM Machine Translation Lab unternommen; vgl. Brown et al. 1990. Klassisch wurde der Algorithmus und der Aufsatz von Gale/Church 1993; aktueller, mit weiteren Methoden kombiniert und auf sog. “low ressourced languages” zielend etwa bei Varga et al 2005.
             Als zusätzliche Dimension haben wir dem Vektorraum die Position des jeweiligen Satzes im Text sowie die Behandlung der benachbarten Sätze hinzugefügt, so dass von zwei Satzpaaren mit gleichen n-Gramm-Häufigkeiten dasjenige den Vorzug erhalten kann, dessen Sätze näher beieinander liegen oder das eine mit den benachbarten Sätzen vergleichbare Verschiebung darstellt.
             Ansätze wie Kay/Röscheisen 1993, Fung/Church 1994 oder auch Varga et al. 2005 können ein solches Wörterbuch auf der Basis allein der vorliegenden Texte erstellen.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Manuela Bragagnolo:
                  Les voyages du droit du Portugal à Rome. Le ‘Manual de confessores’ de Martín de Azpilcueta (1492-1586) et ses traductions, 
                        (The Travels of Law from Portugal to Rome. Martín de Azpilcueta’s ‘Manual de confessores’ (1492-1586) and its Translations), Max Planck Institute for European Legal History Research Paper Series No. 2018-13 (https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3287684)
                    
               
                  Peter F. Brown / John Cocke / Stephen A. Della Pietra / Vincent J. Della Pietra / Fredrick Jelinek / John D. Lafferty / Robert L. Mercer / Paul S. Roossin:
                  A statistical approach to machine translation, 
                        in: Computational Linguistics 16 (1990): 79-85, https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=92860.
                    
               
                  V.M. Darriba Bilbao / J.G. Pereira Lopes / T. Ildefonso:
                  Measuring the impact of cognates in parallel text alignment, 
                        in: Proceedings of the Portuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2005): 338-343. DOI: 10.1109/EPIA.2005.341306.
                    
               
                  Ábel Elekes / Adrian Englhardt / Martin Schäler / Klemens Böhm:
                  Toward meaningful notions of similarity in NLP embedded models, 
                        in: International Journal on Digital Libraries (2018), DOI: 10.1007/s00799-018-0237-y.
                    
               
                  Samuel Fernando / Mark Stevenson:
                  A semantic similarity approach to paraphrase detection, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 11th Annual Research Colloquium of the UK Special Interest Group for Computational Linguistics (2008), 45-52, https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/d020/eb83f03a9f9c97e728355c4a9010fa65d8ef.pdf.
                    
               
                  Marc Franco-Salvador / Paolo Rosso / Manuel Montes-y-Gómez:
                  A systematic study of knowledge graph analysis for cross-language-plagiarism detection, 
                        in: Information Processing and Management 52 (2016), 550-570. DOI: 10.1016/j.ipm.2015.12.004.
                    
               
                  Pascale Fung / Kenneth W. Church:
                  K-vec: A new approach for aligning parallel texts, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Computational Linguistics, Vol. 2 (1994), 1096-1102, DOI: 10.3115/991250.991328.
                    
               
                  William A. Gale / Kenneth W. Church:
                  A program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora, 
                        in: Computational linguistics 19/1 (1993): 75-102, https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=972455.
                    
               
                  Martin Kay / Martin Röscheisen:
                  Text-translation Alignment, 
                        in: Computational Linguistics 19/1 (1993), 121-142.
                    
               
                  Tom Kenter / Maarten de Rijke:
                  Short Text Similarity with Word Embeddings, 
                        in: CKIM ’15 Proceedings (2015) DOI: 10.1145/2806416.2806475.
                    
               
                  Chin-Yew Lin / Franz Josef Och:
                  Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation Quality Using Longest Common Subsequence and Skip-bigram Statistics, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics (2004). DOI: 10.3115/1218955.1219032.
                    
               
                  Xiaoyi Ma:
                  Champollion: A robust parallel text sentence aligner, 
                        in: 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) 2006, 489-492.
                    
               
                  Helena de Medeiros Caseli / Maria das Graças Volpe Nunes: 
                  Evaluation of sentence alignment methods for brazilian portuguese and english parallel texts, 
                        in Brazilian Symposium on Artificial Intelligence (SBIA) (2004), 184-193, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-28645-5_19.
                    
               
                  I. Dan Melamed:
                  A Portable Algorithm for Mapping Bitext Correspondence, 
                        in: ACL ’98 Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (1997), 305-312, DOI: 10.3115/976909.979656.
                    
               
                  I. Dan Melamed:
                  Bitext Maps and Alignment via Pattern Recognition, 
                        in: Computational Linguistics 25/1 (1999), 107-130, https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=973218.
                    
               
                  Robert C. Moore:
                  Fast and accurate sentence alignment of bilingual corpora, 
                        in: S.D. Richardson (ed.): AMTA 2002. Machine Translation: From Research to Real Users, LNCS 2499 (2002), pp. 135-144. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-45820-4_14.
                    
               
                  Roberto Navigli / Simone Paolo Ponzetto:
                  BabelNet: The automatic construction, evaluation and application of a wide-coverage multilingual semantic network, 
                        in: Artificial Intelligence 193 (2012), 217-250, DOI: 10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.001
                    
               
                  Kishore Papineni / Salim Roukos / Todd Ward / Wei-Jing Zhu:
                  BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics (2002): 311-318. DOI: 10.3115/1073083.1073135.
                    
               
                  Christian Paul / Achim Rettinger / Aditya Mogadala / Craig A. Knoblock / Pedro Szekely:
                  Efficient graph-based document similarity,
                        in: 
                        H. Sacks et al. (eds.):
                  ESWC ’16 European Semantic Web Conference / LNCS 9678 Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
                        (2016), 334-349, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-34129-3_21.
                    
               
                  Alexandr Rosen:
                  In search of the best method for sentence alignment in parallel texts, 
                        in: 
                        R. Garabık (ed.):
                  Computer treatment of Slavic and East European languages. 
                        Third international seminar (2005), 174-185, http://utkl.ff.cuni.cz/~rosen/public/slovko05.pdf.
                    
               
                  David Sankoff / Joseph Kruskal:
                  Time Warps, String Edits, and Macromolecules. The Theory and Practice of Sequence Comparison. 
                        Addison-Wesley (1983).
                    
               
                  André Santos / José João Almeida / Nuno Carvalho: 
                  Structural Alignment of plain text books, 
                        in: LREC ’12 Proceedings of the Eigth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (2012), 2069-2074, http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/967_Paper.pdf.
                    
               
                  Danica Seničić:
                  Automatic alignment of bilingual sentences. 
                        The case of English and Serbian. M.A. thesis, Louvain, 2016, https://dial.uclouvain.be/memoire/ucl/en/object/thesis%3A11186.
                    
               
                  Daniel Stein:
                  Machine translation: Past, present and future, 
                        in: 
                        Georg Rehm / Felix Sasaki / Daniel Stein / Andreas Witt (eds.):
                  Language technologies for a multilingual Europe, 
                        TC3 III. Language Science Press (2018), pp. 5-17. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1291924.
                    
               
                  Joseph P. Turian / Luke Shen / I. Dan Melamed:
                  Evaluation of Machine Translation and its Evaluation, 
                        in: Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit IX (2003), 386-393, https://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/pubs/papers/turian-summit03eval.pdf.
                    
               
                  Dániel Varga / Péter Halácsy / András Kornai / Viktor Nagy / László Németh / Viktor Trón:
                  Parallel Corpora for medium density languages [Hunalign], 
                        in: RANLP ’05 Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (2005), 247-258, http://kornai.com/Papers/ranlp05parallel.pdf.
                    
               
                  Krzysztof Wołk / Krzysztof Marasek:
                  A Sentence Meaning Based Alignment Method for Parallel Text Corpora Preparation, 
                        in: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 275 (2014), 107-114, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-05951-8_22.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die Digital Humanities haben sich im Verlauf der letzten zehn Jahre aus einem randständigen Thema an den deutschen Universitäten zu einem etablierten Ausbildungsbereich verwandelt. Die seit Jahren anhaltende Diskussion um konvergente Curricula zeugt von dieser Entwicklung (Sahle 2013). Digitale Editionen waren vor zehn Jahren im deutschsprachigen Raum selten anzutreffen. In ihren Ausprägungsformen waren sie noch sehr unterschiedlich und trugen den Charakter vereinzelter Leuchtturmprojekte, die die Grenzen neuer Verfahren in den Geisteswissenschaften ausloteten. Mittlerweile ist die “digitale Editorik” ein eigener Forschungsbereich. Während Fachkenntnisse in diesem Bereich vor zehn Jahren nur in außeruniversitären Sonderveranstaltungen wie Summer Schools und Workshops erworben werden konnten, gibt es heutzutage an einigen deutschsprachigen Universitäten regelmäßige Lehrveranstaltungen zum Thema, die im Kontext der bisher entstandenen Lehrstühle
            1
             der Digital Humanities verortet sind.
         
         
            Obwohl sich die universitäre Ausbildung in den letzten Jahren merklich und kontinuierlich verbessert hat, ist dennoch der Bedarf nach den Schools des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik (IDE) ungebrochen; dies ist ein deutliches Zeichen, dass die Digital Humanities weiterhin stärker an den Universitäten verankert werden müssen. Daneben bieten die IDE-Schools ein gutes Angebot für InteressentInnen sowohl des außeruniversitären, als auch des postdoktoralen Sektors.
         
         
            Deshalb bleiben komprimierte Angebote jenseits von Studiengängen wie die Veranstaltungsreihe ESU Leipzig
            2
             oder eine Vielzahl vereinzelter Workshops oder Summer Schools
            3
             die einzige Möglichkeit, sich grundlegende Kompetenzen für die von individuellen Forschungsfragen angetriebene Arbeit in den Digital Humanities anzueignen. Daneben wurden auch verschiedene Online-Angebote für E-Learning entwickelt. Für den Bereich der digitalen Editorik seien hier beispielsweise Kurse bei #dariahTeach, Schulungsmaterialien von DiXiT und DARIAH-DE oder Dokumentationen auf Webseiten oder GitHub genannt.
            4
         
         
            Das IDE bietet seit 2008 regelmäßig einwöchige Schools an, die sich auf Themen rund um digitale Editionen konzentrieren. Bis 2018 wurden insgesamt 13 Schools in Wien (4), Köln (2), Chemnitz (2), Graz (2), Berlin (1), Weimar (1) und Rostock (1) mit insgesamt fast 300 TeilnehmerInnen durchgeführt.
            5
             Sie vermitteln wesentliche Kenntnisse für AnfängerInnen und Fortgeschrittene auf dem Gebiet der XML-basierten digitalen Editorik. In der Regel organisieren dabei lokale InteressentInnen die finanziellen und örtlichen Rahmenbedingungen und können grobe inhaltliche Vorgaben machen. Das IDE übernimmt die inhaltliche Ausgestaltung und die Auswahl des Lehrpersonals. Dabei wird in die Planung neuer Schools immer die Auswertung von Evaluationsbögen der vorangegangenen Schools einbezogen.
         
         Das IDE legt Wert darauf, dass die TeilnehmerInnen an ihren eigenen Editionsprojekten arbeiten, um die Motivation, die eigene Arbeit konsequent auf den neuen Methoden aufzubauen, zu erhöhen. Es hält jedoch auch eigene Übungsmaterialien bereit, um den Einstieg durch gemeinsames Erarbeiten der jeweils neuen Lernstoffe sowohl an der “Tafel” und zeitgleich am eigenen Arbeitsgerät zu erleichtern.
         
            Der erfolgreiche Besuch einer School wird stets durch ein Zertifikat bescheinigt, das in manchen Fällen als “credit points” in Studiengängen angerechnet werden konnte. Besonderes Augenmerk wird auf eine gute personelle Betreuung der TeilnehmerInnen durch zusätzliche TutorInnen und einen hohen Praxisanteil für Übungen gelegt. Die Kurse behandeln Basistechnologien wie XML, XSL, XQuery, Python, kontrollierte Vokabularien und Normdaten, editionsrelevante Kapitel der TEI, Metadaten, Text Mining, sowie allgemeine Webtechnologien wie HTML und JavaScript oder neuere Ansätze wie Graphentechnologien. Die konsequente Online-Bereitstellung von Vortragsfolien und Übungsaufgaben auf der Website des IDE ermöglicht auch nachträglich, sich Inhalte der Schools anzueignen und fügt das Angebot in die wachsende Zahl von online verfügbaren Tutorials ein (s.o.). Im Zuge der Schools wurden essentielle Technologien in Flyerform
            6
             kurz zusammenzufassen. Das auf den Schools vermittelte Wissen lässt sich so einerseits direkt nachnutzen, andererseits können diese Angebote auch zeitlich versetzt in andere Schools eingebunden werden.
         
         
            Das Poster wird die mit den Schools gewonnenen Erfahrungen der letzten Jahre zusammenfassen. Es vergleicht die IDE-Schools mit thematisch benachbarten Veranstaltungen,
            7
             analysiert Trends und Konstanten der curricularen Struktur, erhebt statistische Angaben über die BesucherInnen, präsentiert die Sicht der TeilnehmerInnen durch die Auswertung einer umfassenden Befragung und verortet das Angebot im Gesamtfeld der digitalen Editorik bzw. der Digital Humanities im Allgemeinen. Es leistet damit einen Beitrag für die Untersuchung der Vermittlungsformen und Lehrinhalte in der Ausbildungslandschaft der Digital Humanities außerhalb ordentlicher Studiengänge und die Auswirkungen dieser Ausbildungsformen auf Forschung und Karriere.
         
      
      
         
            
               https://dhd-blog.org/?p=6174
            
            
               http://www.culingtec.uni-leipzig.de/ESU_C_T/node/97
            
             Siehe z.B. Digital Humanities at Oxford Summer School (https://digital.humanities.ox.ac.uk/dhoxss/), Digital Humanities Summer Institute der University of Victoria (http://www.dhsi.org/courses.php).
             Siehe https://teach.dariah.eu/; zu den Schulungsmaterialien im Rahmen des Marie Sklodowska Curie Doktorandenprogramms DiXiT: http://dixit.uni-koeln.de/programme/materials/; zu den Lehrmaterialien von DARIAH-DE siehe exemplarisch “Digitale Textedition mit TEI” von Christof Schöch: https://de.dariah.eu/tei-tutorial; eine Workshop-Dokumentation unter https://www.lib.ncsu.edu/workshops/introduction-to-xml-and-digital-scholarly-editing-using-the-text-encoding-initiative-tei-1, ein Github-Repository unter https://github.com/slstandish/lrbs-scholarly-editing.
             Zur Dokumentation der Schools siehe https://www.i-d-e.de/aktivitaeten/schools/.
            
               https://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/xml-kurzreferenzen/.
             Zu digitalen Editionen siehe z.B. die Reihe „Edirom“ in Paderborn 2013-2018 (https://ess.uni-paderborn.de/) oder als Einzelveranstaltungen Madrid "Edición digital académica" 2015 (https://extension.uned.es/actividad/idactividad/9408) und 2016 (https://formacionpermanente.uned.es/tp_actividad/idactividad/8680, München “Digital Humanities” 2017 (https://dhmuc.hypotheses.org/summerschool-2017), Prag 2017 (https://praguebeast.hypotheses.org/program) und Grenoble 2018 (https://edeen.sciencesconf.org/).
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                    Digital Humanities als Beruf. Fortschritte auf dem Weg zu einem Curriculum. Akten der DHd-Arbeitsgruppe 
                        
                     "
                  Referenzcurriculum Digital Humanities
                        
                     "
                  . Graz 2015.
                    
               Digital Humanities Course Registry. Dariah/Clarin 2014-2018. 
                        https://registries.clarin-dariah.eu/courses/
               
               
                  Fritze, Christiane / Rehbein, Malte (2012):
                  Hands-On Teaching Digital Humanities: A Didactic Analysis of a Summer School Course on Digital Editing, 
                        in: 
                        Hirsch, Brett D. (ed.): 
                  Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics [Online]. 
                        Cambridge: Open Book Publishers. 
                        
                     http://books.openedition.org/obp/1617
                  
               
               
                  Henny, Ulrike (2012): 
                  Digitale Editionen – Methoden und Technologien für Fortgeschrittene 
                        [Tagungsbericht zur IDE-School, Chemnitz 2012], in: 
                        H-Soz-Kult, 11.12.2012, 
                        www.hsozkult.de/conferencereport/id/tagungsberichte-4540
               
               
                  Locke, Brandon T. (2017): 
                  Digital Humanities Pedagogy as Essential Liberal Education: A Framework for Curriculum Development, 
                        in: DHQ 11.3 (2017). 
                        
                     http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000303/000303.html
                  
               
               
                  Neuber, Frederike (2015): 
                  Spring in Graz – Sunshine and X-technologies 
                        [Bericht zur IDE-School Graz 2015], in: DiXiT Blog 26.4.2015. 
                        https://dixit.hypotheses.org/633
               
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2008):
                  Digitale Editionen – Methodische und technische Grundfertigkeiten 
                        [Tagungsbericht zur IDE-School, Köln 2008], in: H-Soz-Kult, 21.11.2008, 
                        www.hsozkult.de/conferencereport/id/tagungsberichte-2353
               
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): 
                  DH studieren! Auf dem Weg zu einem Kern- und Referenzcurriculum der Digital Humanities. 
                        (= DARIAH-DE Working Papers Nr. 1). Göttingen: GOEDOC. 
                        http://nbn-resolving.de/urn.nbn.de.gbv:7-dariah-2013-1-5
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            EINLEITUNG
            In den vergangenen 30 Jahren ist ein beträchtlicher Teil des in Deutschland gedruckten Materials aus der Zeit von 1500 bis ca. 1850 in mehreren, durch die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) geförderten Kampagnen in den Verzeichnissen der im deutschen Sprachraum erschienenen Drucke des 16.-18. Jahrhunderts (VD16, VD17, VD18) zunächst nachgewiesen und seit 2006 digitalisiert worden. Zusätzlich vorliegender Volltext wird mittlerweile auf breiter disziplinärer Front als Schlüssel zu einer ganzen Reihe von geistes- und kulturwissenschaftlichen Forschungsfragen gesehen und gilt zunehmend als elementare Voraussetzung für die Weiterentwicklung der transdisziplinär arbeitenden Digital Humanities. Deshalb werden bereits an verschiedenen Stellen OCR-Verfahren angewendet; viele dieser Unternehmungen haben allerdings noch sehr starken Projektcharakter. Die informationswissenschaftliche Auseinandersetzung mit OCR kann an der großen Zahl wissenschaftlicher Studien und Wettbewerbe ermessen werden, die Möglichkeiten zur Verbesserung der Textgenauigkeit sind in den letzten Jahrzehnten enorm gestiegen. Der Transfer der auf diesem Wege gewonnenen, oftmals sehr vielversprechenden Erkenntnisse in produktive Anwendungen ist jedoch häufig nicht gegeben: Es fehlt an leicht nachnutzbaren Anwendungen, die eine qualitativ hochwertige Massenvolltextdigitalisierung aller historischen Drucke aus dem Zeitraum des 16. bis 19. Jahrhundert ermöglichen. 
                    Auf dem DFG-Workshop „Verfahren zur Verbesserung von OCR-Ergebnissen“ (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 2014) im März 2014 formulierten Expertinnen und Experten daher folgende Desiderate um die Weiterentwicklung von OCR-Verfahren zu ermöglichen. Es bestehe eine dringende Notwendigkeit für freien Zugang zu historischen Textkorpora und lexikalischen Ressourcen zum Training von vorhandener Software zur Texterkennung bestehe. Ebenso müssen Open-Source-OCR-Engines zur Verbesserung der Textgenauigkeit weiterentwickelt werden, wie auch Anwendungen für die Nachkorrektur der automatisch erstellten Texte. Daneben sollten Workflow, Standards und Verfahren der Langzeitarchivierung mit Blick auf zukünftige Anforderungen an den OCR-Prozess optimiert werden. Als zentrales Ergebnis dieses Workshops stand fest, dass eine koordinierte Fördermaßnahme der DFG notwendig ist. Die „Koordinierte Förderinitiative zur Weiterentwicklung von Verfahren der Optical Character Recognition (OCR)“, kurz OCR-D, begann im September 2015 und versucht seitdem einen Lückenschluss zwischen Forschung und Praxiseinsatz, indem für die Entwicklungsbedarfe Lösungen erarbeitet und der aktuelle Forschungsstand zur OCR mit den Anforderungen aus der Praxis zusammengebracht werden. 
                
         
         
            ARBEITEN IM PROJEKT OCR-D
            Das Vorhaben hat zum Ziel, einerseits Verfahren zu beschreiben und Richtlinien zu erarbeiten, um einen optimalen Workflow sowie eine möglichst weitreichende Standardisierung von OCR-bezogenen Prozessen und Metadaten zu erzielen, andererseits die vollständige Transformation des schriftlichen deutschen Kulturerbes in digitale Forschungsdaten in (xml-strukturierter Volltext) konzeptionell vorzubereiten. Am Ende des Gesamtvorhabens (d.h. unter Einschluss der Modulprojektphase) sollte ein in allen Aspekten konsolidiertes Verfahren zur OCR-Verarbeitung von Digitalisaten des schriftlichen deutschen Kulturerbes stehen und eine Dokumentation, die Antworten auf die damit verbundenen technischen, informationswissenschaftlichen und organisatorischen Probleme und Herausforderungen gibt sowie Rahmenbedingungen formuliert.
            Das Projekt ist in zwei Phasen geteilt: In der ersten Phase hat das Koordinierungsgremium von OCR-D Bedarfe für die Weiterentwicklung von OCR-Technologien analysiert und sich intensiv mit den Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Verfahren zur Text- und Strukturerkennung auseinandergesetzt. Zahlreiche Gespräche mit ExpertInnen aus Forschungseinrichtungen und Bibliotheken sowie Sichtung vorhandener Werkzeuge aber auch Betrachtung vorhandener Textsammlungen sowie aktueller und geplanter Digitalisierungsvorhaben mündeten in der Erkenntnis, dass der Lückenschluss zwischen Wissenschaft und Praxis das primäre Desiderat im Bereich der Textdigitalisierung darstellt. Zudem hat sich im Lauf der ersten Projektphase eine technologische Wende auf dem Gebiet der Zeichenerkennung vollzogen - an die Stelle traditioneller Verfahren der Mustererkennung, die auf einer Segmentierung von Textabschnitten in Zeilen, Wörter und schließlich einzelne Glyphen basieren, die anschließend aufgrund charakteristischer Merkmale (z.B. Steigung an Kanten) erkannt werden, ist eine zeilenorientierte Sequenzklassifizierung auf Basis statistischer Modelle, insbesondere verschiedener Arten neuronaler Netze (sog. 
                    Deep Learning), getreten. Grund für diesen Technologiewechsel ist die vielfach nachgewiesene Überlegenheit segmentierungsfreier Erkennungsverfahren bezüglich der resultierenden Textgenauigkeit. Diese Überlegenheit gilt insbesondere für schwierige, historische Vorlagen. Dieser Technologiewandel hat sich bisher nicht oder nur äußerst begrenzt auf die Digitalisierungspraxis ausgewirkt. Der Grund dafür liegt vor allem in den bisher bestehenden Hürden beim Einsatz verfügbarer OCR-Lösungen auf Basis neuronaler Netze. Ohne weitreichende projektspezifische Anpassungen ist ein produktiver Einsatz derzeit nicht möglich. Das betrifft unter anderem die Erstellung passender Erkennungsmodelle, die durch das Trainieren eines neuronalen Netzes auf Basis ausgewählter Ground-Truth-Daten generiert werden. Dafür sind zum einen hochqualitativer und umfangreicher Ground Truth aber auch Erfahrungen bzgl. freier Parameter wie z.B. Anzahl der Trainingsschritte, Lernrate, Modelltiefe unabdingbar. Aus OCR-D heraus ist daher ein Datenset mit Trainings- und Ground-Truth-Daten entstanden, welches für Trainings und Qualitätsanalysen im Vorhaben selber genutzt wird aber auch durch andere Forschungsprojekte nachgenutzt werden kann. Neben der Qualität der Zeichenerkennung sind es vor allem Umfang und Korrektheit der strukturellen Annotationen, die die Utilität eines Volltexts für wissenschaftliche Kontexte determinieren. Auch im Bereich der automatischen Layouterkennung (OLR) gab es innerhalb des bisherigen Projektzeitraums vielversprechende Forschungsergebnisse durch den Einsatz innovativer statistischer Verfahren. Der Übertrag in die Praxis in Form nachnutzbarer Software ist hier jedoch noch nicht gegeben. Kommerzielle OCR-Lösungen ignorieren diesen Bereich weitestgehend und bieten nur minimale Strukturinformationen auf Seitenebene (Text, Tabelle, Abbildung etc.) an. Tiefergehende strukturelle Auszeichnungen (Kapitelstruktur, Bildunterschriften, Inhaltsverzeichnisse) werden daher manuell erfasst und in METS/MODS repräsentiert. Eine Verknüpfung zwischen Struktur und Volltext findet, obwohl technisch möglich, in vielen Digitalisierungsvorhaben nicht statt. Für die philologische, editorische oder linguistische Wissenschaftspraxis bedeutet das eine massive Einschränkung die bspw. eine sinnvolle Transformation in hochstrukturierte Formate wie TEI verhindert. 
                
            Die Erkenntnisse dieser Bedarfsanalyse mündeten in einem OCR-D-Funktionsmodell, welches den Rahmen für die Modulprojekt-Ausschreibung der DFG im März 2017 bot. Vor diesem Hintergrund wurden acht Modulprojekte bewilligt die seit 2018 an Lösungen zur Bildvorverarbeitung, Layouterkennung, Textoptimierung (inkl. Nachkorrektur), zum Modelltraining und zur Langzeitarchivierung der OCR-Daten arbeitet. Die Entwicklungen schöpfen dabei das Potential innovativer Methoden für den gesamten Bereich der automatischen Texterkennung für die Massenvolltextdigitalisierung von historischen Drucken aus. Sie werden anschließend nahtlos in den OCR-D-Workflow zur optimierten OCR-basierten Texterfassung integriert. Das so entstehende OCR-D-Softwarepaket steht damit Kultureinrichtungen wie Forschenden für die automatische Texterkennung als Open-Source-Software zur Verfügung.
            Die meisten Arbeiten werden im Sommer 2019 abgeschlossen sein, aber bereits Anfang des Jahres wird die Alpha-Version einen Einblick in die zu erwartende Gesamtlösung bieten können.
         
         
            ZIEL DES WORKSHOPS
            Der Workshop soll neben der Vorstellung des Projektes und der Software die Gelegenheit bieten selber die Software zu testen und zugleich über Optimierungen und Anforderungen seitens der Wissenschaft an diese Technologien zu diskutieren. Teilnehmende erhalten somit einen exklusiven Einblick in die Entwicklungsarbeit und haben die Möglichkeit proaktiv auf die Arbeiten Einfluss zu nehmen, die Ihren späteren Forschungsalltag begleiten und verbessern soll.
                
         
         
            PROGRAMM
            Der Workshop gliedert sich in drei Abschnitte:
            
               Vorstellung des Projekts OCR-D, des Ground-Truth-Datensets und der Guidelines (30min)
               Demonstration der Eigenentwicklung und eines Test-Workflows (120min)
               Diskussion zu Anforderungen und Optimierungen aus Sicht der Digital Humanities (30min)
            
            Der erste Abschnitt stellt die Hintergründe zum Vorhaben vor und geht auf Besonderheiten der Volltextdigitalisierung von historischen Beständen ein. Anschließend wird das Trainings- und Ground-Truth-Datenset präsentiert, das im Rahmen von OCR-D auf- und weiter ausgebaut wird. Besonders die dazu entwickelten Guidelines geben Hinweise für eine spätere Nachnutzung und die Erstellung eigener Ground-Truth-Daten in anderen Projekten. Der Fokus des Workshops liegt auf dem zweiten Abschnitt, in welche der derzeitige Entwicklungsstand präsentiert wird. Die benötigten Test-Dateien werden auf 
                GitHub1 veröffentlicht. Abgerundet wird der Workshop durch eine Diskussionsrunde zu Anforderungen aus der Wissenschaft heraus an OCR-Techniken und die dafür eingesetzte Software.
                
         
         
            VORAUSSETZUNG
            Teilnehmende benötigen einen eigenen Laptop mit Internetanbindung und Ubuntu 18.04 als Betriebssystem. Alternativ kann auch Windows/Mac OSX mit der Software VirtualBox verwendet werden. Die VM wird den Teilnehmenden vom OCR-D-Projekt vor Ort zur Verfügung gestellt. Die Anzahl der Teilnehmenden ist auf 20-25 begrenzt. Python- und Linux-Kommandozeilen-Kenntnisse sind wünschenswert
         
      
      
         
             OCR-D Git-Hub: https://github.com/OCR-D/
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2014):  
                        Workshop 
                        Verfahren zur Verbesserung von OCR-Ergebnissen. 
                        Protokoll zu den Ergebnissen und Empfehlungen des Workshops. 
                        
                     http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/programme/lis/140522_ergebnisprotokoll_ocr_workshop.pdf
                   [Zuletzt abgerufen 07.01.2019]
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Text und Graph
            Zahlreiche geisteswissenschaftliche Fachdatenrepositorien setzen zur Modellierung ihrer Forschungsdaten auf die Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) und somit auf XML als primäres Datenformat. XML eignet sich sehr gut zur Lösung editorisch-philologischer Aufgabenstellungen. Durch die standardkonforme Auszeichnung der Forschungsgegenstände in TEI werden diese formal und inhaltlich erschlossen. TEI-kodierte Daten beinhalten mannigfaltige semantische Bezüge – aus der Perspektive einer Graphmodellierung sind diese Bezüge jedoch zunächst nur implizit und nicht explizit in den Daten vorhanden (Schrade 2013).
            Während die formale Erschließung geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungsgegenstände mittels XML-basierter Annotationsmethoden mittlerweile als weit fortgeschritten gelten kann, kann die semantische Erschließung häufig noch verdichtet werden. Zwar wird in den Daten oft das Auftreten bestimmter Ortsnamen, Personennamen, Werktitel etc. annotiert. Dennoch gehen diese Annotationen meist nicht darüber hinaus, anzuzeigen, dass eine bestimmte Entität an einer spezifischen Stelle erwähnt ist. Damit bleibt die Vernetzung der Fachdaten hinter den Möglichkeiten zurück, die Graphentechnologien bieten (Iglesia u.a. 2015; Grüntgens/Schrade 2016).
            Graphentechnologien sind hervorragend für die Modellierung, Speicherung und Analyse semantisch vernetzter Daten – auch verschiedener Modalitäten – geeignet. Einerseits sind in Graphen modellierte Daten hinreichend genau und berechenbar, andererseits bietet die Schema- und Hierarchiefreiheit dieser Datenstrukturierung eine ausreichend große Flexibilität zur Erfassung auch komplexer geisteswissenschaftlicher Sachverhalte (Kuczera 2017).
            Eine gegenseitig ausschließende oder separate Modellierung von Forschungsgegenständen entweder in klassischen Strukturen – linearem Text (etwa in TEI-XML kodiert), hierarchischer Baumstruktur (Ontologien) – oder als Graph ist nicht mehr zwangsläufig. Möglich ist auch die Verknüpfung beider Technologien, so dass das geeignetste Datenmodell für jeden Aspekt der Daten zur Anwendung kommt. Dies erlaubt die Synthese und zusammenfassende Analyse verschiedener Daten- und Objekttypen.
            Darüber hinaus werden die Grenzen zwischen den Technologien zunehmend überbrückt: Die Extraktion von Graphstrukturen aus (annotierten) Texten ist ebenso möglich wie die Modellierung von annotiertem Text als Graph in Form von standoff property markup.
            Es breitet sich also ein Spektrum an Möglichkeiten aus: Von der Ableitung von (ephemeren) Graphen aus (führenden) XML-Texten, über die verlustlose Migration von XML zu Graph, bis zu text-as-a-graph als führendes Datenformat mit geeigneten Editionsumgebungen.
            Die Gangbarkeit jeder dieser Möglichkeiten und ihre Unterstützung durch flexible Werkzeuge soll in diesem Workshop nachvollziehbar gemacht werden, sowie die Grundlagen zur eigenständigen Anwendung gelegt werden.
         
         
            Werkzeuge
            Zur Abdeckung des oben dargestellten Spektrums stellen wir vier Werkzeuge vor, die in der Digitalen Akademie der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur entwickelt werden. Teilweise eng aufeinander aufbauend, bieten sie einen aktuellen Werkzeugkasten der Graphentechnologien.
            
               XTriples
               XTriples (http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de) ist ein Webservice zur Extraktion von RDF-Statements aus XML-Daten zur Vernetzung von Ressourcen im semantic web. Dieses Werkzeug ist insbesondere geeignet zur (einmaligen oder wiederkehrenden) Ableitung von RDF-Graphen aus XML-Daten (RDF-Lifting).
               Grundfunktion des generischen Dienstes ist das Crawling beliebiger XML-Datenbestände und die anschließende Generierung semantischer Aussagen aus den XML-Daten auf Basis definierter Aussagemuster. Wird eine Dateneinheit in einer Ressource als das Subjekt einer semantischen Aussage begriffen, können diesem Subjekt über Prädikate aus kontrollierten Vokabularen weitere Werte aus den XML-Daten bzw. URIs zu weiteren Datenressourcen als Objekte zugeordnet werden. Im Übersetzungsvorgang zwischen XML und RDF geht es also vor allem um die Bestimmung semantischer Aussagemuster, die sich gesamthaft auf alle Ressourcen eines XML-Datenbestandes anwenden lassen.
               Die Aussagemuster werden in Form einer einfachen, XPath-basierten Konfiguration an den Dienst übermittelt. Dabei ist es auch möglich, über die Bestände eines spezifischen XML-Repositoriums hinauszugehen und externe Ressourcen oder Dateneinheiten in die Transformation mit einzubeziehen (bspw. aus der GND, der DBpedia, aus GeoNames u.a). Die technische Realisierung als Webservice hat den Vorteil, dass AnwenderInnen keine weitere Software zur semantischen Übersetzung von Forschungsdaten benötigen.
            
            
               eXGraphs
               eXGraphs ist der Ausbau des Grundprinzips von XTriples zur Extraktion von property graphs, d.h. Graphstrukturen, die über die Subjekt-Prädikat-Objekt-Tripelstruktur von RDF hinausgehen. Der Dienst ist so weit generalisiert, dass grundsätzlich keine Einschränkungen der Komplexität der extrahierten Graphen bestehen.
               eXGraphs basiert auf der Graphdatenbank neo4j, das heißt es importiert entweder die gewonnenen Graphen direkt in eine spezifizierte Datenbank, oder oder gibt sie als Cypher-Abfrage zurück. Das Tool ist somit geeignet, Datenbestände von XML in gerichtete Property-Graphen zu migrieren oder wiederkehrend zur Aktualisierung der Graph-Datenbank aufgerufen zu werden. Die Konfiguration der Extraktion und Transformation wird in einer unkomplizierten XML-Konfiguration spezifiziert, deren hierarchische Struktur direkt mit den notwendigen Extraktionsschritten korrespondiert. Die gesuchten Informationen werden mittels XPath angesteuert.
            
            
               GRACE
               GRACE (
                     graph content editor) ist eine Web-App, die das Erstellen und Pflegen von Graphdaten in neo4j-Datenbanken über eine GUI anwenderfreundlich ermöglicht. Unterstützt ist die Suche nach bestehenden Daten, das Verknüpfen von bestehenden Knoten mittels neuer Kanten, das Bearbeiten von Knoten, und die Neuanlage von Knoten. Die Attribute (properties) der Knoten werden als Tabelle bzw. bei der Bearbeitung als Formular dargestellt; das Nutzererlebnis ist also durchaus einer klassischen Datenbankeingabe oder Registerpflege vergleichbar.
               Gegenüber einer klassischen Sacherschließung innovativ ist, dass Kanten zur Modellierung von Beziehungen, Zusammengehörigkeiten – generell für semantische Relationen verwendet werden können. Die Flexibilität und Aussagekraft ist Querverweisen klar überlegen, da die Kanten grundsätzlich klassifiziert sind und durch Attribute weiter spezifiziert werden können. Die Darstellung und Verwaltung der Kanten ist in die Nutzeroberfläche integriert, so dass die Sacherschließung im Graphen ohne Kenntnisse von Datenbankabfragesprachen aufgebaut werden kann.
            
            
               SPEEDy
               SPEEDy (s
                  tandoff 
                  p
                  roperty 
                  edi
                  tor, https://github.com/argimenes/standoff-properties-editor) ist ein Editor zur Bearbeitung von text-as-a-graph – sowohl zur nativen Erfassung wie auch zur Weiterpflege von Datenbeständen nach Konvertierung.
               Bei standoff properties werden Text und Annotationen voneinander getrennt gespeichert. Im Unterschied zu Standoff XML sind die in SPEEDy verwendeten standoff properties resistent gegen nachträgliche Änderungen, da der Editor die Indizes nach jeder Bearbeitung neu berechnet.
               Mit diesem Konzept sind überlappende und auch konkurrierende Annotationshierarchien möglich. Annotationen lassen sich auch in Layern organisieren und in SPEEDy ein- und ausblenden.
               Gespeichert werden die Texte im json-Format, wobei in der json-Datei als erstes der reine Text und anschließend die verschiedenen Annotationen abgelegt sind.
               Mit dem in SPEEDy realisierten Annotationskonzept mit standoff properties werden multiple Annotationshierarchien möglich, die perspektivisch auch den wissenschaftlichen Diskurs abbilden könnten.
            
         
         
            Material
            Für den Workshop werden Beispieldaten aus den Sozinianischen Briefwechseln1 herangezogen, die derzeit erfasst und annotiert werden. Charakteristikum dieser Korrespondenzen ist die enge Verzahnung verschiedener Themengebiete – beispielsweise werden astronomische Beobachtungen von Person zu Person entlang akademischer und familiärer Verbindungen weiter berichtet und von Ort zu Ort weitergetragen, um politisch und theologisch interpretiert zu werden … Dieses komplexe Ineinandergreifen der Themenfelder in den Korrespondenzen erfordert eine entsprechend verzahnte Registerstruktur, die die diversen Relationen zwischen Entitäten verschiedener Art adäquat abbilden kann.
                
            Die Brieftexte werden im TEI-Subset DTABf kodiert, das eindeutige Kodierungen und verlässliche Extraktion von Informationen ermöglicht.
            Als Gegenstand der Übungen stehen die Korrespondenzmetadaten im correspDesc-Format wie auch das named entity tagging und die Sacherschließung im Brieftext zur Verfügung. Ersteres bildet bereits das Netzwerk von Korrespondenten und Orten ab; zweiteres gewährt Einblick in die inhaltlichen und thematischen Verknüpfungen. Die zugehörigen Register, auf die die Annotationen verweisen, werden sowohl im Ausgangs-XML-Format wie auch in Form des Graphregisters Teil der Übungsdaten sein.
         
         
            Ablauf
            Nach einer kurzen einführenden Standortbestimmung der Graphentechnologien in den DH und einer Vorstellung der Beispieldaten werden in den zwei Workshoptagen die vier oben genannten Werkzeuge vorgestellt. Zu jedem Tool zeigen wir Beispielkonfigurationen bzw. -anwendungen, und bieten Übungen an, die praxisnah an die Forschungsziele des datengebenden Projekts angelehnt sind. Darüber hinaus steht es den TeilnehmerInnen frei, auch mit eigenen Daten zu experimentieren.
            Am ersten Workshoptag gehen wir auf die Werkzeuge XTriples und SPEEDy ein. Damit zeigen wir Optionen auf, welche ohne eine Migration von XML zum Graph zur Verfügung stehen: die Beibehaltung von XML als führendes Format, oder die native Erfassung in text-as-a-graph. In der Übung demonstrieren wir die Erzeugung einer RDF-Datei zur Verknüpfung von Ortserwähnungen mit einer geographischen Normdatenbank.
            Am zweiten Workshoptag liegt unser Fokus auf eXGraphs und GRACE. Am Ende dieses Tages sollen die Grundprinzipien des Zusammenspiels von XML und neo4j klar geworden sein, indem Forschungsdaten zu neo4j migriert und aktualisiert werden, und dort in einer für ein breites Nutzerspektrum zugänglichen GUI bearbeitet werden.
            Beschlossen werden soll der Workshop neben dem ausleitenden Resümee durch eine Feedback-Runde im Plenum insbesondere zu den neu entwickelten Werkzeugen eXGraphs und GRACE, sowie zur weiteren Entwicklung von SPEEDy.
         
         
            Lernziele
            Ziel des Workshops ist, einen Einblick in die Durchlässigkeit zwischen traditionellen (linearen und hierarchischen) Datenstrukturen und der Modellierung im Graphen zu bieten. Die Verwendung von Transformations-, Migrations- und Bearbeitungswerkzeugen wird praktisch vermittelt und ihre Position im DH-Ökosystem umrissen. Die interaktive Demonstration wird anwendungsnah auf reale Forschungsdaten und Auswertungsziele aufgebaut. Neben der technischen Kompetenz wird das Bewusstsein für implizit vorhandene und semantisch auswertbare Graphstrukturen in bestehenden XML-Daten geschärft.
            Die Übungen werden ausgehend von einem Einstiegsniveau konzipiert, mit der Option, zu höheren Komplexitätsstufen weiterzuarbeiten oder die Methoden auf eigene Daten und Fragestellungen zu transferieren.
            Zwei der vorgestellten Werkzeuge sind Neuentwicklungen, so dass dies eine der ersten Gelegenheiten zur Schulung in der Anwendung sein wird.
         
         
            Zahl der TeilnehmerInnen
            Maximal 20.
         
         
            Technische Voraussetzungen
            Die Teilnehmenden benötigen nur Laptops. Es muss im Vorfeld keine Software installiert werden.
         
         
            Beitragende
            
               Julian Jarosch
               Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz
                        Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 2
                        55131 Mainz
                    
               2007–2014 Studium der Allgemeinen Sprachwissenschaft an der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz. 2011 Auslandssemester an der Bangor University, Wales. Magisterarbeit zu »Typography and Legibility: Do Typeface, Serifs and Justification influence Reading Behaviour?«. Seit 2015 wiederum an der JGU Mainz Promotionsprojekt »Empirical Typography« an der Schnittstelle Sprachwissenschaft–Buchwissenschaft, 2015–2017 als Stipendiat der Stipendienstiftung Rheinland-Pfalz. Seit 2018 wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter der Digitalen Akademie im DFG-Projekt »Die sozinianischen Briefwechsel«.
            
            
               Andreas Kuczera
               Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz
                        Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 2
                        55131 Mainz
                    
               1993-1998 Studium der Physik und Geschichte an der Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen (Staatsexamen für das Lehramt an Gymnasien), 2001 Promotion »Grangie und Grundherrschaft«. Zur Wirtschaftsverfassung des Klosters Arnsburg als Stipendiat der hessischen Graduiertenförderung. 2001-2006 Mitarbeiter im DFG-Projekt Regesta Imperii Online. Von 2007–2012 leitend in der Projektverwaltung der Akademie Mainz und der Digitalen Akademie tätig. Sachverständiger der IT-Kommission der Akademie Mainz. Seit 2015 Zuständigkeit im Bereich des Projektes Regesta Imperii.
            
            
               Torsten Schrade
               Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz
                        Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 2
                        55131 Mainz
                    
               Historiker, Germanist und Anglist, Softwareentwickler und Digitaler Geisteswissenschaftler (seit 2002). Seit 2009 wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter der Akademie und Leiter der Digitalen Akademie.
            
            
               Tariq Yousef
               Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz
                        Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 2
                        55131 Mainz
                    
               Bachelor in Computer Science (Softwareentwicklung) an der AlBaath Universität (Syrien), Master in Computer Science an der Universität Leipzig. Forschungsinteressen: NLP, Datenextraktion, Datenaufbereitung, data mining, Visualisierung und Webentwicklung.
            
         
      
      
         
            http://www.adwmainz.de/projekte/zwischen-theologie-fruehmoderner-naturwissenschaft-und-politischer-korrespondenz-die-sozinianischen-briefwechsel/informationen.html
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Grüntgens, Max / Schrade, Torsten (2016):
                  Data repositories in the Humanities and the Semantic Web: modelling, linking, visualising, 
                        in: 
                        Adamou, A. / Daga, E. / Isaksen, L. (Hrsg.)
                  Hrsg
                  .): Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Humanities in the Semantic Web (WHiSe), CEUR Workshop Proceedings
                  . Aachen
                  , 
                  S. 53–64.
               
               
                  Iglesia, Martin de la / Moretto, Nicolas / Brodhun, Maximilian
                   (2015): Metadaten, LOD und der Mehrwert standardisierter und vernetzter Daten. In: 
                  Heike Neuroth, Andrea Rapp, Sibylle Söring (Hrsg.): TextGrid: Von der Community – für die Community. Eine Virtuelle Forschungsumgebung für 
                  die Geisteswissenschaften
                  . Göttingen, S. 91–102. DOI: 
                   
                  
                  [Letzter Zugriff 
                  09
                  .
                  01
                  .201
                  9
                  ]
               
               
                  Kuczera, Andreas
                   
                  (
                  2017
                  ):
                   Graphentechnologien in den Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften. abitech 37, 
                  S. 
                  179
                  –196
                  . 
                  
                   
                  [Letzter Zugriff 09.01.2019]
               
               
                  Schrade, Torsten 
                  (2013): Datenstrukturierung. In:
                         
                  Über die Praxis des kulturwissenschaftlichen Arbeitens. Ein Handwörterbuch.
                   Bielefeld: transcript, S. 91–97.
               
            
         
      
   



      
         Gesellschaften fügen sich aus Individuen zusammen. Das gilt auch für die Vergangenheit, aus der die Mehrzahl der Individuen nur schlecht bis gar nicht dokumentiert ist. Es hat sich deshalb ein eigenständiger historischer Forschungsbereich entwickelt, die “Prosopographie”, die sich der Aggregation von Einzelinformationen zu Individuen aus historischen Quellen und ihrer Auswertung widmet (Keats-Rohan 2007). Dieses Forschungsgebiet hat früh digitale Methoden eingesetzt. Der Beitrag widmet sich der Frage, ob die Methoden vergleichbar zu IIIF (International Image Interoperability Framework) in ein „International Proposography Interoperability Framework“ (IPIF) integriert werden können.
         Ein IPIF muss von den Personendatenbanken abweichen, die sich als kontrollierte Vokabularien und Referenzen für Linked Open Data in den Digital Humanities etabliert haben (GND/VIAF, deutsche-biographie), bzw. im Begriff sind, sich zu etablieren (wikidata). Diese berücksichtigen nämlich nicht den Vorgang, mit dem Informationen über eine Person aus historischen Quellen aggregiert werden. Der Ansatz weicht damit auch von der „personography“ der TEI ab, die, wie die Linked-Data-Ressourcen, eine Person mit einer Liste an Eigenschaften beschreiben. Ein IPIF muss dagegen ein Modell realisieren, für das Bradley/Short (2005) die Bezeichnung „Factoid“-Model eingeführt haben. Es geht von drei Informationseinheiten aus: Quelle, Individuum und Aussagen der Quelle über das Individuum. John Bradley hat das Modell mehreren Projekten des King’s College London zu Grunde gelegt (PASE, DPRR, CCEd). Auch das Persondendatenrepositorium (PDR) der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Neumann et al. 2011) und Projekte, die die Software der BBAW weitergenutzt haben, verwenden das gleiche Modell, auch wenn das PDR nicht explizit auf Bradley referenziert. Ebenso verwendet das Repertorium Academicum Germanicum ein solches dreiteiliges Modell (Andresen 2008). 
         Das dreiteilige Modell impliziert auch, dass (auch widersprechende) Aussagen über dasselbe Individuum aus verschiedenen Quellen an verschiedenen Orten publiziert werden können. Es erscheint also als ein Paradebeispiel für das 
                Web of Data des W3C. Das 
                Web of Data ist die Fortführung der Semantic-Web-Aktivitäten des W3C. Es konzentriert sich auf die Öffnung von Datenbanken und erhebt insbesondere den Anspruch, individuelle kleine Datenmengen als RDF über das Semantic Web abfragbar zu machen. Technisch ist RDF, die Grundlage des 
                Web of Data, eine weit verbreitete und gut unterstützte Technologie. Es ist deshalb auch eine Technologie, mit deren Hilfe immer häufiger Maschinen auf prosopographische Datenbanken zugreifen können. Deshalb haben Bradley/Pasin (2015) eine CIDOC-CRM basierte Version des Factoid-Modells vorgeschlagen und entsprechende Ontologien veröffentlicht (Bradley 2017). Das Basismodell ist aber auch mit anderen Vokabularien realisiert worden: SNAP verwendet z.B. Vokabularien aus dem 
                Linking-Ancient-Wisdom-Projek
               1
            ). Das King’s Digital Lab hat jüngst mit Hilfe von 
                Ontop
            
               2
             die prosopographische Datenbank zur römischen Republik als LOD-Ressource incl. eines SPARQL-Endpoints 
                veröffentlicht.
               3
            
         
         Diese Strategie teilt jedoch das Problem vieler RDF-Ressourcen: Die technische Pflege eines SPARQL-Endpoints ist sehr anspruchsvoll. SPARQL-Endpoints sind hä
               4
             und Core 
            API
               5
             liegen auch Vorschläge vor, derartige API-Definition standardisiert zu beschreiben, so dass die Implementation von einschlägigen API-Anbietern und API-Konsumenten teilweise sogar automatisiert werden 
            kann.
               6
             Aus Sicht des Software-Engineering erscheint es also angemessen, auf eine eigene API-Definition statt auf einen SPARQL-Endpoint zurückzugreifen. Gleichzeitig wird es damit erschwert, Daten aus verschiedenen Datenquellen zu aggregieren, da für jeden Datenanbieter ein eigener API-Konsument programmiert werden müsste. Im Bereich der Bibliotheken hat sich deshalb für die Bereitstellung von Bildern von Büchern mit IIIF eine Kombination aus einem Datenstandard und einer Adressierungs-API durchgesetzt. Es ist an der Zeit, auch für personenbezogene Daten über einen solchen technischen Standard nachzudenken, der die Implementation von Anwendungen erleichtert und die Daten auch praktisch interoperabel macht.
            
         Ein solcher Standard muss von konkreten Anwendungsszenarien ausgehen. Sie können unter den Überschriften „Biographical Lexicon“, „Careers”, „Source Editing“, „Fact Checking“, „New Interpretation“, „Publish a Database”, „Integrate Other Databases“, „Analysis“, „Tool User“, „Tool Builder” zusammengefasst werden. Die Szenarien bilden sowohl Forschung mit prosopographischen Daten wie die Erzeugung solcher Daten ab. Zusätzlich achten die Szenarien darauf, nicht nur explizit prosopographische Workflows zu berücksichtigen, sondern schließen auch wissenschaftliches Edieren als Szenario mit ein, in dem der edierte Text als Beleg für eine Person betrachtet werden kann. In einem Workshop in Wien im Februar 2017 haben Forscher aus dem Themengebiet der Prosopographie religiöser Orden solche Anwendungsszenarien diskutiert und einen Entwurf für eine API entwickelt.
         Ein Ergebnis dieser Arbeit ist eine nach den Standards von OpenAPI beschriebenen Definition einer prosopographischen 
            API.
               7
             Die API baut auf dem dreiteiligen Factoid-Modell auf und erlaubt den Zugriff auf Personen, Aussagen, Quellen und ihr Aggregat, einem „Factoid“. Für alle diese Objekte gibt es eigene Pfade zur Suche und Ausgabe der Daten über die zu ihnen abgelegten IDs. Im Kern der API steht deshalb der Zugriff auf Factoide 
            (/factoid). Sie können individuell über bekannte IDs adressiert werden 
            (/factoid/id). Wichtiger sind aber inhaltliche Filtermöglichkeiten. Sie ergeben sich einfach aus den Eigenschaften des Factoids, als Aussage über eine Person. Die Parameter 
                s
            , 
            st und 
                f lassen also die Suche in den Inhalten der mit dem Factoid verknüpften Quellen 
                (source), Aussagen 
                (statement) und den Metadaten des Factoids selbst 
                (factoid) zu. Dabei ist der Standard eine Volltextsuche. Ebenso lassen sich die Quellen und Personen abfragen. Als Parameter können aber auch Identifikatoren für die einzelnen Informationsgruppen übergeben werden, also z.B. mit 
                /statement/?p_id=Placidus_Seiz alle Aussagen über die Person mit einem Identifikator „Placidus_Seiz“ in einem beliebigen Kontext. Die Anwendung liefert dann ein JSON-Objekt zurück, in dem diese Aussagen formalisiert sind. Zu jeder Aussage gehört eine ID, mit der Entwickler z.B. über die API überprüfen können, woher die jeweilige Aussage stammt.
            
         Als Rückgabewert der API-Definition sind JSON-Serialisierungen vorgesehen. Die Statements können Daten als Text (z.B. der Quelle) ebenso wie strukturiert als Graph enthalten. Die Graphen sollen den Spezifikationen von JSON-LD folgen. Damit können zwei Ziele erreicht werden: Erstens ist damit die Ausgabe der API direkt in Linked-Open-Data-Umgebungen nutzbar, kann prinzipiell auch in einer FROM-Klausel einer SPARQL-Abfrage integriert werden oder in Caching-Mechanismen wie im 2011 als Linked Data Middleware von Virtuoso vorgeschlagenen URI-Burner verwendet werden. Zweitens wird damit ein Standard verwendet, der die Referenzierung der verwendeten Vokabularien und ihre formale Beschreibung mit RDFS und OWL ermöglicht.
         Der Workshop in Wien hat als Kernproblem eines echten Datenaustausches die divergierenden Datenmodelle für die Einzelaussagen über die Individuen identifiziert. Während die Individuen selbst im Factoid-Modell keine beschreibenden Metadaten tragen und damit kaum Probleme beim Datenaustausch erzeugen, sind für die Aussagen über die Individuen je nach Projekt, Verwendungszweck und Forschungsdomäne eine Vielfalt von Vokabularien im Einsatz. Einen Ausweg aus dieser Situation bietet die 2017 gegründete 
            dataforhistory-Initiative.
               8
             Die Initiative arbeitet daran projekt- und domänenspezifische Modellierungen zu erleichtern, die zum CIDOC CRM kompatibel sind. Die derzeitige API-Definition sieht deshalb vor, dass die zurückgegebenen Daten eine Referenz auf ein Schema (in JSON-LD als 
                @context) enthalten müssen, das die verwendeten Klassen und Eigenschaften auf Definitionen im CIDOC CRM abbildet, der es der die API konsumierenden Anwendung erlaubt, die Daten als CIDOC CRM zu interpretieren und darauf aufbauende Operationen durchzuführen. Ergänzend dazu ist ein Parameter 
                format=json/cidoc-crm vorgesehen, bei dem die Transformation serverseitig stattfindet. Die Abbildung auf CIDOC CRM soll insbesondere die grundlegenden Suchoperationen ermöglichen, die Katerina Tzompanaki und Martin Doer 2012 formuliert haben und die im Projekt 
                researchspace
               9
             realisiert werden. Die API definiert die Objekteigenschaft 
                graph für die strukturierte Repräsentation der Daten über Personen.
            
         John Bradley und Michele Pasin haben 2015 eine OWL basierte Ontologie vorgestellt, in der eine „temporal entity documented“ (TED) als Ereignis (E4 und E5 im CIDOC-CRM) oder als eine zeitliche Einheit oder klare zeitliche Grenzen (E3: condition, state) modelliert sind. Das entspricht dem Stand der Diskussion über prosopographische Datenmodelle (Lind 1994, Andresen 2008, Tuominen / Hyvönen / Leskinen 2018).
         Nicht zuletzt der Erfolg von IIIF belegt, dass eine solche API aber auch Referenzimplementationen benötigt. Dabei ist entsprechend der oben beschriebenen Benutzungsszenarien sowohl an Ressourcen zu denken, die Daten bereitstellen, als auch an Anwendungen, die diese Daten konsumieren. Die Nachnutzung des „Archiveditors“, eines zunächst projektinternen Werkzeugs der BBAW, in anderen Projekten zeigt, dass dabei nicht nur an Datenextraktion und –anzeige sondern auch an Datengenerierung zu denken ist. Im Rahmen der Arbeit an der Personendatenbank der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften ist deutlich geworden, dass gerade automatische Informationsextraktion von „Personenrelationen“ (Schlögl et al. forthcoming, Schlögl et al. 2018) von einer solchen API profitieren kann. Die automatisch generierten Aussagen können als eigenständige Factoide in die Personendatenbanken eingehen. Die Metadaten des Factoids und die Referenz auf die verwendete Quelle stellen sicher, dass sie als automatisch generierte Daten identifizierbar bleiben. Der Vortrag wird Beispiele für Datenangebote aus dem Umfeld mittelalterlicher Urkunden (Register der Urkundenempfänger von Papsturkunden nach den Regesten von August Potthast, Daten aus monasterium.net) und Steuererhebungen (England) vorstellen, und Prototypen für Anwendungen benennen, welche die mit der API bereitgestellten Daten konsumieren können.
      
      
         
            
                http://lawd.info/ontology/
            
             https://github.com/ontop/ontop
            
               
                  http://romanrepublic.ac.uk/rdf
               , Dokumentation von John Bradley: 
                  http://romanrepublic.ac.uk/rdf/doc
               
            
             https://www.openapis.org/ 
             http://www.coreapi.org
             z.B. das Python-Framework Flask in Verbindung mit 
                  https://github.com/zalando/connexion
               , vgl. weitere Tools: 
                  https://swagger.io/tools/open-source/open-source-integrations/
               
            
             https://github.com/GVogeler/prosopogrAPhI
             http://dataforhistory.org
             https://www.researchspace.org/
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andresen, Suse (2008):
                  Das 'Repertorium Academicum Germanicum'. Überlegungen zu einer modellorientierten Datenbankstruktur und zur Aufbereitung prosopographischer Informationen der graduierten Gelehrten des Spätmittelalters, 
                        in: 
                        Sigrid Schmitt u. Michael Matheus (eds.):
                  Städtische Gesellschaft und Kirche im Spätmittelalter (Geschichtliche Landeskunde 62). Stuttgart: Steiner 17-26.
                    
               
                  Bradley, John (2017):
                  Factoids. A site that introduces Factoid Prosopograph, 
                        
                     http://factoid-dighum.kcl.ac.uk/
                   und 
                        
                     https://github.com/johnBradley501/FPO
                  
               
               
                  Bradley, John / Pasin, Michele (2015):
                  Factoid-based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies. Towards an integrated approach, 
                        in: DSH 30,1: 86-97.
                    
               
                  Bradley, John / Short, Harold (2005):
                  Texts into databases. The Evolving field of New-style Prosopography, 
                        in: LLC 20, suppl. 1: 3-24.
                    
               
                  CCEd: 
                  Clergy of the Church of England Database, King’s College London 
                        
                     http://theclergydatabase.org.uk/
                  
               
               
                  DPRR: 
                  Digital Prosopography of the Roman Republic, King’s College London 
                        
                     http://romanrepublic.ac.uk/
                  
               
               
                  Keats-Rohan, Katherine S.B. (ed.) (2007): 
                  Prosopography. Approaches and Applications. A Handbook 
                        (Prosopographica et genealogica 13). Oxford: P&G.
                    
               
                  Lind, Gunner (1994):
                  Data Structures for Computer Prosopography, 
                        in: Yesterday: Proceedings from the 6th International Conference of the Association of History and Computing, Odense 1991. Odense: University Press of Southern Denmark. 77-82.
                    
               
                  Neumann, Gerald / Körner, Fabian / Roeder, Torsten / Walkowski, Niels-Oliver (2011):
                  Personendaten-Repositorium, 
                        in: Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Jahrbuch 2010: 320-326.
                    
               
                  PASE:
                  Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England, King’s College London, URL: 
                        
                     http://www.pase.ac.uk/jsp/index.jsp
                  
               
               
                  Schlögl, Matthias / Katalin Lejtovicz (2018):
                  A Prosopographical Information System (APIS), 
                        in: 
                        Antske Fokkens / ter Braake Serge / Sluijter, Ronald / Arthur, Paul / Wandl-Vogt, Eveline (eds.): 
                  BD-2017. Biographical Data in a Digital World 2017. Proceedings of the Second Conference on Biographical Data in a Digital World 2017. 
                        Linz, Austria, November 6-7, 2017. Budapest: CEUR (CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2119): 53-58.
                    
               
                  Schlögl, Matthias / Lejtovicz, Katalin / Bernád, Ágoston Zénó / Kaiser, Maximilian / Rumpolt, Peter (2018):
                  Using deep learning to explore movement of people in a large corpus of biographies. 
                        Zenodo. 
                        
                     http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1149023
                  
               
               
                  Tuominen, Jouni / Hyvönen, Eero / Leskinen, Petri (2018):
                  Bio CRM. A Data Model for Representing Biographical Data for Prosopographical Research, 
                        in: BD-2017. Biographical Data in a Digital World 2017, hg. v. Antske Fokkens, Serge ter Braake, Ronald Sluijter, Paul Arthur, Eveline Wandl-Vogt, Budapest: CEUR (CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2119): 59-66. 
                    
               
                  Tzompanaki, Katerina / Doerr Martin (2012):
                  Fundamental Categories and Relationships for intuitive querying CIDOC-CRM based repositories, 
                        Technical Report ICS-FORTH/TR-429, April 2012, 
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Digitale Editionen haben nach einer Phase des Ausprobierens und Entwickelns nunmehr eine Reife erreicht, dass sie in vielen Disziplinen nicht mehr als exotischer Sonder-, sondern als Regelfall angesehen werden, was sich in Publikationen wie  (Apollon et. al 2014; Driscoll/Pierazzo 2016) oder Förderbedingungen (DFG 2015) spiegelt. Trotz dieser greifbaren Fortschritte stehen digitale Editionen nach wie vor in der Kritik. Genannt wird immer wieder die fehlende Stabilität und ungelöste Frage der Langzeitarchivierung und - verfügbarkeit. Doch dieses Gefühl des Mangels, so die These des Beitrags, resultiert nicht aus noch nicht geklärten methodischen oder technischen Fragen, sondern beruht auf einer Fehleinschätzung der Natur digitaler Editionen, die in Analogie zum Druckmedium meist nur von ihrer Oberfläche her beurteilt werden. Mit einem Perspektivwechsel, der die Eigentümlichkeiten digitaler Editionen und die zugrundeliegende strukturellen und algorithmischen Komponenten ernst nimmt, ist indes vergleichbare Stabilität möglich, zumindest wenn man sich über das Dokumentenmodell und über die Form seiner technischen Realisierung verständigt. 
         
         
            Markup und Overlap - auf dem Weg zu einem konsolidierten Dokumentenmodell 
            Die Entwicklung und Nutzung der Markupsprache XML war von Anbeginn an begleitet von Kritik über die Unzulänglichkeit des hierarchischen OHCO Modell (DeRose et al. 1990) für die Repräsentation von Text. Trotz verschiedener Vorschläge konnte bis heute keine abschließende, alle spezifischen Kodierungsprobleme klärende Lösung gefunden werden. Nun hat das der Popularität von XML im Allgemeinen und der in diesem Feld maßgeblichen TEI im Besonderen nicht geschadet. Nach wie vor erfreut sich XML/TEI großer Beliebtheit, auch wenn in jüngerer Zeit der Unterschied von TEI und XML betont wird (Cummings 2017). Das ist umso erstaunlicher, als es an alternativen Ansätzen nicht gemangelt hat (DeRoses 2004; Speerberg-McQueen 2007). Von MECS, GODDAG, TexMECS über LMNL bis zuletzt Text as a Graph (TAGML) entstanden Markup-Konzepte, die für sich in Anspruch nehmen und nahmen, XML und seine Beschränkungen zu überwinden. Gerade mit dem neuesten Konzept des 
                    Text as a Graph (Kuczera 2016; Dekker/Birnbaum 2017) scheint nach dem Selbstverständnis der Autoren nun endlich der Weg aus der Dauerkrise gewiesen. Doch auch dieses Modell, für das ein erster Serialisierungsentwurf vorliegt (Dekker et al. 2018), wirft erneut Fragen auf. Wenn es auch bestechend scheint und mehr Kodierungsflexibilität verheißt, ist doch fraglich, ob die Graphentheorie tatsächlich das Mittel der Wahl ist, um z.B. einem 
                    autopoietischen Textbegriff, wie (McGann 2016) ihn postuliert, Herr zu werden. Auch wenn die Graphentheorie als Modell von großem Nutzen sein kann, da sie uns hilft, mehr „clarity of thought about textuality“ (McGann 2016: 90) zu gewinnen, scheint es klug, in der Frage der „Textdefinition“ Vorsicht walten zu lassen und nicht aus dem Auge zu verlieren, dass es bei der Übersetzung des Textes in maschinenlesbare Form nicht nur darum geht, den “intellektuellen” Textbegriff zu modellieren - als “model of” (McCarty 2005) -,  sondern auch und vor allem darum, das Textverständnis im Sinne eines “model for” zu erweitern. So vermag man einen “Text” zu konzipieren, von dem McCarty sagt, dass er einen “end maker”, keinen “end user” benötigt und der es erlaubt, so etwas wie eine “digitale Pragmatik” oder “digitale Hermeneutik”, vgl. u.a. (Scheuermann 2016), in die digitale Editorik einzuführen - in Anknüpfung an Konzepte von (Robinson 2003), (Shillingsburg 2006)  oder (Gabler 2010). 
                
            Was aber von Anfang an bei der Diskussion um Overlap und die Unzulänglichkeiten von XML vernachlässigt wurde, ist, dass die Limitationen des Textmodells nicht unbedingt mit Limitationen der Serialisierung und der digitalen Technik in eins gesetzt werden können. So ist es zwar richtig, dass SGML und in der Folge XML mit dem OHCO Modell im Kopf entwickelt wurden, doch haben bereits (Renear et al.1993) in ihrer Revision darauf abgehoben, dass im pragmatischen Sinne deskriptives Markup auch unabhängig von der OHCO These verwendet werden kann. Eben weil XML vor allem eine Syntax ist, war es letztlich immer wieder möglich, für „konforme“ Lösungen zu sorgen, wie die Vorschläge der TEI zu nicht-hierarchischen Strukturen (TEI Guidelines: Chap. 20) verdeutlichen, aber auch die Beiträge von Renear zum Konzept des “trojanischen Markup” (Renear 2004) und zur XMLisierung von LMNL in CLIX (Renear 2004) oder xLMNL (Piez 2012). Der Grund lag auch darin, dass XML nicht nur in gut etablierte Strukturen der X-Familie eingebettet ist (XSD, XSLT, XQuery etc.), sondern auch allgemeiner die zentrale Document Object Modell (DOM)-Schnittstelle mit allen wichtigen Webelementen wie HTML bzw. XHTML (HTML 5), CSS oder Javascript teilt. 
         
         
            Multimodalität des Dokumentenmodels - nicht nur Markup
            Trotz aller Experimente ist heute in der Praxis kaum strittig, dass die TEI und das in ihr entwickelte Dokumentenmodel und mit Abstrichen auch ihre Serialisierung in XML das Mittel der Wahl für digitale Editionen ist. Allerdings bleibt das Modell unvollständig, wenn man nicht auch die anderen Komponenten der Edition in die Überlegungen einbezieht. Wie das analoge Buch über die Rolle zum Kodex und über die Handschrift zum Druck gefunden hat, so muss auch das digitale Buch zu einer stabilen Struktur und Form finden, um nicht nur in der Wissenschaft, sondern auch in Gedächtniseinrichtungen wie Bibliotheken langfristig gesichert, reproduziert und als wissenschaftlich referenzierbares Objekt über Schnittstellen zur Verfügung gestellt und genutzt werden zu können. Dabei sind die Besonderheiten digitaler Dokumente bzw. ihre spezifische Dynamik bzw. Potentialität zu beachten (PDF z.B. erfüllt diese Kriterien nicht). So ist es für das Verständnis der digitalen Edition wichtig, in die Debatte um die Zu- oder Unzulänglichkeit bestimmter Markupsprachen auch das eine Edition verwirklichende Ensemble von Dateien und Funktionen einzubeziehen, deren logisches Zusammenspiel zu bestimmen und nicht nur nach dem, wie die TEI es nennt, „abstract model“ und dessen Serialisierungen zu unterscheiden, sondern auch Regelstrukturen, Präsentationsmodelle und differenzierte Metadatenformate als zum Verständnis notwendige Aspekte zu berücksichtigen. Editionen treten uns typischerweise als eine Kombination von Text mit Markup, Schemadatei, Stylesheets, Transformations- und sonstigen Skripten entgegen. Konkret handelt es sich um eine Reihe von Dateien (oder Datenströmen), wie z.B. .xml,.xslt,.xsd,.css oder .html, die zusammen ein funktionales Ganzes bilden, das als solches nicht nur die Stelle des physischen Dokumentes einnimmt, sondern auch die Grundlage der Langzeitarchivierung bildet. Dieser ganzheitlich betrachteten digitalen Edition ist eigentümlich, dass sie erst durch eine konkrete, meist nutzergesteuerte algorithmische Verarbeitungsanweisung nach dem klassischen EVA-Prinzip im Viewport oder Empfängersystem „verwirklicht“ wird, während ihre Persistenz in den in die Edition hineinkodierten und in ihren Darstellungsfunktionen niedergelegten Möglichkeiten, keineswegs aber in der sichtbaren Oberfläche liegt. Letztere reduziert sich zu einem Ausschnitt, der nur bedingt das gesamte Potential der Edition aufzeigen kann. Wenn diese kombinatorisch vollständig beschreibbaren Möglichkeiten der Präsentation, die zutreffend mit dem Begriff der Schnittstelle verbunden werden (Boot/Zundert 2011; Zundert 2018), den Kernbegriff der digitalen Edition konstituieren, resultieren daraus eine Reihe von praktischen und theoretischen Konsequenzen. Ein erster wichtiger Schritt liegt in der Erkenntnis der Superiorität der Kodierungsgrundlage über die erzeugte angezeigte Oberfläche (Turska/Cummings/Rahtz 2016): “Data is the important Long-term Outcome”. Das heißt aber nicht, dass die Oberfläche gleichgültig wäre. Sie darf nur nicht, weil sichtbar, als das einzig wichtige, ja nicht einmal als für die Edition maßgebliche Layer begriffen werden. Die Oberfläche, Visualisierung, die Ausgabe, die Schnittstelle, allgemein das algorithmische Erzeugnis, können über die primäre, immer aber reduzierte und mit Blick auf die kombinatorischen Möglichkeiten ausschnitthafte Darstellungsfunktion hinaus ihrerseits eigenständige Produkte bzw „Interpretationen“ sein, vgl. (Zundert 2018). Die Edition selbst sind sie aber nicht, denn eine digitale Edition kann man, streng genommen, nicht sehen. Entsprechend sind zum einen eine Reihe von Text- bzw. Dokumentelemente wie das Layout als eigenständiges bedeutungstragendes oder zumindest -beinflussendes Phänomen als digitale “Textästhethek” und als ein Ergebnis einer Funktion mit vielfältigen Parametern neu zu interpretieren (Stäcker 2019), zum anderen verändern sich Nutzungsszenarien etwa bei der Archivierung und Zitierbarkeit von Editionen, denn wenn die Oberfläche eine von mehreren Möglichkeiten ist, kann sie nicht ohne weitere Vorkehrung Gegenstand des Zitierziels sein.  Auf anderer Ebene bedeutet es, dass der/die Autor/Autorin oder, vermutlich genauer, das Autorenteam ein genaues Verständnis auch der technischen Dimension des digitalen Textes haben muss, um seinen nicht nur natürlichen, sondern auch maschinellen „Leser“ zu erreichen, oder aber, dass die Autorintention die Schaffung von Möglichkeiten der digitalen Hermeneutik und Analyse einschließen muss. Eine wesentlich Dimension der digitalen Edition ist ferner ihre Verankerung im “Netz”. Daraus ergeben sich generell Anforderungen an ihre “Hypertextualität”, ihre “Schnittstellen”  (Zundert 2018; Stäcker 2019) und Fähigkeit, sich in das “semantic web” zu integrieren (Ciotti/Tomasi 2016). Dazu zählt auch die unmittelbare Integration der genutzten „Forschungsdaten“, etwa der digitalen Faksimiles, die im Rahmen der 
                    recensio gesammelt und gesichtet wurden, so dass auf der Oberfläche ein transkludentes Ensemble entsteht, das auf 
                    hypertextuellen Strukturen aufbaut.
                
            Es besteht die Hoffnung, dass mit dem Blickwechsel von dem zweidimensionalen sichtbaren Ergebnis auf die unsichtbare Potentialität der Edition sich das eher Proteushafte der Oberfläche der digitalen Edition auflöst und auch für die schon lange gärende Frage nach deren Persistenz und Nachhaltigkeit ein zufriedenstellender Ansatz gerade in ihrer, mit dem Motto der Tagung gesprochen: Multimodalität, gefunden werden kann. Der Beitrag möchte diesen Gedanken anhand von Beispielen weiter ausführen, um einen tragfähigen Begriff von einer persistenten digitale Edition als einem funktionalen und organischen Ensemble von exakt definierbaren Komponenten zu entwickeln.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andrews, Tara L. / Zundert, Joris J. van (2018):
                  What Are You Trying to Say? The Interface as an Integral Element of Argument, 
                        in: 
                        Roman Bleier / Martina Bürgermeister / Helmut W. Klug /Frederike Neuber / Gerlinde Schneider (eds. / hrsg.): 
                  Digital Scholarly Editions as Interfaces.
                    
               Norderstedt 3-33. 
                        
                     urn:nbn:de:hbz:38-91064
                  
               
               
                  Apollon, Daniel / Claire Bélisle / Philippe Régnier (eds.) (2014):
                  Digital critical editions. Topics in the digital humanities. 
                        Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
                    
               
                  Boot, Peter/ Zundert, Joris van (2011):
                  The Digital Edition 2.0 and The Digital Library: Services, not Ressources, 
                        in: Digitale Edition und Forschungsbibliothek. (Beiträge der Fachtagung im Philosophicum der Universität Mainz am 13. und 14. Januar 2011). Harrassowitz 2011: 141–52 (Bibliothek und Wissenschaft, 44) 
                        
                     http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11755/c9e80904-8def-438e-a82b-80d4107b36ed
                  
               
               
                  Ciotti, Fabio / Tomasi, Francesca (2016):
                  Formal Ontologies,  Linked Data, and TEI Semantics, 
                        in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative. 
                        
                     10.4000/jtei.1480
                  
               
               
                  Cummings, James (2017):
                  Slides zum Vortrag gehalten auf der DH2017: 
                        
                     https://slides.com/jamescummings/teimyths
                  . Erscheint in Kürze in DSH.
                    
               
                  Dekker, Ronald / David J. Birnbaum (2017):
                  It's more than just overlap: Text As Graph. 
                        Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2017, Washington, DC, August 1 - 4, 2017, in Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2017. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 19. 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol19.Dekker01
                  
               
               
                  Dekker, Ronald / Elli Bleeker / Bram Buitendijk, Astrid Kulsdom / David J. Birnbaum (2018):
                  TAGML: A markup language of many dimensions. 
                        Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2018, Washington, DC, July 31 - August 3, 2018, in Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2018. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 21. 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol21.HaentjensDekker01
                    
                    
               
                  DeRose, Steven J. / Durand, David G. / Mylonas, Elli / Renear, Allen H.:
                  What Is Text, Really?, 
                        in: Journal of Computing in Higher Education 1, Nr. 2 (Dezember 1990) 3–26.
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02941632
                  .
                    
               
                  DeRose, Steven J. (2004):
                  Markup overlap: a review and a horse, 
                        in: Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages.
                        
                     http://xml.coverpages.org/DeRoseEML2004.pdf
                  
               
               
                  Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2015):
                  Förderkriterien für wissenschaftliche Editionen in der Literaturwissenschaft. 
                        Merkblatt der DFG. 2015. 
                        
                     http://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/antragstellung/forschungsdaten/foerderkriterien_editionen_literaturwissenschaft.pdf
                    
                    
               
                  Driscoll, Matthew James/ Elena Pierazzo (eds.) (2016):
                  Digital scholarly editing: Theories and practices. 
                        Cambridge, UK. 
                        
                     https://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/483
                  .
                    
               
                  Gabler, Hans Walter (2010):
                  Theorizing the Digital Scholarly Edition, 
                        in: Literature Compass 7, Nr. 2 (Februar 2010) 43–56.
                        
                      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-4113.2009.00675.x
                  .
                    
               
                  W3C (2017):
                  HTML 5.2 Recommendation (14 December 2017): §9: XML Syntax. 
                        
                     https://www.w3.org/TR/html52/xhtml.html#xhtml
                  
               
               
                  Kuczera, Andreas (2016):
                  Digital Editions beyond XML – Graph-based Digital Editions, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 3rd HistoInformatics Workshop on Computational History (HistoInformatics 2016). ceur-ws.org/Vol-1632/paper_5.pdf 
                    
               
                  McCarty, Willard (2005):
                  Humanities computing. 
                        Basingstoke, Hampshire [u.a.].
                    
               
                  McGann, Jerome J. (2014):
                  A new republic of letters: memory and scholarship in the age of digital reproduction. 
                        Cambridge, Mass. [u.a.]: Harvard Univ. Press.
                    
               
                  Piez, Wendell (2012):
                  Luminescent: parsing LMNL by XSLT upconversion. 
                        Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2012, Montréal, Canada, August 7 - 10, in Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2012. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 8. 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol8.Piez01
                  
               
               
                  Renear, Allen / Mylonas, Elli / Durand, David (1993):
                  Refining our Notion of What Text Really Is: The Problem of Overlapping Hierarchies. 
                        Final version, January 6. 
                        
                     http://cds.library.brown.edu/resources/stg/monographs/ohco.html
                  
               
               
                  Robinson, Peter (2003):
                  WHERE WE ARE WITH ELECTRONIC SCHOLARLY EDITIONS, AND WHERE WE WANT TO BE, 
                        in: Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie. 
                        
                     http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg03/robinson.html
                  
               
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013):
                  Digitale Editionsformen : zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. 
                        Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik. Bd. 1-3. Norderstedt.
                    
               
                  Scheuermann, Leif (2016):
                  Die Abgrenzung der digitalen Geisteswissenschaften, 
                        in: Digital Classics Online vol. 2. 
                        
                     https://journals.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/index.php/dco/article/viewFile/22746/21865
                  
               
               
                  Shillingsburg, Peter L. (2006):
                  From Gutenberg to Google: electronic representations of literary texts, 
                        Cambridge.
                    
               
                  Speerberg-McQueen, C. M. (2007):
                  Representation of overlapping structures: Proceedings of the 2007 Extreme Markup Languages conference. 
                        
                     http://conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2007/SperbergMcQueen01/EML2007SperbergMcQueen01.html#id96245
                  
                   
               
               
                  Stäcker, Thomas (2018):
                  ‚Von Alexandria lernen‘. Die Forschungsbibliothek als Ort digitaler Philologie. 
                        In Frauen – Bücher – Höfe: Wissen und Sammeln vor 1800 Women – Books – Courts: Knowledge and Collecting before 1800. Essays in honor of Jill Bepler. Hrsg. von Volker Bauer, Elizabeth Harding, Gerhild Scholz Williams und Mara R. Wade. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 93–103. 
                        
                     http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:tuda-tuprints-75938
                  
               
               
                  Stäcker, Thomas (2019):
                  Literaturwissenschaft und Bibliothek – eine Beziehung im digitalen Wandel, 
                        in: Digitale Literaturwissenschaft. Metzler/Springer (im Druck, voraussichtl. 2019).
                    
               TEI Guidelines: 
                        
                     Chapter 20: Non-hierarchical Structures.
                     http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/NH.html
                  
               
               
                  Turska, Magdalena / Cummings, James / Rahtz, Sebastian (2016):
                  Challenging the Myth of Presentation in Digital Editions, 
                        in:  Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 9 (2016-2017). 
                        
                     http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1453
                     
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung
            In diesem Beitrag wird eine domänenspezifische Anwendung von Linked Open Data und Ontologien vorgestellt, die als Paradigma für den Umgang mit digitalen Corpora in der Archäologie dienen kann. Zunächst wird die Entwicklung des Projektes Nomisma.org sowie dessen Anwendung für die Verlinkung von digitalen Datenbeständen erläutert. In einem zweiten Teil wird ein Pilotprojekt vorgestellt, das darauf abzielt, textbasierte Münzpublikationen als RDF zur Verfügung zu stellen und somit prüft, inwieweit das Vokabular und die Ontologie von Nomisma.org eingesetzt werden können.
            Das 2010 von der American Numismatic Society, New York, initiierte Projekt 
                Nomisma.org1 definiert und stellt stabile digitale Repräsentationen numismatischer Konzepte nach den Prinzipien von Linked Open Data zur Verfügung. Sie werden als http-URIs 
                veröffentlicht2, die Zugang zu weiterverwertbaren Informationen zu den Konzepten liefern, dazu noch Links zu weiteren Linked Open Data-Ressourcen (Getty Vocabularies, wikidata, viaf, GND, u.v.m.). Ferner wurde eine numismatische 
                Ontologie3 entwickelt, die den Bedürfnissen und Arbeitsweisen der Numismatik gerecht ist und eine unkomplizierte Modellierung ermöglicht. Das kanonische Format von Nomisma.org ist RDF/XML, aber auch weitere Formate wie JSON-LD (für Geodaten geoJASON-LD), Turtle, KML und HTML5+RDFa 1.1. werden bedient.
                
         
         
            Virtuelle Sammlungen
            Zunächst lag der Schwerpunkt der Arbeit von Nomisma.org bei der römischen Numismatik und bis 2016 erfolgte die Onlinestellung der Linked Open Data-Ressourcen 
                    Coinage of the Roman Republic Online 
                    (CRRO)4 und 
                    Online Coins of the Roman Empire 
                    (OCRE)5 als virtuelle Münzsammlungen für die Prägungen der römischen Republik und der Kaiserzeit. Die Abfrage erfolgt über RDF Dumps der Projektpartner, die zentral gehalten werden; die dazugehörigen Bilder werden on-the-fly von den Servern der Partner geholt, wodurch nicht nur das Volumen der zentralen Datenhaltung gering gehalten und die Abfragegeschwindigkeit erhöht, sondern auch eventuelle rechtliche Probleme bei der Lizenzierung der Bilder vermieden werden.
                
            Mittlerweile befassen sich erste Projekte auch mit dem disparaten und weitaus komplexeren Stoff der griechischen 
                Welt,6 z.B. 
                    PELLA für die Prägungen der makedonischen Dynastie der Argeaden, 
                    Corpus Nummorum Thracorum für Thrakien, oder 
                    Seleucid Coins Online für die Prägungen der Seleukiden. Des Weiteren haben Arbeitsgruppen bereits angefangen, die notwendigen Konzepte für die keltische und islamische Numismatik sowie für das Mittelalter zu definieren.
                
            Fast 200.000 antike Münzen von insgesamt 39 Institutionen werden heute in auf Nomisma.org basierenden Online-Ressourcen veröffentlicht.7 Aktiv an der Entwicklungen beteiligt sind u.a. das Institute for Studies of the Ancient World, New York, das Deutsche Archäologische Institut sowie vier der weltweit bedeutendsten Münzsammlungen: Die American Numismatic Society, das British Museum, die Bibliothèque nationale de France und das Münzkabinett der Staatlichen Museen zu Berlin. Auch eine Reihe kleinerer Sammlungen sind dabei ihre Bestände in Portalen wie OCRE und CRRO online zu stellen. Darunter schon acht der 34 deutschen universitären Sammlungen, die Mitglieder im 
                    NUMiD-Verbund 
                    (Netzwerk universitärer Münzsammlungen in Deutschland)8 sind.
                
         
         
            Die verlinkte Antike
            Nomisma.org und die darauf bauenden Projekte sind in die Linked Open Data-Welt der Antike fest integriert. Mit Nomisma.org verlinkte, bzw. gemappte Münzen werden bei Ressourcen wie 
                    Pleiades
               9 und 
                    Pelagios
               10 angezeigt und umgekehrt können Einträge in den virtuellen Sammlungen mit kontextvermittelnden Daten aus anderen Quellen angereichert werden. Beispielsweise: Wird Literatur in der Form von iDAI.bibliographie / 
                    ZENON11 URIs zitiert, können umgekehrt in Zenon Verweise auf Münzen beim entsprechenden Titel angezeigt werden. Im Abschlussbericht des Work Package 15 des EU-FP7 Projektes ARIADNE wurde Nomisma.org mehrfach als führendes Beispiel für die fachspezifische Anwendung von Linked Open Data zitiert (Geser 2016).
                
            Nomisma.org hat numismatische Daten auf eine Weise digital zur Verfügung gestellt, die vor 10 Jahren kaum vorstellbar gewesen wäre und macht einen bedeutenden Bestand an Material der Forschung leichter zugänglich. Durch die Verlinkung mit anderen LOD-Ressourcen sind diese Daten auch deutlich sichtbarer und stehen damit für Forschungsvorhaben in anderen Disziplinen vermehrt zur Verfügung. So kann Nomisma.org beispielsweise einen wichtigen Beitrag zur Aufhebung der immer noch weit verbreiteten Isolation der Numismatik in den Altertumswissenschaften leisten, eine Isolation, die in der (bisher oft fehlenden) Zusammenarbeit mit der Archäologie besonders deutlich erkennbar ist.
         
         
            Fundmünzen und Archäologie
            Konzentrierten sich Projekte wie OCRE und PELLA zunächst auf die Präsentation von Münzen aus öffentlichen Sammlungen, richtet sich der Blick mittlerweile zunehmend auf Münzen im archäologischen Kontext. Nomisma.org kompatible Standards für die Aufnahme und Veröffentlichung von Münzen aus Ausgrabungen wurden bei einem Treffen an der University of Oxford im September 2018 vereinbart, um Re-use und Interoperabilität zu 
                ermöglichen.12
            
            Nationale Projekte wie 
                    NUMIS
               13 für die Niederlande oder das 
                    Inventar der Fundmünzen der Schweiz
               14 veröffentlichen umfangreiche Bestände an Fundmünzen im Web, die aber nur über das jeweilige nationale Portal zugänglich sind. Eine länderübergreifende Abfrage ist nicht möglich. Eine Ausnahme bietet das Projekt
                     Antike Fundmünzen in Europa
               15, das die Datenbanken der Römisch-Germanischen Kommission in Frankfurt und des Unternehmens 
                    Finds of Roman Coins in Poland auf das Vokabular und die Ontologie von Nomisma.org mappt und mittels eines D2R-Servers als RDF online stellt. Ein SPARQL-Endpoint ermöglicht die gemeinsame Abfrage der beiden Datenbestände und erleichtert damit die Analyse der Fundmünzen aus einem von der Nordsee bis zur Ukraine reichenden Raum.
                
         
         
            Text zu RDF: Erster Versuch einer Digitalisierung
            Bisher lag der Schwerpunkt der Verlinkung mit bzw. Mapping auf Nomisma.org auf in Datenbanken gehaltene Daten. In diesem Beitrag soll abschließend ein Pilotprojekt vorgestellt werden, das sich mit den Möglichkeiten der Anwendung von Nomisma.org auf textbasierte Datenbestände beschäftigt.
            
               Grundlage
               Das Projekt „Fundmünzen der römischen Zeit in Deutschland“ (FMRD) brachte 48 Bände mit weit über 300.000 erfassten Fundmünzen heraus. Im Rahmen eines Praxisprojektes im Studiengang „Digitale Methodik in den Geistes- und 
                    Kulturwissenschaften“16 wurde als Beispieldatensatz aus FMRD der Fundkomplex Domgrabung/Liebfrauen-Areal in Trier mit 1.157 Münzen digitalisiert (M. Radnoti-Alföldi 2006: 119–206).
                    
            
            
               Das Verfahren
               Die Daten zu den Münzen wurden aus dem PDF in CSV und XML extrahiert und in ein RDF-Dokument umgewandelt, um die Vernetzung und Visualisierung zu ermöglichen (Abb. 1).
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 1. Verlaufsplan.
               
               Für die Konvertierung aus dem PDF und die Bearbeitung wurde 
                        Adobe Acrobat Pro DC
                  17, der 
                        Oxygen
                  18 Editor und 
                        Libre Office
                  19 verwendet. Die extrahierten Daten wurden anhand der CSV-Extraktion in ein einheitliches Spaltensystem gebracht. Über das XML-Dokument wurden anhand von regulären Ausdrücken Konvertierungsfehler etc. ausgebessert. Am Ende stand eine einzelne TEI-konforme Tabelle. Der nächste Schritt bestand darin, ein Linked-Open-Data-Modell anhand der Ontologie von Nomisma.org (Abb. 2) zu entwickeln.
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 2. RDF-Modell.
               
               Um dieses Modell automatisiert auf alle 1.157 Münzen der Trierer Domgrabung übertragen zu können, wurde der Webdienst 
                        XTriples verwendet
                     20
                  , der es erlaubt aus XML ein RDF-Dokument zu erzeugen.
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 3. Webservice XTriples.
               
               Das RDF-Dokument wurde auf einen Triple Store abgelegt, der über ein RDF4J-Framework verfügt und SPARQL-Abfragen erlaubt. Ein weiterer Webdienst, 
                        sgvizler,
                     21
                   ermöglicht es im Anschluss die Daten zu visualisieren und zu analysieren (Abb. 4).
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 4. Visualisierung über sgvizler zu den Fundmünzen der Trierer Domgrabung.
               
            
            
               Ausblick
               Das oben beschriebene Verfahren wurde dann erweitert, um eine Pipeline aufzubauen, mit der alle Bände der FMRD-Reihe digitalisiert werden können. Auf manuelle Schritte und proprietäre Software soll dabei möglichst verzichtet werden.
            
            
               Tabellenextraktion
               In einem ersten Schritt wurden aktuelle Open-Source-Angebote verglichen, die es ermöglichen, aus der PDF-Struktur Tabellen in CSV- bzw. XML-Dateien zu extrahieren. Die Daten liegen jedoch so inhomogen vor, dass bisher erschienene Programme und Skripte/Bibliotheken schnell an ihre Grenzen stoßen. Als Beispiel soll hier das browserbasierte Tool 
                        Tabula
                  
                     22
                   dienen, welches Tabellen im PDF automatisch erkennt und anschließend als CSV ausgeben kann. Im Verlauf der Erprobung stellte sich 
                        Tabula als ungeeignet heraus, da immer noch zu viele manuelle Eingriffe vonnöten sind. So erkennt es manche Tabellenteile nicht (Abb. 5) und die Spalteninhalte im erzeugten CSV werden nicht richtig zugeordnet.
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 5. Tabula: Fundmünzen Nummer 1 bis 4 werden nicht erkannt.
               
            
            
               pdftohtml
               Eine andere Herangehensweise erzeugt als Zwischenschritt XML, bevor dieses in CSV umgewandelt werden kann. Für die Erzeugung des XML wird das Tool 
                        pdftohtml verwendet.
                     23
                   Das Ergebnis lässt sich über den 
                        pdf2xml-viewer
                  24 überprüfen (Abb. 6).
                    
               
                  
                  
                     Abbildung 6. OCR-Ergebnis.
               
               Die Normalisierung der Spalten ist hier leichter, da auch leere Tabellenspalten erkannt werden. Jedoch wird auch hier der Spalteninhalt nicht überall korrekt erkannt (Münze 18). Die XML-Struktur erlaubt es über die Tags zu navigieren und diese mit X-Technologien zu manipulieren. Doch ist der Anteil der nicht korrekt erkannten Spalteninhalte immer noch zu hoch, um die Daten wie im Druckband abzubilden.
            
            
               Reguläre Ausdrücke
               Eine andere Möglichkeit an die Tabellendaten zu gelangen sind reguläre Ausdrücke. Mithilfe eines Pythonskriptes wurden diese separiert und als CSV ausgegeben. Dafür wurden beispielhaft verschiedene Münzkomplexe herangezogen und die regulären Ausdrücke um die pro Komplex neu auftretenden Sonderfälle modifiziert. Dieses Verfahren erzeugte gute Ergebnisse für die behandelten Komplexe. So waren nur noch kleinere manuelle Nachbesserungen nötig. Im Vergleich erzeugte dieses Verfahren das beste Ergebnis.
            
         
         
            Fazit
            Die Digitalisierung von „Fundmünzen der römischen Zeit in Deutschland“ erweist sich als anspruchsvoll. Der Ansatz, die Daten über reguläre Ausdrücke zu gewinnen und zu extrahieren, erscheint bisher am vielversprechendsten. Die dabei auftretenden Abweichungen zwischen den Münzfundkomplexen lassen sich durch auf die FMRD-Struktur zugeschnittene Ausdrücke ausbessern. So erhoffen wir uns, die bisher über Nomisma.org veröffentlichten Datenbestände durch wichtige archäologische Kontexte zu erweitern und zu bereichern.
         
      
      
         
             http://nomisma.org/; Hinweis: Alle im Beitrag erwähnten URLs wurden zuletzt am 14.10.2018 überprüft.
             z.B. http://nomisma.org/id/sestertius
             http://nomisma.org/ontology
             http://numismatics.org/crro/
             http://numismatics.org/ocre/
             https://www.greekcoinage.org/portals.html
             http://nomisma.org/datasets
             http://www.numid-verbund.de/
             https://pleiades.stoa.org/
             http://peripleo.pelagios.org/
             http://peripleo.pelagios.org/
             https://www.greekcoinage.org/coins-in-context.html
             https://www.dnb.nl/en/about-dnb/nationale-numismatische-collectie/numis/numis-database/index.jsp
             https://www.fundmuenzen.ch/
             http://afe.fundmuenzen.eu/
             https://www.digitale-methodik.uni-mainz.de/
             https://acrobat.adobe.com/de/de/acrobat/acrobat-pro.html
             https://www.oxygenxml.com/
             https://de.libreoffice.org/
             http://xtriples.spatialhumanities.de/index.html
             http://mgskjaeveland.github.io/sgvizler/
             https://tabula.technology/
             https://poppler.freedesktop.org/
             https://github.com/WZBSocialScienceCenter/pdf2xml-viewer
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  G. Geser (2016):
                  ARIADNE WP15 Study: Towards a Web of Archaeological Linked Open Data 
                        (www.ariadne-infrastructure.eu/.../ARIADNE_archaeological_LOD_study_10-2016.pdf, 31.10.2016).
                    
               
                  E. Gruber:
                  Numishare Blogspot: 
                        http://numishare.blogspot.com/.
                    
               
                  E. Gruber / G. Bransbourg / S. Heath / A. Meadows (2014):
                  Linking Roman Coins: Current Work at the American Numismatic Society, 
                        in: 
                        G. Earle et al. (eds):
                  Archaeology in the Digital Era: 
                        Papers from the 40th Annual Conference of Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA), Southampton, 26-29 March 2012 (Amsterdam) 249–258.
               
                  E. Gruber / S. Heath / A. Meadows / D. Pett / D. Wigg-Wolf (2014):
                  Semantic Web Technologies Applied to Numismatic Collections, 
                        in: 
                        G. Earle et al. (eds):
                  Archaeology in the Digital Era: 
                        Papers from the 40th Annual Conference of Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA), Southampton, 26-29 March 2012 (Amsterdam) 264–274.
               Radnoti-Alföldi, M. (2006): Die Fundmünzen der römischen Zeit in Deutschland IV 3/2. Stadt und Reg.-Bez. Trier. Die Sog. Römerbauten (Mainz).
               
                  
                  K. Tolle / D. Wigg-Wolf (2015):
                  Uncertainty Handling for Ancient Coinage, 
                        in: 
                        F. Giligny et al. (eds):
                  CAA2014. 21st Century Archaeology. Concepts, Methods and Tools. 
                        Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Conference on Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (Oxford) 171–178.
                    
               
                  K. Tolle / D. Wigg-Wolf (2016):
                  How to Move from Relational to 5 Star Linked Open Data – A Numismatic Example, 
                        in: 
                        S. Campana et al. (eds):
                  CAA2015. Keep the Revolution Going. 
                        Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Conference on Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (Oxford 2016) 275–281.
                    
               
                  D. Wigg-Wolf / F. Duyrat (2017):
                  La révolution des Linked Open Data en numismatique: Les exemples de nomisma.org et Online Greek Coinage. 
                        Archéologies numériques 1.1, 2017.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Wir präsentieren 
                WebAnno-MM1, eine Erweiterung des populären web-basierten Annotationstools 
                WebAnno2 (Yimam et al., 2013; Eckart de Castilho et al., 2014), welches die Annotation transkribierter Daten ermöglicht und dabei parallel synchronisierte Ansichten auf die Daten zur Verfügung stellt. Die Erweiterung wurde im Rahmen eines Projekts zur Erarbeitung und Erprobung innovativer Lehrmethoden entwickelt (vgl. Remus et al, 2018), um Annotation von Videodaten als Unterstützung für die Analyse und Reflexion authentischer Diskursbeispiele einsetzen zu können. Eine entscheidende Rolle spielen dabei das kollaborative Annotieren und die systematische Überprüfung der Übereinstimmung – einerseits zwischen Studierenden, als Diskussionsgrundlage im Seminar, und anderseits durch einen Studierenden zu verschiedenen Zeitpunkten, um so Einblicke in die Aneignung neuer Konzepte zu bekommen. Die Auswertung von Inter- und Intra-Annotator-Agreement wird durch die elaborierte Nutzerverwaltung und das bereits existierende Kurationsmodul von WebAnno ermöglicht. Ein weiterer Vorteil von WebAnno in Hinblick auf die Diskursannotation ist der bessere Überblick über größere Abschnitte des Diskurses verglichen mit gängigen Werkzeugen, die in erster Linie für die Transkription und Annotation auf Äußerungsebene entwickelt worden sind, wie z.B. der EXMARaLDA Partitur-Editor (Schmidt und Wörner, 2014) oder ELAN (Sloetjes, 2014). Auch hinsichtlich der Struktur der Annotationen bietet WebAnno große Flexibilität, da neben einfacher Spannenannotation auch relationale und feature-basierte Annotationen möglich sind. Ein wichtiger Aspekt für den Einsatz in der Lehre ist zudem die einfache Handhabung einer web-basierten Plattform.
                
         
         
            WebAnno-MM Plugin
            WebAnno bietet in der Basisversion nur geringe Funktionalität für transkribierte gesprochene Daten. WebAnno-MM bietet daher nun als Plugin für WebAnno sowohl die Möglichkeit, alignierte Mediendateien abzuspielen, als auch die Transkriptionsdaten nach bestimmten Konventionen und dem vorgesehenen Layout für die qualitative Analyse zu visualisieren. Durch ein Open-Source-Projekt wie WebAnno wird nicht nur der Einsatz der Lehrmethode und der neuen WebAnno-Version in verschiedenen Kontexten ermöglicht, sondern auch die Ergänzung und Weiterentwicklung zusätzlicher Funktionalitäten für ähnliche Vorhaben. In Hinblick auf Interoperabilität und Nachhaltigkeit der Lösung wurde dementsprechend der auf den 
                TEI-Richtlinien3 basierende ISO-Standard „Transcription of Spoken 
                Language“4 als Grundlage gewählt, für die eine Konvertierung aus gängigen Transkriptionswerkzeugformaten bereits möglich ist (vgl. Schmidt et al., 2017).
                
         
         
            Datenmodellierung in WebAnno
            Die Grundlage in WebAnno‘s Backend ist UIMA (Unstructured Information Management 
                Architecture)5 (Ferrucci und Lally, 2004). UIMA speichert Textinformationen, d.h. den Text selbst und die Annotationen, in sogenannten CASs (Common Analysis Systems). Eine große Herausforderung ist die Darstellung von Transkriptionen und den (zeitlichen) Annotationen basierend auf mehreren Sprechern. Die Textsequenz soll dabei die Wahrnehmung einer Konversation möglichst wenig behindern und die einzelnen segmentierten Äußerungen der Sprecher und ihrer kontinuierlichen Annotationen beibehalten. Dazu parsen wir ISO/TEI-XML-Inhalte und speichern Äußerungen einzelner Sprecher in verschiedenen sogenannten Views (verschiedene CASs des gleichen Dokuments) und behalten Zeitstempel als Metadaten innerhalb einer CAS. Wir verwenden das jeweils auf einzelnen Sprecherbeiträgen basierende 
                    annotationBlock-XML-Element als eine unterbrechungsfreie Einheit, da wir in diesem Fall davon ausgehen können, dass einzelne Annotationen innerhalb der Zeitgrenzen des Sprecherbeitrags liegen. Äußerungen und vorhandene Spannenannotationen werden auf diese Weise in die vorhandene Annotationsansicht von WebAnno übernommen. Eigenständige Ereignisse wie beispielsweise non-verbale Äußerungen hingegen, die als sogenannte 
                    Incidents auch über andere, sprecherabhängige Äußerungen hinweg auftreten können, werden nicht in die sequentielle WebAnno Annotationsansicht konvertiert, sondern nur in der zusätzlichen Partituransicht dargestellt.
                
         
         
            Visualisierung der Transkriptionsdaten
            Die neu integrierte Partituransicht basiert auf einer Visualisierung von Äußerungen und Annotationen im bekannten 
                Partiturlayout6. Abbildung 1 (rechts) zeigt einen Screenshot von der Partituransicht. Die Annotationsansicht und die Partituransicht sind synchronisiert, d.h. durch Klicken auf die entsprechenden Zeitmarkierungen im jeweiligen Browserfenster ändert sich der Fokus in dem anderen. Durch Klicken wird auch die Medienwiedergabe gestartet oder pausiert. Darüber hinaus kann in der Partituransicht unter den verknüpften Medienformaten die aktuell abzuspielende Datei festgelegt und die Breite der Partiturflächen nach Bedarf eingestellt werden. Es stehen außerdem die Metadaten der Aufnahme und den Sprechern zur Verfügung.
                
            
               
               
                  
                  Abbildung 1. Annotationsansicht (links), Partituransicht (rechts)
               
            
         
         
            Präsentation
            Wir stellen auf der Grundlage unseres Posters die theoretischen Hintergründe sowie die technische Implementierung der Erweiterung vor und zeigen das Plugin und seine Anwendung in einer Live-Demonstration.
         
      
      
         
             https://github.com/webanno/webanno-mm
                    
             https://webanno.github.io
                    
             http://www.tei-c.org/guidelines/p5/
                    
             http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=37338
                    
             https://uima.apache.org/
                    
             Beispiel der Partituransicht: http://hdl.handle.net/11022/0000-0000-4F70-A
                    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Eckart de Castilho, Richard / Biemann, Chris / Gurevych, Iryna / Yiman, Seid Muhie (2014):
                  WebAnno: a flexible, web-based annotation tool for CLARIN, 
                        in: Proceedings of the CLARIN Annual Conference 2014 1-3.
                    
               
                  Ferrucci, David / Lally, Adam (2004):
                  UIMA: An Architectural Approach to Unstructured Information Processing in the Corporate Research Environment, 
                        in: Natural Language Engineering, 10(3–4): 327-348.
                    
               
                  Remus, Steffen / Hedeland, Hanna / Ferger, Anne / Bührig, Kristin / Biemann, Chris (2018):
                  WebAnno meets EXMARaLDA, 
                        in: Selected papers from the CLARIN Annual Conference 2018, Pisa, 8–10 October 2018. Linköping: University Electronic Press.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas / Wörner, Kai (2014):
                  EXMARaLDA, 
                        in: 
                        Durand, Jacques / Gut, Ulrike / Kristoffersen, Gjert (eds.): 
                  Handbook on Corpus Phonology. Oxford: University Press 402-419.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Thomas / Hedeland, Hanna / Jettka, Daniel (2017):
                  Conversion and annotation web services for spoken language data in CLARIN, 
                        in: Selected papers from the CLARIN Annual Conference 2016, Aix-en-Provence, 26–28 October 2016. Linköping: University Electronic Press 113–130.
                    
               
                  Sloetjes, Han (2014):
                  ELAN: Multimedia annotation application, 
                        in: 
                        Durand, Jacques / Gut, Ulrike / Kristoffersen, Gjert (eds.): 
                  Handbook on Corpus Phonology. Oxford: University Press 305–320.
                    
               
                  Yimam, Seid Muhie / Gurevych, Iryna / Eckart de Castilho, Richard / Biemann, Chris (2013):
                  WebAnno: A flexible, web-based and visually supported system for distributed annotations, 
                        in: Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations  , Sofia, Bulgaria 1-6.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das Projekt
            
               Gutenberg Biographics
               ist ein webbasiertes System zur schwerpunktmäßigen Erfassung und Präsentation der Biographien von Mainzer Gelehrten in der Zeit von 1477-1798/1802 und seit der Wiedergründung der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität 1946 bis in die Gegenwart. Das Digital Humanities Projekt wird in Kooperation der Universitätsbibliothek Mainz, des Instituts für Geschichtliche Landeskunde an der Universität Mainz e.V sowie der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz durchgeführt. Die Schwerpunkte liegen hierbei in der quellenbasierten Erschließung, der Forschungsdatenmodellierung im Bereich der Digitalen Biographik sowie im Aufbau und der Präsentation der webbasierten Plattform. Seit 2013 wird das Projekt vom Forschungsverbund Universitätsgeschichte finanziell unterstützt.
            
            
               Gutenberg Biographics
               verzeichnet die Personen in ihren Rollen als Handelnde innerhalb unterschiedlicher historischer Ereignisse. Die Biographien der einzelnen Gelehrten werden als Summe ihrer Ereignisse erfasst, sodass ein Zugang sowohl über die Person selbst als auch über die Ereignisse ermöglicht wird. Die stark strukturierten Daten der einzelnen Professoren_innen und Lehrenden der Universität Mainz dienen hierbei als Basis für eine Vielzahl von interdisziplinären Fragestellungen (Vgl. Auge 2013): Welche Karrierewege sind typisch oder treten gehäuft auf? Lässt sich ein Karrieremuster feststellen? Welche wissenschaftlichen oder verwandtschaftlichen Netzwerke innerhalb der einzelnen Fachbereiche und/oder auf universitärer Ebene lassen sich identifizieren? Durch welche Mitgliedschaften in Vereinen, Interessensverbänden oder politischen Parteien nehmen die Professoren_innen Einfluss auf die Gesellschaft jenseits des akademischen Feldes (Beispielhaft hierfür Göllnitz 2013)? Durch die ereignisbasierte Modellierung der Personendaten profitieren also nicht nur die regionalgeschichtliche und biographische Forschung, sondern auch die Universitäts- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte von 
               Gutenberg Biographics.
                
         
         
            Datenstruktur 
            
               Verwendet wird das Cultural Heritage Framework der Akademie der Wissenschaften Mainz (Schrade 2017). Dieses ermöglicht eine hohe Flexibilität der Datenmodellierung, sodass es auch an zukünftige Fragestellungen oder Ereignisse angepasst werden kann. Für die insgesamt knapp 1650 
                    Personendatensätze
               1
                 (vgl. Eckert 2017) werden zum einen die Stammdaten bestehend aus einer System-ID, dem Namen und Namensvarianten, Lebensdaten, Konfession und Fachgebieten erfasst. Zum anderen wird jeder Personendatensatz sowie alle Orte und Körperschaften mit der jeweiligen eindeutigen Identifikationsnummer verknüpft. Personen werden zusätzlich auch über die VIAF identifiziert. Die einzelnen Ereignisse werden nach der Ereignisart, dem Datum und einer zugehörigen Rolle, welche der Handelnde einnimmt, strukturiert. Ergänzt werden diese Informationen um in Beziehung stehende Entitäten, Orte, Personen und Fachbereiche bzw. Institute sowie um archivische Quellen und Literatur. Durch die Verwendung einer 
                    GND-BEACON-Datei
               2
                werden verschiedene Projekte und bibliographische Informationen miteinander verknüpft und aufeinander bezogen. Die verwendeten Personendatensätze der GND werden zu Tp-Sätzen des Kategorisierungslevels 1 aufgearbeitet und fehlende Einträge innerhalb des Normdatenkatalogs ergänzt. So verfügen alle verzeichneten Professoren nach Abschluss des Projekts über eine eindeutige standardisierte ID, die im Rahmen von Semantic Web und Linked Open Data weiterverwendet werden kann.
            
         
         
            FAIRness
            
               Gutenberg Biographics
               legt großen Wert auf Datenstandards und Normdaten sowie auf die Offenheit und gute Nachnutzbarkeit aller im Projekt erschlossenen Forschungsdaten. Hierzu werden die Daten in standardkonformen Formaten über mehrere Schnittstellen (BEACON, TEI/XML, OpenSearch) zur freien Nachnutzung angeboten und somit die 
                    FAIR-Prinzipien
               3
                angewendet. 
            
            
               F
               INDABLE:
            
            
               Dank persistenter Identifikatoren und Permalinks können die einzelnen Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) der Datensätze von 
               Gutenberg Biographics
                sowohl von Maschinen als auch durch den Menschen langfristig im Web gefunden werden. Zur besseren Auffindbarkeit von Ressourcen wird eine BEACON-Datei, welche mit den Normdaten der Gelehrten versehen ist, verwendet.
            
            
               A
               CCESSIBLE: 
            
            
               Gutenberg Biographics
               besitzt verschiedene offene Schnittstellen, über welche die Forschungsdaten bereitgestellt werden. Neben einer 
               
               RESTful-API steht eine Open Search-Schnittstelle zur Verfügung.
               4
            
            
               I
               NTEROPERABLE:
            
            
               Die Forschungsdaten liegen zum Austausch in standardkonformen TEI/XML vor. Auch die Präsentationsschicht der Anwendung bietet die Forschungsdaten in strukturierter Form unter Zuhilfenahme der 
                    schema.org
               5
                Ontologie an. Dank der Verwendung sowohl von Normdaten in Form von GND und VIAF als auch einer BEACON-Datei, ist 
               Gutenberg Biographics
                zu anderen Professorenkatalogen, Lexika oder bibliographischen Katalogen kompatibel. 
            
            
               R
               EUSABLE:
            
            
               Abgesehen von den verwendeten Fotographien stehen alle Daten unter der Creativ Commons Lizenz CC-BY 4.0. Die offenen Daten können somit unter Nennung des Urhebers durch Dritte weiterverwendet und bearbeitet werden.
            
         
         
            Perspektiven
            
               Geplant, aber bisher noch nicht umgesetzt, ist ein weiterer Zugang mittels Einbindung von Geoinformationssystemen und historischen Kartenmaterialien, der eine weitere Herangehensweise zur Beantwortung von historischen Fragestellungen mit digitalen Methoden ermöglicht. Weiterhin ist angedacht, die Forschungsdaten zukünftig auch in einer CIDOC CRM Modellierung zur Verfügung zu stellen 
                    (unter Verwendung des Erlangen CRM/OWL)
               6. 
                    Gutenberg Biographics
               leistet somit einen wertvollen Beitrag als Provider von strukturierten (Forschungs-) Daten für die Geschichts- und Kulturwissenschaften im Sinne der Digitalen Geisteswissenschaften. Ein nächster und notwendiger Schritt wäre sicherlich, möglichst viele digitale Gelehrtenverzeichnisse im Rahmen einer gemeinsamen Plattform zusammenzuführen. Hierfür muss jedoch eine einheitliche Basis der Modellierung bspw. in Form von katalogübergreifenden Standards und Schnittstellen gefunden werden, welche eine Zusammenführung der unterschiedlichen methodischen Grundlagen der einzelnen Kataloge (vgl. Schrade 2016: 19) ermöglicht. Durch einen interoperablen Zusammenschluss aller Professorenkataloge kann das Potential der in ihnen enthaltenen Biographien noch besser für die (historische) Forschung genutzt werden.
            
         
      
      
         
             Die Zahl setzt sich zusammen aus rund 750 Professoren_innen, die bis 1973 an die Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz berufen worden sind und weiteren rund 900 Professoren aus der frühneuzeitlichen Mainzer Universität (1477-1798/1823). Bis Januar 2019 konnten bereits mehr als 700 Datensätze veröffentlicht werden.
            
               https://github.com/digicademy/beaconizer
            
            
               https://www.force11.org/group/fairgroup
            
            
               http://gutenberg-biographics.ub.uni-mainz.de/daten.html
            
            
               https://schema.org/
            
            
               http://erlangen-crm.org/
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Auge, Oliver / Piotrowski, Swantje (2013):
                  Professorenkataloge 2.0 – Ansätze und Perspektiven webbasierter Forschung in der gegenwärtigen Universitäts- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte, 
                        in: Jahrbuch für Universitätsgeschichte 16: 143-339.
                    
               
                  Eckert, Karin / George, Christian / Hüther, Frank (2017):
                  Gutenberg Biographics: Eine biographische Online-Datenbank zur Mainzer Universitätsgeschichte, 
                        in: ABI Technik – Zeitschrift für Automation, Bau und Technik im Archiv-, Bibliotheks- und Informationswesen 37, 3:  171-178 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.1515/abitech-2017-0041
                   [letzter Zugriff 08. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Göllnitz, Martin (2013):
                  Das ‚Kieler Gelehrtenverzeichnis‘ in der Praxis: Karrieren von Hochschullehrern im Dritten Reich zwischen Parteizugehörigkeit und Wissenschaft, 
                        in: 
                        Auge, Oliver / Piotrowski, Swantje (eds.):
                  Professorenkataloge 2.0 – Ansätze und Perspektiven webbasierter Forschung in der gegenwärtigen Universitäts- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte. 
                        Jahrbuch für Universitätsgeschichte 16. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag 291-312.
                    
               
                  Pfeiffer, Barbara (2013):
                  Über Zweck und Nutzen der Gemeinsamen Normdatei, 
                        in: 
                        Auge, Oliver / Piotrowski, Swantje (eds.):
                  Professorenkataloge 2.0 – Ansätze und Perspektiven webbasierter Forschung in der gegenwärtigen Universitäts- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte. 
                        Jahrbuch für Universitätsgeschichte 16. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag 251-259.
                    
               
                  Schrade, Torsten (2016):
                  Deutsche Professorenkataloge. Perspektiven, Möglichkeiten, Potentiale zur Interoperabilität
                  
                     https://digicademy.github.io/presentation-catalogus-professorum/#/step-1
                   [letzter Zugriff 08. Januar 2019].
                    
               
                  Schrade, Torsten (2017):
                  Sammlungs- und Editionsportale mit dem Cultural Heritage Framework der Digitalen Akademie. Ein Werkstattbericht.
                  
                     https://digicademy.github.io/2017-editionsportale-jena/#/step-1
                   [letzter Zugriff 08. Januar 2019].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         „I meant my notebooks to be a storehouse of materials for future use and nothing else” (Maugham 1949: xiv) schreibt der englische Dramatiker William Somerset Maugham in seinem Vorwort 
                A Writer’s Notebook über den Zweck seiner Notizbücher. 
                Notizbücher werden in unterschiedlichen Disziplinen verwendet: Schriftsteller, Künstler und Wissenschaftler halten ihre unmittelbaren Eindrücke und Ideen in Form von schriftlichen Notizen und flüchtigen Skizzen fest (Radecke 2013: 161). Diese werden zu einem späteren Zeitpunkt zur Ausführung eines Werkes herangezogen oder erweisen sich als Sackgasse und werden wieder verworfen. 
            
         Obwohl Notizbücher zum einen eine reiche Quelle an Informationen zur Entstehungsgeschichte von Werken liefern und zum anderen in ihrer Objekthaftigkeit als eigenständiges Meta(kunst)werk betrachtet werden können, gibt es nur wenige Editionsvorhaben – gedruckt oder digital – die sich der Herausforderung Notizbuch stellen. Zu den wenigen Projekten, die sich ausschließlich den Notizen eines Akteurs widmen, zählen die Hybrid-Edition von 
                Theodor Fontanes Notizbüchern (Radecke 2013) oder 
                Paul Klee - Bildnerische Form- und Gestaltungslehre (Eggelhöfer & Keller 2012). Als Beispiele für die Berücksichtigung von Notizen als Teil von umfassenderen Editionsprojekten seien hier stellvertretend die digitale Faksimile-Ausgabe Nietzschesource (D’Iorio 2009), die 
                Digital Edition of Fernando Pessoa (Sepúlveda & Henny-Krahmer 2017), die 
                Beckett-Edition (Van Hulle & Nixon 2018) oder das digitale Archiv 
                eMunch (Munch Museum 2011-2015) genannt.
            
         Das hier verwendete Korpus entstand als Teil einer Dissertation zur Erschließung und Untersuchung der Notizbücher des österreichischen bildenden Künstlers Hartmut Skerbisch (1945-2009) mit digitalen Methoden. Dabei handelt es sich um 35 Notizbücher, die knapp 40 Jahre künstlerischer Tätigkeit zwischen 1969 und 2008 auf insgesamt 2200 Seiten dokumentieren. Die im Zuge der Forschungsarbeit entstandene digitale Edition steht – derzeit in einer Betaversion – unter 
                
               https://gams.uni-graz.at/skerbisch
             im Geisteswissenschaftlichen Asset Management System (GAMS) des Zentrums für Informationsmodellierung der Universität Graz zur freien Verfügung und soll im Laufe des Jahres 2019 finalisiert werden.
            
         GAMS ist ein OAIS-konformes Asset-Management-System zur Verwaltung, Publikation und Langzeitarchivierung digitaler Ressourcen das sich an den FAIR Data Principles orientiert (Stigler & Steiner 2018: 209-211). 
                Damit wird eine gleichermaßen künstlerische und wissenschaftliche Ressource digital erschlossen und verfügbar gemacht, die bislang für die Öffentlichkeit unzugänglich war.
            
         Skerbisch befasste sich mit konzeptioneller Kunst, Medienkunst und Objektkunst und entzieht sich einer eindeutigen Zuordnung zu einer bestimmten Kunstrichtung. Seine 35 Notizbücher sind jedoch ohne Zweifel 
                konzeptionell (Sol LeWitt 1967; Kosuth 1969): Diese nutzte er für die Konzeption und Entwicklung seiner künstlerischen Ideen, seiner Gedankenexperimente, seines allgemeinen Verständnisses für künstlerische Konzepte und die Detailplanung seiner ausgeführten Kunstwerke, sowohl in textueller als auch grafischer Form. 
            
         Das Werk von Skerbisch reflektiert neben der grundsätzlichen Faszination für Technik und Wissenschaft zeitlebens Einflüsse aus Literatur, Musik und bildender Kunst. Er stellte die Materialität und die Weiterentwicklung des Raumbegriffs gegenüber der ästhetischen Hülle in den Vordergrund (Holler-Schuster 2015: 170; Scholger 2015: 83-86).
         Im Zusammenhang mit einer digitalen Repräsentation der Notizbuchinhalte stellen sich folgende Forschungsfragen: 
         
            a) Wie kann eine digitale Aufbereitung der Notizbücher zum Erkenntnisprozess über das Kunstwerk beitragen? 
            Besonders für die Rezeption und die Vermittlung zeitgenössischer Kunst erweisen sich Notizen als wertvolle Quelle: Auf Arbeiten mit neuen Medien und Materialien, in denen die Ästhetik des Werks nicht im Vordergrund steht, reagiert das Publikum oft verunsichert und verständnislos. Eine editorische Aufbereitung von Notizbüchern vermag jedoch Antworten und Erklärungen zugänglich zu machen, die das Kunstwerk bzw. der Künstler / die Künstlerin zum Zeitpunkt der Aus- oder Aufführung – mitunter auch durchaus bewusst – schuldig bleibt.  
            
         
            b) Wie können Notizbücher dazu beitragen, eine Werksidee, die nie zur Ausführung gekommen ist, oder eine Installation, die verloren gegangen ist, zu rekonstruieren? 
            Eine weitere Funktion von Notizbüchern gerade im Kontext zeitgenössischer Kunst ist jene der Dokumentation, insbesondere bei temporären und performativen Kunstwerken: Möglich wird damit eine – wenn auch nicht lückenlose – Rekonstruktion nicht zur Ausführung gelangter Werksideen und nicht mehr in ihrer Gesamtheit erhaltener Kunstwerke, deren Einzelteile oftmals für andere Installationen weiterverwendet wurden, oder die sogar nur noch durch Fotos, Berichte und Aussagen von Zeitgenossen dokumentiert sind.
            
         
            c) Welche Assoziationsprozesse fließen in die Werkkonzeption ein?
            Die Notizbücher enthalten eine Reihe an Querverweisen untereinander sowie Referenzen auf Kunstwerke, Personen, Literatur und Musik in Form von direkten oder indirekten Nennungen oder Zitaten. Mit dem Einbringen zusätzlichen Wissens durch Markup wird die Ressource inhaltlich erschlossen und stellt damit ein Werkzeug bereit, das den systematischen Interpretationsvorgang erleichtert und es ermöglicht, die Genese von Ideen, Assoziationen und Konzepten nachzuzeichnen. 
            
         Der Beitrag widmet sich den Resultaten dieser Forschungsfragen an die digital edierten Notizbücher von Hartmut Skerbisch und 1) präsentiert auf die Notizbücher angewandte Methoden, 2) zeigt die daraus gewonnenen Erkenntnisse und Ergebnisse und 3) versucht eine generelle Ableitung der verwendeten Methoden und Anwendbarkeit auf vergleichbare Quellen. Schließlich sollen die aus der digitalen Edition gewonnenen Erfahrungen in Bezug auf die digitale Repräsentation thematisiert werden: Welche Methoden erwiesen sich als effektiv, oder aber als wenig erkenntnisbringend in Relation zum geleisteten Ressourcenaufwand.
         Methoden
         Textkodierung/Textrepräsentation mit TEI
         Die angemessene digitale Repräsentation der textuellen Notizbucheinträge, die in etwa zwei Drittel des Korpus ausmachen, erfordert ein geeignetes Textmodell. Dieses Textmodell muss dem der Quelle inhärenten pluralistischen Charakter (Sahle 2013: 45-49) der Textgattung Notizbuch gerecht werden. So gilt es die Notizen inhaltlich, strukturell, materiell und visuell zu erfassen. Diese Anforderungen konnten weitgehend mittels des Standards der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) abgedeckt werden, insbesondere mit dem Modul 11 zur Repräsentation von Primärquellen (TEI Consortium 2018: „Representation of Primary Sources“), das Empfehlungen zur Verzeichnung von Faksimiles, zur Verknüpfung von Text und Faksimile sowie dem Umgang mit einfachen und erweiterten Elementen für die Transkription zur Kodierung von Interventionen sowohl am Text als auch am Textträger (Streichungen, Hinzufügungen, unklare Stellen, Beschädigungen, Textumstellungen etc.) gibt. Die Eingriffe am Text lassen sich in Anlehnung an die Methode der 
                critique génétique weitgehend in TEI erfassen (Burnard et al. 2008; Brüning et al. 2013). Gerade bei Künstlernotizen steht jedoch nicht die Textgenese, sondern vielmehr die Genese einer künstlerischen Idee, eines Konzepts, im Fokus.
            
         Kodierung von Skizzen in TEI und RDF
         Neben dem Text sind es besonders Skizzen, die von Skerbisch zur Konzeption und Planung von Kunstwerken als Ausdrucksform eingesetzt wurden. Diese reichen von flüchtigen Skizzen bis hin zu detaillierten Zeichnungen mit Materialangaben und Abmessungen zur Ausführung. Sie nehmen in etwa ein Drittel der Notizbücher ein und bedürfen daher einer besonderen Betrachtung. Aus diesem Grund braucht es neben dem Textmodell ein Modell zur form- und inhaltsbezogenen Beschreibung von Skizzen, das die grafische Komponenten, die Textfunktionen und die Interpretationsebene berücksichtigt (siehe Abb. 1). 
         
            
            
               Abbildung 1. Modell zur Beschreibung von grafischen Komponenten
				
         
         Für die formale Beschreibung der grafischen Komponenten ist es nicht ausreichend, lediglich die Existenz von Skizzen im Text zu verzeichnen oder als illustrativen Zusatz zum Text zu verstehen. Vielmehr müssen die Skizzen sowohl als solitäre Einheit als auch in Verbindung mit dem Text stehend beschrieben werden können. Dazu wurden die Möglichkeiten der TEI und jene der Beschreibung von Ressourcen über das Resource Description Framework (RDF) kombiniert und ein eigenes Modell im Rahmen des Editionsprojektes entwickelt. Es beschreibt die grafischen Komponenten (Typ, Ansicht, Zeichenwerkzeug, Form, Datierung, Informationsträger), die Textfunktionen (Beschriftung, Titel, Beschreibung, Abmessung, Materialbezeichnung) und die Interpretationen (Kommentar, Bildgenese sowie Relationen zu Notizbucheinträgen, externen Referenzen, Manifestationen, Konzepten).
         Entitäten über RDF beschreiben
         Um die zahlreichen Relationen zwischen den Notizen untereinander aber auch von einzelnen Einträgen zu Entitäten in der real existierenden Welt – wie zu Personen, Literatur, Tonträgern und Kunstwerken – zu verzeichnen braucht es ein Modell, das diese Beziehungen abbildet und operationalisierte Abfragen auf diese Wissensbasis zulässt. Durch die Verknüpfung der Notizbucheinträge mit sachbezogenen Zusatzinformationen in Registern und Thesauri entsteht ein Informationsnetzwerk, das die individuellen Einträge in einen breiteren Kontext einbindet (Vogeler 2015). Diese Aussagen werden als RDF in einem Triple Store gespeichert und über SPARQL-Anfragen die Beziehungen zwischen Einheiten sichtbar gemacht. Neben der Anwendung des Referenzmodells CIDOC-CRM (Le Boeuf et al. 2018) werden, wo möglich, bestehende Authority Files wie die GND (Deutsche Nationalbibliothek 2012-2019), VIAF (OCLC 2012-2019), der Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus (Getty Research Institute 2019) etc. integriert, um Konzepte formal zu beschreiben und dem Prinzip des 
                Linked Open Data zu folgen. 
            
         Ergebnisse
         Dieser Beitrag kombiniert methodische Ansätze – gewonnen aus der konkreten Arbeit an der digitalen Edition der Notizbücher von Hartmut Skerbisch – und versucht diese zu allgemeinen Aussagen zu formulieren, die für die Anwendung auf ähnliche Quellen herangezogen werden können. 
         Textgenese auf Dokumentebene
         Obwohl die Textkonstitution der Notizbucheinträge meist eine untergeordnete Rolle spielt, hat der Blick auf spezifische Editionsmethoden – wie jene der critique génétique – gezeigt, wie sich bestimmte Textsequenzen durch nachträgliche Interventionen durch den Künstler sinngemäß verändern.
         Text- und Ideengenese auf Korpusebene
         Textentwicklungen können bei Skerbisch nicht nur über direkte Textinterventionen am Dokument beobachtet werden, sondern auch über mehrere Notizbuchseiten innerhalb eines Heftes und sogar über das gesamte Korpus hinweg. Seine Methode sich einem Thema anzunähern, war auffallend oft eine Vielzahl an Wiederholungen, die er in den Notizbüchern verzeichnete (siehe Abb. 2). 
         
            
            
               Abbildung 2. Wiederholung und Modifikation einer Phrase in mehreren Notizbüchern
				
         
         Entwicklung einer Idee
         Eine zentrale Rolle in der Auswertung und Interpretation der Notizbücher spielt die Entwicklung einer Idee. Skerbischs Werke entstanden über einen langen Zeitraum intensiver Beschäftigung mit den Themen, die er vermitteln wollte. Hier entsteht ein Informationsnetzwerk aus Notizbucheinträgen, künstlerischen Manifestationen, physischen Objekten, externen Einflüssen aus der Literatur und werkübergreifenden künstlerischen Konzepten, das nur über die elektronische Erschließung des Materials zusammengefügt werden kann (siehe Abb. 3).
         
            
            
               Abbildung 3. Entwicklung einer Idee
				
         
         Das Editionsmodell eignet sich für Textgattungen mit ähnlichen materiellen, formalen und inhaltlichen Eigenschaften, wie a) fragmentarische Einträge, b) grafische Darstellungen, die als Bedeutungsträger einer gesonderten Betrachtung bedürfen, c) Referenzen auf externe Werke aus Literatur, Kunst und Musik, d) Namens- und Ortsnennungen, e) Verzeichnung von Zitaten, f) Textinterventionen sowie g) Text- und Ideengenese.
         Die Zusammenführung unterschiedlicher Methoden (Textrepräsentation mit TEI, Formalisierung der Skizzen mit TEI und RDF, Beschreibung von Entitäten mit RDF) ermöglicht es die Entwicklung spezifischer Ideen nachzuvollziehen. Das Ergebnis ist eine umfangreiche Dokumentation des kreativen Prozesses, von der konzeptionellen Notiz zur künstlerischen Manifestation.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Allemang, Dean / Hendler, James (2011): 
                  Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist. Effective Modeling in RDFS and OWL. Oxford: Elsevier.
                    
               
                  Burnard, Lou / Jannidis, Fotis / Pierazzo, Elena / Rehbein, Malte (2008-2013):
                  An Encoding Model for Genetic Editions. 
                        http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Council/Working/tcw19.html 
                    
               
                  Brüning, Gerrit / Henzel, Katrin / Pravida, Dietmar (2013):
                  Multiple Encoding in Genetic Editions: The Case of ‘Faust’, 
                        in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 4 http://jtei.revues.org/697
                    
               
                  Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (2012–2019): 
                  GND – Gemeinsame Normdatei, https://www.dnb.de/gnd 
                    
               
                  D’Iorio, Paolo (2009): 
                  Nietzschesource. 
                        http://www.nietzschesource.org/
               
               
                  Eggelhöfer, Fabienne / Keller Tschirren, Marianne (2012):
                  Paul Klee – Bildnerische Form- und Gestaltungslehre. 
                        
                     http://www.kleegestaltungslehre.zpk.org
                  
               
               
                  Getty Research Institute (2018): 
                  Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT). 
                        https://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/index.html
               
               
                  Holler-Schuster, Günther (2015):
                  Hartmut Skerbisch’s work between media art and land art, 
                        in: 
                        Verein der Freunde von Hartmut Skerbisch (ed.):
                  Hartmut Skerbisch. Life and Work. Present as Present. 
                        Wien: Verlag für moderne Kunst 142-171.
                    
               
                  Kosuth, Joseph (1969a):
                  Art after philosophy I, 
                        in: Studio International (915): 134-37.
                    
               
                  Le Boeuf, Patrick / Doerr, Martin / Emil Ore, Christian / Stead, Stephen (2018):
                  Definition of the CIDOC Conceputal Reference Model. 
                        Version 6.2.4. 
                        http://www.cidoc-crm.org/sites/default/files/2018-10-26%23CIDOC%20CRM_v6.2.4_esIP.pdf
               
               
                  LeWitt, Sol (1967):
                  Paragraphs on Conceptual Art, 
                        in: Artforum 5 (10): 80-84.
                    
               
                  Maugham, William Somerset (1949): 
                  A writer's notebook, Melbourn-London-Toronto: William Heinemann.
                    
               
                  Munch Museum (2011-2015): 
                  eMunch. Edvard Munchs Tekster. Digitalt Arkiv. 
                        http://www.emunch.no
               
               
                  OCLC - Online Computer Library Center (2010–2016): 
                  VIAF – Virtual International Authority File, https://viaf.org/.
                    
               
                  Radecke, Gabriele (2013):
                  Notizbuch-Editionen. Zum philologischen Konzept der Genetisch-kritischen und kommentierten Hybrid-Edition von Theodor Fontanes Notizbüchern, 
                        in: editio 27 149-172. 10.1515/editio-2013-010
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013):
                  Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 3: Textbegriffe und Recodierung, 
                        in: Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 9. Norderstedt: Books on Demand.
                    
               
                  Scholger, Martina (2015):
                  Tracing the association processes of the Artist – The artwork as a commentary, 
                        in: 
                        Verein der Freunde von Hartmut Skerbisch (ed.): 
                  Hartmut Skerbisch. Life and Work. Present as Present. Wien: Verlag für moderne Kunst 305-3.
                    
               
                  Sepúlveda, Pedro / Henny-Krahmer, Ulrike (2017): 
                  Fernando Pessoa – Digitale Edition. Projekte und Publikationen. 
                        http://www.pessoadigital.pt
               
               
                  Stigler, Johannes Hubert / Steiner, Elisabeth (2018):
                  GAMS – Eine Infrastruktur zur Langzeitarchivierung und Publikation geisteswissenschaftlicher Forschungsdaten, 
                        in: Mitteilungen der Vereinigung Österreichischer Bibliothekarinnen und Bibliothekare 71 (1), 207-216. 
                        
                     https://doi.org/10.31263/voebm.v71i1.1992
                  
               
               
                  TEI Consortium (2018): 
                  TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.4.0.
                  http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/3.4.0/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/
               
               
                  Van Hulle, Dirk / Nixon, Mark (2019):
                  Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project.
                  
                     http://www.beckettarchive.org/
                  
               
               
                  
                  Vogeler, Georg (2015):
                  Warum werden mittelalterliche und frühneuzeitliche Rechnungsbücher eigentlich nicht digital editiert?, 
                        in: Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities, edited by Constanze Baum and Thomas Stäcker. Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften 1. 10.17175/sb001_007
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Dieses Poster stellt ein Annotationssystem für graphische Narrative vor. Mittels einer auf Java basierten graphischen Oberfläche sind Annotator_innen in der Lage, graphische Narrative und andere statische Bild/Text-Medien in XML zu annotieren. Grundlage für die hier verwendete XML-basierte Annotationssprache, „Graphic Novel Markup Language“, kurz GNML, ist die von John Walsh entwickelte, auf TEI basierende, „Comic Book Markup Language“, kurz CBML. Abbildung 1 zeigt einen Überblick über die in GNML darstellbaren Objekt-Typen und deren Beziehungen.
         Das System ermöglicht Annotator_innen die Annotation verbaler und visueller Repräsentation auf der Comicseite; dazu zählen unter anderem Panels, Charaktere, Sprechblasen, Captions, Erzähltext, Sprechtext, Onomatopoeia und diegetischer Text. Figurenkonstellationen können über verschiedene spezialisierte Interaktionsmuster festgehalten werden. Darüber hinaus erfassen narratologische Tools eine Übersicht über subjektive Filterung einer Erzählsituation (Fokalisierung), Diegese einer Erzählsituation sowie die Hierarchisierung von Erzählwelten.
         
            
            Abbildung 1. Überblick über die verschiedenen Objekt-Typen in GNML
         
         Features
         Das Annotieren wird Nutzern durch die Automatisierung einiger Prozesse erleichtert. So lokalisiert das Annotationssystem auf Basis von Verfahren, wie z.B. dem aus der Computergraphik bekannten Marching Squares Algorithmus, die Konturen der Panels. Einfachere Strukturen wie z.B. Sprechblasen oder Captions müssen vom Nutzer nur durch einen einfachen Klick auf den Hintergrund selektiert werden, so dass danach mit Hilfe eines Floodfill-Verfahrens die komplette Sprechblase erkannt wird. Komplexere Repräsentationen wie Charaktere können mithilfe einer auf der Livewire Segmentation (Mortensen & Barrett, 1995), die beim ungenauen Umranden eines Charakters sich an dessen kontrastreiche Kanten heftet und so die Kontur des Charakters genau erfasst, effizient graphisch annotiert werden. Eine automatische Texterkennung ist derzeit noch nicht integriert, da diese aufgrund der schwer zu erfassenden, oft verwendeten pseudo-handschriftlichen Fonts noch keine befriedigenden Ergebnisse liefert. Dieser wird aber hoffentlich für spätere Versionen in einer ausreichenden Qualität entweder direkt integriert in den Editor oder als optionaler Vorverarbeitungsschritt verfügbar sein. Um aber dennoch die Fehlerrate bei der manuellen Eingabe der Texte und Charakter-Namen möglichst gering zu halten, sind Mechanismen wie eine automatische Rechtschreibprüfung oder Autovervollständigung eingebaut.
         Die Beta-Version des Annotationssystems wurde zusammen mit einer Gruppe von Studierenden am „Graphic Narrative Corpus“ (GNC), dem ersten digitalen Korpus für englischsprachige graphische Narrative, getestet (Dunst, Hartel, & Laubrock, 2017). Eines der Hauptziele des Annotationssystems ist die quantitative Analyse, welche auch und vor allem etablierte narratologische Terminologie auf empirische Evidenzen hin prüft. Die Operationalisierung bestehender narratologischer Diskurse in einer für digitale und quantitative Forschung optimierten Testumgebung erfordert die umfassende Gestaltung einer narratologischen Annotationsebene. Grundlage dieser Annotationsebene sind sowohl Theorien der kognitiven und transmedialen Narratologie als auch empirische Daten, die mithilfe des vorgestellten Annotationssystems erhoben und anschließend analysiert wurden. 
         Abbildung 2 zeigt die Oberfläche des Annotationssystems mit einer Beispielannotation.
         
            
            Abbildung 2. Graphische Oberfläche und Beispielannotation des Comics „Pepper & Carrot“ (Revoy, 2017)
         
         Ausblick
         Durch die quantitative Operationalisierung etablierter qualitativer narratologischer Terminologie fördert das Annotationssystem die Erweiterung digitaler und quantitativer Methodologien in den Geisteswissenschaften. Komplexe Text-Bild-Interaktionen in graphischen Narrativen werden so mithilfe des Annotationssystems der Analyse von größeren Korpora eröffnet und ermöglichen eine weitreichende digitale Analyse multimodaler Narrative. Gleichzeitig trägt die evidenzbasierte Untersuchung dieser Elemente in zweierlei Hinsicht zu einem besseren Verständnis theoretischer Modelle bei: Zum einen zeigen die annotierten Daten die Möglichkeiten und Grenzen traditioneller Begrifflichkeiten an konkreten Analysebeispielen auf; zum anderen bietet die Auseinandersetzung von Annotator_innen mit komplex erzählten graphischen Narrativen (beispielsweise im Seminarkontext) einen hohen didaktischen Wert insofern, als dass sich Annotator_innen anhand von Fallbeispielen mit narratologischen Konzepte und Problemen kritisch auseinandersetzen.
         Die letzte Version des Annotationssystems ist frei verfügbar unter:
         
            http://graphic-literature.upb.de/?page_id=3592
         
         Eine FAQ zum Annotieren mit dem Programm ist zu finden unter:
         
            http://graphic-literature.upb.de/?page_id=4123
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Dunst, A. / Hartel, R. / Laubrock, J. (2017): The Graphic Narrative Corpus (GNC): Design, Annotation, and Analysis for the Digital Humanities. 2nd International Workshop on coMics Analysis, Processing, and Understanding, 14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition. Kyoto, Japan.
                    
               
                  Mortensen, E. / Barrett, W. (1995): Intelligent scissors for image composition. Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (pp. 191-198). ACM.
                    
               
                  Revoy, D. (2017): Pepper & Carrot. Episode 21: The Magic Contest. (Pepper and Carrot) Retrieved 2018 10, from https://www.peppercarrot.com/en/article400/episode-21-the-magic-contest
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das Abstract im Kontext
            Die Autoren haben auf der DHd2019 einen Hackathon zum Book of Abstracts durchgeführt, in dessen Rahmen sich die Teilnehmenden nicht nur mit der digitalen Publikation, sondern auch mit der Normierung der biobibliographischen Angaben und den Potentialen einer inhaltlichen Analyse der Abstracts auseinander gesetzt haben. (Andorfer et al. 2019) Dieser Beitrag greift die Erkenntnisse der Veranstaltung auf und soll sowohl die konzeptuelle Auseinandersetzung als auch die konkrete Implementierung weiterführen sowie die im Nachgang des Workshops erfolgten Arbeiten präsentieren. Dabei werden im Sinne des Konferenzthemas insbesondere experimentelle Ansätze hervorgehoben. Zwei Aspekte der Konferenzabstracts stehen im Fokus des Beitrags: 1.) das Abstract als eigenständige und reputierliche Publikation und 2.) die Abstracts als Datenquelle selbstreflexiver Untersuchungsansätze in den DH. Die wissenschaftliche Relevanz der Book of Abstracts der DHd-Jahrestagung bekräftigte zuletzt noch einmal Sahle in seiner Einführung des letzten Konferenzbandes (Sahle 2019, S.): „Books of Abstracts als durch peer review-Verfahren gefilterte und qualitätsgesicherte Summen der aktuellen Forschungen definieren das Feld, sind ein äußerst nützliches Instrument der Fachkommunikation und wertvolle Dokumente zum Beleg der Entwicklung über die Zeit.“
         
         
            Das Abstract als Publikation
            Der Anspruch an die Veröffentlichung der Konferenzbeiträge wird in
dem bereits 2018 konstatierten „Status einer wissenschaftlich
nutzbaren Publikation“ (Vogeler 2018) deutlich und mit dem letzten
Band der DHd 2019 noch einmal unterstrichen (Sahle 2019): „Um das Ziel
ganz klar zu formulieren: die hier vorgelegten Abstracts sind
wissenschaftliche Texte eigenen Rechts, die auch bibliografisch
fassbar sein sollen, um die eigenen Forschungsgebiete und die
gewonnenen Erkenntnisse sichtbar machen zu können.“ Auf dem Weg zu
einer digitalen Publikation, die sowohl informationswissenschaftliche
Standards erfüllt als auch informationstechnologische Potentiale
ausreizt, ergeben sich zum jetzigen Stand noch viel Raum für
Entwicklung der Konferenzbeiträge (Cremer 2018). Die Book of Abstracts
werden als Gesamtband in einer Druckfassung sowie als PDF
publiziert. Daneben werden einzelne Beiträge von den Vortragenden auf
verschiedenen Repositorien oder Webseiten unsystematisch
veröffentlicht, darunter einzelne Abstracts, Poster, Präsentationen
oder zugrundeliegende Daten. Der Beitrag evaluiert die Möglichkeiten und Voraussetzungen für eine eigenständige Publikation der einzelnen Abstracts mit persistenter Speicherung, zitationsfähiger Adressierung, bibliografischer Erfassung und multipler Repräsentationsform (PDF, HTML, TEI). Dabei werden auch dezentrale (z.B. Zenodo-Community) und zentrale Ansätze (z.B. zentrale Redaktion, eigene Infrastruktur) verglichen. Gegenüber traditionellen Formaten und Infrastrukturkomponenten im Sinne einer reputierlichen und zitierfähigen Publikationsform sollen auch experimentelle Repräsentationsformen betrachtet werden, um die vorhandenen Spielräume digitaler Publikationen auszuloten. Als Ausgangspunkt ist hier die im Rahmen des Hackathons entwickelte Präsentationsschicht zu nennen.
            
         
         
            Das Abstract als Daten
            
Die Konferenzabstracts als TEI-basierte Veröffentlichungen demonstrieren ihr Potential als Untersuchungsgegenstand innerhalb des eigenen Faches (Sahle/Henny-Krahmer 2018; Hannesschläger/Andorfer 2018; Hoenen 2019; Kiefer 2019). Ein Desiderat der Untersuchungen bis dato ist die Betrachtung und Auswertung der in den Abstracts zitierten Literatur. Die Bibliographie wissenschaftlicher Artikel dient in der geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschung neben dem Nachweis der zitierten Literatur auch als Ressource für Recherche und Kontextualisierung (Andorfer, DWP 14, S. 24-25) sowie als Datenquelle für die Analyse von Publikations- und Zitationspraktiken (Nyhan/Duke-Williams 2014). Gerade in den Digital Humanities eröffnen sich durch die Verbindung mit Methoden der Netzwerkanalyse neue Untersuchungsansätze (Gao et al. 2018). Im Rahmen des Hackathons wurden die eingereichten Abstracts über Skripte automatisiert mit zusätzlichen Informationen angereichert sowie über manuelle Arbeiten in ihren Metadaten vereinheitlicht.
Die bibliographischen Angaben in den Abstracts lagen jedoch in zu heterogenen Formen vor, so dass Auswertungen und Visualisierungen nicht möglich waren. Für das Poster werden diese Daten mit Unterstützung der DHd-AG Digitales Publizieren vereinheitlicht und in der Folge durch die Autoren in ersten Analyseergebnissen und Visualisierungen ausgewertet. Die aufgezeigten Potentiale ließen sich zudem multiplizieren, wenn auch die Konferenzabstracts früherer und folgender DHd-Tagungen aufbereitet werden können, um so auch Entwicklungen und Tendenzen eruieren zu können.

         
         
            Das Abstract in der Diskussion
            Viele Jahre nach Christines Borgmans “Call to Action for the Humanities” (Borgman 2010), der auch das digitale Publizieren jenseits der simplen Konversion der Papiermedien in das PDF-Format inkludierte, werden auch in den Digital Humanities die Möglichkeiten nicht ausgeschöpft und traditionelle Praktiken gepflegt (Kaden/Kleineberg 2017) – von dem Wechsel einer layoutbasierten zu einer strukturbasierten Publikationstechnik ganz zu schweigen (Stäcker 2013). Die DHd-Konferenzabstracts bergen dabei das Potential dieses Paradigma zu durchbrechen: die XML-basierte Einreichung, die datengestützten Analysemethoden und selbstreflexiven Ansätze des Faches, die technische Expertise der Einreichenden, die Kürze der Beiträge und die enge Vernetzung mit Infrastruktureinrichtungen. Das Poster soll auf die bisher erfolgten Arbeiten und die erzielten Ergebnisse aufmerksam machen sowie vor Ort die Diskussion um Möglichkeiten und Ressourcen sowie Relevanz und Reputation einer „erweiterten Publikation“ der DHd-Abstracts weiterführen. Die Autoren werden im Vorfeld der DHd2020 mit dem Organisationskomitee zur Anreicherung der diesjährigen Abstracts sowie Nutzung der HTML-Präsentationsschicht in Kontakt treten.
         
      
      
         
            
      DHd-Community bei Zenodo: 
            
            DHd 2019 Book of Abstracts Hackathon: 
    https://dhd-boas-app.acdh-dev.oeaw.ac.at
            
            
      Die aufbereiteten Daten sind zu finden unter: https://github.com/csae8092/dhd-boas-data.
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Andorfer, Peter  (2015): 
  Forschungsdaten in den (digitalen) Geisteswissenschaften. Versuch einer Konkretisierung, DARIAH-DE Working Papers, 14 
  urn:nbn:de:gbv:7-dariah-2015-7-2[letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Andorfer, Peter / Cremer, Fabian / Steyer, Timo  (2019): DHd 2019 Book of Abstracts Hackathon, in: 
  DHd 2019 Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts 
                  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Borgman, Christine L.  (2010): The Digital Future is Now: A Call to Action for the Humanities, in: 
  Digital Humanities Quarterly 003, Nr. 4.

               
                   Cremer, Fabian  (2018): Nun sag, wie hältst Du es mit dem Digitalen Publizieren, Digital Humanities?, in: 
  Blog. Digitale Redaktion (blog)
                  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Gao, J. / Duke-Williams, O. / Mahony, S. / Ramdarshan Bold, M. / Nyhan, J.  (2017):The Intellectual Structure of Digital Humanities: An Author Co-Citation Analysis, in: 
  Digital Humanities 2017
                   [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Hall, Mark  (2019): DH is the Study of dead Dudes, in:
  Hd 2019: multimedial & multimodal Konferenzabstracts: 111-113
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Hannesschläger, Vanessa / Andorfer, Peter  (2018): 
  Menschen gendern? Datenmodellierung zur Erhebung von Geschlechterverteilung am Beispiel der TEI2016 Abstracts App
                  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Henny-Krahmer, Ulrike / Sahle, Patrick  (2019): Einreichungen zur DHd 2018, in: 
  DHd-Blog (blog), 29. März 2019 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Hoenen, Armin  (2019): Einreichungen zur DHd 2019 II, in: 
  DHd-Blog (blog), 29. März 2019 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Kaden, Ben / Kleineberg, Michael  (2019): Zur Situation des digitalen geisteswissenschaftlichen Publizierens – Erfahrungen aus dem DFG-Projekt ‚Future Publications in den Humanities‘, in: 
  Bibliothek Forschung und Praxis 41, Nr. 1 (2017): 7–14 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Kiefer, Katharina  (2019): Einreichungen zur DHd 2019, in: 
  DHd-Blog (blog), 29. März 2019 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Nyhan, Julianne / Duke-Williams, Oliver  (2014): Joint and Multi-Authored Publication Patterns in the Digital Humanities, in:
  Literary and Linguistic Computing 29, Nr. 3 (1. September 2014) 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Sahle, Patrick (ed.)  (2019): 
  DHd 2019 Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts. Frankfurt am Main: Zenodo, 2019 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Stäcker, Thomas  (2013): Wie schreibt man Digital Humanities richtig?, in: 
  Bibliotheksdienst 47, Nr. 1 
  [letzter Zugriff 30.08.2019].

               
                   Vogeler, Georg (ed.)  (2018): 
  DHd 2018: Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. Konferenzabstracts. Köln, Universität zu Köln, 2018.

            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die Infrastuktur und das Projekt
            Seit 2010 kooperieren das Wittgenstein Archiv der Universität Bergen und das Centrum für Informations- und Sprachverarbeitung der Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München in der Forschungsgruppe „Wittgenstein Advanced Search Group“ (WAST). Die Forschungsgruppe entwickelt Web-Frontends (FinderApps) und spezielle Suchwerkzeuge, die sich gut für die Forschung und Lehre im Bereich der Digital Humanities eignen. Ihre erste Suchmaschine, die FinderApp WiTTFind (wittfind.cis.lmu.de, siehe Abb. 1), die den von der UNESCO zum Weltkulturerbe (im Jahr 2017) erhobenen (Schmidt 2018) Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein durchsucht, gewann im Jahre 2014 der EU-Open-Humanity Award. Der Preis zeichnet Gruppen aus, die herausragende Technologie im Bereich der Humanities entwickelt haben. Die in der Forschergruppe programmierte FinderApp WiTTFind erlaubt es, mit hochqualifizierten, computerlinguistisch orientierten Suchwerkzeugen Nachlasstrans-kriptionen zu durchsuchen. Die Transkriptionen entstammen der 
                    Bergen Normalized Edition, die die Grundlage der Wittgenstein Edition bildet. Neben den gefundenen Treffern der Suchmaschine, werden in den Suchergebnissen von WiTTFind die Faksimile-Extrakte aus den Originaldokumenten angezeigt. So kann der Nutzer die „Aura“ der gefundenen Textstelle im Original studieren und nicht nur den transkribierten Text sehen.
                
            
               
                  
                   Abbildung 1: WiTTFind (http://wittfind.cis.lmu.de)
               
            
            Damit derNutzer auch den seitenweisen Kontext des Suchtreffers im Original studieren kann, wurde am CIS eine weitere WEB-Applikation entwickelt, der doppelseitige Reader. Dieser Reader ermöglicht es, vom Suchtreffer direkt an die entsprechende Stelle im entsprechenden Dokument des Originals zu springen. Im doppelseitigen Lesemodus kann der Nutzer in den Faksimile des originalen Dokuments blättern. Eine symmetrische Autovervollständigung gibt während der Suchanfrage einen statistischen und lexikalischen Zugang zu den Wörtern, die in der Edition vorkommen. Im Zentrum der Suche steht die selbstprogrammierte C++ Suchmaschine wf, die mit Hilfe von Vollformlexika (WiTTlex), verbessertem POS-Tagging und weiteren Metainformationen regelbasiertes Suchen erlaubt. Zum Aufspüren semantisch ähnlicher Textpassagen in der Edition gibt es das NLP-Tool WiTTSim.
            Die thematisch getrennten Aufgaben innerhalb der Infrastruktur der WAST-Tools (siehe Abb. 2) werden über REST-API’s von einzelnen Microservices realisiert, deren zentrale Datenhaltung über eine mongo Datenbank realisiert wird. Die Oberflächen der FinderApps werden mit HTML5, Javascript und Bootstraptechniken für WEB-Browser programmiert und möglichst browserunabhängig gehalten. 
            
               
                  
                   Abbildung 2: Infrastruktur der WAST-Tools (http://gitlab.cis.lmu.de)
               
            
            Alle Programme, Schnittstellen und Entwicklungen werden dokumentiert (siehe Abb. 3) und Tutorials für Anschlussprojekte entwickelt. So ist gewährleistet, dass die Tools und Suchmaschinen nachhaltig verwendet und auch für die Forschung und Lehre eingesetzt werden können. Als Versionskontrollsystem wird git verwendet.
            
               
                  
                   Abbildung 3: Dokumentation der WAST-Tools: http://wittfind.cis.uni-muenchen.de/wast/infrastruktur/index.html
                  
               
            
            Bei der Entwicklung der Infrastruktur der WAST-Tools wurden die strengen Vorgaben des EU-Open-Humanity Awards eingehalten: Forderungen nach Open-Source, interdisziplinäre Öffnung und Nachhaltigkeit. Diese Offenheit ermöglichte es weitere FinderApps für andere Wissenschaftsbereiche zu implementieren: GoetheFind (Faust-I und Faust-II Edition, Deutsches Textarchiv Berlin (XML-TEIP5, DTA Basis Format)), HistoFind (Briefwechsel Erzherzog Leopold Wilhelms an Kaiser Ferdinand III. aus dem Reichsarchiv Stockholm; Kooperation mit Historikern) und den OdysseeReader (Schreibprozess der zur Logisch-Philosophischen-Abhandlung führte; Kooperation mit Philosophen).
            In diesem Workshop werden die verwendeten Softwaretechnologien und computerlinguistischen Methoden im konkreten Einsatz vorgestellt. Den Teilnehmer*innen wird ein Debian-10 Container mit allen notwendigen Programmen, Tools und Dokumentation der gesamten Softwareinfrastruktur zur Verfügung gestellt. Innerhalb dieses Containers können die Teilnehmer*innen die einzelnen Tools der WAST-Projektgruppe kennenlernen und bekommen von den Projektmitarbeiter*innen kleine Aufgaben gestellt, die sie dann mit ihnen bearbeiten. So können sie die Arbeitsweise der WAST Infrastruktur konkret kennenlernen.
         
         
            Im Workshop werden folgende Datenformate, Tools und Programmierkonzepte vorgestellt und geübt
            Gitlab Projektmanagement und Continuous Integration, XML TEI-P5 Edition CISWAB, Faksimilestrukturierung und Texterkennung, lexikalische Arbeit, WEB-Oberfläche der FinderApps und Einsatz mit Micorservices, doppelseitiger Faksimilereader mit MongoDB, NLP-Tools zur semantischen Ähnlichkeitssuche, Vorstellung und Programmierung einer regelbasierten Suchmaschine und die Erstellung eines Dokumentationssystems mit Sphinx.
            
               Voraussetzungen an die Kursteilnehmer*innen
               Programmierkenntnisse (Grundkenntnisse): LINUX (Arbeit mit der UNIX-Shell), Python, XML, HTML, git, javascript, POS-Tagging.
               Da beim Workshop einige Entwickler der WAST-Tools anwesend sein werden, gibt es die Möglichkeit auch vertieft in die jeweilige Thematik einzusteigen.
            
            
               Gitlab Projektmanagement und Continuous Integration (Hadersbeck, Still)
               Im gesamten Projekt wird als Versionierungssystem git verwendet. Die Projektrepositories werden auf zwei unterschiedlichen Rechnern ausgerollt: Dem preview-Server für Tests und einem Projektserver für die offizielle Onlineversion. Es wird das in der Praxis bewährte „git branching model“ kombiniert mit einer „continuous integration“ Technik eingesetzt. Mit einer Feedbackapp können Nutzer Fehler melden oder Implementierungswünsche äußern, die in Issues innerhalb der Projektrepositories bearbeitet werden.
            
            
               XML TEI-P5 Edition CISWAB (Hadersbeck)
               Als Datenbasis für das WiTTFind Projekt wird die „Bergen Nachlass Edition“ (BNE) verwendet, die sich an den Richtlinien der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI-P5) orientiert. Im Workshop werden die wichtigen TEI-XML-Elemente der BNE vorgestellt.
                  
            
            
               Faksimilestrukturierung und Erkennung (Eisterhues, Landes)
               Da in den FinderApps neben den gefunden Textstellen auch die zugehörigen Faksimileextrakte aus der Edition dargestellt werden, sind Kenntnisse der Bildkoordinaten der Textstellen nötig. Diese Koordinaten werden mit Hilfe einer Kette von Bildverarbeitungstools ermittelt. Da bei Manuskripten und bei manuellen Änderungen in Dokumenten die automatische Zeichenerkennung unbrauchbare Ergebnisse liefert, wurden eigene Strategien entwickelt, die die Informationen aus der BNE nutzen. Im Workshop werden die eingesetzten Tools und Optimierungsstrategien vorgestellt.
            
            
               Lexikalische Arbeit (Lokale Grammatiken, Semantik) (Röhrer)
               Zur lemmatisierten Suche, Partikelverberkennung und semantischen Wortfeldern wurden spezielle Projektlexika entwickelt (Röhrer 2017). Die Lexika enthalten alle Wörter der zu durchsuchenden Edition und sind mit grammatischen Angaben und zum Teil mit zusätzlichen semantischen Informationen versehen. Diese Lexika und ein nachgestelltes optimiertes Part-of-Speech Tagging ist die Grundlage für die computerlinguistischen Methoden, die bei der regelbasierten Suche im Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein eingesetzt werden.
            
            
               Regelbasierte Suchmaschine (Babl)
               Im Zentrum der FinderApps steht die Suchmaschine wf, ein multithreaded C++ Programm, das viele Anfragemöglichkeiten zur Suche implementiert: Einwort und Mehrwortsuche (mit internem Rankingverfahren) und reguläre Ausdrücke kombiniert mit linguistischen Anfragen (Morphologische Eigenschaften, POS-Tags, semantische und syntaktische Tags). Für das Rankingverfahren wird für jeden Suchtreffer die Relevanz zur Suchanfrage berechnet. Die Qualität für jeden Suchtreffer, die Distanz zwischen den einzelnen Wörtern und unterschiedlichen Belohnungs- und Bestrafungsparametern, gehen in die Berechnung der Relevanz ein. Die Treffer werden dann nach dieser sortiert und auf der Website ausgegeben. Durch dieses neuartige Ranking kann nun auch nach verschiedenen Wörtern gesucht werden, die im Text nicht direkt hintereinander stehen müssen.
            
            
               NLP-Tool Semantische Ähnlichkeitssuche (Ullrich)
               Zur Extraktion von semantisch ähnlichen Bemerkungen wurde das Analysetool WiTTSim (Ullrich 2018) entwickelt, welches anhand von semantischen und syntaktischen Features ähnliche Texte identifiziert. Da die enorm hohe Anzahl von etwa 100.000 Features in Kombination mit den zu vergleichenden 54.000 Bemerkungen eine effiziente Suche unmöglich macht, wurde ein semantisches Clustering-Verfahren vorgeschaltet (Ullrich 2019), welches durch Dimensionsreduktion und Gruppierung der Texte die Rechenzeit der Ähnlichkeitssuche um den Faktor 100 beschleunigt.
            
            
               WEB-Oberfläche der FinderApps und Micorservices (Hadersbeck, Still)
               Zur Arbeit mit WiTTFind wird dem User eine WEB-basierte FinderApp zur Verfügung gestellt, die über REST-APIs und „internet microservices“ mit den WAST-Tools kommuniziert. HTML5, Javascript und Bootstrap-css erlauben den Aufbau der WEB-page, die nahezu browserunabhängig die Schnittstelle zum Anwender darstellt. 
            
            
               Doppelseitiger Faksimilereader und MongoDB (Lindinger)
               Der doppelseitiger Faksimilereader ist eine komplett eigenständige Anwendung mit Suchschlitz und Investigate Mode zur gleichzeitigen Betrachtung von Faksimile und Transkription. Außerdem gibt es zahlreiche weitere Features, die es den Nutzern sehr bequem erlauben, die gefunden Treffer der Suchmaschine im Kontext einer doppelseitigen Darstellung der Faksimile zu sehen und gleichzeitig durch die Dokumente der Forschungsdomäne zu blättern. Sämtliche Informationen bzgl. Edition und Faksimile sind in einer MongoDB gespeichert und werden über HTTP-Schnittstellen abgefragt.
            
            
               Dokumentationssystem Sphinx (Babl) (siehe Abb.2)
               Für jedes Teilprojekt der Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools (WAST) wird im entsprechenden Gitlab Ordner eine README.md Datei erstellt, das in einer Dokumentation, die alle Projekte umspannt mithilfe der Software Sphinx zusammengefasst und online auf ansprechende Art und Weise darstellt. Die Dokumentation hilft, neuen Studierenden einen schnelleren Einstieg in das Projekt zu finden und ermöglicht es, das gesamte WAST-Projekt schnell nach bestimmten Fachbegriffen zu durchsuchen. 
            
         
         
            Programm des Workshops (ganztages Workshop)
            
               Überblick/Einführung/Vorstellungsrunde 
               Digitaler Zugang zum Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein, das Projekt WAST (Dr. Max Hadersbeck)
               Fragen/ Diskussion/ gewünschte Schwerpunkte der Teilnehmer*innen des Workshops
            
            
               
                  WAST-Spezialthemen (jeweils ca. 15 Min. Theorie / 20 Min. Praxis)
               
                   Gitlab Projektmanagement und Continuous Integration mit git production / testing server (Hadersbeck, Still) 
      
                   XML TEI-P5 Edition CISWAB (Hadersbeck): Bergen Normalized Edition und xslt-Transformationen und Investigate-Mode von WiTTFind
                   Faksimilestrukturierung und OCR Erkennung (Eisterhues, Landes) 
                   Lexikalische Arbeit (Röhrer): Lemmatisierte Suche, Lexika, Lokale Grammatiken, Query Beispiele
                   WEB-Oberfläche der FinderApps und Microservices (Hadersbeck, Still): Flask server, Javascript
                   Doppelseitiger Faksimilereader und mongodb (Lindinger) 
                   NLP-Tool Semantische Ähnlichkeitssuche (Ullrich): NLP-Python Libraries, Funktionalitäten
                   Regelbasierte Suchmaschine (Babl): Programmierung C++, make/cmake, client-server Programmierung mit C++
                   Dokumentationssystem Sphinx (Babl): Markdown, Sphinx Installation, 2HTML, 2PDF
               
            
            
               Arbeitsgruppen: Diskussionen/Spezialfragen
               Je nach Interesse der Teilnehmer*innen unter der Leitung der einzelnen Dozent*innen.
            
         
         
            Kurzbiographie der Dozent*innen
            
               Florian Babl (CIS)
               Bachelorarbeit: Entwicklung eines Rankingverfahrens der Suchtreffer für die FinderApp WiTTfind im Nachlass Ludwig Wittgensteins 
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: verschiedene Rankingalgorithmen und ihre Funktionalität mit dem Ziel der Rankingverbesserung.
            
            
               Marcel Eisterhues (CIS)
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: Der momentane Forschungsschwerpunkt ist die automatische Seitensegmentierung von handgeschriebenen Texten.
            
            
               Max Hadersbeck (CIS)
               Projektleiter und Dozent am CIS
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: Digitaler Zugang zum Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein, FinderApp WiTTFind, Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools, Programmierung: C++, Python, XML
            
            
               Florian Landes (Kommission für bayerische Landesgeschichte bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften) 
               Bachelorarbeit: Optical Character Recognition (OCR) – Optische Zeichenerkennung (OZE) Ein Werkzeug zur Verknüpfung von digitaler Edition und Faksimile? Semiautomatische Ermittlung von Bildkoordinaten für WiTTFind
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: OCR, OZE, Bavarikonprojekt Ortsnamen des Regierungsbezirks Schwaben
                  
            
            
               Ines Röhrer (CIS)
               Masterarbeit: Lexikon, Syntax und Semantik - computerlinguistische Untersuchungen zum Nachlass Ludwig Wittgensteins
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: Digitales Speziallexikon WiTTLex für den Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein
            
            
               Sebastian Still (CIS)
               Masterarbeit: Ludwig Wittgenstein: 100 Jahre Traktatus. Der Odyssee-Reader, ein web-basiertes Tool zur textgenetischen Suche im Traktatus
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: moderne Frontend Programmierung, NLP (Backend)
            
            
               Sabine Ullrich (CIS)
               Masterarbeit: Clustering zur Verbesserung der Performanz einer Ähnlichkeitssuche
               Forschungsschwerpunkte: Natural Language Processing, Data Mining, semantische Ähnlichkeitserkennung im Nachlass von Ludwig Wittgenstein
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Babl, Florian (2019): 
                        Entwicklung eines Rankingverfahrens der Suchtreffer für die FinderApp WiTTFind im Nachlass Ludwig Wittgensteins. Bachelor‘s thesis. LMU.
                    
               
                  Landes, 
                  Florian (2019): 
                        Optical Character Recognition (OCR) – Optische Zeichenerkennung (OZE). Ein Werkzeug zur Verknüpfung von digitaler Edition und Faksimile? Semiautomatische Ermittlung von Bildkoordinaten für WiTTFind, Bachelorarbeit, LMU.
                    
               
                  Lindinger, Matthias (2013): 
                        Highlighting von Treffern des Suchmaschinentools 
                  WiTTFind im zugehörigen Faksimile. Bachelor‘s thesis, LMU.

               
                  Lindinger, 
                  Matthias (2015): 
                        Entwicklung eines WEB-basierten Faksimileviewers mit Highlighting von Suchmaschinen-Treffern und Anzeige der zugehörigen Texte in unterschiedlichen Editionsformaten. Master's thesis, LMU.
                    
               
                  Pichler, Alois (2017): 
                        Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen (WAB): Open Access to Wittgenstein's Nachlass. XML based Interactive Dynamic Presentation (IDP) of WAB's Nachlass transcriptions. 16. Mai 2017. http://wab.uib.no/transform/wab.php?modus=opsjoner [letzter Zugriff 20.09.2019].
                    
               
                  Hadersbeck, 
                  Maximilian / 
                  Pichler, 
                  Alois / 
                  Fink, 
                  Florian /
                   Gjesdal, 
                  Øyvind L. (2014): „Wittgenstein's Nachlass: WiTTFind and Wittgenstein advanced search tools (WAST)“
                        , in: 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage, 91-96. ACM.
                    
               
                  Hadersbeck , 
                  Maximilian /
                   Pichler, 
                   Alois /
                   Bruder, Daniel / Schweter, Stefan (2016): 
                        New (re)search 
                  possibilities for Wittgenstein's Nachlass II: Advanced Search, Navigation and Feedback with the FinderApp WiTTFind. http://wab.uib.no/alois/Hadersbeck_Pichler%20Kirchberg2016.pdf [letzter Zugriff 20.09.2019].
                    
               
                  Röhrer, 
                  Ines / 
                  Ullrich, 
                  Sabine / 
                  Hadersbeck, 
                  Maximilian (2019): 
                        Weltkulturerbe international digital: Erweiterung der Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools durch Semantisierung und neuronale maschinelle Übersetzung. multimedial multimodal. Abstracts zur Jahrestagung des Verbandes Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum, 25. - 29.03.2019 an den Universitäten zu Mainz und Frankfurt.
                    
               
                  Röhrer, 
                  Ines (2017): 
                        Musik und Ludwig Wittgenstein: Semantische Suche in seinem Nachlass. Bachelor‘s thesis, LMU.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, 
                  Alfred (2018): „Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Nachlass in the UNESCO Memory of the World register.“, in: 
                        Nordic Wittgenstein Review 7(2):209–213.
                    
               
                  Ullrich, 
                  Sabine /
                   Bruder, 
                  Daniel /
                   Hadersbeck, 
                  Maximilian (2018): Aufdecken von „versteckten" Einflüssen: Teil-Automatisierte Textgenetische Prozesse mit Methoden der Computerlinguistik und des Machine Learning. Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. Abstracts zur Jahrestagung des Verbandes Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum, 26.02.-02.03. 2018 an der Universi
                        tät zu Köln, veranstaltet vom Cologne Center for eHumanities (CceH).
                    
               
                  Ullrich, Sabine (2019):
                         Boosting Performance of a Similarity Detection System using State of the Art Clustering Algorithms. Master‘s thesis. LMU.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            
  Seit 2010 kooperieren das Wittgenstein Archiv an der Universität Bergen (WAB, Alois Pichler) und das Centrum für Informations- und Sprachverarbeitung der Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München
  (CIS, Max Hadersbeck et. al.) in der Forschungsgruppe „Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools” (WAST). Die WAST-Projektgruppe entwickelt die web-basierte 
  FinderApp WiTTFind (), die einen computerlinguistisch gestützten digitalen Zugang zu WABs Wittgenstein-Edition erlaubt. Nach einer kompletten Neuscannung des Nachlasses und intensiven Verhandlungen des WAB mit den Rechteinhabern, dürfen seit 2018 WABs Edition auf der WiTTFind-Webseite durchsucht und Faksimileextrakte dargestellt werden. Nun konnten wir uns einer zentralen Frage der Wittgensteinforscher widmen: Wo finden sich in seinem Nachlass semantisch ähnliche Bemerkungen und, retroperspektivisch betrachtet, wann fanden diese Änderungen statt? 

            Wir entwickelten das Analysetool WiTTSim (Ullrich, 2018), das semantisch ähnliche Bemerkungen in der Edition aufspürt, zusammen mit einem vorgeschalteten semantischem Clusterverfahren (Ullrich, 2019), welches die Rechenzeit der Ähnlichkeitssuche um den Faktor 100 verkürzte. Zur retroperspektivischen Analyse der Edition entwickelten wir ein zeitorientiertes, textgenetisches Datenmodell, das die Spielräume der Interpretation der bisher dokumentorientierten Edition auf zugelassene Lesarten reduziert.
            In unserem Vortrag stellen wir die Verfahren unserer Ähnlichkeitssuche mit vorgeschaltetem semantischen Clustering und ein neues mehr textgenetisch- als dokumentorientiertes Modell einer Edition vor, das im Web-Frontend des OdysseeReaders (www.odysseereader.wittfind.cis.lmu.de) implementiert ist und auch die Frage beantwortet: „Wann gibt es semantisch ähnliche Bemerkungen“.
         
         
            Die Datenbasis: Dokument- und Zeitorientierte Modelle
            Die bei uns verwendete Datenbasis BNE 2015- und IDP 2016-, die am Wittgensteinarchiv an der Universität Bergen (Pichler, WAB) erstellt werden, enthalten Faksimile und Transkriptionen (auf der Basis von XML-TEI-P5) des Nachlasses von Ludwig Wittgenstein. Dieser Nachlass umfasst ca. 20.000 Seiten, welche vom WAB in Dokumente und diese wiederum in logische Textabschnitte unterteilt sind. Jeder der 54.930 Textabschnitte – eine sogenannte Bemerkung – wird mit einer eindeutigen Bezeichnung, dem sogenannten Siglum, versehen und wird in unserer Ähnlichkeitssuche als einzelnes Textobjekt definiert und semantisch analysiert. 
            Betrachtet man die Annotationen der BNE unter dem Aspekt der Retroperspektive, taucht folgendes Problem auf: Die BNE liefert nur auf der Ebene der Bemerkungen Informationen über ihren Erstellungszeitpunkt bzw. -zeitrahmen. Die Änderungen auf Wort und Zeichenebene sind zwar akribisch annotiert, allerdings fehlt die zeitliche Information wann diese Änderungen vorgenommen wurden. Um textgenetische Metainformationen auf Wort- bzw. Zeichenebene in das “ordered hierarchy of content objects model data” (OHCO) einer XML-Edition, wie das der BNE zu integrieren, schlägt das TEI-P5 Konsortium Fragmentierungs-, Milestone oder Standoff-Markup Annotationen vor (Jörg Hornschemeyer, 2013), die am WAB bisher nicht durchgeführt wurden. Von Geisteswissenschaftlern, deren wissenschaftliches Kerngebiet im Allgemeinen weit entfernt von der XML-Programmierung liegt, würde großer programmtechnischer Editionsaufwand verlangt. Eine Folge ist, dass von „Nachverwertern“ der Edition zur Generierung der textlichen Varianten algorithmisches Ausmultiplizierten der annotierten Varianten implementiert wird, was z.B. in der Wittgenstein-Edition bei einzelnen Bemerkungen eine vierstellige Anzahl von Lesarten generiert. Betrachtet man die so automatisch generierten Lesarten, sind die meisten syntaktisch und semantisch falsch, was fatale Auswirkungen auf semantische Analysen der Textobjekte hat. Ohne zusätzliche, fein granulierte Metainformation in den annotierten Varianten sind die Spielräume der automatisierten Lesartengenerierung jedoch nicht einzugrenzen.
            Im Umfeld der Wittgensteinforschung gibt es eine Edition, die bis auf Zeichenebene zeitliche Informationen zur Textgenese liefert: Die Prototractatus-Tools (PTT 2016) von Martin Pilch (Pilch 2018). Sie dokumentieren den 
Nutzern Ludwig Wittgensteins Schreibprozess, beginnend mit einem leeren Notizbuch im Jahre 1915 und bis zum endgültigen Diktat des Ts-204 im Sommer 1918, das zu seiner einzigen philosophischen Veröffentlichung zu Lebzeiten, der „Logisch-Philosophischen Abhandlung“ führte. Leider konnten wir die Daten und Metainformationen der PTT-Edition in unserer FinderApp Infrastruktur nicht direkt analysieren, da unsere WiTTFind Infrastruktur zum einen auf das dokumentorientierte XML-TEI-P5 Datenformat aus Bergen zugeschnitten ist, und zum anderen die PTT-Edition im inkompatiblen Microsoft Word-97 Format vorliegt. Alle verfügbaren XML-TEI Importtools erfassten nur Bruchteile der Annotationen, sodass z.B. die Zeitinformationen der PTT überhaupt nicht erkannt und transformiert wurden. Um möglichst viel von der PTT-Textedition weiterzuverwenden, und damit der PTT-Hg. die Edition in seiner gewohnten Microsoft-Office Umgebung weiter optimieren kann, entwickelten wir eine mit Microsoft EXCEL leicht zu bedienende mehrdimensionale Tabellenstruktur. Die Editionsdaten und Metainformation der Word-97 Edition konnten wir größtenteils mit eigenen Programmen und Office-Macrotechniken transferieren. Zur Integration der Tabellen in die Infrastruktur unserer FinderApp verwendeten wir LibreOffice-Tools und selbst geschriebene Python Programme, die die Daten, sobald sie in das git-Repository des Projekts kopiert werden, mit Hilfe der continuous Integration automatisch transformieren und importieren. Zur Web-Präsentation werden sie an unsere neu entwickelte FinderApp, den 
OdysseeReader (siehe Abb. 1,
odysseereader.wittfind.cis.lmu.de), übergeben. Dieses Vorgehen trennt zwar das Daten- und Repräsentationsmodell, jedoch entwickelten wir ein positionsinvariantes Siglensystem, bestehend aus dem Tupel (Zeitstempel, Dokument, Seite, Zeile, Zeichenposition), das die beiden Modelle eineindeutig verknüpft. Diese bijektive Relation zwischen den beiden Modellen definiert dem Hg., wo er in seinem Datenmodell Änderungen vornehmen muss um sie an eine bestimmte Stelle, zu einem bestimmten Zeitpunkt im Repräsentationsmodell zu platzieren.

            
               
                  
                   Abbildung 1: Der OdysseeReader odysseereader.wittfind.cis.lmu.de
                  
               
            
         
         
            Ähnlichkeitssuche mit vorgeschaltetem Semantic Clustering
            Die Ähnlichkeitssuche WiTTSim berechnet mit Hilfe
computerlinguistischer Methoden für jede Bemerkung einen
„charakteristischen” Vektor, oder, intuitiv gesprochen: Man bestimmt
einen “Fingerabdruck”. Dieser automatisierte Prozess wird unabhängig
im Voraus berechnet, was spätere Prozesse vereinfacht und
beschleunigt. Dieser „Fingerabdruck“ beinhaltet linguistische
Informationen, wie beispielsweise Wörter, deutsche und englische
Synonyme (aus Germanet und Wordnet), Wortarten (Treetagger) und
Lemmata  (WiTTLex, Röhrer 2019). Diese Informationen werden in binäre Vektoren übersetzt, welche insgesamt etwa 115.000 Features umfassen. Zusätzlich zur Datenbasis wurden 471 Bemerkungen bereits gruppiert, also mit Ground Truth Labels versehen. Die Gruppen bestehen dabei aus 2-15 Bemerkungen und das gelabelte das Korpus umfasst 1.670 Bemerkungen, was ca. 3% des gesamten Nachlasses entspricht.

            Zur Semantischen Ähnlichkeitsberechnung ist allerdings eine Reduktion des Feature Raumes zwingend nötig, da die Vektoren mit so hoher Dimensionalität semantisch „weit voneinander entfernt“ sind und keine semantischen Gruppierungen auszumachen sind. Dieses Phänomen ist auch bekannt als 
Curse of Dimensionality. Daher werden die Vektoren zunächst auf eine angemessene Anzahl von Features skaliert, um sie anschließend clustern zu können. Verwendete Reduktionstechniken umfassen Singular Vector Decomposition (SVD), Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Sparse Random Projection (SRP) und Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). Auf unseren Daten zeigte eine SVD Reduktion zu 1.600 Dimensionen die besten Ergebnisse, zusammen mit UMAP, welches darüber hinaus die Daten im zweidimensionalen Raum klar gruppiert. Letzteres erlaubt nur eine Zieldimension von 2 bis 100 Dimensionen, weshalb zum Erhalt der Varianz die maximale Dimensionsanzahl von 100 gewählt wurde, um einen bestmöglichen Erhalt der gespeicherten Information zu gewährleisten.

            Nach erfolgter Reduktion der Dimension können die Datenpunkte, also alle Bemerkungen, geclustert werden. Verwendete Clustering Techniken umfassen den klassischen K-Means Ansatz (Mac-Queen 1967, Ball and Hall 1956, Lloyd 1982, Steinhaus 1955), aber auch Dichte-basierte Ansätze wie Mean-Shift (Duda und Hart 1973) und DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996), das statistische Gaussian Mixture Modell (Redner und Walker 1984) und das hierarchische Ward Clustering (Ward 1963). Beste Ergebnisse konnten mit einer Kombination von SVD und K-Means mit einer Anzahl an k=150 Clustern erzielt werden. Evaluiert wurde anhand der drei unüberwachten Metriken Silhouette Score, Davies Bouldin Index, und Calinski-Harabasz Index. Zusätzlich konnte durch die verfügbaren Ground Truth Labels auch der Recall berechnet werden, welcher in den Experimenten einen maximalen Wert von 1,0 erreicht. Dies zeigt, dass alle der gelabelten Daten richtig zugeordnet werden konnten. Wird eine Suchanfrage zum Auffinden ähnlicher Bemerkungen gestartet, muss nur der charakteristische Vektor der eingegebenen Bemerkung berechnet werden und das nächstliegende Cluster bestimmt werden. Letzteres erfolgt durch eine Bestimmung des am nächsten gelegenen Cluster Mittelpunkts (Zentroids). Anschließend werden die Abstände zu allen Bemerkungen des bestimmten Clusters gemessen, welche zuletzt dem Philologen zur genaueren Prüfung „gerankt“ vorgeschlagen werden.
         
         
            Zusammenfassung und Ausblick
            Unsere zeitgesteuerte textgenetische Edition kann von einem Wissenschaftler ohne XML Kenntnisse innerhalb einer Office Umgebung erstellt werden. Das continuous Integration System von git transferiert die Edition automatisch in unser WEB-basiertes Repräsentationssystem, den OdysseeReader. Über das von uns entwickelte eineindeutige Siglensystem verliert der Hg. niemals den klaren Zusammenhang zwischen Editions- und Präsentationsmodell.

            Das von uns entwickelte Ähnlichkeitstool mit vorgeschaltetem Semantic Clustering könnte auch zur Ähnlichkeitsbestimmung zwischen zwei gegebenen Texten verwendet werden: Der Nutzer könnte einen Text eingeben, und es werden potentiell ähnliche Textpassagen in einer Sammlung von Texten gesucht, die dann „gerankt“ nach Ähnlichkeiten in einer Art Hitliste ausgegeben werden. Eine derartige Sortierung nach Textähnlichkeiten könnte es dem Philologen zum Beispiel besonders erleichtern, potentielle Zitate, Einflüsse und Verweise eines Autors innerhalb seines Werkes und im Bezug auf die Literatur seiner Zeit aufzuspüren.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Ball, 
                  Geoffrey H.
                   / Hall 
                  David J. (1965): 
                        Isodata, a novel method of data analysis and pattern classification. Technical report, Stanford research inst Menlo Park CA.
                    
               
                  Duda, Richard
                   O. / Hart, 
                  Peter E. (1973): "Pattern analysis and scene classification." 
                        J. Wiley 1:73.
                    
               
                  Ester, 
                  Martin
                   / Kriegel 
                  Hans-Peter /
                   Sander, 
                  Jörg
                   / Xu, 
                  Xiaowei
                   et al. (1996): „A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.“, in 
                        KDD, volume 96, pages 226–231.
                    
               Hadersbeck, Maximilian / Pichler, Alois / Fink, Florian / Gjesdal, Oyvind (2014): Wittgenstein’s Nachlass: WiTTFind and Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools (WAST), DATeH, Madrid.
               
                  Hadersbeck, 
                  Maximilian
                   / Still, 
                  Sebastian
                   (2018): 
                  Investigating Wittgenstein’s Nachlass: WiTTFind, WiTTReader, OdysseeReader and Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools, im Katalog zur Ausstellung „DIE TRACTATUS ODYSSEE“ S.127-137, Wittgenstein Initiative, Wien.
                    
               
                  Lloyd, 
                  Stuart P. (1982): „Least squares quantization in pcm“, in: 
                        IEEE transactions on information theory, 28(2):129–137.
                    
               
                  MacQueen, 
                  J. B. (1967): „Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations.“, in: 
                        Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, volume 1, pages 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA, 1967
                    
               
                  Pichler, Alois / Krüger, Heinz W. / Smith, D. / Bruvik, Tone / Lindebjerg, Anne / Olstad, Vemund (Hrsg.) (2009): Wittgenstein Source Bergen Facsimile (BTE). Wittgenstein Source Bergen.
                    
               
                  Redner, 
                  Richard A. /
                   Walker, 
                  Homer F. (1984): Mixture densities, maximum likelihood and the em algorithm. SIAM review, 26(2):195–239.
                    
               
                  Röhrer, 
                  Ines / 
                  Ullrich, 
                  Sabine / 
                  Hadersbeck, 
                  Maximilian (2019): 
                        Weltkulturerbe international digital: Erweiterung der Wittgenstein Advanced Search Tools durch Semantisierung und neuronale maschinelle Übersetzung. multimedial multimodal. Abstracts zur Jahrestagung des Verbandes Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum, 25. - 29.03.2019 an den Universitäten zu Mainz und Frankfurt.
                    
               
                  Steinhaus, 
                  Hans (1955): Quelques applications des principes topologiques à la géométrie des corps convexes. Fund. Math, 41:284–290.
                    
               
                  Ullrich, Sabine /
                   Bruder, Daniel /
                   Hadersbeck, Maximilian (2018): “Aufdecken von “versteckten” Einflüssen: Teil-Automatisierte Textgenetische Prozesse mit Methoden der Computerlinguistik und des Machine Learning”, 5. Tagung Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum 26.2.-2.3. (Köln).
                    
               
                  Ullrich, Sabine (2019):
                         Boosting Performance of a Similarity Detection System using State of the Art Clustering Algorithms. Master‘s thesis. LMU.
                    
               
                  Pilch, Martin (2018): 
                        Frontverläufe im Prototractatus – Zur gedanklichen Entwicklung von Krakau bis Sokal (1914/1915), Wittgenstein-Studien 9 (S.101-154), Internationale Ludwig Wittgenstein Gesellschaft (ILWG).
                    
               
                  Still, Sebastian (2018): 
                        Ludwig Wittgenstein: 100 Jahre Traktatus. Der Odyssee-Reader, ein web-basiertes Tool zur text-genetischen Suche im Traktatus, Masterthesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.
                    
               
                  Feldweg, Birgit /
                   Feldweg, Helmut (1997): „GermaNet - a Lexical-Semantic Net for German.", in: 
                        Proceedings of the ACL workshop Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Applications. Madrid.
                    
               
                  Henrich, Verena / Hinrichs, Erhard (2010): „GernEdiT - The GermaNet Editing Tool", in: 
                        Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010). Valletta, Malta, pp. 2228-2235.
                    
               
                  Hörnschemeyer, Jörg / Thaller, Manfred / Förtsch, Reinhard (2017): 
                        Textgenetische Prozesse in Digitalen Editionen, Köln Universitäts- und Stadtbibliothek Köln 2017, https://www.worldcat.org/title/textgenetische-prozesse-in-digitalen-editionen/oclc/1002260195
                    
               
                  Schmidt, 
                  Alfred (2018): „Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Nachlass in the UNESCO Memory of the World register.“, in: 
                        Nordic Wittgenstein Review 7(2):209–213.
                    
               
                  UNESCO (2017): UNESCO-Weltdokumentenerbe - Zwei
  Neuaufnahmen. URL:
  https://www.unesco.at/presse/artikel/article/unesco-weltdokumentenerbe-zwei-neuaufnahmen/
  [letzter Zugriff 19. Juni 2018].

               
                  Ward, John H. (1963): „Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function." 
                        Journal of the American statistical association 58.301: 236-244.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Digitale Edition für Born-Digital-Texte?
            Kulturelles Erbe wird zunehmend vielfältig in digitalen Formen hervorgebracht. Für einen stetig wachsenden Teil dieses Born-Digital-Materials werden besondere Zugangsarten benötigt: Lesegeräte für veraltete Medienspeicher müssen konserviert und bereitgehalten werden, Emulatoren für nicht mehr unterstützte Betriebssysteme entwickelt und Daten in aktuellere Formate übertragen werden – was manchmal nur noch mithilfe der Computerarchäologie gelingt.
            Der Erhalt digitalen Kulturerbes wird jedoch nicht nur durch deren technische Verfügbarkeit garantiert, sondern bedarf zusätzlich einer kritischen Beleuchtung und wissenschaftlich fundierten Kommentierung. Im Bereich des “analogen” kulturellen Erbes werden beispielsweise jahrhundertealte, zerfallende Handschriften für die Wissenschaft und für die Öffentlichkeit in textkritischen (digitalen, analogen und hybriden) Editionen aufbereitet und verfügbar gemacht: Dies müsste mit denselben Konsequenzen auch für jedwede Überlieferung relevanten kulturellen Erbes in digitaler Form gelten. Benötigen wir also (digitale) textkritische Editionen von Born-Digital-Texten?
         
         
            Digitale Fachmagazine der 8-Bit-Ära
            Ein Beispiel, das konservatorische und textkritische Aspekte verbinden kann, ist in digitalen Fachmagazinen überliefert, die in den späten 1980er und frühen 1990er Jahren auf 5¼-Zoll-Disketten (“Floppy Disk”) publiziert wurden. Ein beachtenswerter Teil dieser sogenannten “Diskmags” richtete sich an Nutzer des 8-Bit-Rechners 
Commodore 64 (kurz: C64) und bediente primär eine frühe User- und Gamer-Community. Diskmags enthielten einerseits benutzbare Software (meist Public Domain) und andererseits Besprechungen neu erschienener Software, Rezensionen aktueller Spiele, Hardwaretipps und -bauanleitungen, Editorials, Leserbeiträge und mehr. Schätzungsweise existierten über 30 Diskmags (vgl. Diskmag-Archiv o. D.), unter denen im deutschsprachigen Raum die Titel Magic Disk 64 (1987–1993) und 
Game On (1988–1995)  zweifelsohne zu den bekanntesten gehörten.
            
            Die Überlieferungssituation der Diskmags ist prekär. In öffentlichen Institutionen sind kaum Bestände erhalten, und viele Exemplare werden nur noch in Privatsammlungen konserviert. Zudem drohen die Datenträger ihre Inhalte zu verlieren,  und inwieweit die gedruckten Titelseiten, mit denen die Diskmags ausgeliefert wurden, überhaupt noch greifbar sind, ist bislang nicht erforscht. 
                    Es ist einer sehr lebendigen 8-Bit-Szene zu verdanken, dass zumindest ein Teil der Binärdaten noch verfügbar ist; deren Erschließung allerdings vorrangig die Interessen der Fangemeinde bediente und bislang höchstens ansatzweise unter wissenschaftlichen Vorzeichen geschah. Bei anderen “professionellen” Bewahrern ist die Diskmagazin-Thematik offenbar noch nicht weiter ins Bewusstsein gerückt.
            
         
         
            Computerspielekritik als Forschungsobjekt
            Diskmags sind unter anderem für die Kulturwissenschaft interessant, da die Spiele-Rezensionen (auch “Spieletests”) unmittelbar das zeitgenössische Erleben von Computerspielen widerspiegeln. Die damaligen Kriterien hinsichtlich Konzept, Ästhetik (Grafik, Animationen, Sound, Musik) und Spielerfahrung sind aus heutiger Sicht kaum noch nachvollziehbar und können allenfalls von Zeitzeugen mit überzeugender Authentizität geschildert werden: Die C64-Hardware war mit 320x200 Bildpunkten, 16 Farben, 64KiB RAM, einer Rechenleistung von ca. 1MHz  und einem dreistimmigen SID-Soundchip
 “state of the art”, und bot Programmierern sowie Konsumenten völlig neue Nutzungsmöglichkeiten und Erlebnisräume. Und das sogar mit “Haushaltsgeräten”: Es war gängig, anstelle eines Monitors den Fernseher als Bildschirm zu verwenden, und die Mono-Tonausgabe über die eigene Soundanlage laufen zu lassen. Über den kreativen Umgang mit der technischen Grundausstattung des Commodore 64 und der Auslotung ihrer Grenzen wurde in der Fachcommunity ausführlich diskutiert. Beispielsweise konnte der Soundchip dazu gebracht werden, Sprachausgaben zu erzeugen (z. B. im Spiel “Ghostbusters”, vgl. Rettinghaus 2018), und man fand heraus, dass durch eine besondere Behandlung der sogenannten “Sprites” (vgl. Morrow 2019) bildschirmfüllende Animationen kreiert werden konnten (z. B. im Spiel “Katakis”, C64 Wiki 2019c, Abschnitt “Katakis-Entwicklungs-System”). Die in den Diskmags (und Printmagazinen, z.B. 64er
               ) überlieferten Rezensionen sind für Studien im Gebiet der 8-Bit-Ära eine unersetzliche Quelle.
                
            Ein Blick in die 
                    Magic Disk 64 veranschaulicht deren Potenzial als Quelle kulturgeschichtlicher Untersuchungen. In frühen Ausgaben sind die Spieleberichte sehr kurz und lesen sich mehr wie Teasertexte, weshalb die Bezeichnung “Rezension” im Sinne einer kritisch-reflexiven Betrachtung noch nicht angemessen ist (z. B. in “The Last Ninja”, Magic Disk 64 1987a). Die Texte vermitteln die Thematik und die Atmosphäre eines Spiels und übernehmen die Aufgabe, in der 8-Bit-Umgebung eine Vorstellungswelt zu stimulieren. In späteren Ausgaben werden die Texte ausführlicher und kritischer, und ein Bewertungsraster tritt hinzu. Trotz dieser Objektivierungstendenz bleibt das subjektive Spielerlebnis – so lassen die bislang gesichteten Texte vermuten – der entscheidende Faktor für die Bewertung. Anhand der Entwicklung der Spieleberichte über einen längeren Zeitraum (und den Vergleich mit weiteren Textkorpora) ließen sich sowohl die Herausbildung einer 8-bit-spezifischen Spieleästhetik als auch eine Genese der Computerspielekritik beobachten und nachvollziehen.
                
         
         
            Herausforderungen einer digitalen Edition
            Als Quellenmaterial stellen Diskmags eine Herausforderung dar. Die einerseits historische und andererseits technische Distanz sprechen für eine zeitgemäß aufbereitete (digitale) Präsentation. 
                    Im Unterschied zu analogem Material stellt beim Diskmag die Medialität eine besondere Herausforderung dar, zumal es für diese keine editionswissenschaftlichen Standards gibt. 
                    Die Medialität des Editionsobjekts zwingt den Bearbeiter förmlich dazu, sich mit der spezifischen Benutzungsweise auseinanderzusetzen und diese als “Erlebensparameter” in die Edition mit einzubeziehen – und auch Vorzüge der Emulation gegenüber der Edition abzuwägen.
                
            Ein Versuch, die Texte zugänglich zu machen, wurde bereits durch ein anonymes Underground-Portal unternommen (
                    http://magicdisk.untergrund.net, keine autoritative Quelle). Die dort wiedergegebenen Texte wurden aus Originaldaten generiert, welche der Beschreibung nach im Floppy-Image-Format “.d64” vorlagen.  Die Übertragung offenbart jedoch einige Desiderata in text- und medienkritischer Hinsicht:
                
            
               Wie waren die Texte insgesamt zu einem Magazin angeordnet? Wie war das Layout der einzelnen Texte gestaltet? Wie wurden Grafiken eingebunden? Könnten exemplarische Screenshots helfen, um die Originaldarstellung nachvollziehen zu können? Und sind die einzelnen “Screens” statisch (wie eine konventionelle Seite) oder sind sie scrollbar (ähnlich einer Website)?
               Das originale Diskmag zeichnete sich durch eine animierte Menüführung und eine Begleitmusik aus, die im Hintergrund abgespielt wurde.
 Beides wurde nicht abgebildet. Wie könnten diese aber in einer Edition präsentiert werden?

               Ferner ist das Layout von einem Zeichenraster abhängig, das aus 25 Zeilen zu 40 PETSCII-Zeichen besteht. Sollten die Texte also mit einer dicktengleichen Schriftart dargestellt werden? Wie können die originalen Zeilenumbrüche dokumentiert und berücksichtigt werden, zumal sie manchmal für die korrekte Darstellung von Rastergrafiken (z.B. Magic Disk 64 1987b) notwendig sind?
               
                  Hinzu kommt die Tatsache, dass der Grafikchip des C64 für eine analoge Bildschirmausgabe entwickelt wurde und eine (wie auch immer geartete) Farbtreue im Digitalen nur schwer zu erzielen ist (vgl. Pepto 2017).
                    
               
                  Der teilweise sehr spezielle Fach- und Szenejargon bedarf einer historischen Erläuterung. Zudem fehlt jeglicher Kommentar zu offensichtlichen sachlichen Fehlern im Text. Beispielsweise wurde bei einer Besprechung des sehr erfolgreichen Spiels “Pirates!” der englische Ausdruck “Dutch” mit “Deutsch” verwechselt (vgl. Magic Disk 64 1987a). Spätestens an einer solchen Stelle ist ein textkritischer Kommentar notwendig.
                    
            
            Des Weiteren stellen sich allgemeine methodische Fragen:
            
               In welches Format ließen sich die Texte generell sinnvoll übertragen, um sie langfristig zu erhalten und darauf aufbauende Studien zu ermöglichen? Finden sich beispielsweise in TEI bereits Lösungen dafür, oder bedarf die “neodigitale” Form neuer Elemente? 
                        An einem Versuch ließ sich feststellen, dass zwar keine grundsätzlichen neuen Elemente notwendig sind, sich aber teilweise die Begrifflichkeiten verschieben: So ist z.B. die “Bildschirmzeile” (die auch leer sein kann) von der “Textzeile” abzugrenzen.
                    
               Wie können Diskmag-spezifische interaktive oder mediale Elemente, z.B. Menüführung, Animationen und Hintergrundmusik nachnutzbar dokumentiert werden? Sollte z.B. die Musik vom SID-Format nach MEI übertragen werden, bzw. welche anderen nicht-binären Formate bieten sich an?
               
               Wie ist das Verhältnis zur mitgelieferten Software zu gestalten? Gibt es außerdem Printanteile, die den Magazinen beilagen (Intertextualität)?
               
               Ist es möglich – und wenn ja, wieweit sinnvoll – die ursprüngliche Nutzererfahrung nachzubilden? Möchte der heutige Nutzer beispielsweise die ursprünglich langen Ladezeiten nachvollziehen können?
               Welche juristischen Modelle könnten im Hinblick auf die Urheberschaft und die Verwertungsrechte von Texten, Musik und Grafiken, die noch in persönlicher bzw. privatwirtschaftlicher Hand liegen, zur Anwendung kommen?
            
         
         
            Zusammenfassung
            Für eine kritische digitale Edition von Diskmags sprechen sowohl die kulturgeschichtliche Relevanz der Texte, gerade im Hinblick auf die wenig erforschte Entwicklung einer Ästhetik und professionellen Software- und Spielekritik, als auch die Notwendigkeit einer Vermittlung des Materials, das hinsichtlich Inhalte und (8-Bit-)Medium als historisch anzusehen ist. Der Vortrag präsentiert ausgewählte Diskmags im Original sowie eine exemplarische digitale Diskmag-Edition (TEI mit HTML-Ausgabe), anhand derer die aufgezeigten Phänomene demonstriert und die verwendeten Methoden zur Diskussion gestellt werden. Welche Grenzen weisen die gewählten Verfahren auf, und welche Aspekte – analog zur unersetzlichen Begutachtung eines echten Manuskripts – kann wiederum nur die Emulation abdecken? Welche methodischen Aspekte gelten allgemein für Born-Digital-Material, welche sind materialspezifisch für Diskmags? Bedarf es schließlich einer Erweiterung der “textkritischen Edition” zu einer “medienkritischen Edition”?
                
         
      
      
         
             Magic Disk 64 1987–1993. Erscheinungsjahre bei Wikipedia 2019 und C64 Wiki 2019a.
             Game On 1988–1995. Erscheinungsjahre bei Wikipedia 2018 und C64 Wiki 2019b.
             Eine systematische Auswertung von Auflagen, Verkaufzahlen und Verbreitung steht aus. Zudem ist eine Sekundärleserschaft zu berücksichtigen: Diskmags wurden mehrfach weitergegeben und auch durch Kopien vervielfältigt (sofern kein Kopierschutz dies verhinderte).
             In der Zeitschriftendatenbank (ZDB) sind von den Diskmags
                            Magic Disk 64 und 
                            Game On lediglich einige Ausgaben aus den Jahren 1992 und 1993 in München nachgewiesen. Wenigstens von der 
                            Golden Disk 64 sind Exemplare aus den Jahren 1993 bis 1996 in München greifbar.
                        
             Magnetische Aufzeichnungen erleiden mit der Zeit eine sogenannte “data degradation”. Speziell zur Floppy Disk vgl. die Ausführungen in National Semiconductor Corporation 1989, 5-30.
            
               Eine konkrete Anfrage beim Computerspielemuseum Berlin blieb bislang leider unbeantwortet.
                    
             Abhängig vom verwendeten Farbkodiersystem (NTSC/PAL).
             Zu technischen Aspekten und der kulturgeschichtlichen Bedeutung des SID vgl. Rettinghaus 2018.
             Der C64 hatte einen eingebauten HF-Modulator, sodass man das Bild über ein Antennenkabel (Koaxialkabel) in einen Fernseher einspeisen konnte.
             64er 1984–1996. Digitalisate des Magazins sind unter anderem im Internet Archive 2013 verfügbar.
             Dies impliziert nicht, dass dies angesichts der grafischen und auditiven Möglichkeiten des Commodore 64 notwendig war. Selbst rein textbasierte Spiele (Textadventures) oder Spiele mit extrem einfacher Grafik können eine hohe Spielqualität aufweisen.
             Das Schema umfasste die Kategorien Grafik, Musik [vermutlich auch Soundeffekte], Motivation [gemeint: “Wiederholungsdrang”], Preis/Leistung und Overall [Gesamtbewertung]; vgl. Magic Disk 64 1993: “Game-Test: First Samurai”.
             Eine detaillierte Beschreibung des d64-Image-Formats (entspricht dem 1541 Floppy Disk Format) ist unter
                            verfügbar.
                        
             Die Musik wurde zumeist von Thomas Detert beigesteuert und ist in der High Voltage SID Collection (HVSC) erhalten. Das Sammlungsprojekt versteht sich als “attempt to accurately archive the most popular C64 SIDs into one complete collection”. Hinter SID verbergen sich die Musikdateien, die in den zwei Datenformaten PSID und RSID vorliegen, vgl. die Dokumentation bei HVSC 2019.
             Unberücksichtigt bleibt hier der Horizont technischer Reproduzierbarkeit des Klangerlebnisses, vgl. Rettinghaus 2018, hier bes. S. 275.
             Aufgrund des begrenzten Arbeitsspeichers waren Printbeilagen eine häufige Ergänzung, teilweise wurden z. B. (wie auch bei Printmagazinen) Poster beigelegt.
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  64er (1984–1996): 
  64er – Das Magazin für Computerfans, Haar (bei München): Markt+Technik Verlag. (ZDB: 
  50387-3)

               
                  C64 Wiki (2019a): “Magic Disk 64”, Website: 
  C64 Wiki, 17. März 2019, 21:11 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  C64 Wiki (2019b): “Game On”, Website: 
  C64 Wiki, 28. März 2019, 21:28 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  C64 Wiki (2019c): “Katakis”, Website: 
  C64 Wiki, 29. August 2019, 18:25 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  C64 Wiki (2019d): “Ghostbusters”, Website: 
  C64 Wiki, 4. September 2019, 10:45 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  Game On (1988–1995): 
  Game On. Das C64-Spielemagazin auf Diskette, Nürnberg: CP Computer Publications, 1988–1995. (ZDB: 
  1276125-4)

               
                  HVSC (2019): 
  The High Voltage SID Collection. Commodore 64 music for the masses, URL: 
  
               
               
                  Internet Archive (2013): “64’er Magazine”, Website: 
  archive.org, 9. Januar 2013. URL: 
  
               
               
                  Magic Disk 64 (1987–1993): 
  Magic Disk 64. Das C64-Magazin auf Diskette, Nürnberg: CP Computer Publications. (ZDB: 
  1275979-X)

               
                  Magic Disk 64 (1987a): “3.1 Software” [Autor: Alexander Wiederhold?], 
  Magic Disk 64 12/1987. (Textversion abrufbar auf: 
  magicdisk.untergrund.net,
  zuletzt geändert: 15. August 2008, 12:08 Uhr, archiviert unter: 
  Internet Archive Wayback Machine)

               
                  Magic Disk 64 (1987b): “Intern” (= Rubrik 8.1), 
  Magic Disk 64 12/1987. (Textversion abrufbar auf: 
  magicdisk.untergrund.net, zuletzt geändert: 15. August 2008, 12:08 Uhr, archiviert unter: 
  Internet Archive Wayback Machine)

               
                  Magic Disk 64 (1993): “Game-Test: First Samurai” [Autor: Florian Brich?], 
  Magic Disk 64 (02/1993). (Textversion abrufbar auf: 
  magicdisk.untergrund.net,
  zuletzt geändert: 15. August 2008, 12:03 Uhr, archiviert unter: 
  Internet Archive Wayback Machine)

               
                  Steve Morrow (2019):  “C64 Sprites Defined”, Website: 
  C64 Brain, 4. Februar 2019. URL: 
  
               
               
                  National Semiconductor Corporation (1989): Mass Storage Handbook, Section 5: Floppy Disk Controller. Santa Clara: National Semiconductor. (archiviert unter: 
  Internet Archive)

               
                  
                  Philip „Pepto“ Timmermann: (2017): “Calculating the color palette of the VIC II”, Februar 2017. URL: 
  ; siehe auch die Fassung von 2001: “Commodore VIC-II Color Analysis (Preview)”. URL: 
  
               
               
                  Klaus Rettinghaus (2018): “Sidology. Zur Geschichte und Technik des C64-Soundchips”, in: 
  Digitale Spiele. DOI: 
  10.14361/9783839440025-018
               
               
                  Wikipedia (2018): “Game On”, Website: 
  Wikipedia. Die freie Enzyklopädie, 2. Dezember 2018, 18:35 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  Wikipedia (2019): “Magic Disk 64”, Website: 
  Wikipedia. Die freie Enzyklopädie, 9. Mai 2019, 21:06 Uhr. URL: 
  
               
               
                  www.c64.at (o. D.): “Diskmag-Archiv”, Website: 
  www.c64.at. Das Verzeichnis von deutschsprachigen Magazinen für den C64, ohne Datum. URL: 
  
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Ziele und technische Grundlagen des Infrastrukturprojektes „Deutsches Zeitungsportal“
            Historische Zeitungen wurden in den letzten Jahren von deutschen Kulturerbe-Einrichtungen verstärkt digitalisiert und zugänglich gemacht. Dadurch stehen der Forschung hunderte Millionen digitalisierter Zeitungsseiten zur Verfügung – ein Reichtum an Primärquellen, dem man mit den herkömmlichen geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschungsmethoden („Close Reading“) kaum gerecht werden kann. Zunehmend gewinnen daher Analysemethoden der Digital Humanities, wie z.B. „Distant Reading“ (Burckhardt u.A. 2018), an Bedeutung, um die bei der Massendigitalisierung entstandenen Daten auswerten zu können. 
            Die Aufgabe eines nationalen Zeitungsportals ist es jedoch, nicht nur für Forschende, sondern auch für eine interessierte Öffentlichkeit einen niedrigschwelligen Zugang zu entwickeln. Während mit ANNO, Delpher oder dem British Newspaper Archive im europäischen Raum mehrere Projekte – teilweise in Kooperation mit kommerziellen Partnern – entstanden sind, die große digitale Zeitungsbestände in einem nationalen Portal verbinden, existieren in Deutschland bislang nur lokale und regionale Portale einzelner Bibliotheken oder Regionen. Ein übergreifendes Portal, das einen zentralen Zugriff bietet, ist bislang noch ein Forschungsdesiderat (Blome 2018: B.6-33). Dank verschiedener DFG-Förderinitiativen zur Digitalisierung historischer Zeitungen sowie der Förderung der Errichtung eines nationalen Zeitungsportals wird sich das nun ändern. Anfang 2019 wurde das Projekt „Deutsches Zeitungsportal“ gestartet. Es wird im Rahmen der Deutschen Digitalen Bibliothek (DDB) umgesetzt. Ende 2020 soll das Portal, an dessen Aufbau vier Projektpartner beteiligt sind, online gehen.
                
            Das entstehende Portal wird eine auf die Besonderheiten von Zeitungen zugeschnittene zentrale Präsentations- und Rechercheoberfläche bieten und die folgenden Kernfunktionalitäten umsetzen:
            
               übergreifende Volltextsuchen in den digitalisierten Zeitungsbeständen
               unterschiedliche Einstiegspunkte, z.B. über Kalender und Zeitungstitel
               einen unmittelbar in die Portalumgebung integrierten Viewer für Volltexte und Images
               
                  persistente Referenzierbarkeit und damit Zitationsfähigkeit der digitalen Zeitungsobjekte
               
            
            Das Deutsche Zeitungsportal ist ein Infrastrukturprojekt, das auf den bestehenden Netzwerken, Techniken und Workflows der DDB aufbaut. Das heißt, die Zeitungen, die im Zeitungsportal zur Verfügung gestellt werden, stammen aus verschiedenen Einrichtungen, zumeist Bibliotheken, die Erschließungsinformationen, Bilddateien und Volltexte der Zeitungen aus ihren Beständen an das Zeitungsportal liefern. In der ersten Ausbaustufe des Zeitungsportals stellen Bibliotheken ihre Metadaten im METS/MODS-Format bereit, sodass über Verlinkungen in der Datenstruktur sowohl die Bilddateien (i.d.R. im jpg-Format) als auch die Volltexte (i.d.R. im ALTO-xml-Format) in das Portal übernommen werden. Dort werden diese Bestände zusammengeführt und können über einen Suchschlitz durchsucht werden. Basis der Suche bilden die Volltexte, welche vollständig in einen zentral vorgehaltenen SOLR-Index aufgenommen werden. Durch die standardisierten, maschinennutzbaren Inhalte des Zeitungsportals, die über eine Schnittstelle (API) heruntergeladen werden können, sollen neue Nutzungsszenarien, wie z.B. Big-Data-Analysen, ermöglicht werden (Altenhöner 2018: 146). Da es sich bei den Zeitungstexten und -bildern ausschließlich um rechtefreies Material handelt, können die Dokumente in der eigenen Forschung nachgenutzt und weiterverarbeitet werden. 
            Zum Start des Portals werden Bestände aus mindestens sechs deutschen Bibliotheken verfügbar sein; vorsichtigen ersten Schätzungen zufolge wird es sich um 250 verschiedene Zeitungstitel im Umfang von ca. 15 Mio. Zeitungsseiten handeln. Nach der Inbetriebnahme des Portals sollen die Inhalte beständig wachsen, um möglichst viele historische Zeitungen in diesem Portal zu vereinen. Das Fernziel des Unterfangens ist es also, den Forschenden (und der allgemeinen Öffentlichkeit) einen einheitlichen und stabilen Zugang zu vielen (wenn möglich: allen) historischen Zeitungen aus deutschen Kulturerbe-Einrichtungen zu geben. Zudem wird angestrebt, in einer zweiten Ausbaustufe ab 2021 das Zeitungsportal für andere Datenformate wie TEI-XML zu öffnen, um z.B. digitale Editionen und Annotationen in den Korpus aufnehmen zu können. 
                
            Um Zeitungen aus vielen unterschiedlichen Quellen zusammenzuführen, sind bei der Aufbereitung der (Meta-)Daten vielfältige Standardisierungsprozesse notwendig. So wird im Rahmen des Projekts ein zeitungsspezifisches Anforderungsprofil für das METS/MODS-Metadatenformat entwickelt und eine Verknüpfung der Metadaten mit der Zeitschriftendatenbank (ZDB) umgesetzt, deren Identifier für die eindeutige Identifizierung der Zeitungstitel benutzt werden.
            Durch den Aufbau der Datenverarbeitungsstrukturen für Zeitungen und die dafür nötigen Standardisierungsprozesse sollen auch Impulse für die Digitalisierung, Erschließung und Referenzierung der Zeitungsbestände der kooperierenden Datenpartner ausgehen, ein Effekt, der sich bereits beim Aufbau der Deutschen Digitalen Bibliothek gezeigt hat. Darüber hinaus soll der Aufbau eines Zeitungsportals Kulturerbe-Einrichtungen dazu anregen, weitere Digitalisierungsvorhaben von historischen Zeitungen anzugehen. Um ein Portal mit für die Zukunft gerüsteten offenen Schnittstellen zu schaffen, ist die perspektivische Integration der IIIF-Technologie sowie eine Anbindung an die Europeana Newspapers Collection geplant.
         
         
            Ein Zeitungsportal für die Wissenschaft und die interessierte Öffentlichkeit
            Das Medium Zeitung zeichnet sich dadurch aus, dass es alle Bereich des Lebens abdeckt. Digitalisierte historische Zeitungen bieten den (Geistes-)Wissenschaften die Möglichkeit, eine Vielzahl von Forschungsfragen zu adressieren (Blome 2018). Das Interesse aus der Wissenschaft fließt beim Aufbau des Zeitungsportals auf mehreren Wegen in die Konzeption ein: So waren die oben genannten vier Kernfunktionalitäten Ergebnis eines Workshops mit WissenschaftlerInnen, der im Herbst 2014 im Rahmen des DFG-Pilotprojektes „Digitalisierung historischer Zeitungen“ in Bremen stattfand. Auch der laufende Entwicklungsprozess des Zeitungsportals wird von einem internationalen wissenschaftlichen Beirat begleitet. Im Gegensatz zu führenden Zeitungsprojekten der Digital Humanities wie Impresso, NewsEyes oder Oceanic Exchanges, welche ausschließlich ein wissenschaftliches Publikum im Blick haben, richtet sich das Angebot des Zeitungsportals auch an allgemeininteressierte NutzerInnen. Wie bereits bestehende, internationale Zeitungsportale zeigen, werden ihre Angebote sehr gut angenommen und von unterschiedlichsten Nutzergruppen besucht (für Nutzergruppen des österreichischen Zeitungsportals ANNO vgl. z.B. Müller 2016: 86). Vor allem die Volltextsuche, also die Möglichkeit, nicht nur in den Zeitungstiteln und anderen Metadaten, sondern in den eigentlichen Zeitungstexten zu suchen, macht das Zeitungsportal zu einem sehr niedrigschwelligen Angebot: Auch ohne große Recherchekenntnisse können NutzerInnen Artikel oder Informationen zu allen vorstellbaren Themen finden – sei es zum eigenen Sportverein, zu einer berühmten Persönlichkeit oder zur Geschichte der eigenen Familie. 
                
         
         
            Anforderungen der unterschiedlichen Nutzergruppen
            Das Projekt „Deutsches Zeitungsportal“ steht somit vor der Herausforderung, Anforderungen aus der Wissenschaft und aus der allgemeinen Öffentlichkeit zu analysieren, sie soweit wie möglich zu vereinen und ihnen allen bei der Umsetzung des Zeitungsportals möglichst gerecht zu werden. 
            Einer der ersten Schritte bei der Entwicklung des Zeitungsportals war es darum, die Anforderungen von Seiten der Wissenschaft sowie von allgemeininteressierten NutzerInnen zu erheben. Dabei kamen zu Beginn des Projekts drei unterschiedliche Methoden zum Einsatz: eine webbasierte Nutzerumfrage, fünfzehn, jeweils einstündige Interviews mit ausgewählten NutzerInnen und ein zweitägiger Workshop mit dem wissenschaftlichen Beirat. 
            Die Umfrage hatte als Ziel, potenzielle Zielgruppen des Zeitungsportals und ihre Anforderungen und Erwartungen kennenzulernen. Sie umfasste 23 Fragen zu Themengebieten wie Rechercheanlässe, Funktionalitäten und thematische Interessen und wurde für fünfeinhalb Wochen über die Homepage der DDB und über 27 weitere digitale Kanäle verbreitet. Das große Interesse, das dem Zeitungsportal entgegengebracht wird, zeigte sich hierbei schon rein zahlenmäßig – mit 2.422 ausgefüllten Fragebogen.
            Die Usability-Tests mit fünfzehn ausgesuchten potenziellen NutzerInnen wurden als halbstrukturierte Interviews durchgeführt, bei denen Methoden wie Protokolle lauten Denkens, Beobachtung und Aufzeichnung des Klickverhaltens, Aufzeichnung der Gestik und Mimik zum Einsatz kamen. Der Schwerpunkt der Interviews lag auf der Interaktion mit einem Klick-Dummy des Zeitungsportals, der aufgrund gezielter Fragen und kleiner Aufgaben auf seine Verständlichkeit und Usability einerseits und die Erwartungen der Interviewten andererseits überprüft wurde.
            Die Nutzerumfrage und die Nutzerinterviews richteten sich an die allgemeine Öffentlichkeit und wurden in Zusammenarbeit mit einer Marktforschungsagentur durchgeführt, die die Ergebnisse analysiert und aufbereitet hat.
            Bei dem Workshop mit dem wissenschaftlichen Beirat handelte es sich um ein zweitägiges Treffen, bei dem im Juni 2019 die vorliegenden Konzeptpapiere und der Klick-Dummy vorgestellt und mit den WissenschaftlerInnen unter Einbeziehung anderer Zeitungsportale diskutiert wurden. Die Empfehlungen, die im Lauf des Workshops entwickelt wurden, sind ebenfalls in die Konzeption des Portals eingeflossen.
            Der Vortrag widmet sich der Auswertung dieser Erhebungen: Wo finden sich Gemeinsamkeiten? Wo gibt es Unterschiede? Was ist zu tun, wenn sich die Anforderungen aus Wissenschaft und allgemeiner Öffentlichkeit widersprechen? Welche Wünsche lassen sich überhaupt realisieren und wo liegen Grenzen, seien diese technisch oder urheberrechtlich bedingt?
            Ein Beispiel für eine übereinstimmende Anforderung ist der Wunsch nach möglichst umfassenden Inhalten. Sowohl die allgemeine Öffentlichkeit als auch die Wissenschaftscommunity wünscht sich ein Zeitungsportal, das weitreichende Bestände anbietet, sodass sich die Recherche im besten Fall über ein einziges Portal erledigen lässt. Zwar ist genau dies der Anspruch und das angestrebte Alleinstellungsmerkmal des Deutschen Zeitungsportals, aber die Umsetzung dieses Zieles kann nicht allein vom Zeitungsportal erreicht werden. Viele Faktoren und Stakeholder – wie die schiere Menge des Materials, die Zerstreuung der Bestände in viele unterschiedliche Einrichtungstypen, die von der DFG überhaupt nicht erreicht werden, und nicht zuletzt das Urheberrecht, das die Digitalisierung und Verbreitung der besonders interessanten Bestände aus dem 20. Jahrhundert einschränkt – spielen hier eine Rolle. Ein kompletter Nachweis aller deutschen digitalisierten Zeitungsbestände kann darum eher als Vision der Community der Kulturerbe-Einrichtungen und ihrer Träger beschrieben werden, denn als ein kurzfristig erreichbares Ziel (Bürger 2018: 131f.).
            Eine wichtige Erkenntnis der Diskussion war es, dass das Zeitungsportal möglichst transparent mit seinen Inhalten umgehen muss: Wenn nicht alle historischen Zeitungen zu finden sind, muss für die NutzerInnen deutlich werden, welche Inhalte verfügbar sind und nach welchen Kriterien das vorhandene Zeitungskorpus zusammengestellt wurde. 
            Unterschiedliche Erwartungen der Nutzergruppen wurden besonders im Bereich Nutzerinterface formuliert. Während die allgemeinen NutzerInnen sich hier eher eine einfach gestaltete Oberfläche wünschen und erwarten, alle Suchanfragen über einen Suchschlitz eingeben zu können, wurde in der Diskussion mit der wissenschaftlichen Begleitgruppe der Wunsch nach anspruchsvolleren Funktionen laut, z. B. nach der Möglichkeit, sich ein individuelles Zeitungskorpus zusammenzustellen und dieses gezielt durchsuchen zu können. Diese Anforderungen werden teilweise von der aus dem DDB-Hauptportal übernommenen Funktion „Meine DDB“ erfüllt, mit der sich Favoriten und Suchanfragen speichern lassen. Zudem könnten zukünftig erweiterte Funktionen implementiert werden, die, ohne die Startseite zu überladen, für WissenschaftlerInnen und erfahrene NutzerInnen einen komfortablen Zugang bieten, der komplexere Suchanfragen erlaubt. Der Suchschlitz für die Volltextsuche soll jedoch über alle Iterationen das bestimmende Element bleiben. Im Suchschlitz selber können auch komplexe Abfragen gemäß der von der Suchmaschine vorgegebenen Syntax eingegeben werden.
         
         
            Ausblick
            
               Zum Abschluss des Vortrags wird der aktuelle Projektstand vorgestellt, inklusive eines ersten Blicks auf den Prototypen des Zeitungsportals, das Ende 2020 für die Öffentlichkeit freigeschaltet werden soll. Der Prototyp ist nicht nur aus technischen Gesichtspunkten (Tests, Qualitätssicherung) wichtig, sondern soll als Grundlage für eine zweite Runde der Nutzerforschung dienen: Die Erkenntnisse, die zu Beginn des Projektes gewonnen wurden, sollen bis Ende 2020 anhand einer weiteren Nutzerbefragung überprüft werden. So ist geplant, den Prototyp sowohl von den allgemeininteressierten NutzerInnen als auch vom wissenschaftlichen Beirat evaluieren zu lassen und daraus Erkenntnisse für die Schwerpunkte der nächsten, für 2021–2022 geplanten Projektphase zu gewinnen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
      Hervorzuheben sind insbesondere das Portal der Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin ZEFYS http://zefys.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de [letzter Zugriff 05.09.19], digiPress der Bayerischen Staatsbibliothek 
      https://digipress.digitale-sammlungen.de/ [letzter Zugriff 05.09.19] und das Zeitungsportal NRW 
      https://zeitpunkt.nrw/ [letzter Zugriff 05.09.19]. 
    
            
      Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (Projektleitung), Sächsische Landesbibliothek – Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Dresden (SLUB), Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz, FIZ Karlsruhe – Leibniz-Institut für Informationsinfrastruktur.
    
            
      Dabei handelt es sich um die folgenden sechs Bibliotheken, von denen die ersten fünf auch am vorgeschalteten DFG-Pilotprojekt beteiligt waren: Sächsische Landesbibliothek – Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Dresden (SLUB), Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – Preußischer Kulturbesitz (SBB), Bayerische Staatsbibliothek (BSB), Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek Sachsen-Anhalt (ULB), Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Bremen (SuUB), Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Hamburg Carl von Ossietzky (SUB).
    
            
      Mitglieder des wissenschaftlichen Beirats sind: Astrid Blome (Institut für Zeitungsforschung Dortmund), Christa Müller (Österreichische Nationalbibliothek), Claudia Resch (Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften), Estelle Bunout (Universität Luxemburg), Fotis Jannidis (Universität Würzburg), Günter Mühlberger (Universität Innsbruck), Jana Keck (Universität Stuttgart), Jörg Lehmann (Universität Tübingen), Marc Priewe (Universität Stuttgart), Maria Elisabeth Müller (Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Bremen), Marian Dörk (Fachhochschule Potsdam/Urban Complexity Lab), Marten Düring (Universität Luxemburg), Pim Huijnen (Universität Utrecht), Thomas Werneke (Zentrum für Zeithistorische Forschung Potsdam).
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   ANNO (AustriaN Newspapers Online):
                  http://anno.onb.ac.at [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].

               
                  Altenhöner, Reinhard (2018): „Auf dem Weg zu einem nationalen Zeitungsportal. Eine materialspezifische Kooperation als Treiber eines neuen Dienstes für Wissenschaft und Forschung“ in: Bonte, Achim / Rehnolt, Juliane (eds.): 
  Kooperative Informationsinfrastrukturen als Chance und Herausforderung: Festschrift für Thomas Bürger zum 65. Geburtstag. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter 144-160, DOI: 
  10.1515/9783110587524-019.

               
                  Bürger, Thomas (2016): „Zeitungsdigitalisierung als Herausforderung und Chance für Wissenschaft und Kultur“ in: 
  Zeitschrift für Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie 63, H 3, 123-132, DOI: 10.3196/186429501663332.

               
                  Blome, Astrid (2018): „Zeitungen“ in: Busse, Laura / Enderle, Wilfried / Hohls Rüdiger u.A. (eds.): 
  Clio-Guide. Ein Handbuch zu digitalen Ressourcen für die Geschichtswissenschaften. Berlin: Clio-online und Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (Veröffentlichungen von Clio-online, Nr. 2), B.6-1-D.6-36, DOI: 10.18452/19244.

               
                   The British Newspaper Archive:
                   [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019]. 
               
                  Burckhardt, Daniel / 
  Geyken, Alexander / 
  Saupe, Achim / 
  Werneke, Thomas (2019): „Distant Reading in der Zeitgeschichte. Möglichkeiten und Grenzen einer computergestützten Historischen Semantik am Beispiel der DDR-Presse“ in: 
  Zeithistorische Forschungen/Studies in Contemporary History 16: 177-196, DOI: 10.14765/zzf.dok-1345.

               
                  Delpher: 
                  https://www.delpher.nl/ [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].

               
                  DFG-Antrag „Errichtung eines nationalen Zeitungsportals auf der Basis der organisatorischen und technischen Infrastruktur der Deutschen Digitalen Bibliothek (DDB) – DDB-Zeitungsportal. Online verfügbar unter: 
  https://pro.deutsche-digitale-bibliothek.de/node/985 [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].

               
                  DFG-Ausschreibung „Digitalisierung historischer Zeitungen des deutschen Sprachgebiets“ im Rahmen des LIS-Förderprogramms von 2018
  ( ) [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019].
               
                  DFG-Ausschreibung „Digitalisierung historischer Zeitungen des deutschen Sprachgebiets“ im Rahmen des LIS-Förderprogramms von 2019(
  https://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/programme/lis/ausschreibung_zeitungsdigitalisierung_2019.pdf) [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019].

               
                  digiPress: 
                  https://digipress.digitale-sammlungen.de/ [letzter Zugriff 05. September 2019].

               
                  Empfehlungen zur Digitalisierung historischer Zeitungen in Deutschland (Masterplan Zeitungsdigitalisierung):
 [letzter Zugriff 05. September 2019].
               
                  Impresso: 
                  https://impresso-project.ch/ [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].

               
                  Müller, Christa (2016): „ANNO – Der Digitale Zeitungslesesaal der Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek: Aktuelle und zukünftige Entwicklungen im Überblick“ in: 
  BIBLIOTHEK – Forschung und Praxis 40(1). Berlin: de Gruyter 83-89, DOI: 10.1515/bfp-2016-0012.

               
                  NewsEye: https://www.newseye.eu/ [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].
               
                   Oceanic Exchanges: http://oceanicexchanges.org/ [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].
               
                  ZDB (Zeitschriftendatenbank): 
                  https://zdb-katalog.de/ [letzter Zugriff 29. August 2019].
  
               
                  ZEFYS: 
                  http://zefys.staatsbibliothek-berlin.de [letzter Zugriff 05. September 2019]. 
  
               
                  Zeitpunkt NRW: 
                  https://zeitpunkt.nrw/ [letzter Zugriff 05. September 2019].
  
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Das Problemfeld der OCR früher Drucke
            Lange galt die automatisierte Texterkennung oder sog. Optical Character Recognition (OCR) historischer Drucke des späten Mittelalters und der Frühen Neuzeit, das heißt die Überführung des gedruckten Textes in eine maschinenverarbeitbare Form, als sehr problematisch (Rydberg-Cox 2009). Die OCR moderner Texte wird dagegen auch aufgrund technischer Innovationen wie des zeilen- statt zeichenbasierten OCR-Ansatzes (Breuel et al. 2013) weithin als informatisch gelöstes Problem angesehen. Die teils höchst komplexen Layoutstrukturen von Inkunabeln und der bis zum Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts gedruckten Werke, ihr oft schlechter Erhaltungs- und Druckzustand sowie die Vielfalt und Varianz der in ihnen verwendeten Drucktypen stellen dagegen bis heute sogar den kommerziellen State of the Art der Texterkennungssoftware wie beispielsweise ABBYY FineReader
vor erhebliche Probleme. Auch die vermeintlich einfach gedruckten Frakturromane des 19. Jahrhunderts bereiten bei ihrer Überführung in eine E-Text-Variante immer wieder große Schwierigkeiten. Trotz der durch Bibliotheken und andere öffentliche Einrichtungen bereit gestellten, wachsenden Bestände bilddigitalisierter Vorlagen dieser Epochen ist darum der Umfang digitalisierter Texte nicht annähernd im selben Maß gewachsen, obwohl in den vergangenen Jahren bereits deutliche Fortschritte für die OCR vormoderner Drucke aufgezeigt werden konnten (Springmann / Lüdeling 2017).
                
            Vor allem für die geistes- und kulturwissenschaftliche Editionsphilologie eröffnet sich auf diese Weise ein erhebliches Problemfeld, ist diese vor dem Hintergrund der Entwicklung hin zu immer mehr digitalen Editionen doch auf meist große Textmengen in digitaler Form angewiesen, die im besten Fall neben ihrer hohen Zeichengenauigkeit bereits Metainformationen über das gedruckte Ursprungsmedium aufweisen – zu denken wäre hier besonders an die Typisierung unterschiedlicher Layoutregionen (Überschriften, Marginalien, Bildbeischriften etc.) oder die Lesereihenfolge der einzelnen Layoutelemente des originalen Textes. Und auch mit Blick auf neuere Forschungsfelder innerhalb der Geisteswissenschaften und Digital Humanities (Text Mining, Sentiment Analysis usw.) sowie deren Bedarf an großen Textmengen zur Anwendung quantitativer Analyseverfahren stellt sich zunehmend die Frage nach Möglichkeiten einer OCR früher und vormoderner Drucke, die sowohl hohen Qualitätsansprüchen als auch einem entsprechenden Automatisierungsgrad genügt.
            Werkzeuge, die diese Anforderungen erfüllen, sollten zudem frei verfügbar sein, sich einfach und selbstständig von einem informatisch nicht vorgeschulten Nutzerkreis auf einer einheitlichen Benutzeroberfläche bedienen lassen und die unterschiedlichen Submodule wie beispielsweise die Vorverarbeitung von Bilddateien, Möglichkeiten der Layouttypisierung sowie die eigentliche Zeichenerkennung integrativ zu einem kohärenten OCR-Workflow zusammenführen.
            Am Lehrstuhl für Künstliche Intelligenz und Angewandte Informatik der Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg wurde deshalb die OCR-Software OCR4all entwickelt, welche die genannten Notwendigkeiten in sich vereint und sich als erstes Programm überhaupt mit Blick auf die besonders herausfordernden Textgruppen direkt an Geisteswissenschaftler*innen richtet. 
                
         
         
            OCR-Workflow
            Typischerweise gliedert sich ein OCR-Workflow in vier Hauptkomponenten (s. Abbildung 1). Im sog. 
                    Preprocessing werden die Originalbilder in Vorbereitung späterer Arbeitsschritte binarisiert (Konvertierung des Ausgangsbildes in ein Schwarzweißbild) und gerade gestellt, um die nachfolgenden Arbeitsschritte zu erleichtern.
                
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Hauptkomponenten eines typischen OCR-Workflows. Von links nach rechts: Originalbild, Preprocessing, Segmentierung, OCR, Nachkorrektur. 
            
            Während der 
                    Segmentierung erfolgt die Erkennung und Typisierung der Layoutbestandteile. Dazu werden zuerst die Text- und Nicht-Textregionen (Bilder, Bordüren etc.) unterschieden, optional die Textregionen anschließend als Haupttext, Überschriften, Marginalien etc. semantisch ausgezeichnet. Abschließend werden die Textregionen zur Vorbereitung der OCR in einzelne Zeilenbilder zerschnitten. 
                
            In einem dritten Schritt, der 
                    OCR, werden die identifizierten Bildzeilen durch die Anwendung von sog. Modellen in maschinenverarbeitbaren Text umgewandelt. Je nach Material können dazu entweder sog. gemischte Modelle verwendet werden, die mithilfe einer Vielzahl ganz unterschiedlicher, jedoch epochentypischer Werke erstellt wurden. Handelt es sich bei den zu bearbeitenden Werken hinsichtlich der Vielfalt und Varianz der in ihnen verwendeten Drucktypen sowie deren Erhaltungszustand jedoch um sehr spezifische Drucke, können sog. werkspezifische Modelle für die Erkennung erstellt und verwendet werden.
                
            In der 
                    Nachkorrektur können die generierten maschinenverarbeitbaren Texte und Daten abschließend nachbearbeitet und korrigiert werden.
                
            OCR4all orientiert sich in seinem Aufbau an den beschriebenen Hauptkomponenten eines OCR-Workflows, gliedert diese jedoch noch einmal in unterschiedliche Teilmodule. Der modulare Aufbau erlaubt dabei eine Einbindung und Verwendung bereits bestehender Softwarelösungen, die gemäß ihrer Stärken zu einem kohärenten OCR-Workflow kombiniert werden.
            Grundsätzlich kann der Workflow vollautomatisch durchlaufen werden. Dennoch hat der Nutzer immer die Möglichkeit, korrigierend in jeden Teilschritt einzugreifen, um ein optimales Ergebnis zu garantieren, welches als Startpunkt des dann folgenden Teilschritts fungiert. Dafür können die für jedes Teilmodul vorgegebenen Einstellungen durch den Nutzer individuell angepasst werden.
            Das Preprocessing erfolgt in OCR4all wie oben beschrieben. Dabei werden alle gängigen Eingabeformate für Bilddateien unterstützt. Dem schließt sich die Layouttypisierung mithilfe des Segmentierungstools LAREX
 (s. Abbildung 2) an. Hier können werkspezifische Parameter zur Text- und Bildtypisierung festgelegt sowie zu erkennende Layoutregionen (Haupttext, Überschriften, Marginalien, Seitenzahlen etc.) definiert werden. Je nach Komplexität des vorliegenden Seitenlayouts ist nach einer automatischen Layouterkennung ein Eingriff in das vorliegende Ergebnis mittels unterschiedlicher Korrekturwerkzeuge möglich. Weiterhin kann in LAREX die Lesereihenfolge der Layoutbestandteile markiert werden, um den Lesefluss des Originals vorlagengetreu nachbilden zu können. Vor allem für die Verwendung des maschinenverarbeitbaren Textes in digitalen Editionen sind diese Funktionen unverzichtbar. 
                
            
               
               Abbildung 2: Im Teilmodul der Segmentierung erfolgen die Typisierung der Layoutelemente sowie die Festlegung der Lesereihenfolge. 
            
            Der Layouttypisierung folgt die Zeilensegmentierung. In dieser werden die Text beinhaltenden Layoutbestandteile in einzelne Zeilenbilder zerteilt (OCRopus), um die eigentliche OCR vorzubereiten.
                
            Anschließend wird im Erkennungsschritt aus den vorliegenden Einzelzeilen (mittels Calamari) maschinenverarbeitbarer Text generiert. Dazu können in OCR4all bereits standardmäßig integrierte gemischte Modelle für Fraktur- und Antiquaschriften unterschiedlicher Epochen genutzt werden. Es besteht die Möglichkeit, die entstandenen Texte anschließend in einem Editor komfortabel zu korrigieren (s. Abbildung 3).
                
            
               
               Abbildung 3: Im Editor kann generierter Text mithilfe eines sog. Virtual Keyboard (rechts) zeichengetreu korrigiert werden.
            
            Für die Feststellung der Fehlerrate der Zeichenerkennung kann im Evaluationsmodul der ursprünglich erkannte Text mit der durch den Nutzer vorgenommenen Korrektur verglichen werden.
            Darüber hinaus bietet OCR4all die Möglichkeit, die oben angesprochenen werkspezifischen Modelle unter Verwendung vorgenommener Textkorrekturen selbst zu trainieren, stetig zu verfeinern und anzuwenden. Besonders bei Werken mit erheblicher Typenvielfalt und -varianz, bei denen ein bestehendes gemischtes Modell keine hinreichenden Erkennungsergebnisse erzielt, können auf diese Weise dennoch sehr hohe Zeichenerkennungsraten erreicht werden.
            In der abschließenden Nachkorrektur können die generierten Texte editionsreif korrigiert und als Plain Text oder PageXML ausgegeben werden. Letzteres Format beinhaltet neben dem eigentlichen Text auch dessen Verankerung in semantischen Positionen auf den Druckseiten in Form von Koordinaten. 
                
            In Abhängigkeit des Ausgangsmaterials variiert der zum Erreichen einer sehr hohen Genauigkeit benötigte Arbeitsaufwand zwischen wenigen Minuten bei Werken mit einfachen Layoutstrukturen, für die ein passendes Modell vorliegt, und einigen Stunden bei sehr komplexen, frühen Drucken, für die werkspezifische Modelle trainiert werden müssen (Reul et al. 2019). 
         
         
            Workshopkonzeption
            Der ganztägige Workshop soll einem informatisch und technisch nicht spezifisch vorgeschulten Nutzerkreis einen nachvollziehbaren und verständlichen Einstieg in das Themen- und Problemfeld der OCR historischer Drucke bieten. Er wird dazu befähigen, mithilfe der vorgestellten Software eigenständig qualitativ hochwertige Texte aus ganz unterschiedlich anspruchsvollen Ausgangsdaten zu generieren – und dies mit zeitlich vertretbarem Aufwand. Die Konzeption erfolgt aus diesem Grund sehr praxisbezogen. Konkret bedeutet dies einen angeleiteten und individuell betreuten Durchgang durch den oben vorgestellten OCR-Workflow anhand verschiedener, nach Layoutkomplexität, Typographie, Erhaltungszustand und Entstehungszeitraum geclusterter Drucke. Dabei sollen anwendungsbezogen wichtige Grundfragen der OCR beantwortet werden: 
            
               Wie verändert sich entsprechend des Ausgangsmaterials die Anwendung der OCR-Workflows und der in ihm enthaltenen Submodule? 
               Mit welchem Aufwand ist in unterschiedlichen Bearbeitungsphasen des Materials zu rechnen? 
               Wie stark lässt sich der Workflow in Abhängigkeit des vorliegenden Materials automatisieren? 
               Wie schnell sind bei einem werkspezifischen Training welche Erkennungsraten erreichbar? 
               Welcher Aufwand ist mit Blick auf die spätere Verwendung der produzierten Texte überhaupt sinnvoll?
               …
            
            Da sich neben den oben beschriebenen, meist vormodernen Textspezifika auch eine grundlegende technische Expertise der Benutzer*innen im Bereich der OCR als eine wichtige Bedingung für die Produktion hochwertiger digitaler Texte herausgestellt hat, strebt der Workshop neben einer besonders praktischen Handlungsanleitung auch die Vermittlung der wichtigsten Funktionskonzepte der in OCR4all integrierten Submodule an. 
            Der Workshop umfasst neben den oben beschriebenen Inhalten auch Fragen der Einrichtung und Installation der Software. Zusätzlich wird eine Serverversion der Software zur Verfügung gestellt, die einen reibungslosen Ablauf gewährleistet und Trainingsprozesse werkspezifischer Modelle effizient durchführbar macht. Die max. 25 Teilnehmer*innen benötigen einen Laptop und Internetzugang. Die Verwendung einer Maus wird empfohlen. 
         
         
            Forschungsinteressen der Beitragenden
            
               Maximilian Wehner ist Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter am Lehrstuhl für Künstliche Intelligenz und Angewandte Informatik sowie am Zentrum für Philologie und Digitalität „Kallimachos“ der Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg. Forschungsinteressen sind die Literatur der Frühen Neuzeit, die OCR früher Drucke sowie die Entwicklung entsprechender Vermittlungskonzepte.
                
            
               Dr. Michael Dahnke arbeitet als Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter am Zentrum für Informations- und Medientechnologie der Universität Siegen. Seine Forschungsschwerpunkte bewegen sich in den Bereichen digitaler Editionsphilologie, Datenmodellierung im Rahmen von TEI sowie der OCR und der Modellierung gewonnener Textdaten.
                
            
               Florian Landes ist als Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften beschäftigt. Seine Forschungsinteressen liegen in den Bereichen der OCR sowie der digitalen Rekonstruktion.
                
            
               Robert Nasarek ist Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter am Lehrstuhl für Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte der Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg sowie des Zentrums für Wissenschaftsforschung der Nationalen Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina. Seine Arbeit bewegt sich im Bereich der Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte, OCR und Digital Humanities.
                
            
               Christian Reul ist Kommissarischer Leiter der Digitalisierungseinheit des Zentrums für Philologie und Digitalität „Kallimachos“ der Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg. Seine Forschungsschwerpunkte sind die OCR auf historischem Material sowie die Entwicklung von OCR-Software.
                
         
      
      
         
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Breuel, Thomas M. / Ul-Hasan, Adnan / Al-Azawi, Mayce Ali / Shafait, Faisal (2013): High-Performance OCR for Printed English and Fraktur Using LSTM Networks, in:
                         12th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition: 683-687.
                    
               
                  Reul, Christian / Christ, Dennis / Hartelt, Alexander / Balbach, Nico / Wehner, Maximilian / Springmann, Uwe / Wick, Christoph / Grundig, Christine / Büttner, Andreas / Puppe, Frank (2019): OCR4all – An Open-Source Tool Providing a (Semi-)Automatic OCR Workflow for Historical Printings, in: 
                        ArXiv Preprints (submitted to MDPI – Applied Sciences) https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.04032.
                    
               
                  Rydberg-Cox, Jeffrey A. (2009): Digitizing Latin Incunabula: Callenges, Methods, and Possibilities, in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 3, 1 http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/3/1/000027/000027.html.
                    
               
                  Springmann, Uwe / Lüdeling, Anke (2017): OCR of historical printings with an application to building diachronic corpora: A case study using the RIDGES herbal corpus, in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 11, 2 http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000288/000288.html.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Karl Kraus' Endzeitdrama »Die letzten Tage der Menschheit«, 1919 zum ersten Mal vollständig erschienen (Buchausgabe 1922), ist in vielerlei Hinsicht inkommensurabel. Der schiere Umfang sprengt alle Gattungsnormen (638 Seiten in der »Volk und Welt«-Ausgabe von 1978). Die fünf Akte plus Vorspiel und Epilog sind in 220 Szenen unterteilt, es gibt je nach Zählweise um die 1.000 sprechende Figuren bzw. Instanzen (zum Vergleich: als nächstgrößtes deutschsprachiges Drama gilt Grabbes »Napoleon oder Die hundert Tage« von 1831 mit 259 Figuren).
         Die Zählweise ist nicht nur deshalb kontingent, weil es zahlreiche Rufe aus der Menge gibt, die sich nicht quantifizieren lassen (wozu vor allem auch das undurchsichtige Stimmengewirr im Epilog gehört), sondern auch, weil es konkrete Gruppierungen wie die ›Fünfzig Drückeberger‹ (III/26) oder ›Die zwölfhundert Pferde‹ (V/55) gibt, die man theoretisch quantifizieren könnte, auch wenn dies nicht unmittelbar sinnvoll erscheint. Insgesamt spricht man tatsächlich besser von Sprecherinstanzen, die von historischen Personen über namenlose Zwischenrufer und allegorische Figuren (etwa den »Hyänen, die Menschengesichter tragen«) bis hin zur »Stimme Gottes« reichen.
         Es ist nicht nur auf das Thema des Stücks bezogen – die Apokalypse des Ersten Weltkriegs –, sondern auch auf die Form, wenn Kraus im Vorwort schreibt: »Die Aufführung des Dramas, dessen Umfang nach irdischem Zeitmaß etwa zehn Abende umfassen würde, ist einem Marstheater zugedacht. Theatergänger dieser Welt vermöchten ihm nicht standzuhalten.« (Kraus 1978, S. 5) Die Handlung der Tragödie ist »unmöglich, zerklüftet, heldenlos« (ebd.) und erschwert jede Absicht, das Stück darzustellen, zumal vollständig. Dies betrifft sowohl Inszenierungen auf der Bühne oder als Hörspiel (obwohl es schon Kompletteinspielungen gibt) als auch digitale Modellierungen der Figurenbeziehungen.
         Es ist Konsens innerhalb des Forschungszweigs der Netzwerkanalyse dramatischer Texte, dass sich eine Einzelanalyse der verhältnismäßig übersichtlichen Figurennetzwerke selten lohnt. Das Augenmerk liegt daher normalerweise auf der Untersuchung struktureller Entwicklungen hunderter oder tausender Stücke über verschiedene historische Zeiträume (Algee-Hewitt 2017, Trilcke/Fischer 2018).
         »Die letzten Tage der Menschheit« gehören hier zu den Ausnahmen. Ziel dieses Projekts ist es, das Stück als soziales Netzwerk zu visualisieren, basierend auf Kookkurrenzen von Sprecherinstanzen in den einzelnen Szenen. Voraussetzung dafür ist eine brauchbare Formalisierung des Gesamttextes. Dieser ist einerseits bereits digitalisiert, in annehmbarer Qualität innerhalb des Projekts Gutenberg-DE (obwohl es in dieser Version kaum eine Seite ohne zumindest kleinere OCR-Fehler gibt). Andererseits gibt es noch keine digitale Fassung in einem Format, das die wissenschaftliche Auswertung ermöglicht.
         Am Beginn dieses Projekts stand daher die Herstellung einer TEI-Version des Dramas, die vor Konferenzbeginn veröffentlicht wurde und damit der wissenschaftlichen Community zum ersten Mal eine Version des Textes zur Verfügung stellt, die auf die FAIR-Prinzipien setzt (findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable). Neben einem Qualitätssprung hinsichtlich der Textbasis im Vergleich zur Gutenberg-DE-Version stand dabei die Auszeichnung der Sprecher-IDs im Mittelpunkt. Da, wie bereits angedeutet, diese Auszeichnung kontingent ist, also je nach Formalisierungsentscheidung anders aussehen kann, wird dieser Prozess offengelegt. So werden etwa die Vielzahl an Stimmen aus Menschenmengen oder die Unzahl ausrufender Zeitungsverkäufer nachvollziehbar individualisiert, speziell die Massenszenen in Wien, etwa die Geschehnisse an der Sirk-Ecke, die das Vorspiel und jeden der fünf Akte eröffnen.
         Ergebnis ist ein visualisiertes Netzwerk, das auf einem Poster im A0-Format einen Blick ins Kraus'sche »Marstheater« erlaubt, auf die schiere Masse der Auftritte und Stimmen, aus der doch eine Struktur hervorscheint, wie sie bisher im Kontext der Kraus-Forschung noch nicht visualisiert worden ist. So werden viele »innere Symmetrien« sichtbar (Matala de Mazza 2018), die das Stück strukturieren, wiederkehrende Konstellationen wie etwa die vier Offiziere am Beginn jedes Aktes oder die Szenen in der Schulklasse (I/9 und V/23).
         Deutlich wird im Netzwerkgraph auch die Diskrepanz zwischen Front und Heimat, zwei Welten für sich, wobei Kraus den Fokus auf die entlarvende Sprache von nicht direkt am Krieg beteiligten Personen legt: »Wenn nicht Krieg wär, möcht man rein glauben, es is Friede.« (Kraus 1978, S. 95)
         Da der Text nunmehr als Volltext-TEI-Dokument vorliegt, lässt sich auch der Word Space in das Netzwerk hineinmodellieren, d. h., die Anzahl der Wörter pro Sprecherinstanz. Auf diese Weise scheinen deutlich die (quantitativ gesehen) Hauptfiguren dieses »heldenlosen« Dramas auf (etwa der »Nörgler« und der »Optimist« sowie der »Patriot« und der »Abonnent«), die oft über dutzende Seiten als Zweierkonstellationen auftreten, die aber darüber hinaus, wie der Graph verdeutlicht, auch anderweitig vernetzt sind.
         Um auch komparatistische Aspekte abzudecken, werden auf dem Poster vergleichend einige Netzwerkmetriken präsentiert, um die Gigantomanie des Dramas mit Zahlen zu verdeutlichen.
         Zur Gewährleistung der Nachnutzbarkeit und Nachhaltigkeit der
Modellierung wurde das Stück auch dem German Drama Corpus hinzugefügt
(), der den Zugang zu bestimmten Formalisierungen der Textsubstanz erheblich erleichtert (Fischer et al. 2019).

      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  
                  Algee-Hewitt, Mark
	(2017): Distributed Character: Quantitative Models
		  of the English Stage, 1550–1900. In: New Literary
		  History 48(4), 751–782. Johns Hopkins University
		  Press.
		  DOI: 
               
               
                  Fischer, Frank / Börner, Ingo / Göbel, Mathias / Hechtl, Angelika / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Trilcke, Peer
		  (2019): Programmable Corpora. Die digitale
		  Literaturwissenschaft zwischen Forschung und
		  Infrastruktur am Beispiel von DraCor. DHd
		  2019. Digital Humanities: multimedial &
		  multimodal. Konferenzabstracts, S. 194–197.
		  DOI: 
               
               
                  Kraus, Karl
		  (1978): Die letzten Tage der Menschheit. Tragödie in fünf Akten mit Vorspiel und Epilog. Ausgewählte Werke. Band 5,1. Berlin: Volk und Welt 1978.
		
               
                  Matala de Mazza, Ethel
		  (2018): Der populäre Pakt. Verhandlungen der Moderne zwischen Operette und Feuilleton. Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer 2018.
		
               
                  Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank
		  (2018): Literaturwissenschaft als Hackathon. Zur
		  Praxeologie der Digital Literary Studies und ihren
		  epistemischen Dingen. In: Wie Digitalität die
		  Geisteswissenschaften verändert: Neue
		  Forschungsgegenstände und Methoden. Hrsg. von Martin
		  Huber und Sybille Krämer (= Sonderband der
		  Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 3).
		  DOI: 
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            In diesem Beitrag stellen wir eine Methode vor, um Informationen über Figurenrelationen in dramatischen Texten, die innerhalb der 
dramatis personae (Figurenverzeichnis) sprachlich kodiert sind, zu extrahieren und maschinenlesbar im TEI/XML vorzuhalten. Das Figurenverzeichnis kann als Paratext (Genette 1993) dem Nebentext zugerechnet werden, ist jedoch literaturwissenschaftlich, von Einführungswerken abgesehen, noch so gut wie nicht erschlossen. Das Figurenverzeichnis steht zwar unabhängig vom eigentlichen Text am Anfang, kann jedoch bereits Figuren- bzw. Textwissen vermitteln, indem die Figuren nach sozial-politischem Stand, Familienzugehörigkeit oder nach anderen Gruppierungen geordnet sind (vgl. Abbildung 1). Häufig lässt sich an der Positionierung eines Names im Figurenverzeichnis auch die Wichtigkeit der betreffenden Figur im Drama ablesen (Pangallo 2015, 91). Durch diese Strukturierung ist es teilweise möglich, schon vorab auf zentrale Konfliktpotentiale des Textes zu schließen (Jeßing 2015, 79–80). Darüberhinaus kann das Figurenverzeichnis laut Pfister und Asmuth auch der Ort erster auktorialer Bewertungen oder Hinweise sein und dient somit nicht nur der reinen Vorstellung der Figuren und ihrer Strukturen untereinander (Pfister 2001, 95; Asmuth 2016, 85).

            
               
                  
                   Abbildung 1: Figurenverzeichnis in Die Räuber (Friedrich Schiller, 1781)
               
            
            Das Verfahren – und dessen Implementierung in einem Python-Skript – ist auch für in Zukunft digitalisierte Dramen anwendbar, und wird von uns als quelloffene Software zur Verfügung gestellt. Es ist vergleichsweise einfach auf neue Sprachstufen oder Genres anpassbar und liefert – auch bei nicht-perfekten Ergebnissen – eine gute Vorlage. Eine Evaluation des Verfahrens erfolgt auf ungesehenen Testdaten. Außerdem veröffentlichen wir einen Datensatz mit extrahierten Figurenrelationen aus deutschsprachigen Dramen, die manuell validiert und korrigiert wurden. Diese Daten werden zur einfachen und breiten Nutzung im TEI-Format in das GerDraCor eingespeist. Schlussendlich beschreiben wir beispielhaft zwei Analyseszenarien in denen die Daten neue Einblicke bieten (können).

         
         
            Automatische Extraktion von Figurenrelationen
            Unsere Methode unterscheidet zwischen sieben Kategorien von Figurenrelationen (Tabelle 1). Ausschlaggebend für die Zuordnung zu einer der Kategorien sind Signalwörter wie “Vater”, “Kammerdiener”, “Geschwister” etc. Diese Signalwörter werden in einer kontextfreien Grammatik der entsprechenden Kategorie zugeordnet.
            
                Tabelle 1: Figurenrelationen
               
                  Relationen Label
                  gerichtet/ungerichtet
                  Beschreibung
               
               
                  parent_of
                  directed
                  Eine Figur ist Elternteil einer anderen
               
               
                  lover_of
                  directed
                  Liebesbeziehungen (unverheiratet)
               
               
                  related_with
                  directed
                  Familienbeziehungen (außer Eheleute)
               
               
                  associated_with
                  directed
                  Figuren, die miteinander anderweitig verbunden sind (z.B. Diener, Kindermädchen etc.)
               
               
                  siblings
                  undirected
                  Figuren, die mindestens ein gemeinsames Elternteil haben
               
               
                  spouses
                  undirected
                  verheiratete oder verlobte Figuren
               
               
                  friends
                  undirected
                  Freundschaftsbeziehungen
               
            
            Kontextfreie Grammatiken bezeichnen in der Informatik eine Sammlung aller syntaktisch korrekten Programme einer Programmiersprache (Böckenhauer und Hromkovič 2013, 177). Die formalisierte Art, in der die Grammatik alle Regeln einer Programmiersprache enthält, erlaubt es, automatisierte Syntaxanalysen von Programmen durchzuführen (Böckenhauer und Hromkovič 2013, 177). Die Regeln werden mit Hilfe zweier Alphabete beschrieben: Das Terminalalphabet enthält alle Wörter einer Sprache, wohingegen das Nichtterminalalphabet Variablen enthält, die vorgeben, auf welche Art und Weise die Wörter kombiniert werden können (Böckenhauer und Hromkovič 2013, 178).
            Wir nutzen eine solche Grammatik, um drei verschiedene Zeilenarten im Figurenverzeichnis zu unterscheiden, bei denen es sich um Nichtterminale handelt. Alle in den Sätzen vorkommenden Tokens sind Terminale, deren Kombination und Anzahl Aufschluss darüber gibt, um was für eine Art von Zeile es sich jeweils handelt. Auf diese Weise können auch zeilenübergreifende Relationen erkannt werden.
            Zu Beginn des Programmablaufs werden die in GerDraCor vorhandenen Figuren-IDs zusammen mit dem Figurenverzeichnis ausgelesen und gespeichert. Da wir die Beziehungen zwischen den Figuren ausschließlich anhand der Angaben im Figurenverzeichnis konstruieren, muss der Dramentext nicht extra eingelesen werden. Daraus ergibt sich die Beschränkung, dass jegliche Beziehungen, die nicht im Figureverzeichnis explizit gemacht werden, vom Programm auch nicht erkannt werden können. Es geht demnach ausschließlich darum, das Personenverzeichnis maschinenlesbar und -interpretierbar zu machen. So ignoriert das Programm beispielsweise auch alle Zeilen, die eine Gruppe von Figuren als Kollektiv einführt, da diese als “Nummern oder als anonyme Angehörige von Untergruppen” (Schlaffer 1972, 11) meistens keine eigenen Namen haben und auch keine explizit gemachten Beziehungen.
            
            Anschließend werden alle Tokens jeder Zeile des Figurenverzeichnisses daraufhin untersucht, ob es sich dabei um Figurennennungen oder Signalwörter handelt und die Grammatik einem Parser übergeben, der die Zeilen des Figurenverzeichnisses in Baumstrukturen überführt (Abbildung 2).
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 2: Zwei reduzierte Baumstrukturen für Figuren aus Nathan der Weise. 
               
            
            Aus den erstellten Baumstrukturen werden einzelne Informationen ausgelesen, die grundlegend für die Erkennung der Figurenrelationen sind. Zuerst wird überprüft, wie viele IDs sich in einer Zeile befinden. Die erste oder einzige wird zur Erstellung späterer Relationen abgespeichert. Befindet sich in einer Zeile zusätzlich zu einer ID noch ein Signalwort für eine Figurenrelation, bezieht sich die Zeile in der Regel auf die vorangegangene, wie beispielsweise in 
                    Nathan der Weise:
                
            Sultan Saladin.
            Sittah, seine Schwester.
            Die zweite Zeile enthält neben dem Namen noch das Signalwort “Schwester”, das auf die Beziehungsart siblings hinweist, eine ungerichtete Relation. Da keine zweite Figurenbezeichnung in der Zeile vorkommt, entnimmt das Programm als zweiten Part für die Geschwisterbeziehung den Namen bzw. die daraus abgeleitete ID saladin aus der vorherigen Zeile:
            
            Wenn die beiden benötigten IDs für das Erstellen der Figurenrelation feststehen, wird die Art der Relation durch das Auslesen des Signalworts aus der Baumstruktur festgestellt. Danach werden daraus die Zeilen mit den Figurenrelationen erstellt und diese anschließend in die jeweilige TEI-Version des Textes geschrieben.
            Befindet sich in einer Zeile eine zweite Figuren-ID, bezieht sich die Zeile nicht auf eine vorangegangene, sondern stellt selbst den zweite Bezugspunkt der Relation. Das ist beispielsweise bei der Figur “Camillo Rota” in 
                    Emilia Galotti der Fall:
                
            Camillo Rota, einer von des Prinzen Räten.
            Die erste erkannte ID ist camillo_rota, die zweite der_prinz, abgeleitet aus “des Prinzen”. Die IDs werden in gerichtete Relationen mit aktivem und passivem Part überführt:
            
            Das Programm arbeitet dabei ausschließlich mit den IDs. Dafür ist es nicht nötig, dass Figurennamen explizit als Namen oder Adelstitel als Titel erkannt werden. Es geht ausschließlich darum aus den einzelnen Wörtern einer Zeile im Figurenverzeichnis Namen bzw. Namensteile und Titelangaben herauszufiltern, die den IDs entsprechen, um die Zeilen einer oder mehreren Figuren zuordnen zu können.
            Um auch IDs zu erkennen, die sich geringfügig von den Namensnennungen im Figurenverzeichnis unterscheiden, überprüft das Programm pro Wort eine Reihe an Varianten. So trennt es beispielsweise vom oben gennannten Wort “Prinzen” das Suffix ab und überprüft, ob ein Artikel Teil der ID ist. So kann “des Prinzen” der ID “der_prinz” zugeordnet werden. In manchen Fällen funktioniert diese Abwandlung aber nicht so reibungslos. In 
                    Der Eheteufel auf Reisen wird eine Figur im Figurenverzeichnis mit dem Namen “Gustel” eingeführt, wohingegen die ID „gustchen“ lautet. Die ID orientiert sich hier an der Namensform, die im Stück tatsächlich verwendet wird und nicht an der Bezeichnung im Figurenverzeichnis. Das führt dazu, dass das Programm die ID “gustchen” nicht dem Wort “Gustel” zuordnen kann, da sie sich zu stark unterscheiden.
                
         
         
            Evaluation
            Um die Methode zu evaluieren, wurden die automatisch erzeugten Relationen manuell nachkorrigiert und so ein Goldstandart erzeugt. Im Schnitt bearbeiteten die Korrektoren 12 Texte pro Stunde. Beim Abgleich der automatisch erzeugten Ergebnisse mit dem Goldstandart lag der Macro-Average-Recall Wert bei 0,3 (Standardabweichung: 0,3) und der Wert von Macro-Average-Precision bei 0,55 (Standardabweichung: 0,4), was einen Macro-Average-F-Score von 0,49 (Standardabweichung: 0,25) ergibt.
         
         
            Korpus
            GerDraCor ist ein deutsches Dramenkorpus, das nach TEI-P5 Standarts kodiert ist und im Dezember 2019 474 Dramen enthält, die im Zeitraum von 1730 bis 1940 veröffentlicht wurden (Fischer u. a. 2019). Es ist Teil des größeren DraCor (Fischer u. a. 2019), das als 
                    Programmable Corpus darauf ausgelegt ist, durch Community-Anstrengungen korrigiert und verbessert werden zu können (Fischer u. a. 2019, 195). Da auf einem Fork von GerDraCor gearbeitet wurde, können die automatisch erzeugten Figurenrelationen dem Korpus unproblematisch hinzugefügt werden. Zusätzlich wurden die Relationen, wie bereits beschrieben, manuell nachkorrigiert, um eine erhöhte Qualität für die Nachnutzung zu gewährleisten.
                
            Im Rahmen der manuellen Nachkorrektur wurden außerdem interessante Fälle identifiziert. So wird etwa eine Gruppe von Figuren in dem oben abgebildeten Figurenverzeichnis von Schillers 
                    Die Räuber als “Libertiner,
		    nachher Banditen” bezeichnet, wodurch
		    Informationen aus der späteren Handlung des
		    Stückes vorweggenommen werden. Diese Art der
		    Vorwegnahme findet sich außerdem in Stücken von
		    Grabbe
		    (Herzog Theodor von
		    Gothland, Panizza
		    (Das Liebeskonzil) und
		    Uhland
		    (Ludwig der Bayer). In Kaisers 
                    Stadt und Land hingegen wird mit der Zeile “Erster Bergmann, später Michael” keine Entwicklung in der Handlung, sondern eine Veränderung der Sprecherbezeichnung markiert. Vorwegnahmen mit Bezug auf veränderliche Beziehungen zwischen Figuren konnten nicht festgestellt werden.
                
         
         
            Analyseszenarien
            Wir stellen im folgenden zwei Analysen vor, in denen von den automatisch extrahierten Relationen Gebrauch gemacht wird, sowohl eine Einzeltext- als auch eine Korpusanalyse. Diese illustrieren Möglichkeiten, die Relationen in der Textanalyse zu berücksichtigen.
            Im ersten Beispiel betrachten wir Shakespeares 
                    Romeo and Juliet in der derzeit auf dracor.org verfügbaren Fassung. Zunächst können die Relationen visualisiert werden. Abbildung 3 zeigt das Figurennetzwerk nach Kopräsenz auf der linken und das Netzwerk, das sich aus den sozialen Beziehungen ergibt auf der rechten Seite. Zur besseren Lesbarkeit wurde ein geeigneter Layout-Algorithmus angewendet. Dabei ist zunächst interessant, dass die beiden Familien keineswegs unverbunden sind: Über Mercutio (Freund von Romeo) und Paris (Verlobter von Julia) sind beide mit dem Prinzen verbunden.
                
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 3: Figurennetzwerke nach Kopräsenz (oben) und Relationen (unten). Zur besseren Übersichtlichkeit wurden die Figuren auf feste Positionen gesetzt, die oben und unten gleich sind. Bezeichnungen werden nur gezeigt wenn der Grad groß genug ist (oben) oder sie an einer Beziehung beteiligt sind (unten). 
               
            
            Auch wenn Abbildung 3 eine gewisse Symmetrie suggeriert, ist diese keineswegs gegeben wenn wir die Redeanteile nach Familien aufschlüsseln, wie es aus den Annotationen ebenfalls direkt möglich ist. Abbildung 4 zeigt die aggregierten Redeanteile der Figuren, wobei Figuren, die durch Verwandtschaft oder Arbeitsverhältnis zu einer der Familien gehören, zusammengefasst wurden (mit Ausnahme von Mercutio und Paris, die beide mit dem Prinzen verwandt sind). Es zeigt sich, dass Angehörige der Familie Capulet etwas weniger als doppelt so viele Wörter äußern als Angehörige der Familie Montague.
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 4:  Redeanteile nach Familie 
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 5: Verteilung der Relationen im Gesamtkorpus
               
            
            Betrachtet man das annotierte Gesamtkorpus stellt man fest, dass die Relationen ungleich verteilt sind. Während Ehen/Verlobungen, Elternschaft und sonstige Assoziationen relativ häufig vorkommen, spielen Geliebte, sonstige Verwandtschaften, Freundschaften und Geschwister eine vergleichsweise kleine Rolle.
            
            In Abbildung 6 sehen wir die Anzahl der Relationen bestimmter Typen
ins Verhältnis gesetzt zur Großgattung (Komödie/Tragödie). Dabei
wurden die Angaben auf den Titeln der Dramen übernommen und leicht
vereinheitlicht (z.B. Bürgerliches Trauerspiel → Tragödie oder Zauberlustspiel → Komödie). Dabei ist zu konstatieren, dass Median und erstes Quartil bei 0 für alle Dramen bei 0 liegen: Viele Dramen weisen keine Beziehungsdefinition auf (oder sie konnten nicht automatisch identifiziert werden, siehe Fußnote ). Größere oder signifikante Abweichungen zwischen den Gattungen gibt es nicht, egal welche Relation betrachtet wird. Lediglich die Relation spouses scheint im Figurenverzeichnis von Komödien häufiger genannt zu werden.
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 6:  Anzahl typisierter Relationen nach Gattung 
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 7: Anzahl typisierter Relationen nach Autor. Zur besseren Übersicht wurden nur Autoren berücksichtigt, die mindestens durch fünf Dramen vertreten sind
               
            
            Eine Verteilung der genannten Relationen nach Autor zeichnet jedoch ein anderes Bild (Abbildung 7). Bestimmte Autoren, vor allem Ludwig Anzengruber (1839-1889) und Johann Nestroy (1801-1862), haben klare Tendenzen dazu, mehr Relationen im Figurenverzeichnis zu nennen. Beide verfassen tendenziell Possen und Komödien.
         
         
            Fazit
            Mit den von uns bereitgestellten maschinenlesbaren Informationen ermöglichen wir Analysen dramatischer Figuren, die die als bekannt vorausgesetzten Informationen im Figurenverzeichnis mit berücksichtigen können. Neben den oben skizzierten Analysen können die Informationen auch in inhaltliche Analysen einfließen und etwa die soziale Nähe mit der Bühnennähe korrelieren o.ä.
            Kontextfreie Grammatiken haben sich hier – trotz der bekannten Schwächen im Bezug auf natürliche Sprache – als effizienter Formalismus herausgestellt, um die Figurenverzeichnisse maschinenlesbar zu machen. Wir halten dieses Verfahren für geeignet, um auch in anderen Kontexten mit semi-strukturierten Textdaten zu arbeiten, wo aufgrund der begrenzten Menge ein maschinelles Lernverfahren nur bedingt zum Einsatz kommen kann.
         
      
      
         
            
      Beispielsweise  spielt das Figurenverzeichnis im kürzlich erschienenen
      (Tonger-Erk, Werber, und Baum 2018), aber auch in (Genette 1993)
      quasi keine Rolle.
    
            
               https://dracor.org
            
            
      Für mehr     Informationen vergleiche (Schlaffer 1972, 11)
    
            
               
            
            
      Die konkreten Ergebnisse wurden auf den vollautomatisch erzeugten Relationen erzielt.
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Asmuth, Bernhard.  (2016). 
  Einführung in die Dramenanalyse. Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler Verlag.

               
                   Böckenhauer, Hans-Joachim /  Juraj Hromkovič  (2013): 
  Formale Sprachen: Endliche Automaten, Grammatiken, lexikalische und syntaktische Analyse. Zürich: Springer.

               
                   Fischer, Frank / Ingo Börner / Mathias Göbel /
  Angelika Hechtl  / Christopher Kittel / Carsten Milling /  Peer
  Trilcke
  (2019):  „Programmable Corpora – Die digitale Literaturwissenschaft zwischen Forschung und Infrastruktur am Beispiel von DraCor“. In 
  Proceedings of DHd. 
  .

               
                   Genette, Gérard  (1993): 
  Palimpseste. Die Literatur auf zweiter Stufe. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

               
                   Jeßing, Benedikt (2015): 
  Dramenanalyse. Eine Einführung. Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag.

               
                   Pangallo, Matteo (2015):  „‚I will keep and character that name‘: Dramatis Personae Lists in Early Modern Manuscript Plays“. 
  Early Theatre 18 (2): 87–118. .

               
                   Pfister, Manfred (2001): 
  Das Drama. München: Wilhelm Fink.

               
                   Schlaffer, Hannelore (1972):
  Dramenform und Klassenstruktur. Eine Analyse der dramatis persona "Volk". Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler Verlag.

               
                   Tonger-Erk, Lily  /  Nils Werber /  Constanze Baum (Hrsg.) (2018):  „Hauptsache Nebentext. Regiebemerkungen im Drama“. 
  Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 48 (3).

            
         
      
   



      
         
            Historischer Raum konstituiert sich stets als Summe der dokumentierten Wahrnehmungen einer Zeit. Dabei spielen die beschriebenen Räume nicht nur eine dokumentarische Rolle, vielmehr waren sie in ihrer Zeit normative Dokumente, so dass sich mentale Räume nicht nur im Begehen entwickeln konnten, sondern auch im Erlesen oder Erblicken. Historischer Raum kann also als Bricolage aus Erfahrungen historischer AkteurInnen verstanden werden, welche diese selbst körperlich oder aber textuell bzw. bildlich vermittelt gemacht haben.
         
         
            Das durch die Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaft geförderte Projekt „Becoming Urban – Reconstructing the city of Graz in the long 19th century (BeUrb)“ widmet sich als Gemeinschaftsprojekt der Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, des Stadtmuseums Graz sowie des Stadtarchivs Graz der (Re-)konstruktion dieses historischen Raums am Fallbeispiel der Stadt Graz im langen 19. Jahrhundert (1789-1914). Thematisiert werden dabei gleichfalls die Veränderung der Stadt im Kontext der Urbanisierung wie auch deren Wahrnehmung in schriftlichen, bildlichen und kartographischen Quellen.
         
         
            Durch die Zusammenarbeit von Stadtarchiv, GrazMuseum und Universität konnte die Quellenbasis mit historischen Reiseberichten und -führern, Karten, Plänen und weiteren geographischen Darstellungen sowie Stadtansichten auf Fotografien, Druckgrafiken und Gemälden auf unterschiedlichsten Gattungen aufgebaut werden, was einen umfangreichen Blick auf das Verständnis von der Stadt Graz im 19. Jh. erlaubt. Diese transdisziplinäre Herangehensweise, welche Historische Geographie, Kunstgeschichte, Urbanistik und Digitale Geisteswissenschaften vereint, wird durch eine gemeinsame technische Grundlage in Form eines Geoinformationssystems ermöglicht. 
         
         
            Als erste Herausforderung steht dabei die Erarbeitung eines gemeinsamen Datenmodells, welches die quellenspezifischen Charakteristika abbildet und die aufgenommenen Quellen gleichzeitig auf einer topographischen Ebene miteinander in Beziehung setzt. Modellierung wird dabei als „a process of signification and reasoning in action“ (Ciula / Eide, 2017  i34) angesehen. Die Theorie Modelle als
            Icons
             – also als bildhafte
Vertreter anzusehen, hilft dabei Blickpunkte zu verschieben und
Interpretationsspielräumen zu eröffnen, denn: “The context of the
interpretation changes the sign but the sign also changes the context
of interpretation” (i38). Fotografien und Pläne, aber auch Texte sind
zudem an sich bildhafte Modelle, die in einem spezifischen
Ähnlichkeitsverhältnis zum Original stehen. Ziel des Projektes ist es
also, aus diesen singulären Modellen relationale, diagrammatische
Modelle in Form eigener historischer, dynamisch abfragbarer Karten zu
erzeugen, die eine, wie Kralemann und Lattmann definieren,
“interdependence between the structure of the sign and the structure
of the object” (Kralemann / Lattmann, 2013: 3408) aufweisen.
         
         Umsetzung
         
            Die Umsetzung kann in eine Datenaufbereitung und daran anschließend eine vertiefte Geoanalyse unterteilt werden. Abschließend werden beide Ergebnisse des Projektes in einem Webauftritt präsentiert und nachhaltig in einem Repositorium archiviert.
         
         a)
                    Ein Metadatenmodell wird für die bildlichen, textuellen und kartographischen Quellen in LIDO implementiert.
            
         b)
                    Historische Karten werden georeferenziert und transkribiert, d.h. die in der Entzerrung entstandenen Artefakte werden auf einen Grundplan übertragen, der auf der Basis des Franziszeischen Katasters (1824) erstellt wird. Dabei werden bauliche Veränderungen, die sich aus den späteren Kartendarstellungen ergeben, in die Grundkarte integriert. Ein in diesem Kontext aufgebauter eindeutiger Identifikator fungiert als Grundlage für die räumliche Verortung der Bild- und Textquellen.
            
         c)
                    Textuelle Stadtbeschreibungen (z.B. Reiseberichte) werden transkribiert und die räumlichen Objekte (Gebiete, Wege, Plätze, Gebäude) darin in TEI-P5 mit den Referenzen aus der Basiskarte ausgezeichnet. In den Texten implizit vorhandene ‚narrative‘ Wege bzw. Abfolgen der Nennungen der Geoobjekte finden dabei ebenfalls besondere Berücksichtigung.
            
         d)
                    Bildliche Darstellungen (z.B. Gemälde, Druckgraphiken, Fotos, Postkarten) werden in LIDO beschrieben, in ihrer zeitlichen und räumlichen Gestaltung verortet. Dabei werden nicht nur abgebildete Objekte, sondern auch die mögliche Standorte und Blickrichtungen einbezogen
            
         Auf Basis der gewonnenen Daten kann nun ein ‚Spiel mit den Räumen‘
beginnen, welches die hermeneutische Aneignung durch die Projektteilnehmer ebenso beinhaltet wie die diagrammatische Analyse (vgl. Bauer / Ernst 2010, Rau 2013). In der Analyse wird nun die sich stets im architektonischen Wandel begriffene ‚fluide‘ Stadt stehen, wie auch das Diskursfeld Graz, welche sich in den Quellen widerspiegelt. Dabei wird nicht nur die ‚dargestellte‘ Stadt im Zentrum stehen, sondern in besonderer Weise auch diejenigen Bezirke, die gerade nicht in den Quellen genannt werden und so als ‚blinde Flecken‘ im Diskursfeld der Stadt besonderer Aufmerksamkeit bedürfen.
            
         Dabei stellen sich fragen wie: In wieweit sind jene Gebäude Ereignisorte der öffentlichen, aber auch einer ganz privaten Wahrnehmung? Wie sind die Eindrücke einer Stadt für Bewohnerinnen und Bewohner? Wie im Gegensatz dazu für Reisende? Wie möchte sich die Stadt nach außen repräsentieren? Was bewirken diesbezüglich Bau- und Infrastrukturmaßnahmen? Welche Bedeutung kommt Plänen einer zukünftigen Stadt zu, die niemals umgesetzt wurden? Wo finden sich widersprüchliche Wahrnehmungen – oder Raumverzerrungen?
      
      
         
            
      Als Spielwiese dient das open-source geographisches Informationssystem ‚QGIS‘ und die ‚GAMS-Infrastruktur‘, die die Forschungsdaten (GML, TEI, LIDO) langzeitarchiviert und die Möglichkeit bietet Daten neu zu kombinieren (content models, GEOSPARQL) und zu vernetzen (RDF) und abzufragen (SPARQL, SOLR).
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Bauer, Matthias / Ernst, Christoph 
	(2010): Diagrammatik. Einführung in ein kultur- und
	medienwissenschaftliches Forschungsfeld. Bielefeld:
	transcript.
      
               
                   Ciula, Arianna / Eide, Øyvind  (2017): „Modelling in digital humanities: Sings in context“ in: Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 32 (suppl_1) i33-i46 
        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw045
               
               
                   GAMS:  Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset
	Management System, 
        http://gams.uni-graz.at/
               
               
                   GEOSPARQL – A Geographic Query Language for
	RDF DATA  (2012). Version 1.0 (eds.) OGC 
        https://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/geosparql
               
               
                   GML: Geographic Markup Language  (2012) – Extended schemas and encoding rules. Version 3.3.0 (eds.) OGC 
        https://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/gml
               
               
                   LIDO – Lightweight Information Describing
	Objects  (2010). Version 1.0 (eds.) Coburn, Erin et al. 
        http://www.lido-schema.org/schema/v1.0/lido-v1.0-specification.pdf
               
               
                   Kralemann, B. / Lattmann, C.  (2013):
	„Models as icons: modeling models in the semiotic framework of Peirce’s theory of signs“ in:  Synthese 190, 3397-3420.
      
               
                   QGIS: 
                  https://www.qgis.org/de/site/
               
               
                   Rau, Susanne (2013): Räume, Wahrnehmungen, Nutzungen. Frankfurt/New York: Campus.
               
                   RDF – Resource Description Framework  (2014) (eds.) W3C 
          https://www.w3.org/RDF/
               
               
                   Scheuermann, Leif  (2014): “Thoughts on a Web Based Co-productive Spatio-Temporal Information System” in: Rau, Susanne / Schönherr, Ekkehard (eds.): Mapping Spatial Relations, Their Perceptions and Danymics. Cham / Heidelberg / New York: Springer 17-23.
               
                   SOLR: Apache Solr. (eds.)  Apache Software Foundation 
          https://lucene.apache.org/solr/
               
               
                   SPARQL 1.1 Query Language  (2013) (eds.) W3C 
  https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/
               
               
                   TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text
	  Encoding and Interchange  (2019). Version 3.6.0 (eds.) the TEI Consortium 
          https://tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/Guidelines.pdf
               
            
         
      
   



      
         Am Lehrstuhl für Medieninformatik der Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg wird derzeit ein Prototyp zum Management von Forschungsdaten entwickelt (FDMS), der heterogene Daten, die momentan nicht digital katalogisiert werden, speichern, beschreiben, und veröffentlichen soll. Von besonderer Bedeutung sind hierbei die FAIR-Prinzipien, wonach wissenschaftliche Daten auffindbar (Findable), zugänglich (Accessible), interoperabel (Interoperable), und wiederverwendbar (Re-usable) sein sollten (Wilkinson 2016). Es existiert bereits ein Projekt zur Einführung eines Forschungsinformationssystems (FIS) an der Universitätsbibliothek Bamberg (Franke 2019), jedoch liegt dort der Fokus auf Publikation, Forschenden, und Projekten. Forschungsdaten werden hier bisher nur am Rande als Anhang bei der Publikation von Dissertationen und anderen Arbeiten adressiert. Weitere Forschungsdaten, die mit keiner Publikation zusammenhängen, werden hingegen in diesem FIS nicht miteinbezogen. Aus diesem Grund soll ein FDMS entwickelt werden, welches genau diese Art von Forschungsdaten ohne zugehörige Publikation, sowie auch alle anderen Forschungsdaten abdeckt.
         Eine wichtige Anforderung und Herausforderung für das FDMS stellt die Heterogenität der Daten dar. Diese Heterogenität manifestiert sich durch die unterschiedlichen Fachrichtungen der Lehrstühle an der Universität Bamberg und dementsprechend in einer Vielzahl an Metadatenschemata und Datenformaten. Die Erschließung und weitere Verwendung dieser Metadaten ist von großer Bedeutung, da die effiziente Suche sowie weitere Dienste, wie Filterung oder Visualisierung, von umfangreichen Metadaten profitieren (Neuroth 2017) und zudem Fördergeber wie die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Anforderungen an ein Forschungsdatenmanagement stellen, das den FAIR-Prinzipien folgt.
         Für die erste Umsetzung wurde DSpace verwendet (Smith 2003, Donohue 2018), eine Software zur Verwaltung von digitalen Forschungs- und Lehrmaterialien. DSpace wird in Bamberg auch zur Realisierung des FIS eingesetzt, dort jedoch in der Erweiterung als DSpace-CRIS (Donohue 2019). Während der Installation und Anpassung von DSpace an die Testdaten wurde eine Einschränkung und zugleich ein Nachteil von DSpace deutlich, welche die Nutzung dieser Software für den Zweck eines FDMS ungeeignet erscheinen lassen. Der Import von unterschiedlichen Metadatenschemata für Forschungsdaten wird in DSpace zwar unterstützt, jedoch ist dieser Import in der DSpace Standard-Installation nur mit den originalen Dublin-Core Elementen eingerichtet. Außerdem können keine hierarchischen Datenelemente erzeugt werden, weswegen der Import von Daten sowie deren Metadaten, welche in hierarchischen XML-Dateien vorliegen, verhindert wird.
         Aufgrund dieser Einschränkung von DSpace, welche sich bei einer Vielzahl von Forschungsdaten als restriktiv darstellen würde und somit einer der Anforderungen an ein FAIR-basiertes FDMS widerspricht, wurde eine alternative Software benötigt und in Dataverse gefunden (Dataverse 2019a). Dataverse, als Projekt vom Harvard Institute for Quantitative Social Science, der Harvard Library, und anderen Partnern initiiert (Dataverse 2019b), ermöglicht die Modellierung der Metadaten in mehreren Varianten. Zum einen können über die Administrationsoberfläche der Dataverse Installation händisch Elemente der bestehenden Metadatenschemata angepasst werden. Zum anderen, und für das Umsetzungsszenario der Universität Bamberg passender, kann ein sogenannter Metadatenblock angelegt werden, mit dem ein komplett neues Metadatenschema für Datenobjekte in der Dataverse Installation zur Verfügung gestellt wird (Dataverse 2019c). Dieser selbst erzeugte Metadatenblock, in Form einer TSV (Tab-Separated Values) Datei, kann mithilfe eines Kommandozeilen Befehls importiert werden und steht daraufhin neben den in Dataverse bereits vorgefertigten Standard-Metadatenschemata zur Verfügung.
         
            
               
               Abbildung 1: Oberfläche des FDMS-Prototyps mit einer Suchanfrage und der Ergebnisseite. 
            
         
         Als prototypische Anwendung wurden Bilder von Grabsteinen mit weiteren zugehörigen Forschungsprimärdaten verwendet, die mehrere Eigenschaften eines typischen Use Cases für das künftige FDMS abdecken. Diese Forschungsdaten liegen zum einen als Bilder vor, die ohne zugehörige Publikation bisher nicht in einem FIS abgespeichert werden können, zum anderen sind komplexe Metadaten vorhanden, welche in DSpace, wie oben beschrieben, nur eingeschränkt darzustellen, in Dataverse jedoch besser einzufügen sind. Die Testdaten für diesen Prototyp basieren auf dem epidat Projekt des Steinheim-Instituts (Steinheim-Institut 2019), die dem Datenbestand der Professur für Judaistik der Universität Bamberg ähneln, welcher ein konkretes künftiges Anwendungsszenario darstellt.
         Auch für die Analyse der Metadatenelemente, die im FDMS verwendet werden, wurde das epidat Projekt als Testfall genutzt. Hierzu wurden die XML-Dateien, welche die Gräber einer Vielzahl von Friedhöfen in Deutschland mit Metadaten im Epidoc-TEI-Format (Elliott 2006-2017) beschreiben, analysiert und relevante Metadatenfelder identifiziert. Diese relevanten Metadatenelemente wurden als Basis für ein Dataverse im Kontext von Fotografien von Grabsteinen verwendet. Der Begriff Dataverse umfasst dabei nicht nur die Software Dataverse, sondern dient auch als Oberbegriff für eine Sammlung von Datensätzen (King 2007). Die Vorgehensweise zur Erstellung eines eigenen Metadatenschemas wurde verwendet, da das im epidat-Projekt verwendete Epidoc-Format sehr umfangreich und dementsprechend für ein initiales Anwendungsszenario zu mächtig scheint. Die Anzahl der Elemente für den Prototyp wurde daher eingeschränkt. 
         Die identifizierten Metadatenelemente, welche für die forschungsorientierte Beschreibung der Grabsteine notwendig sind, wurden mithilfe eines der oben erwähnten Metadatenblöcke modelliert. Das hiermit erstellte Metdatenschema „epitaph“ – betitelt in Anlehnung an den Fachbegriff für Grabinschriften – enthält 25 Elemente, die unter anderem den zugehörigen Friedhof, den Zustand des Grabmals, die Inschrift inklusive Übersetzung, und weitere Datenfelder umfassen. Weiterhin wurden hierarchische Beziehungen zwischen den Elementen aufrechterhalten, beispielsweise für die verstorbene Person, deren Todestag, und die erwähnten Verwandten dieser Person über die Datenfelder „person“, „personDeathdate“, und „personRelationship“.
         In Kooperation mit dem Rechenzentrum und der Universitätsbibliothek wird aufbauend auf internen Diskussionen die Weiterentwicklung des in diesem Poster vorgestellten Prototyps geplant, welche in einer größeren Testphase 2020 vorgenommen werden soll. Die Anbindung an das bereits im Betrieb befindliche FIS soll ebenso wie die Integration der lokalen Shibboleth-Authentifizierungsverfahren dort umgesetzt werden.
         Das Poster verdeutlicht die Anforderungen und Anstrengungen, die für die Konzeption eines FDMS an einer mittelgroßen Universität notwendig sind, sowie erste positive Ergebnisse. Weiterhin werden durch die Betrachtung zweier Softwarelösungen die Probleme in der Praxis, also in der Umsetzung eines derartigen Forschungsdatenmanagements, näher beleuchtet. Die Erfahrungen verdeutlichen wie wichtig eine systematische Anforderungsanalyse bei der Auswahl eines Systems zum Forschungsdatenmanagement ist. Hierbei sollten insbesondere Aspekte wie die Unterstützung unterschiedlicher Metadatenformate und deren hierarchische Ausprägungen berücksichtigt werden. Diese und weitere Erfahrungen werden am Poster geteilt und ausgetauscht.
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Dataverse (2019): The Dataverse Project: Open source research data repository software. Online: https://dataverse.org/ [letzter Zugriff: 19.12.2019]
               
                   Dataverse  (2019): The Dataverse Project: About the project. Online: https://dataverse.org/about [letzter Zugriff: 20.12.2019]
               
                   Dataverse  (2019): The Dataverse Project Admin Guide: Metadata Customization. Online: http://guides.dataverse.org/en/latest/admin/metadatacustomization.html [letzter Zugriff: 19.12.2019]
               
                   Donohue, Tim  (2018): DSpace User FAQ. Online: https://wiki.lyrasis.org/display/DSPACE/User+FAQ [letzter Zugriff: 20.12.2019]
               
                   Donohue, Tim  (2019): DSpace-CRIS Home. Online: https://wiki.duraspace.org/display/DSPACECRIS/DSpace-CRIS+Home [letzter Zugriff: 19.12.2019]
               
                   Elliott, Tom / Bodard, Gabriel / Cayless, Hugh / et al.  (2006-2017): EpiDoc: Epigraphic Documents in TEI XML. Online: https://sourceforge.net/p/epidoc/wiki/Home/ [letzter Zugriff: 19.12.2019]
               
                   Franke, Fabian  (2019): Laufende Projekte unter Beteiligung der Universitätsbibliothek Bamberg. In: Projekte – Otto-Friedrich-Universtiät Bamberg. Online: https://www.uni-bamberg.de/ub/ueber-uns/projekte/ [letzter Zugriff: 19.12.2019]
               
                   King, Gary  (2007):
  An Introduction to the Dataverse Network as an Infrastructure for Data Sharing. In:
   Sociological Methods & Research 36(2): 173–199.

               
                   Neuroth, Heike  (2017): Bibliothek, Archiv, Museum. In:
   Digital Humanities: 213–222.

               
                   Smith, MacKenzie / et al. (2003): "An Open Source Dynamic Digital Repository". In:  D-Lib Magazine 9.1.

               
                   Steinheim-Institut  (2019): Datenbank: Jüdische Grabsteinepigraphik. Online: http://www.steinheim-institut.de/cgi-bin/epidat [letzter Zugriff: 20.12.2019]

               
                   Wilkinson, Mark D., et al.  (2016): 
  The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. In:  Scientific data  3.

            
         
      
   



      
         Das sogenannte „Detmolder Hoftheater-Projekt“ hat im Laufe der letzten fünf Jahre den überlieferten Musikalienbestand des Detmolder Hoftheaters aus der Zeit von 1825–1875 einschließlich der erhaltenen Aktenmaterialien erschlossen bzw. übertragen und mit einer eigenen Software im Web präsentiert (www.hoftheater-detmold.de). Die dabei eingesetzte Software „Theatre-Tool“ wurde ausdrücklich so konzipiert, dass sie auf andere ähnliche Bestände übertragbar ist. Dieser Vortrag möchte die bisherigen Arbeitsergebnisse des Projekts zusammenfassen und die Erschließungsgrundsätze und den Aufbau und die Anforderungen der Software erläutern. Dabei werden auch die Möglichkeiten und Probleme der Übertragbarkeit und der Zusammenarbeit mit anderen bestehenden und neuen Erschließungsprojekten angesprochen.
            
         Im Bereich der digitalen Edition ist es inzwischen zum Standard geworden, Kontextmaterialien im Rahmen der Edition ebenfalls als Volltext bereit zu stellen und über Markup zu verknüpfen (vgl. die für den Musiktheaterbereich vorbildliche Präsentation https://freischuetz-digital.de/). Doch im Bereich der Erschließung von Beständen wird noch sehr viel mit proprietären Datenbanken bzw. bibliothekarischen Standards gearbeitet, die nicht ohne weiteres im Web zugänglich gemacht werden können, und werden vor allem unterschiedliche Quellentypen getrennt in je eigenen Systemen erfasst. Dies zeigt sich z. B. in der zur Zeit im Bibliotheksbereich geführten Diskussion um die Erfassung von Ephemera (siehe Literaturverzeichnis), die gerade im Bereich der für die Theaterforschung wichtigen Erschließung von Theaterzetteln zu zahlreichen Insellösungen geführt hat (vgl. z. B. 
http://digital.ub.uni-duesseldorf.de/theaterzettel, 
http://www.theaterzettel-weimar.de), was eine übergreifende Suche z. B. nach Darstellernamen unmöglich macht. 

         Das Hoftheater-Projekt hat ein Modell zur kontextuellen Erschließung der verschiedenen Materialien entwickelt, auf dem das in seiner Oberflächengestaltung zunächst noch rein funktionale Theatre-Tool aufbaut (https://hoftheater-detmold.de/47-2/das-modell/) . 

         
            
            Abbildung 1: Modell des „Theatre Tool“ 
         
         Dieses Modell basiert auf dem im Bibliotheksbereich allgemein angewandten FRBR-Modell, so dass die erfassten Daten sowohl bibliothekarische als auch wissenschaftliche Anforderungen erfüllen. Die Erschließung der Quellen erfolgt nach FRBR auf drei verschiedenen Ebenen: Die Werkdateien erfassen die Grunddaten ggf. mit dem Datum der Uraufführung und einer normierten Angabe zur Klassifikation. Die Quellendateien (entspricht der FRBR-Entität: manifestation) beschreiben die vorliegenden Quellen, die in unserem Fall zu einer „componentGroup“ zusammengefasst werden, da die Aufführungsmaterialien eine Einheit bilden. Bindeglied zwischen Werk und Quelle ist die expression-Datei, denn das jeweilige Aufführungsmaterial des Theaters in Detmold ist als Einheit eine expression des Werks, dasjenige eines anderen Theaters jedoch eine andere. Auch wäre beispielsweise eine Bearbeitung der Oper für Bläser-Ensemble wiederum eine weitere expression. Die Beziehungen zwischen den Dateien werden mit Relationen beschrieben, wie sie durch FRBR vorgegeben sind: „hasRealization“, „isEmbodimentOf“, „hasEmbodiment“, „isPartof“ etc. 
         Zusätzlich zu diesen zur Quellenerschließung notwendigen Dateien werden solche zu Personen und dramatis personae angelegt. Durch eine jeweils eindeutige ID, mit der jede Datei gekennzeichnet wird, ist bei jeglicher Wiederkehr eines Werk-, Rollen- oder Personennamens eine eindeutige Kennzeichnung möglich. 
         Handelt es sich bei diesen Dateien um typische Katalog-Erschließungen, die jedoch zumindest bei den Quellendateien weit über eine übliche bibliothekarische Erfassung hinausgehen, so werden die umfangreich überlieferten Kontextmaterialien z. T. als Regeste, überwiegend aber im Volltext erfasst. Beide Erschließungsformen basieren auf den XML-Standards TEI und MEI, so dass alle Daten durch ein Markup ausgezeichnet werden können.
         Darüber hinaus werden für Personen, Werke und ggf. Orte Normdaten (GND, VIAF, GeoNames) verwendet, so dass externe Informationen eingebunden werden können. Da aber etliche Personen und Werke wenig bekannt oder nicht eindeutig zu bestimmen sind und damit nicht eindeutig einer Normdaten-ID zugeordnet werden können, bleibt die Verwendung von eigenen IDs notwendig.
         Durch die Verknüpfung der Daten über alle Quellengrenzen hinweg ergeben sich verschiedene inhaltliche Verbindungen: So können zu den Personen des Detmolder Hoftheaters einerseits die Daten zu Gage und eventuellen Sonderzuwendungen, Beschäftigungsdauer und zusätzliche Beschäftigungen im Theaterbetrieb abgerufen werden, andererseits aber auch die Werke und sogar die Rollen, in denen sie beschäftigt waren. Zu den Aufführungsmaterialien werden aus den Akten Angaben zur Datierung und zum Schreiber verknüpft und die Einträge in den Kostüm- und Regiebüchern geben erste Hinweise auf die Darstellung einzelner Werke auf der Bühne. 
         Die Materialien (Digitalisate ausgewählter Quellen) und die XML-Dateien der Katalog- oder der Volltext-Erschließungen werden in einer Web-Präsenz zusammengefasst. 
         
            
            Abbildung 2: Startseite des Portals 
         
         Die hierfür eigens entwickelte Software „Theatre-Tool“ basiert auf XQuery und JavaScript.
         Die Darstellung der Faksimiles erfolgt mit Hilfe eines Leaflet-Plugins (https://leafletjs.com), einer Bibliothek für die Kartendarstellung im Web. 
         Die Software bietet bislang eine einfache Suche nach Personen, Rollen und Werken, die mit einem Fuse.js Plugin, einer Fuzzy basierten Bibliothek, erstellt wurde. 
         Wie in Web-Präsenzen üblich, können die Inhalte als XML-Dateien heruntergeladen werden, um weitere Arbeiten mit den Daten zu ermöglichen (Suche, Abfrage in größerem Kontext etc.). Selbstverständlich können die Daten auch als Beispiele für eine Erschließung in anderen Projekten verwendet werden. 
         Die Werke, Quellen, Personen und Rollen können mit Hilfe von Permalinks von anderen Projekten direkt referenziert werden.
         Da bislang im Detmolder Hoftheater-Projekt vor allem Materialien zum Musiktheater erschlossen worden sind, sind in die Software einige musik-spezifische Anwendungen integriert. So werden z. B. die Anfänge der einzelnen Musiknummern mit Noten-Incipits wiedergegeben, um sie rasch vergleichbar zu machen. Um dem Musikwissenschaftler auch Informationen zur originalen Partituranordnung, Schlüsselung, Schreibweise der Instrumente etc. zu geben, wird nicht nur – wie traditionell üblich – eine Stimme oder ein Klavierauszug wiedergegeben, sondern werden die ersten Takte und der Singstimmeneinsatz vollständig in Partitur wiedergegeben. Die Codierung der Incipits erfolgt mit MEI, die Darstellung mit einem Verovio-Plugin (http://www.verovio.org/index.xhtml). 
         
            
            Abbildung 3: Darstellung der Incipits 
         
         Eine weitere Besonderheit des Projekts ist die exemplarische
sog. Tiefenerschließung einiger ausgewählter Aufführungsmaterialien:
Bei diesen werden auch die Faksimiles der Quellen zur Verfügung
gestellt und zwar in einer Aufbereitung für einen taktgenauen
Zugriff. Nur durch diese Form der Erschließung ist es z. B. möglich,
Eingriffe in den Notentext nicht auf Grund der Materialität (also
z. B.: Streichung auf Bl 4v bis 5r vorletzter Takt), sondern
inhaltlich (z. B.: Streichung in Nr. 1 von T. 17–20) und damit für den
Nutzer (mit Hilfe anderer Materialien, also gedruckter oder anderer
handschriftlicher Quellen) nachvollziehbar anzugeben. Zur Erstellung
der sog. Vertaktung wird die Software „Edirom“ benutzt und zur
Darstellung ist das „Theatre Tool“ mit Edirom Online
(https://github.com/Edirom/Edirom-Online) verknüpft. Diese Software wurde zwar für die Aufbereitung von Notenmaterial entwickelt, aber es lassen sich damit auch Textquellen z. B. nach Szenen oder sogar Zeilen kartieren.
            
         Das Theatre-Tool ist für die Darstellung dieser komplexen Text- und Datenstrukturen entwickelt, kann aber leicht an andere Anforderungen angepasst werden: Bei dem im Projekt erfassten Material handelt es sich z. B. überwiegend um handschriftliches Material, weshalb die nach FRBR vorgesehene vierte Ebene, das Exemplar (item), nach der Regel der „manifestation singleton“ nicht berücksichtigt wird. Selbstverständlich wäre aber auch diese darstellbar. Da das Hauptinteresse der Erschließung auf der Arbeitsweise und dem Personal der Detmolder Hoftheater-Gesellschaft liegt, werden die erwähnten Orte zwar ausgezeichnet, gibt es für diese aber keine eigenständigen Dateien (mit der Möglichkeit zu Referenzen) und bislang keine Suchmöglichkeit. 
         Mit der zunehmenden Digitalisierung der Bestände durch die Bibliotheken könnten diese über iiiF in das Theatre Tool eingebunden werden, wodurch etliche rechtliche Probleme gelöst werden könnten. Wie damit auch eine Vertaktung verbunden werden kann, wäre zu überprüfen. 
         Weiterer Abstimmungsbedarf, an dem aber beidseitig großes Interesse besteht, ist notwendig zwischen Wissenschaft und Bibliothek. Es ist selbstverständlich, dass die Beispiele der Tiefenerschließung des Projekts ebenso wie die Erstellung z. B. von Komponisten-Werkverzeichnissen nur durch die Wissenschaft zu leisten sind. Dennoch besteht großes Interesse, diese Detailinformationen zu einzelnen Quellen auch über die besitzende Bibliotheken zugänglich zu machen Die Verwendung von Standards und Normdaten wie sie im Hoftheater-Projekt erprobt worden sind, bildet hierzu einen erster Schritt, doch muss sicherlich auch verstärkt über Schnittstellen für den Datenaustausch nachgedacht werden. 
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Kamzelak, Roland S. (2016): „Digitale Editionen im semantic web. Chancen und Grenzen von Normdaten, FRBR und RDF“ in: Richts, Kristina / Stadler, Peter (eds.): 
	„ei, dem alten Herrn zoll ich Achtung gern“. Festschrift für Joachim Veit zum 60. Geburtstag. München: Allitera Verlag 423–435; online unter: 
	https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:14-qucosa2-233392
               
               
                   Münzmay, Andreas (2018): „Lesen und Schreiben im digitalen Dickicht, Musikwissenschaft, Digital Humanitites und die hybride Musikbibliothek“ in: BIBLIOTHEK Forschung und Praxis 42; 236–246.
      
               
                   Münzmay, Andreas  (2019): „Kulturtransferforschung und Musikwissenschaft“, in:  Calella, Michele / Leßmann, Benedikt (eds.): 
        Zwischen Transfer und Transformation: Horizonte der Rezeption von Musik (= Wiener Veröffentlichungen zur Musikwissenschaft 51). Wien 175–190. 
      
               
                   Richts, Kristina / Veit, Joachim (2018): „Stand und Perspektiven der Nutzung von MEI in der Musikwissenschaft und in Bibliotheken“ in: BIBLIOTHEK Forschung und Praxis 42: 292–301.
      
               
                   Pernerstorfer, Matthias J.  (2012): 
        Theater – Zettel – Sammlungen. Erschliessung, Digitalisierung, Forschung. Wien (= Don Juan Archiv Wien: Bibliographica, 1)
      
               
                   Pernerstorfer, Matthias J.  (2015): 
        Theater – Zettel – Sammlungen Bd. 2: 
        Bestände, Erschließung, Forschung. Wien 2015 (= Don Juan Archiv Wien: Bibliographica 2)
      
               
                   Veit, Joachim  (2020): „Notistenspezifische Erwartungen der Wissenschaft an die Web-Präsentation digitalisierter Musikhandschriftenbestände“ in
        : Das Instrumentalrepertoire der Dresdner Hofkapelle in den ersten beiden Dritteln des 18. Jahrhunderts – Überlieferung und Notisten.
               
               
                   Wiermann, Barbara  (2018a): „Bibliothekarische Normdaten und digitale Musikwissenschaft“ in: 
        Die Musikforschung, 71: 338–357.
      
               
                   Wiermann, Barbara  (2018b): „musiconn. performance: musikalische Ereignisdaten im Fachinformationsdienst Musikwissenschaft“ in: Bonte, Achim / Rehnolt, Juliane (eds.):
         Kooperative Informationsinfrastrukturen als Chance und Herausforderung. Thomas Bürger zum 65. Geburtstag herausgegeben von. Berlin, Boston 398–415.
      
            
         
      
   



      
         Der Schubert-Forscher Walther Dürr veröffentlichte 2002 einen Beitrag zu Problemen der Artikulation und Dynamik bei Franz Schubert, in dem er betonte, wie stark das „Lesen“ einer Partitur von der Kenntnis der Schreibgewohnheiten eines Komponisten abhängt. Selbst erfahrenen Handschriftenkennern bereiten Phänomene wie jenes von „Schuberts so viel diskutiertem Akzentzeichen“ Schwierigkeiten: Akzente und 
                decrescendo-Winkel „sind bei Schubert oft nicht leicht zu unterscheiden“ und gelegentlich handele es sich um „etwas dazwischen, das sich im Druck unserer Ausgabe nicht wiedergeben läßt“. Dies gelte auch für manche Bogensetzungen, die „offenbar nicht anzeigen, 
                was, sondern nur, 
                daß überhaupt gebunden werden sollte“. Er rät dem Editor daher, zwar Beliebigkeiten der Schubertschen Schreibweise zu kennzeichnen, aber wo „Präzision gemeint“ sei, „diese auch dort anzuzeigen, wo 
                das Manuskript sie 
                nicht hergibt“. Von einer (analogen) Edition erwarte die Aufführungspraxis „genaue Anweisungen“, und „musikalische Plausibilität“ sei dabei zweifellos ein wichtiger Orientierungspunkt (Dürr 2002: 322-326).
            
         In der gedruckten Edition sorgen die Entscheidungen des Editors und die Normierungen des modernen Notensatzes (wie jede Übertragung eines Schriftträgers in einen anderen) zwangsläufig für eine Verengung des in der Vorlage gegebenen (oder laut Dürr bloß vom Lesenden empfundenen) Interpretationsspielraums, der nur durch verbale Erläuterungen im Kritischen Apparat wieder geöffnet werden kann. 
         Bei den ersten digitalen Editionen von Musik der klassisch-romantischen Epoche mit der „Edirom“-Software (Edirom 2005/2010, Reger-Werkausgabe, OPERA) ging es genau um diese Frage der Transparenz editorischer Entscheidungen, die nun durch die fallspezifische Einbindung von Digitalisaten der zur Erstellung des Edierten Textes herangezogenen historischen Quellen erreicht werden sollte. Die Kombination „eindeutiger“ Edierter Texte mit deren „Vorlagen“ sollte Interpretationsspielräume wieder öffnen, was durch eine zusätzliche Kombination mit Annotationen an Ort und Stelle (also nicht im separierten Apparat) erleichtert wurde. Das Konzept ging teilweise auf, auch wenn die Verführung durch Bilder alles andere als unproblematisch ist – die gebotenen Ausschnitte verkürzen Wirklichkeit und können bei entsprechender Auswahl (und ohne Kenntnis einschlägiger Notationsgepflogenheiten) ebenso manipulativ sein wie traditionelle verbale Erläuterungen des Editors (vgl. dazu Sahle 2013, Kap. 3.2).
         Abhilfe versprach die auch für die praktische Nutzung beobachteter Alternativen notwendige Überführung des bildlich Vorgefunden in maschinenles- und verarbeitbare Repräsentationen. Für diese wurde im Bereich wissenschaftlich-kritischer Editionen in den letzten zwanzig Jahren das Format der 
                Music Encoding Initiative (MEI) entwickelt, das im Gegensatz zu anderen, auf spezifische Erfordernisse zugeschnittenen Codierungsformen oder proprietären Notensatzprogrammen von Anfang an (in Anlehnung an TEI) auf die dokumentarischen Bedürfnisse der wissenschaftlichen Community zielte (vgl. Richts/Veit 2018). Mit dieser Codierung können nun Interpretationsspielräume wie die erwähnten bzw. unterschiedliche Deutungen dieser Symbolschrift erfasst und explizit festgehalten werden.
            
         Was bedeutet dies konkret? – MEI ist keine „Auszeichnungssprache“ im engeren Sinne (wie TEI), sondern ein „beschreibendes Markup“, das die auf Konventionen beruhende konkrete graphische Gestalt durch Begriffe bezeichnet und bei deren inhaltlicher Deutung auch den Zeichenkontext berücksichtigt – so kann eine Note aufgrund der äußeren Form als „Viertel“ und durch ihre Position im zweiten Zwischenraum in Verbindung mit einem vorausgehenden Schlüssel als Tonhöhe „c2“ bzw. mit einem vorausgehenden Akzidens als „Viertelnote cis2“ bezeichnet werden. Dabei sagen historische Notensatzregeln, dass ein anschließend wiederholter Ton im gleichen Zwischenraum kein Akzidens benötigt, also graphisch wie ein „c“ aussieht, klingend aber als „cis“ realisiert wird. In die Codierung fließt also – wie im Computernotensatz – Wissen um Notationsregeln mit ein. Wenn der Rechner aber mit dem Ton arbeiten soll, muss ihm explizit mitgeteilt werden, dass die graphische Form hier durch zusätzliche Kontextinformationen in ein anderes klingendes Ergebnis verwandelt wird. 
         Ebenso könnte in dem genannten Schubertschen Beispiel die Ausdehnung des Akzent- bzw. 
                decrescendo-Zeichens im Verhältnis zu den Notenpositionen konkret festgehalten und damit expliziter als in einer bloßen verbalen Beschreibung dokumentiert werden. Zusätzlich wären die Deutungsmöglichkeiten als Alternativen in der Codierung – eventuell in einem Apparateintrag als Lesarten – festzuhalten. Dabei erlaubt MEI Angaben zum Urheber der jeweiligen Interpretation sowie prozentuale Festlegungen der Wahrscheinlichkeit der jeweiligen Lösung. Die Codierung erzwingt also eine möglichst präzise Beschreibung der Alternativen – aber wie hoch ist der Erkenntnisgewinn? Und wo liegen – von dem heilsamen Zwang zur präziseren Erfassung der Phänomene abgesehen – die Vorteile eines solchen Verfahrens gegenüber der traditionellen analogen Arbeit? 
            
         Um die Frage zuzuspitzen: Menschenlesbar wird das, was hier codiert wird, erst bei einer Rücküberführung in die gewohnte Notendarstellung – dort aber sorgt die Normierung des Drucksatzes dafür, dass der Eindruck, den die Handschrift vermittelte, ein völlig anderer ist. Und die präzise Codierung etwa von Bogenlängen, die nicht mit, sondern irgendwo nach Noten beginnen oder enden (und damit ggf. Bedeutungsunterschiede suggerieren), erweist sich letztlich als verlorene Liebesmüh’, denn sie wirkt in der normierten Umgebung völlig anders und bleibt als bloße Positionsbestimmung blind für eine maschinelle Auswertung, die die Werte in Beziehung zu unterschiedlichen Kontextfaktoren setzen müsste. Das Projekt „Beethovens Werkstatt“, das sich mit der komplexen Genese Beethovenscher Kompositionshandschriften beschäftigt, hat daraus die Konsequenz gezogen, solche kodikologischen Aspekte nicht im Neusatz nachzuahmen (und damit zu verfälschen), sondern die Codierung sozusagen fest mit den Einträgen im Manuskript zu verdrahten – das Markup zur Beschreibung des problematischen Bogens wäre dementsprechend direkt mit einer SVG-Erfassung dieses Objekts im Handschriftendigitalisat verknüpft. Das erleichtert das Erkennen von im Apparat erfassten Mehrdeutigkeiten, dennoch bleiben diese ohne Annotation schwer nachvollziehbarund der Urteilsfähigkeit eines Betrachters anvertraut, der zudem schreibereigene Notationsgepflogenheiten zu berücksichtigen hätte. Zwar könnte man vorgefundene Phänomene unter Kategorien subsumieren und damit rascher auffind- und auswertbar machen – aber dennoch bewegen wir uns hier noch in einem Denkraum, für den das Digitale zwar Erleichterungen bringt, der aber traditionellen Herangehensweisen verpflichtet bleibt, weil die Repräsentation des Objekts, die MEI in der bisher beschriebenen Form bietet – wie bei allen derartigen Repräsentationen – nur auf einer sehr spezifischen, von bestimmten Interessen geleiteten Wahrnehmung des Gegenstands beruht (Sahle 2013, Kap. 2).
         Greifen also bisherige digitale Editionsmethoden oder Codierungen zu kurz? Wie aber könnten digitale Methoden helfen, mit den genannten Interpretationsspielräumen sinnvoller umzugehen? Ist hier nicht ein radikal anderes Denken erforderlich? 
         Zunächst muss man sich bewusst machen, welche Fragen überhaupt mit Rechnerunterstützung sinnvoll beantwortbar sind. Bei den erwähnten Bögen mit unklarem Anfang und Ende oder der Akzent/
                decrescendo-Unterscheidung bleibt die Geltungsdauer der Zeichen stark von individuellen Schreibgewohnheiten abhängig und dürfte kaum schreiberunabhängig beurteilbar sein. Aber Dürrs (durch Doppelautographe Carl Maria von Webers bestätigte) Hypothese, andere Bogenformen suggerierten nur, „daß“ und nicht „was“ genau gebunden werden solle – bezeichneten also im Sinne eines 
                sempre legato nur grundsätzlich das Binden (nicht aber z.B. den Strichwechsel) –, wäre auf einem großen Korpus an Digitalisaten (ggf. epochenspezifisch) untersuchbar. Was wäre hier nötig?: Es muss zunächst händisch ein ausreichend großer Bestand (zu Festlegung seiner Größe fehlen noch jegliche Erfahrungswerte!) erfasst werden, um die Frage – auch im Hinblick auf zumindest zeichenspezifisches OMR – präzisieren zu können. Darauf aufbauend könnte eine maschinelle Auswertung umfassender Bibliotheksbestände (z.B. über den Zugriff auf im IIIF-Format zur Verfügung gestellte Digitalisate) erfolgen. Das angewandte Verfahren müsste auch in der Lage sein, aufgefundene Stellen so zu „markieren“ (bzw. ihre Koordinaten zu erfassen), dass sie für spätere Einzelfallstudien rascher auffindbar wären. Je nach Aufbereitung der Trainingsdaten könnte dabei bereits eine automatisierte Sortierung der Fundstellen nach vorgegebenen Kategorien erfolgen, um darauf aufsetzende Arbeiten zu erleichtern. (Bei der Interpretation des Akzentzeichens wäre z. B. ein Einbeziehen verbaler Bezeichnungen wie 
                sf und 
                fz
sowie weiterer orthographischer Varianten denkbar, um die Frage zu klären, inwieweit die Verwendung zeitlich, lokal oder im Hinblick auf die Faktur der Musik variiert, je nach Kontext unterschiedliche Deutungen suggeriert oder lediglich auf Synonymität hindeutet.) Bei dieser Form des Markup hilft die für Common Western Notation im Moment entwickelte automatische Taktmarkierung (Waloschek), da sie ein Festhalten von Phänomenen nicht bloß in abstrakten Koordinaten, sondern auch in Bezug auf ein inhaltliches Modell (hier die in MEI abgebildete Werkstruktur) erlaubt. 
            
         Ein zweites Beispiel, das im Falle Mozarts gar zu einem Preisausschreiben geführt hat (Albrecht): Die in der Aufführungspraxis heiß diskutierte Frage nach dem Unterschied zwischen „Punkt“ und „Strich“ in Artikulationsbezeichnungen bzw. die Grundsatzfrage, ob überhaupt ein Bedeutungsunterschied zu konstatieren sei (Brown: 200ff.). Die subjektive Beobachtung, dass z. B. Striche in 
                forte-Abschnitten eindeutig überwiegen, wäre statistisch und im Hinblick auf bestimmte Zeitabschnitte belegbar. Ebenso die Hypothese, dass besonders deutliche Striche Akzentfunktion haben. Aber für die zahllosen, gerade bei Handschriften kaum unterscheidbaren Zwischenformen wäre zunächst ein auch begrifflich schwer zu differenzierendes Vergleichskorpus anzulegen und zusätzlich auf „Normalwerte“ eines Schreibers zu beziehen (welche zudem von Schreibmittel und beschriebener Oberfläche abhängen), um die Auswertung nicht zu verfälschen. Neben die Auswertung des graphischen Befunds muss außerdem stets eine Auswertung aufführungspraktischer Hinweise in Unterrichts- und Lehrwerken oder erläuternder Texte und Selbstzeugnisse im zeitlichen Kontext treten – trotz des komplizierten Zusammenspiels, das m.E. methodisch die Grenzen unseres Faches überschreitet und auch für die Informatik interessante Modellierungsprobleme bietet, sind hier hilfreiche Erkenntnisse zu erwarten. 
            
         Letztlich wird man sich derartigen Interpretationsproblemen von zwei Seiten nähern können: Wenn etwas für bedeutungstragend gehalten wird, sollte es in der Codierung festgehalten (also „be-zeichnet“) werden, um eine Sammlung von Befunden anzulegen, die maschinell leicht akkumulierbar und strukturierbar ist – auf der anderen Seite werden Materialitäts- und Schriftlichkeitsuntersuchungen im großen Stil durch neuronale Netze oder Künstliche Intelligenz erst jetzt (bzw. künftig) sinnvoll durchführbar. Dann können solche Verfahren wirklich zum Rettungsanker zumindest bei ausgewählten Interpretationsproblemen werden. Bisherige isolierte Untersuchungen bergen stets die Gefahr sehr eingeschränkter Gültigkeit, die heute möglich werdende Korpus-Analyse birgt andererseits die Gefahr, dass die Bedingungen des Einzelfalls nicht genügend berücksichtigt sind – zwischen beiden Extremen kann sich künftig eine sinnvolle Nutzung digitaler Techniken bewegen, die mit neuen Mitteln die Spielräume von Interpretation auszuloten versucht. 
      
      
         
             Links
            
               
            
            
               https://music-endocing.org/
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Albrecht, Hans (1957): 
    Die Bedeutung der Zeichen Keil, Strich und Punkt bei Mozart. Fünf Lösungen einer Preisfrage, Kassel: Bärenreiter
  
               
                  Brown, Clive (1999): 
    Classical & Romantic Performance Practice 1750–1900, Oxford: OUP
  
               
                  Dürr, Walther (2002): „Notation und Aufführungspraxis: Artikulation und Dynamik bei Schubert“, in: 
    Musikedition. Mittler zwischen Wissenschaft und musikalischer Praxis, hg. von Helga Lühning (Beihefte zu editio 17), Tübingen: Niemeyer, S. 313-327
  
               
                  Edirom  (2005): 
    Carl Maria von Weber. Sämtliche Werke, Serie VI, Bd. 3: 
    Kammermusik mit Klarinette, hg. von Gerhard Allroggen, Knut Holtsträter und Joachim Veit. Mit einer digitalen Edition des Quintetts op. 34 von Johannes Kepper u. Ralf Schnieders, Mainz: Schott Musik International
  
               
                  Edirom (2010): 
    Carl Maria von Weber. Sämtliche Werke, Serie V, Bd. 6: 
    Konzertante Werke für Klarinette, hg. von Frank Heidlberger. Mit einer digitalen Edition der Werke, erarbeitet von Benjamin Wolff Bohl, Daniel Röwenstrunk u. Joachim Veit unter Mitwirkung von Philemon Jacobsen, Mainz: Schott Musik International
  
               
                  Ertel, Wolfgang (2016): 
    Grundkurs Künstliche Intelligenz: Eine praxisorientierte Einführung (Computational Intelligence), 4. Auflage, Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg
  
               
                  OPERA. Spektrum des europäischen Musiktheaters in Einzeleditionen (2013ff.), hg. von Thomas Betzwieser, Kassel: Bärenreiter (bislang 3 Bde.)
  
               
                  Reger, Max (2008–2015): 
    Orgelwerke. Reger-Werkausgabe, Serie I, Bd. 1–7, hg. von Alexander Becker et al., Kritischer Bericht auf DVD, Stuttgart: Carus
  
               
                  Richts, Kristina /  Veit, Joachim (2018): „Stand und Perspektiven der Nutzung von MEI in der Musikwissenschaft und in Bibliotheken“, in: 
    Bibliothek – Forschung und Praxis 42 (2) ,S. 291-301
  
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): 
    Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels (Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 9), Teil 1: Das typographische Erbe, Teil 2: Befunde Theorie und Methodik, Teil 3: Texbegriffe und Recodierung, Norderstedt: BoD
  
               
                  Schmid, Manfred Hermann (2012): 
    Notationskunde. Schrift und Komposition 900–1900 (Bärenreiter Studienbücher 18), Kassel
  
               
                  Waloschek, Simon / Hadjakos, Aristotelis / Pacha, Alexander (2019): „Identification and Cross-Document Alignement of Measures in Music Score Images“, in: 
    Proceedings of the 20th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), Delft 2019
  
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Kategorien wie „Textsorte“, „(kommunikative) Gattung“ oder „Genre“ gehören zu einem disziplinenübergreifenden Bestand und werden entsprechend in Sprach-, Literatur-, Kultur- sowie den Sozialwissenschaften verwendet. Allgemein lässt sich die Frage stellen, ob und inwieweit die genannten Kategorien in die Digital Humanities eingehen und inwieweit sie methodologisch reflektiert werden.
         
         Textanalysen in der Text- und Korpuslinguistik
         
            Die Auseinandersetzung mit einer Kategorie wie „Textsorte“ kann auf eine jahrzehntelange Fachgeschichte, besonders in der Sprachwissenschaft, zurückblicken, in der zwar keine Einigkeit hinsichtlich des Verständnisses des Konzepts „Textsorte“ erzielt worden ist, jedoch deutlich geworden ist, dass in diesem Zusammenhang die Unterschiede zwischen Texten unter Einbezug unterschiedlichster Textebenen zu modellieren sind. Textsorten zeigen sich – grosso modo – nicht nur anhand von musterhaften Ausprägungen auf textgrammatischer, -semantischer und -pragmatischer Ebene, sondern berühren auch die Materialität, Kodalität (Nutzung unterschiedlicher Zeichenressourcen) und ggf. eine spezifische Ortsgebundenheit, die Lokalität. Heutige Textsortenmodelle sind Mehrebenen-Modelle, was mit der Annahme verknüpft ist, dass die einzelnen Ebenen in einem wechselseitigen Abhängigkeitsverhältnis stehen (vgl. Adamzik
            2
            2016; Heinemann/Heinemann 2002). Um eine „Textsorte“ oder ein „Textmuster“ zu erfassen, ist eine umfassende Nutzung des linguistischen Beschreibungsinstrumentariums erforderlich. Die Attraktivität von Kategorien wie „Textsorte“ ist v.a. darin gesehen worden, dass sie Einblick in den ‚kommunikativen Haushalt‘, also in spezifische Ordnungsleistungen einer Gesellschaft und Kultur ermöglichen (vgl. Fix 2006). I.d.R. wird die Ausprägung von Textmustern auf rekurrente Aufgaben und deren Lösung zurückgeführt, die wiederum einen Einblick in gesellschaftliche Relevanzen bieten. Gerade der in den letzten zwei Jahrzehnten geführte (text)linguistische Diskurs hat zudem erbracht, dass zunächst als dem Text äußerlich gedachte Faktoren wie Kontext, einschließlich der Beziehung zwischen Textproduzent und -rezipient, nichts dem Text Äußerliches sind, sondern durch den Text hergestellt werden. Zudem ist eine Kategorie wie „Stil“ die etwa auch Dialogizität oder Perspektivität umfasst, verstärkt als Textsortenstil verstanden worden, der sich aus der Sichtung aller Textebenen im Zusammenspiel ergibt (vgl. Sandig 
            2
            2006). Eine wichtige Neuorientierung in der textlinguistischen Betrachtung stellen Modelle dar, die konsequent von der textlichen Oberfläche ausgehend, ohne sich allerdings auf Syntax und Lexik zu beschränken, thematische, situative und funktionale Hinweise und damit zentrale Textdimensionen erschließen (vgl. Hausendorf et al. 2017, historisch: Schuster 2019). 
         
         
            Mehrebenen-Modelle zur Beschreibung von Textsorten sind fast ausnahmslos Produkt von Annahmen, die ebenso aus Sprach- und Kommunikationstheorien wie aus einzelnen Textexemplaren hergeleitet werden. Diese werden zumeist nur an geringen Textmengen überprüft. Da wichtige Untersuchungsebenen ‚vorgegeben‘ sind, verfährt die Methode top down. Wie korpuslinguistische Untersuchungen mit kulturanalytischen Interesse – also nicht im engeren Sinne textlinguistische Studien – deutlich gemacht haben, ließen sich einige auch in der Textlinguistik für wichtig erachtete Ausdrucksmuster durch die Berechnung von Kollokationen, n-Grammen auf Wort und Phrasenebene oder Keywords ermitteln (vgl. Bubenhofer/Scharloth 2016). Dabei handelt es sich um Bottom-Up-Verfahren, die zu neuen Hypothesen und Annahmen führen können. 
         
         
            Innerhalb der Diskussionen um Textsortenklassifikation und Texttypologie ist deutlich geworden, dass „Textsorten“ keine starren Entitäten sind; sie sind nicht vollständig festgelegt und erlauben Veränderungen. Aus dieser Variabilität ergibt sich das generelle Potential zum Wandel von Textsorten, der durch die Nutzung und Grenzen von Spielräumen bestimmt wird. Die entsprechenden Konventionalisierungsprozesse sind jedoch bisher kaum betrachtet worden.
         
         Textanalysen in den Digital Humanities
         
            Den bisher skizzierten Textauffassungen stehen Zugriffe auf die Kategorie „Text“ gegenüber, die in den Digital Humanities bevorzugt werden. Grundsätzlich scheint die Kategorie „Textsorte“ eine Hilfskategorie zu sein, mit der größere Datenmengen (z.B. Referenzkorpora) geordnet werden. Fragen der Textstrukturiertheit werden im Zusammenhang mit dem Text-Encoding z.B. in digitalen Editionen aufgeworfen (vgl. z.B. TEI-P5 Guidelines 2019), wobei die Ergebnisse nur selten Niederschlag in quantitativen Analysen finden. Texte werden zudem für das Training von Methoden ganz unterschiedlicher Anwendungen (z.B. Sentiment-Analysis, Stilometrie oder Topic Modelling) verwendet. Der Text(sorten)begriff bleibt dabei unterspezifiziert, indem „Text“ mit Dokumenten, Sätzen oder Mengen sinntragender Struktureinheiten gleichgesetzt (vgl. z.B. Ravi/Ravi 2015: 16; de Rose et al. 1997: 6) oder nach Alltagsverständnis differenziert wird (vgl. z.B. Medhat et al. 2014: 1096). Einschlägige Kategorien der DH sind daneben die des (Gattungs)Stils, Autorenstils oder Registers. Dabei deckt sich das Stilverständnis nicht mit dem holistischen Verständnis von „Stil“ als einer alle Textebenen durchwirkenden Kategorie, mit der sozialer Sinn erzeugt wird. Das Text- und insbesondere auch das Stil- und Registerverständnis der DH ist wesentlich an Merkmalen orientiert, wie dies etwa in der folgenden Äußerung zum Tragen kommt, die hinsichtlich des Verständnisses hochaggregierter geisteswissenschaftlicher Kategorien in den DH charakteristisch ist: „Style is a property of texts constituted by an ensemble of formal features which can be observed quantitatively or qualitatively.“ (Hermann et al. 2015: 44). 
         
         
            Merkmale bei Untersuchungen zu Textgattungen und Diskursen sind etwa Frequenzen von Inhalts- und Funktionswörtern, der Variantenreichtum des Wortschatzes, Satzlängen, n-Gramme oder mit Parsern ermittelte syntaktische Strukturen; die Auswahl wird in der Regel nicht begründet und scheint durch ihre Operationalisierbarkeit selbst gerechtfertigt. Exemplarisch hierfür steht das Topic-Modeling (Fankhauser et al. 2016, Viehhauser 2017). Dabei wird Text im Sinne des „bag-of-words“-Ansatzes als „Behältnis“ von Wörtern verstanden, wobei die grammatikalische Struktur und selbst die Wortfolge unberücksichtigt bleiben (vgl. Blei et al. 2003). Bibers (1988) und Bibers/Finegans (2014) multidimensionale Analysen (Schöch/Pielström 2014: S. 2f.), die sich am Genre- und Registerbegriff orientieren, fassen eine Vielzahl von Merkmalen zu Merkmalbündeln zusammen, berücksichtigen jedoch kaum die Funktionalität bzw. pragmatische Dimension von Texten. Auffällig ist, dass in diesen und anderen Studien Merkmalen wie der Satzlänge oder Komplexität von Sätzen eine Bedeutsamkeit für Stil, Register oder Genre zugeschrieben wird, die in qualitativen Studien randständig ist. Dass „formal features“ auch durchaus auf interpretierbaren Kategorien basieren, rückt ebenfalls wenig ins Bild. Zusammenfassend darf behauptet werden, dass bei Text- und Stilklassifizierungen in den DH Merkmale der Textoberfläche bevorzugt behandelt werden.
         
         Unvereinbare Traditionen? Ein Fallbeispiel
         
            Man kann mit Blick auf diese unterschiedlichen Forschungstraditionen, die hier bewusst pointiert gegenübergestellt wurden, konstatieren, dass herkömmliche qualitativ-linguistische Studien, obgleich sie stark mit dem Begriff „Muster“ operieren, sich bisher kaum für statistische Signifikanzen u.ä. interessiert haben, während wiederum stilo- und textometrische Studien mit einem „unterkomplexen Textbegriff“ arbeiten und nach Bubenhofer/Scharloth es bisher versäumt haben, „Texte als komplexes Gewebe zu operationalisieren“ (2015: 13). Grundsätzlich gilt: Während merkmalsorientierte Zugänge auf der textlichen bzw. sprachlichen Oberfläche operieren, gehen phänomenorientierte Modelle von textlichen Dimensionen (z.B. der Beziehungsdimension) aus, die in ihrer Relevanz für die textliche Kommunikation erkannt worden sind und auf ihre sprachliche Gestaltung hin befragt werden. Zwar mehren sich in den letzten Jahren die Versuche, im Sinne der „mixed methods“ quantitative und qualitative Methoden miteinander zu verbinden, jedoch ist im Hinblick auf den Text- und Textsortenbegriff bisher nicht deutlich, ob sich diese komplementär zueinander verhalten oder zu möglicherweise sich widersprechenden Befunden führen.
         
         
            In unserem Beitrag möchten wir ein Mehrebenen-Modell vorstellen, das in dem DFG-Projekt: „Die Evolution von komplexen Textmustern: Entwicklung und Anwendung eines korpuslinguistischen Analyseverfahrens zur Erfassung der Mehrdimensionalität des Textmusterwandels“ entstanden ist. Es verbindet unterschiedliche Zugriffe auf die Kategorie „Text“ und bezieht quantitative und qualitative Text(sorten)analyse spiralförmig aufeinander. Am Beispiel der Verwendung personaldeiktischer Ausdrücke (
            ich
             – 
            du 
            – 
            wir
             – 
            ihr
            ) und entsprechender Possessiva sowie Indefinitpronomen wie 
            man
            , die in unterschiedlichen historischen Textgruppen leicht identifizierbar sind, möchten wir auf Basis eines Pilotkorpus von Zeitungstextsorten des Zeitraums 1830 bis 1930 sowie mehrerer Vergleichskorpora aus dem Deutschen Textarchiv (DTA) zeigen: 
         
         
            
               welche Texteigenschaften (allein) durch die automatische, korpusbasierte Textanalyse, insbesondere durch die Nutzung von Part-of-Speech- und Lemma-Informationen, auch in Bezug auf verschiedene Binnentextsorten, zutage treten und hinsichtlich welcher Forschungsfragen dies aufschlussreich ist. So werden durch diachrone Längsschnittuntersuchungen Frequenz, Signifikanz und Typizität entsprechender Ausdrücke, letzteres insbesondere durch Bezugnahme auf Vergleichskorpora, jedoch auch eine hohe Varianz der Ausdrücke sichtbar. Eine derartige Zugriffsweise erlaubt, ergänzt durch POS-sensitive Suchen, einen Einblick in Konstanz und Wandel von Verfasserreferenz und Rezipientenansprache. Sie bieten durch ihre Irritationsmomente einen Ansatzpunkt, um Hypothesen zu Zeiträumen, die für Wandelphänomene interessant sind, zu bilden. Sie dienen ferner zum Abgleich mit auf schmalen Korpora generierten Ergebnissen (vgl. Lefévre 2017: 150), die durch eine solche Zugangsweise relativiert werden. So zeigt sich – gemessen an der vorliegenden Forschungsliteratur und an Vergleichskorpora – ein erstaunlicher Anstieg von 
               ich
               -, 
               du
               -, 
               -wir
                und 
               ihr
               -Verwendungen.
            
            
    was durch eine flankierende manuelle Annotation mit einem vordefinierten Tagset ins Blickfeld rückt. Es wird deutlich, dass die personaldeiktischen Verwendungen sich nicht gleichmäßig über alle Textsorten verteilen, sondern sich besonderen Textsorten wie dem Erfahrungs- und Erlebnisbericht verdanken. Ferner wird deutlich, dass sich relativ von Textkotext und -kontext bestimmte Lesarten (z.B. das Verfasserkollektive oder Rezipienten umschließende, inklusive wir) herausbilden, die weiterführende Analysen zu sprachlicher Inklusion und Exklusion erlauben und damit die Beziehungsdimension von Texten erschließen sowie die Beantwortung von Fragestellungen zu Funktionalität und Sprachhandlungsprofilen der vorliegenden Textsorten ermöglichen. 
  
         
         
            Somit stehen einerseits die Wandelbarkeit der Verteilung von sprachlichen Einheiten vor dem weiten Horizont von Textgruppen, andererseits die Funktionalität von sprachlichen Einheiten für die Konstitution bestimmter Textsorten im Vordergrund. Sowohl die unterschiedliche Verteilung von personaldeiktischen Formen als auch die spezifische Funktionalität von sprachlichen Einheiten, wie wir diskutieren möchten, ist nicht selbsterklärend, sondern gleichermaßen von Forschungshypothesen und -interessen abhängig. Abschließend möchten wir deshalb Überlegungen zu den folgenden Fragen bieten: Ist die „Bricolage“ (Bubenhofer/Dreesen 2018) aus Ansätzen und Methoden sehr unterschiedlicher Forschungstraditionen überhaupt sinnvoll? Lassen sich komplexe, kontextbasierte deiktische Kategorien messen, aber auch: Lassen sich damit verknüpfte Handlungsmuster überhaupt operationalisieren und in einem Tagset darstellen?
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Adamzik, Kerstin
                   (2016): 
                  Textlinguistik. Grundlagen, Kontroversen, Perspektiven.
                   2., völlig neu bearbeitete, aktualisierte und erweiterte Neuauflage. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.
               
               
                  Biber, Douglas / Finegan, Edward
                   (1994): 
                  Multi-Dimensional Analyses of Authors’ Styles: 
                  Some Case Studies from the Eigtheenth Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
               
               
                  Biber, Douglas
                   (1988): 
                  Variation across Speech and Writing
                  . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
               
               
                  Blei, David M. / Ng, Andrew Y. / Jordan, Michael I.
                   (2003): "Latent Dirichlet Allocation", in: 
                  Journal of Machine Learning Research
                  3: 993–1022.
               
               
                  Bubenhofer, Noah / Dreesen, Philipp
                  (2018): "Linguistik als antifragile Disziplin? Optionen in der digitalen Transformation", in: 
                  Digital Classics Online 
                  4: 63–75. 
               
               
                  Bubenhofer, Noah / Scharloth, Joachim
                   (2016): "Kulturwissenschaftliche Orientierung in der Computer- und Korpuslinguistik", in:
                   Sprache – Kultur – Kommunikation / Language – Culture – Communication
                  . Ein internationales Handbuch zu Linguistik als Kulturwissenschaft / An International Handbook of Linguistics as a Cultural Discipline. Bd. 43. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter: 924–933. 
               
               
                  Bubenhofer, Noah / Scharloth, Joachim
                   (2015): "Maschinelle Textanalyse im Zeichen von Big Data und Data-driven Turn – Überblick und Desiderate", in: 
                  Zeitschrift für Germanistische Linguistik
                   43: 1–26. 
               
               
                  DeRose, Steven J. / Durand David G. / Mylonas, Elli / Renear, Allen H.
                   (1997): "What is text, really?", in: 
                  SIGDOC Asterisk Journal of Computer Documentation
                   21.3: 1–24.
               
               
                  Fankhauser, Peter/ Knappen, Jörg / Teich, Elke
                   (2016): "Topical Diversification Over Time In The Royal Society Corpus" in: Eder, Maciej / Rybick, Jan (eds.): 
                  Digital Humanities
                  , 11.–16. Juli 2016, Krakow: Conference Abstracts.
               
               
                  Fix, Ulla
                   (2006): "Was heißt Texte kulturell verstehen? Ein- und Zuordnungsprozesse beim Verstehen von Texten als kulturellen Entitäten", in: Blühdorn, Hardarik / Breindl, Eva / Waßner, Ulrich Hermann (eds.): 
                  Text – Verstehen. 
                  Grammatik und darüber hinaus. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter: 254–276.
               
               
                  Hausendorf, Heiko / Kesselheim, Wolfgang / Kato, Hiloko / Breitenholz, Martina
                   (2017). 
                  Textkommunikation
                  : ein textlinguistischer Neuansatz zur Theorie und Empirie der Kommunikation mit und durch Schrift. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter.
               
               
                  Heinemann, Wolfgang / Heinemann, Margot
                   (2002): 
                  Grundlagen der Textlinguistik
                  . Interaktion – Text – Diskurs. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter.
               
               
                  Herrmann, Berenike J. / Dalen-Oskam, Karina van / Schöch, Christof
                  (2015): "Revisiting Style, a Key Concept in Literary Studies" in
                  : Journal of Literary Theory
                   9: 25–52. 
               
               
                  Hermanns, Fritz
                   (2009): "Linguistische Hermeneutik. Überlegungen zur überfälligen Einrichtung eines in der Linguistik bislang fehlenden Teilfaches", in: Felder, Ekkehard (eds.): 
                  Sprache
                  . Heidelberg: Springer: 179–214.
               
               
                  Jannidis, Fotis
                   (2019): "Digitale Geisteswissenschaften – Offene Fragen, schöne Aussichten", in: 
                  ZMK
                   10: 63–70. 
               
               
                  Lefévre, Michel
                   (2017): "Von der "Berlinischen Privilegierten Zeitung" zur "Königlich Privilegierten Berlinischen Zeitung". Entwicklungstendenzen in der Äußerungsstruktur, Textgestaltung und Syntax", in: Pfefferkorn, Oliver / Riecke, Jörg / Schuster, Britt-Marie (eds.): 
                  Die Zeitung als Medium
                  . Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter: 149–163.
               
               
                  Medhat, Walaa / Hassan, Ahmed / Korashy, Hoda
                   (2014): "Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications. A survey", in: 
                  Ain Shams Engineering Journal
                   5: 1093–1113.
               
               
                  Ravi, Kumar / Ravi, Vadlamani
                   (2015): "A survey on opinion mining and sentiment analysis: Tasks, approaches and applications", in: 
                  Knowledge-Based Systems
                   89: 14–46.
               
               
                  Sandig, Barbara
                   (2006): 
                  Textstilistik der deutschen Sprache
                  . 2. völlig neu bearbeitete und erweiterte Auflage. Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter.
               
               
                  Schöch, Christof / Steffen Pielström
                   (2014): 
                  Für eine computergestützte literarische Gattungsstilistik, Jahrestagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum.
                  http://dig-hum.de/sites/dig-hum.de/files/Schoch-Pielstrom_2014_Gattungsstilistik.pdf. [letzter Zugriff 23. September 2019]
               
               
                  Schuster, Britt-Marie
                   (2019): "Sprachgeschichte als Geschichte von Texten", in: Bär Joachim / Lobenstein-Reichmann, Anja /Riecke, Jörg (eds.): 
                  Handbuch Sprache in der Geschichte
                  . Berlin / Boston: De Gruyter: 219–240.
               
               
                  TEI Consortium
                   (2019): TEI P5. Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Originally edited by C.M. Sperberg-McQueen and Lou Burnard for the ACH-ALLC-ACL Text Encoding Initiative, now entirely revised and expanded under the supervision of the Technical Council of the TEI Consortium. Version 3.6.0 (16. Juli 2019)
               
               
                  Viehhauser, Gabriel
                   (2017): “Digitale Gattungsgeschichten. Minnesang zwischen generischer Konstanz und Wende.” In: Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften. 2017. PDF Format ohne Paginierung. DOI: 10.17175/2017_003.
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Häufig gibt es unterschiedliche Quellen oder Auflagen zu einem Werk, deren Analyse Rückschlüsse auf die Entstehungsgeschichte oder auf unterschiedliche Akzentuierungen, aber z. B. auch auf Transkriptionsfehler zulässt. Dazu gehören nicht nur Differenzen in den Texten, sondern auch in der Typographie (z. B. kursive Hervorhebungen oder Fontgröße). Wir präsentieren das Open-Source Web-Tool „Variance-Viewer" das, anders als die übliche Diff-Funktion in Texteditoren, nicht nur zwei Texte vergleichen und die Unterschiede markieren und hervorheben, sondern auch die Varianzen mit Regeln in Typen einteilen kann. Die verschiedenen Typen können ein- oder ausgeblendet sowie mit unterschiedlichen Farben markiert werden. Weiterhin können die zu vergleichenden Texte vor dem Vergleich normalisiert werden. Dadurch wird die Übersichtlichkeit bei vielen kleineren Unterschieden erheblich gesteigert, und es kann auf fachlich relevante Differenzen fokussiert werden. Es ist ein TEI-Export verfügbar, in dem für die Varianzen vordefinierte Tags generiert werden. Folgender Workflow soll beim Vergleich zweier Werke unterstützt werden:
                
             1. Übersicht über Differenzen bekommen (dafür eignet sich praktisch jedes Diff-Tool).
             2. Wiederhole:
             a. Definition von Typen der Differenzen mittels Konfigurationsdatei.
             b. Ein- und Ausblenden der Typen und Untersuchung der Restkategorie, ob weitere Typ-Definitionen sinnvoll sind.
             3. Weitere editorische Arbeiten, ggf. TEI-Export der typisierten Differenzen. 
         
         
            Verwandte Arbeiten 
            Die meisten Texteditoren verfügen über eine Diff-Funktion, mit der sich zwei Texte (auch Programmcode oder DNA-Sequenzen) vergleichen und insbesondere Änderungshistorien von Dokumenten nachverfolgen lassen (vgl. z. B. die Darstellungen von Varianten in der Faust-Edition). Dabei gibt es häufig zwei Darstellungen: zum einen die der Änderungen innerhalb eines Dokumentes und zum anderen die Gegenüberstellung der beiden Dokumente mit jeweiliger Hervorhebung der Änderungen. Viele Algorithmen basieren auf der Publikation von Myers (Myers 1986), der gezeigt hat, dass die Suche nach der längsten gemeinsamen Teilfolge und der kürzesten Transformation eines Strings A in einen String B als äquivalent angesehen werden können. Eine Implementierung ist die Suche nach einem kürzesten Weg in einem Edit-Graphen bzw. einer Matrix, der aus den Wörtern oder Buchstaben der beiden Dokumente als Zeilen bzw. Spalten besteht. Für literarische Texte ist im Allgemeinen eine feinere Differenzierung wünschenswert, in der Typen von Änderungen erkannt und ein- oder ausgeblendet werden können. Diese können sich sowohl auf den Text als auch die Typographie beziehen. Da die Typen von den individuellen Interessen der jeweiligen Philologen abhängen, sollten sie nicht fest vorgegeben, sondern leicht anpassbar sein. Weiterhin ist neben einer Visualisierung auch ein Export nach TEI wünschenswert. Im Folgenden präsentieren wir ein solches Tool, da wir kein vergleichbares, einfach bedienbares Werkzeug kennen (so wird z. B. in der Übersicht über Digital-Humanities-Tools und Services in (Bulatovic 2016) diese Kategorie nicht erwähnt). Ein ähnliches, aber anspruchsvolleres Tool ist CollateX (Haentjens Dekker 2014), das in der Lage ist, zwei und mehr Texte zu kollationieren und das Ergebnis als Graph zu visualisieren. Dabei können auch Transpositionen, d. h. verschobene Texte gefunden werden, teilweise einschließlich Erkennung von Varianten der verschobenen Texte. Ein weiteres anspruchsvolles Tool ist Stemmaweb, dessen GitHub-Repository jedoch darauf hindeutet, dass es nicht oder kaum noch aktiv gepflegt wird. Im Beitrag (Andrews 2014), bei dem es um eine kritische Bewertung der Entstehungsgeschichte von drei Werken geht, wird u. a. kritisiert, dass bestimmte Typen von Änderungen vorschnell als „insignifikant“ bewertet werden. Entwurfsregeln zur Visualisierung von Text-Varianz-Graphen werden in (Jänicke 2014) dargestellt. Der Variance-Viewer hat einen anderen Schwerpunkt: er gibt die Typen von Änderungen nicht vor, sondern überlässt deren Definition dem Anwender durch einfache Konfiguration. Die Darstellung enthält keine Graphen, sondern eine farbige Kennzeichnung und bietet das Aus- und Einblenden von Typen von Varianten durch einfachen Klick an, so dass Editoren die Übersicht behalten, wenn Sie sich auf bestimmte Differenztypen konzentrieren wollen.
                
         
         
            Methoden
            Der Variance-Viewer verwendet für die Berechnung von Differenzen zwischen zwei Texten eine Implementierung des Algorithmus von Myers und fügt dann Nachbearbeitungen zur Differenzierung verschiedener Typen von Änderungen hinzu. Die Kategorien sind frei konfigurierbar (s. Abbildung 1 links unten für einen Auszug aus der Konfigurationsdatei). Die Nachbearbeitung prüft für jede gefundene Änderung, ob die Bedingungen für einen der definierten Typen vorliegen und ordnet sie dann dem entsprechenden Typ zu. Die Änderungen werden auf Wortebene berechnet und zusätzlich die für die Änderung verantwortlichen Buchstaben identifiziert, so dass beides hervorgehoben werden kann, wobei zusätzliche Leerzeichen auch wortübergreifend gefunden werden. Alle nicht zugeordneten Typen werden einem Default-Typ (z. B. „Inhalt“ bzw. „Content“) zugeordnet, wobei noch zwischen einfachen und komplexen Änderungen unterschieden werden kann (einfache Änderungen unterscheiden sich nur in einem Buchstaben). Die Ergebnisse können in TEI ausgegeben werden, indem das „app“-Tag mit speziellen Attributen für die Änderungstypen benutzt wird. Weiterhin können sie visuell präsentiert werden, wobei den Typen verschiedene Farben zugeordnet werden und bei Bedarf jeder Typ auch ausgeblendet werden kann, um die Übersicht zu verbessern. Das Programm präsentiert beide Texte in einer synoptischen Darstellung, wobei zur Gewährleistung einer zeilenäquivalenten Darstellung in einem Dokument freier Platz auf Abschnittsebene hinzufügt wird, falls das notwendig ist.
                
            Den Umgang mit den Typen erläutern wir an zwei philologischen Anwendungsprojekten, in denen der Variance-Viewer eingesetzt wurde: Die Analyse der Änderungen in den Schriften von Richard Wagner im Projekt RWS und die Analyse der verschiedenen Auflagen von Drucken im Narragonien digital Projekt.
                
            Im RWS-Projekt liegen die Texte als TEI-Dokumente vor. Bei der Analyse der Varianzen sind nicht nur textuelle Änderungen interessant, sondern auch Änderungen bzgl. der Formatierung, die in TEI im Element „rend“ hinterlegt sind. Daher wird dieses genauer analysiert. Insgesamt sind folgende Typen von Änderungen durch projektspezifische Regeln definiert (vgl. Abbildung 1):
            
               Satzzeichen (Punctuation): Die Änderung bezieht sich nur auf ein Satzzeichen (. , ; - ? ! usw.).
               Grapheme (Graphemics): Die Änderung bezieht sich nur auf bestimmte Schreibweisen (y i; u v; s ſ; ss ß; Groß/Kleinschreibung; th t; usw.).
               Abkürzungen (Abbreviation): Die Änderung bezieht sich nur auf Abkürzungen (z. B. Dr. Doktor; Hr. Herr Herrn; usw.).
               Typographie (Typography): Die Änderung ist keine inhaltliche, sondern bezieht sich auf das Layout oder die Typographie und wird in dem TEI-Attribut „rend“ mit entsprechenden Werten spezifiziert (kursiv; gesperrt; usw.).
               Inhalt (Content): Alle übrigen Änderungen, die keiner der obigen Kategorien zugeordnet werden können einschließlich Hinzufügen oder Löschen sowie Änderungen, bei denen mehr als eine Änderung der obigen Typen gleichzeitig vorkommt. 
            
            Im Narragonien-Projekt liegen die Drucktexte als Plain Text Dateien vor. Hier werden folgende Typen von Änderungen unterschieden (vgl. Abbildung 2):
            
               Grapheme (mit anderer Liste von Buchstabenersetzungen wie im RWS-Projekt).
               Abkürzungen (mit anderer Bedeutung als im RWS-Projekt; hier sind es meist einzelne Buchstaben mit Unter- oder Überstrichen, die expandiert werden). 
               Leerzeichen im Wort, die ein Wort in zwei oder mehrere Wörter auftrennen. (Separation). Diese Option ist technisch aufwändiger, weil nicht einzelne Wörter sondern Wortgruppen miteinander verglichen werden müssen.
                Inhaltsänderungen mit nur einem Zeichen Unterschied (OneDifference), die nicht in der Graphem-Liste enthalten sind und anders bewertet werden als komplexere Änderungen. 
               Inhalt (Content): Alle übrigen Änderungen.
            
         
         
            Erfahrungen
            Das Tool wurde in beiden Projekten erfolgreich eingesetzt, und dabei auch für die Verarbeitung sehr langer Dokumente genutzt. Im Folgenden zeigen wir zwei Screenshots aus dem RWS- und dem Narragonien-Projekt. Dabei ist besonders hervorzuheben, dass der Rest-Typ „Content“, der alle sonst nicht speziell erkannten Typen von Änderungen beinhaltet, nur noch ca. die Hälfte der Änderungen ausmacht, während die andere Hälfte spezielleren Typen zugeordnet werden konnte. Wenn das Ziel die Feinanalyse bestimmter Änderungstypen ist, können auch iterativ weitere Typen definiert und der Analysealgorithmus damit erneut ausgeführt werden.
            
               
                Abbildung 1: Vergleich zweier Texte aus dem Schriften-Verzeichnis von Richard Wagner mit Hervorhebung der Änderungstypen in verschiedenen Farben (Erläuterungen der Typen im Text; Auszug aus Konfigurationsdatei links unten). Die Texte liegen im Format TEI vor, wobei TEI-Attributwerte auf CSS abgebildet wurden, um die Darstellung unterschiedlicher Typen sichtbar zu machen, und die gefundenen Differenzen mit ihren Typen können auch als TEI exportiert werden (Auszug für die erste Zeile s. rechts unten).
            
            
               
                Abbildung 2: Vergleich des edierten Lesetextes der Narrenschiff-Ausgabe GW5041 (links) mit dem Ergebnis der OCR auf dem Originaltext einer anderen Druckausgabe (rechts), wobei die Änderungen sowohl OCR-Fehler als auch Normalisierungen der Schrift im Lesetext umfassen. Dies ist durch Hervorhebung der Änderungstypen in verschiedenen Farben leichter nachvollziehbar (Erläuterung der Typen im Text). Unten eine Statistik, die die 6.523 gefundenen Änderungen nach Änderungstypen aufschlüsselt. Der Gesamttext umfasste 150 Seiten mit 4.200 Zeilen, 26.000 Wörtern und 121.000 Zeichen und die zugehörige Konfigurationsdatei („Settings“) ca. 100 Zeilen. Für diese Analyse brauchte der Variance-Viewer in dem serverseitig ausgeführten Demo-Modus im Web ca. 25 Sekunden (für intensive Nutzung sollte der Open-Source Code lokal installiert werden).
            
            Die bisherigen Erfahrungen zeigen, dass noch eine Reihe von relativ einfachen Erweiterungen wünschenswert sind, wobei zu erwarten ist, dass in weiteren Projekten weitere Aspekte hinzukommen: 
            
               Gelegentlich enthält ein Wort mehrere Änderungen (z. B. mehrere Grapheme und/oder Satzzeichen). Wenn es mehrere Änderungen desselben Typs gibt, werden diese dem Typ zugeordnet (z. B. „Schiff“ in Zeile 5 in Abbildung 2 mit zwei graphemischen Differenzen). Wenn es jedoch Änderungen unterschiedlicher Klassen sind, werden diese als ein nicht näher differenzierter Unterschied („Content“) betrachtet (z. B. „ist /“ und „i
                  ʃt/“ in Zeile 81 mit zwei verschiedenen Typen von Änderungen bezüglich Leerzeichen und Graphem). Hier wäre eine Mischklasse aus den jeweiligen Ursprungsklassen wünschenswert. Das Problem lässt sich teilweise durch vorherige Normalisierung lösen, indem z. B. alle Graphem-Änderungen vorab normalisiert werden und sich dann manche komplexe Fehler zu einfachen Fehlertypen reduzieren.
                Es gibt Ausnahmen zu den Regeln, in denen die Nutzer die Änderungsklasse manuell ändern und ggf. kommentieren können sollten. Bisher zeigt der Viewer nur das automatisch generierte Ergebnis der Regelauswertung an, er sollte um eine Editierfunktion erweitert werden. Dies ist z. B. hilfreich, wenn bei automatischer OCR von verschiedenen Ausgaben eines Werkes zwischen OCR-Fehlern und Textvarianten unterschieden werden soll.
            
         
         
            Zusammenfassung und Ausblick
            Der vorgestellte Variance-Viewer ermöglicht die Feindifferenzierung und Klassifikation von Textvarianten mittels selbstdefinierter Typen. In verschiedenen Ausgaben von literarischen Texten treten oft zahlreiche „technische“ Varianzen auf, die sich auf Satzzeichen, Leerzeichen, Buchstabenvarianten und ggf. auch auf das Layout oder die Typographie beziehen, die von eigentlichen inhaltlichen Änderungen zu trennen sind. Hier werden bei Verwendung eines einfachen Diff-Werkzeugs häufig so viele Änderungen angezeigt, dass der Überblick verloren geht. Ein Filtern bzw. Hervorheben bestimmter Typen von Varianzen erleichtert die philologische Arbeit beträchtlich. Wichtig ist, dass die Typen von Varianzen abhängig von den Fragestellungen und individuellen Interessen des jeweiligen Philologen leicht konfiguriert werden können. Der vorgestellte Varianz-Viewer erfüllt diese Anforderungen und hat sich in zwei größeren philologischen Projekten bewährt. Er ist Open-Source, webbasiert, leicht zu installieren und zu bedienen. Perspektiven der Weiterentwicklung umfassen eine einfachere oder sogar automatische Definition der Varianztypen sowie funktionelle Erweiterungen:
            
               Aus technischer Sicht sollte für die Definition von Varianztypen ein Editor bereitgestellt werden, so dass deren Definition im Vergleich zur bisherigen Konfigurationsdatei noch weiter vereinfacht wird. Dazu kann eine Regelsprache bereitgestellt werden oder ein Lernverfahren, dem einige Beispiele präsentiert werden und der das Muster dann selbständig erkennt.
               Die häufigsten Typen von Varianzen können auch durch Lernverfahren vollautomatisch erkannt werden (ohne vorgegebene Varianztypen), indem alle vom Diff-Algorithmus gefundenen Varianten auf gemeinsame Muster hin analysiert werden.
               Eine umfassende Änderung wäre die Weiterentwicklung des relativ einfachen Tools zur Erkennung komplexerer Änderungen wie Transpositionen und zur Visualisierung der Änderungen, auch von mehreren Werken, in Graphen, ggf. durch Übernahme entsprechender Funktionalitäten z. B. aus CollateX oder Stemmaweb.
            
         
      
      
         
            
      Web-Link vom Variance-Viewer: 
      http://variance-viewer.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de; Code Open-Source unter: 
      https://github.com/cs6-uniwue/Variance-Viewer
            
            
               http://faustedition.net
            
            
               https://collatex.net
            
            
               https://stemmaweb.net
            
            
               https://github.com/tla/stemmatology
            
            
      Java-diff-utils: 
      https://code.google.com/archive/p/java-diff-utils. Die Software wird von Google gehostet und wurde von 2009-2013 von verschiedenen Autoren entwickelt (s. 
      https://code.google.com/archive/p/java-diff-utils/source/default/commits).
    
            
      Richard Wagner Schriften (RWS): Historisch-Kritische Gesamtausgabe: 
      http://www.musikwissenschaft.uni-wuerzburg.de/forschung/richard-wagner-schriften.
    
            
      „Narragonien digital“: 
      http://kallimachos.de/kallimachos/index.php/Narragonien.
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andrews, Tara L (2014): Analysis of variation significance inartificial traditions using Stemmaweb, in 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 31(3).
                    
               
                  Bulatovic, Natasa / Gnadt, Timo / Romanello, Matteo / Schmitt, Viola / Stiller, Juliane / Thoden, Klaus (2016): Usability von DH­Tools und Services, in 
                        DARIAH Working Papers: 
                        https://wiki.de.dariah.eu/download/attachments/14651583/AP1.2.3_Usability_von_DH-Tools_und-Services_final.pdf.
                    
               
                  Haentjens Dekker, Ronald / van Hulle, Dirk / Midell, Gregor / Neyt, Vincent / van Zundert, Joris (2014): Computer-supported collation of modern manuscripts: CollateX and the Beckett Digital Manuscript Project, in 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(3), 452-470.
                    
               
                  Jänicke, Stefan / Geßner, Annette / Büchler, Marco / Scheuermann, Gerik (2014): 5 Design Rules for Visualizing Text Variant Graphs, in 
                        DH: 
                        https://www.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/~stjaenicke/5_Design_Rules_for_Visualizing_Text_Variant_Graphs.pdf.
                    
               
                  Myers, Gene (1986): An O(ND) difference algorithm and its variations, in 
                        Algorithmica, 1, 251-266.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Seit März 2006 entsteht in der Hans Kelsen-Forschungsstelle (bis 2011 in Erlangen, seitdem in Freiburg i. Br.) die historisch-kritische Ausgabe der Werke des österreichischen Rechtstheoretikers Hans Kelsen (1881–1973). Mit der Aufnahme in das Programm der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur | Mainz im Jahr 2018 wurde eine weitere Arbeitsstelle für die digitale Komponente der Edition in Frankfurt a. M. etabliert.
                Die im Mohr Siebeck Verlag erschienenen Druckbände werden nach dem 
                Moving-Wall-Prinzip ebenfalls als digitale Edition aufbereitet und unter einer CC BY 2.0 Lizenz zur Verfügung gestellt. Fünf der geplanten 35 Bände (Jestaedt 2007–2013) sind bereits vor 2018 als Print erschienen und werden nachträglich für das Digitale aufbereitet, während zukünftig die digitale und die analoge Form der Edition 
                single source in einer XML-basierten digitalen Editionsumgebung erarbeitet wird. Somit werden für die (Rechts-)Wissenschaften maschinenlesbare Forschungsdaten zum Werk einer zentralen rechtshistorischen Figur des 20. Jahrhunderts nachnutzbar.
            
         Wie bei vielen Editionsprojekten, die bisher in rein analoger Form zur Verfügung standen und nun eine „digitale Wende“ vollziehen, stellen sich für die HKW vielschichtige Herausforderungen. Diese betreffen insbesondere die Beschaffenheit der Datengrundlage und deren Aufbereitung, die Umstellung bisher etablierter Redaktionsprozesse sowie Lern- und Lehrabläufe der digitalen und der klassischen Geisteswissenschaften. In unserem Poster stellen wir dar, inwiefern etablierte Workflows und Standards der Digital Humanities für die „Hans Kelsen Werke“ eingesetzt werden und geben einen Ausblick auf den Wert für die (digitale) Rechtswissenschaft insgesamt.
         
            Datengrundlage und -modellierung
            Vor Abschluss der Redaktionsumstellung in eine XML-basierte digitale Editionsumgebung bilden die Drucksatzdaten der nach bisherigem Verfahren erstellten Bände (innerhalb des Textverarbeitungsprogramms Microsoft-Word) die Datengrundlage für die digitale Edition der entsprechenden Werke Hans Kelsens. Die Datenmodellierung der Texte und der Register anhand der Guidelines der 
                    Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) in XML orientiert sich am Basisformat des Deutschen Textarchivs und wurde um projektspezifische Anforderungen erweitert. Eine Besonderheit der Texte im Vergleich zur herkömmlichen Quellenedition besteht beispielsweise im doppelten Fußnotenapparat – demjenigen Hans Kelsens und den Anmerkungen der HKW-Editor*innen – sowie der Heterogenität der Texte an sich (Buchbesprechungen, Gesetzestexte, Aufsätze, Monografien). Auch der vielfältige Einsatz des editorischen Fußnotenapparats der HKW birgt für die Übertragung in eine semantische Kodierung der Texte kreative Möglichkeiten.
                
            Die Bände der HKW liefern umfangreiche und für die Kelsen-Forschung unverzichtbare Personen- und Sachregister. Die einzelnen Personenregister wurden zusammengeführt und mit entsprechenden Normdaten der 
                    Gemeinsamen Normdatei (GND) versehen. Sie bilden ein digitales Register, welches bereits vor der endgültigen Umstellung des Redaktionsprozesses in eine digitale Editionsumgebung in die reguläre Editionsarbeit integriert wird. Ebenso wurden die Schriftenverzeichnisse der bisher publizierten Bände homogenisiert in das Literaturverwaltungssystem 
                    Zotero
               
                übertragen, in der zukünftig die Literatur nicht nur verwaltet, sondern auch in die neue Arbeitsumgebung integriert wird. Eine besondere Herausforderung stellt das heterogene und komplexe – und dafür umso bedeutendere – Sachregister dar, welches perspektivisch eine Grundlage für die Erarbeitung einer Ontologie in den digitalen Rechtswissenschaften und damit einen Einstieg der Fachrichtung in das Feld der 
                    Linked Open Data darstellen kann. Die datenbasierte Modellierung der Hans Kelsen Werke bietet somit vielfältige innovative Spielräume für die Digital Humanities hinsichtlich ihrer Wirkung auf die Rechtswissenschaften.
                
         
         
            Digitale Infrastruktur
            In der digitalen Infrastruktur und Editionsumgebung der HKW werden etablierte Standards und Angebote aus den DH zur Anwendung gebracht und weiterentwickelt. Die zu edierenden Quellen und Forschungsdaten werden in einer Instanz der XML-Datenbank eXist-db verwaltet und über eine Integration in den oXygen XML-Editor im Author-Modus editorisch bearbeitet. Zum Einsatz kommt hierbei ein projektspezifisches Erweiterungsframework auf Basis von 
                    ediarum sowie die eXistdb-App ediarum.db
               
               .
                
            Die Präsentation der digitalen Edition findet sich perspektivisch auf 
                    kelsen.online, zunächst werden hier nähere Projektinformationen, die PDF der bisher analog publizierten HKW-Bände und ein kumuliertes Gesamtregister der entsprechenden Bände zur Verfügung gestellt. Die Präsentationsschicht basiert auf dem Content Management System TYPO3, in das die Forschungsdaten aus der eXist-db importiert werden und redaktionelle Arbeiten an der Website stattfinden. Neben einer ansprechenden und benutzerfreundlichen Präsentation der Forschungsdaten und korpusinterner sowie -externer Interaktion werden diese über Schnittstellen beziehbar und für weitere maschinengestützte Forschungen nutzbar sein.
                
            Von der digitalen Redaktionsumstellung profitiert auch die gedruckte Buchausgabe der Edition, welche weiterhin ein gleichwertiger Bestand des Projektes bleibt. So beispielsweise durch die Reduzierung bisheriger Arbeitsschritte und einheitliche Ansetzungen in den Verzeichnissen.
         
         
            Ausblick
            Die digitale Edition der Hans Kelsen Werke wird in der 25-jährigen Laufzeit des Projektes die Entwicklungen und Standards der Digital Humanities verfolgen, gegebenenfalls adaptieren und sich dem Forschungsgegenstand “Hans Kelsen” mit dem Einsatz digitaler Methoden nähern. Auch für die rechtswissenschaftliche Forschung insgesamt hoffen wir durch die Erarbeitung von Standards für die digitale Aufbereitung fachspezifischer Daten einen nachhaltigen Beitrag zu leisten.
         
      
      
         
            
      www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat/.
    
            
      https://www.zotero.org/.
    
            
      http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html.
    
            
      https://www.oxygenxml.com/.
    
            
      https://github.com/ediarum.
    
            
      https://typo3.org/.
    
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Jestaedt, Matthias (eds.) (2007): Hans Kelsen Werke. Band 1. Veröffentlichte Schriften 1905–1910 und Selbstzeugnisse. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
               
                  Jestaedt, Matthias (eds.) (2008): Hans Kelsen Werke. Band 2: Veröffentlichte Schriften 1911. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
               
                  Jestaedt, Matthias (eds.) (2010): Hans Kelsen Werke. Band 3: Veröffentlichte Schriften 1911–1917. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
               
                  Jestaedt, Matthias (eds.) (2013): Hans Kelsen Werke. Band 4: Veröffentlichte Schriften 1918–1920. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
               
                  Jestaedt, Matthias (eds.) (2011): Hans Kelsen Werke. Band 5: Veröffentlichte Schriften 1919–1920. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
                    
               
                  Reinthal, Angela (2014): „InterNationalität und InterDisziplinarität der Hans Kelsen Werke (HKW)“ in: Stolz, Michael / Chen, Yen-Chun (eds.): Internationalität und Interdisziplinarität der Editonswissenschaft (= Beihefte zu editio 38). Berlin: De Gruyter 303-314.
                    
               
                  Nečaský, Martin / Knap, Tomáš / Klímek, Jakub / Holubová, Irena / Vidová-Hladká, Barbora (2013) Linked Open Data for Legislative Domain – Ontology and Experimental Data, in: Abramowicz W. (eds) Business Information Systems Workshops (= Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing 160). Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer Verlag 172–183.
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 1: Das typografische Erbe. (= Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 7). Norderstedt: BoD https://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/5351/.
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 2: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik. (= Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 8). Norderstedt: BoD https://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/5352/.
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 3: Textbegriffe und Recodierung. (= Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 9). Norderstedt: BoD https://kups.ub.uni-koeln.de/5353/.
                    
               
                  Staab, Steffen / Studer, Rudi (2009) (eds.): Handbook on Ontologies. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
                    
               
                  TEI Consortium (eds.) (2019): TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version 3.6.0 vom 17.07.2019. TEI Consortium. https://tei-c.org/guidelines/P5/ [letzter Zugriff 25.09.2019].
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Fachwissenschaftliche Hintergründe
            
Theaterhistorische Wissensdinge sind divers und unmittelbar mit vielfältigen historisch-kulturellen Bezügen aufgeladen. Die Objekte stammen teils unmittelbar aus der Aufführungspraxis (z.B. Masken und Requisiten) und sind damit Akteure und Zeugen des Geschehens. Zum Teil stammen sie aber auch aus Produktionsprozessen (z.B. Regiebücher, Bühnenbildentwürfe und -modelle) und ermöglichen damit einen Blick in die Prozesse, Mechanismen und Materialitäten des Theaters. Andere Objekte hingegen dokumentieren das ephemere Ereignis (z.B. Fotografien oder Kritiken) und erlauben so einen Zugriff auf die performativen Spuren einer Aufführung. Und wieder andere Objekte wie Programmhefte und Theaterzettel beinhalten historisch-kulturelle Kontextinformationen. Ergänzend zu den genannten Objektarten tragen Ego-Dokumente wie Briefe und Kalender eher eine sozio-historische Bedeutung: Sie geben Hinweise auf die beteiligten Individuen sowie deren Lebensläufe und Beziehungen. Die Bedeutungsebenen und Bezüge der Objekte sind nicht statisch: Mit jeder neuen Kontextualisierung weiten sich ihre Bedeutungsräume aus. Oft befinden sich Objekte an den Schnittstellen von diversen Verwendungsmöglichkeiten – bspw. beschreiben Kritiken nicht nur, was auf der Bühne geschehen ist, sie bilden auch Publikumsreaktionen und damit einen wichtigen Teil der Rezeptionsgeschichte ab.
                
            
            
Theateraufführungen lassen sich verstehen als das Ergebnis einer intensiven und oft monatelangen Zusammenarbeit unterschiedlichster Professionen: Akteur_innen
                aus den Tätigkeitsbereichen Regie, Darstellung, Bühnen- und Kostümbild, Bühnentechnik und vielen weiteren bilden ein komplexes Netzwerk, das für einen begrenzten Zeitraum besteht und im organisierten Zusammenspiel eine Inszenierungsidee auf der Theaterbühne verwirklicht. Theaterhistorisch relevante Forschungsobjekte beinhalten implizite und explizite Spuren dieser Verwirklichung. Der Wirkungsraum der Objekte erstreckt sich dabei sowohl auf Ereignisse als auch auf die Akteur_innen, die an diesen Ereignissen beteiligt waren. Die unterschiedlichen Ereignisse, zwischen denen Beziehungen und Interdependenzen bestehen, lassen sich als das Ergebnis von komplexen Interaktionen zwischen Akteur_innen beschreiben und können somit als Modelle für personenbezogene Interaktionsnetzwerke dienen. Um diese Netzwerke erfassen zu können, müssen nicht nur die relevanten Objekte mit 
               inhaltsreichen Daten erschlossen werden, sondern auch die Relationen zwischen diesen Daten modelliert werden. 
            
            
               Diesen vergänglichen Netzwerken von Ereignissen und Akteur_innen im 20. Jahrhundert spürt die Theaterwissenschaftliche Sammlung (TWS) in Zusammenarbeit mit Cologne Center for eHumanities (CCeH) nach. Das Forschungsprojekt 
               (Re-)Collecting Theatre History
                zielt auf die theaterwissenschaftliche Resystematisierung personenbezogener Bestände in den theaterhistorischen Sammlungen der Universität zu Köln und der FU Berlin sowie ergänzend der Theatermuseen Düsseldorf und München ab. Die scheinbare ‚Zufälligkeit‘ von Lebenswegen, die sich nicht den Ordnungsbegriffen der politischen oder der Kunstgeschichte unterordnet, soll zum Ausgangspunkt genommen werden, um die Netzwerke ebenso zu erhellen wie die Frage nach personellen und ästhetischen Kontinuitäten im Theaterbetrieb.
            
            Die im Projekt entwickelte Plattform eröffnet Querverbindungen und Vergleichsmöglichkeiten der Bestände in den wichtigsten universitären Theatersammlungen und öffentlichen Theatermuseen in Deutschland – als solche ist sie offen und auch für zukünftige Projekte erweiterbar –, und schafft dadurch ein umfangreiches Forschungsnetzwerk.
         
         
            Metadaten: Modell und Erfassung
            Aus methodischer Sicht lässt sich das Projekt auf den ersten Blick zwar noch als klassische Nachlassdigitalisierung und Erschließung beschreiben, doch schon auf den zweiten Blick wird deutlich, dass die einfache Erfassung von objektbezogenen Metadaten keine ausreichende Datengrundlage für die intendierte Aufdeckung und Erforschung der beschriebenen komplexen Netzwerk- und Interaktionsstrukturen bieten würde. Die Gesamtheit der Objekte und, in Konsequenz daraus, die Objektdatenbank bildet zwar das Rückgrat des Projektes, sie muss aber den gesamten sozio-historischen Wirkungsraum und Kontext der Objekte erfassen können und darf nicht auf die reine materielle Beschreibung beschränkt sein. 
            Für das Projekt war klar, dass ein Metadaten-Standard wie z.b. Dublin-Core hier viel zu kurz greifen würde und nicht die nötige Spezifität und semantische Tiefe wiedergeben kann. Stattdessen werden die Daten im LIDO (Lightweight Information Describing Objects) Standard erfasst. Dieser ermöglicht eine detaillierte Objektbeschreibung, bietet darüber hinaus aber auch Strukturen für die Beschreibung von “events” und “actors”. Als weit verbreiteter Standard in der Museums- und Sammlungswelt bietet LIDO zum einen eine Basis für konsistente und vergleichbare Datenerhebung, zum anderen genügend Flexibilität und Spielraum innerhalb der Strukturen um die sozio-kulturellen Kontexte der Objekte beschreiben zu können. LIDO ist das Produkt einer CIDOC-Arbeitsgruppe und ist mit den Ansätzen von CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) zu großen Teilen konform. Insbesondere bildet die Event-Actor-Struktur der CRM Ontologie einen Kernaspekt des LIDO Standards, der in diesem Projekt von besonderem Interesse und Nutzen war. Durch diese eventbasierte Modellierung können die Daten auch für Graphdatenbank- und Netzwerkansätze verwendet werden, ohne das Objekt, dessen Beschreibung natürlich der Kern eines Nachlass-Projektes bleiben muss, als Informationsträger aus dem Fokus zu verlieren. Ein LIDO Dokument kann auch jederzeit in CRM übersetzt werden, um die Daten für andere Forschungsziele zu verwenden.
            Neben den unmittelbar objektbezogenen Metadaten enthält jeder Datensatz Daten zu drei vordefinierten Ereignissen: “Herstellung”, “Inszenierung” und “Erwerb”, welche die Biographie der Objekte rudimentär nachzeichnen. Zusätzlich können weitere nicht vordefinierte Ereignisse aufgenommen werden. Ihnen können jeweils beliebig viele Akteure zugeordnet werden. Mit diesen Strukturen können dann komplexe Aussagen erfasst werden wie z.B. “Die Maske wurde von einer bekannten Requisitenwerkstatt hergestellt” oder “Schauspieler X war der Inszenierung Y beteiligt, die auf diesem Programmzettel beschrieben wird”. Es werden also teilweise bereits in den objektbezogenen Daten Beziehungen zwischen Akteuren, Ereignissen und Objekten explizit modelliert und beschrieben. 
            Interoperabilität und Nachhaltigkeit haben für solch ein Erschließungsprojekt maßgebliche Bedeutung. Um beides zu gewährleisten, spielen Normdaten und kontrollierte Vokabulare eine wichtige Rolle. Insbesondere personenbezogene Daten profitieren von Verknüpfungen zu externen Datensätzen. Daher werden die Personendatensätze mit GND-Nummern verknüpft (sofern vorhanden). Außerdem werden die Objekttypen unter Zuhilfenahme des Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) erfasst, da sich der heterogene theaterhistorische Objektbestand mit der polyhierarchischen und multilingualen Struktur des AAT adäquat erfassen lässt. Für weitere Datenfelder und -typen, für die keine passende Standards existieren (z.B. Funktionen der Personen oder erweiterte Eventtypen), werden Theaterwissenschafts-spezifische Vokabulare entwickelt, die möglicherweise hilfreich sein können für die zukünftige Weiterentwicklung der LIDO-Terminologie.
            
            
An dieser Stelle ist es wichtig anzumerken, dass LIDO als umfangreiches Datenaustauschformat entwickelt worden ist. Um LIDO für das Projekt effektiv nutzen zu können, wurde ein LIDO-Sub-Schema für die projektspezifischen Bedürfnisse entwickelt, das im Laufe des Projektes erweitert und an die Bedürfnisse des Projekts angepasst wurde. Die Eingabe der Daten findet über den LIDO-Maker statt, der auf dem Metadateneditor CMDI-Maker basiert und entsprechend weiterentwickelt wurde.
            
         
         
            Von Objektdaten zu Akteur- und Inszenierungsdaten
            Verwandte Projekte wie z.B. IbsenStage oder AusStage
stellen die breite Erfassung von Ereignissen, Akteuren und anderen Entitäten in den Vordergrund, und erfassen Objektbezüge nur mit rudimentäre Metadatensets. Auch im institutionsübergreifenden Nachweis- und Rechercheportal 
                    performing-arts.eu
               
(FID Darstellende Kunst) werden nur die Kerndaten zu Objekten präsentiert. Der Ausgangspunkt dieses Projektes ist dagegen die detaillierte Erschließung von Nachlassobjekten. In der Objektdatenbank werden, wie beschrieben, bereits Informationen zu den Beziehungen von Objekten zu Ereignissen und Akteur_innen explizit erfasst. Dagegen sind die Beziehungen zwischen Akteur_innen oder zwischen Ereignissen bisher nur impliziert. Um diese erforschbar und auch referenzierbar zu machen, wurden mithilfe von XSLT zwei zusätzliche Datenbanken aus der im ersten Schritt erstellten LIDO-Objektdatenbank extrapoliert. Um die komplexen XSL-Transformationen kontrollieren zu können, wurden Prinzipien der Konversionspipelines umgesetzt, so dass der Prozess der Datenkuratierung offen gelegt wird. (Barabucci 2018).
                
            Die Personendaten orientieren sich hierbei an der Struktur des TEI:person-Modells, wurden aber mit einigen projektspezifischen Elementen und Attributen ergänzt. Analog dazu wurden auch die Inszenierungsdaten explizit modelliert, indem die Informationen zu einer spezifischen Inszenierung, die aus unterschiedlichen Objekten stammen, kohärent zusammengefügt wurden. In diesem Schritt wurden eindeutige Bezeichner (UUID) zu den Personen- und Inszenierungsdaten zugeordnet, so dass diese nun schon bei der Erfassung von neuen Objektdatensätzen referenziert werden können. Auch die Referenzierungen der Daten untereinander und die entsprechende Abfragen zu diesen Referenzen werden ermöglicht, um nah an der Idee der Netzwerke bleiben zu können. 
                
            Innerhalb eines Akteur_in-Datensatzes sind dann komplexe personenbezogene Informationen wie Wirkungsorte und damit auch Karriereverläufe unmittelbar abrufbar. Wenn eine Person in einem Objektdatensatz als Hersteller_in des Objektes vorkommt – bspw. als Bühnenbildner_in eines Bühnenbildmodells, so wird diese Information einerseits als Objektbezug verarbeitet, andererseits landet sie im Personendatensatz als Berufs- oder Tätigkeitsbeschreibung mit zeitlichen und örtlichen Angaben. Außerdem wird die Verknüpfung mit der entsprechenden Inszenierung gewährleistet, die mit dem jeweiligen Objekt in Beziehung steht. Somit ist die Person nicht nur als Hersteller_in eines Objektes signifikant, sondern auch als Akteur_in der Inszenierungen.
         
         
            Ausblick und Fazit
            Als letzter Schritt von der reinen Objektdatenerfassung hin zu einer Plattform, die Akteur_innen- und Inszenierungdatenbank vernetzt, wurden im Projekt experimentell Möglichkeiten der weiteren Datenanreicherung angedacht und bereits in Teilen umgesetzt. 
            So wurden zum Beispiel, um weitere Informationen über die biographische Hintergründe der Akteur_innen zu erhalten, die biographischen Artikel (ADB und NDB) von der 
Deutschen Biographie
mithilfe der dort bereitgestellten API für die im Projekt erfassten Akteure abgefragt.
                Informationen zu den familiären und beruflichen Hintergründen werden mithilfe eines Skriptes extrahiert und nach einer Überprüfung in die Datensätze der Akteur_innendatenbank eingepflegt. Weiteren biographische Informationen werden aus studentischen Dossier übernommen, die im Rahmen des Projektes von Studierenden der Universität zu Köln erarbeitet wurden. 
            
            
               Diese zwei Ansätze der Datenanreicherung sind als Schritt zu einer Öffnung von Diskussions- und Interaktionsräumen mit den Daten zu verstehen. Gleichzeitig besteht auch der Wunsch die im Projekt erarbeiteten Personendaten anderen Projekten zur Verfügung zu stellen, um so auch über den Projekt und Theaterkontext hinausgehende, prosopographische Studien zu ermöglichen. Hierbei erwies sich der Ansatz von einer prosopographischen Schnittstelle als sinnvoll – Personendaten 
profitieren von der Interoperabilität, die automatisierte Extraktion von Personenrelationen ermöglicht. (cf. Vogeler 2019).
            
            Als ein Ergebnis der Datenanalyse konnte zum Beispiel festgestellt werden, dass ein Akteur immer wieder an zentraler Stelle auftauchte: Carl Hagemann (1871-1945), der vor allem in den 1910er und 1920er Jahren als Intendant in Mannheim, Hamburg, Wiesbaden und beim frisch gegründeten Rundfunk in Berlin sowohl als Regisseur wie auch als Organisator tätig war. Darüber hinaus hat Hagemann in seiner gesamten Laufbahn intensiv als Autor gewirkt. Da sich anhand dieses Akteurs die komplexen Netzwerke der Theaterschaffenden besonders eindrücklich zeigen lassen, wurden die Bezüge zu seiner Theaterarbeit bei den zu digitalisierenden Objekten in den Nachlässen bevorzugt berücksichtigt. Hagemann repräsentiert in diesem Sinne idealtypisch auch jene im Antrag in den Blick genommenen biographischen Verläufe, die unterschiedliche historische Zäsuren überspannen.
            Es lässt sich festhalten, dass es durch die Daten- und Prozessmodellierung realisierbar ist, aus den Objektdaten Datensätze zu extrahieren, die unterschiedlich modelliert und anders definiert sind - wie beispielsweise Akteure oder Ereignisse. Auf diese Weise agieren sie nicht mehr objektgebunden, stehen mit ihnen aber noch immer in engen relationalen Beziehungen. Hiermit können die Datensätze sowohl komplexe Interaktionsnetzwerke zwischen Entitäten abbilden als auch unabhängig vom intendierten Zweck alleinstehend verwendet werden. Mit dieser Aufbereitung wird eine Datenbasis generiert, die als Grundlage für eine Forschungsumgebung dient. Im Laufe des Projektes wurden bisher 1217 Objekte erfasst. Mit Hilfe dieser Objekten sind 3198 Akteur_innen und 290 Ereignisse erschlossen worden. Diese Basis erlaubt zum einen die theaterwissenschaftliche Neuperspektivierung der Bestände, zum anderen kann sie durch die generierten Netzwerke als Grundlage einer fachwissenschaftlichen Neukonfiguration der zentralen Epochen von Theater- und Kulturgeschichte der Moderne genutzt werden.
         
      
      
         
            
    Von dem Arbeitsbuch “100 Jahre Theaterwissenschaftliche Sammlung Köln Dokumente, Pläne, Traumreste” kann ein Überblick über die Forschung an theaterwissenschaftlich relevanten Objekten und deren Kontexte gewonnen werden (Marx, 2019)
            
      Der Begriff “Akteur_in” wird hier weit gefasst und bezieht sich sowohl auf natürliche Personen als auch auf Körperschaften.
    
            siehe Stand von LIDO Terminology unter: 
    .
    
            
               
            
            
               , https://www.ausstage.edu.au/
            
            
               
            
            siehe 
    https://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/de/html/ref-person.html
            
            
               siehe 
               https://www.www.deutsche-biographie.de,
      für API siehe 
            
            
      siehe auch 
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Barabucci, Gioele  (2018): 
	Funktionale und deklarative Programmierung-basierte Methode für nachhaltige, reproduzierbare und verifizierbare Datenkuration. DHd Konferenz 2018: Kritik der digitalen Vernunft, 214–219, doi: 
	  [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019].
      
               
                  Bogatzki, Jakob (2019): »(Re-)Collecting Theatre History. Neue Perspektiven biografischer und theaterhistoriografischer Forschung«, in: 
	Die vierte Wand, Heft 9, S. 26–29.
      
               
                  Deutsche Biographie. Hauptseite, 
	https://www.deutsche-biographie.de [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019]
      
               
                  Deutsche Biographie. Services, 
	  [letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019]
      
               
                  Illmayer, Klaus (2017): „Aufbau einer digitalen Infrastruktur für Theaterwissenschaft“ (Abstract),
	  [letzter Zugriff 7. September 2019].
      
               
                  Leonhardt, Nic (2014): 
	Digital Humanities and the Performing Arts: Building Communities, Creating Knowledge.
	Keynote auf der SIBMAS/TLA Konferenz, New York (NY), 12. Juni 2014,
	 [letzter Zugriff 3. August 2019].
      
               
                  LIDO Working Group. What is LIDO, 
	
	[letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019].
      
               
                  LIDO Working Group. LIDO Terminology, 
	
	[letzter Zugriff 10. September 2019].
      
               
                   Marx, Peter W., Hrsg.  (2019): 100 Jahre Theaterwissenschaftliche Sammlung Köln. Dokumente, Pläne, Traumreste. Berlin: Alexander Verlag.
      
               
                   Probst, Nora / Pinto, Vito: Re-Collecting Theatre History. Theaterhistoriografische Nachlassforschung mit Verfahren der Digital Humanities. In: Wihstutz, Benjamin; Hoesch, Benjamin (Hg.): Neue Methoden der Theaterwissenschaft (Druck in Vorbereitung).
      
               
                  Vogeler, Georg / Vasold, Gunter / Schlögl, Matthias  (2019): 
	Von IIIF zu IPIF? Ein Vorschlag für den Datenaustausch über Personen. In: Sahle, Patrick (Hg.): DHd 2019 Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts. Frankfurt / Mainz. DHd. 2019 DOI: 
	10.5281/zenodo.2600812. pp. 239-241. 
      
            
         
      
   



      
         Im Sommer 2019 konnte die Historische Kommission bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften ihr 2014 begonnenes Pilotprojekt für ein neues Konzept historisch-kritischer Editionsarbeit zu einem erfolgreichen Abschluss bringen. Mit dem neunten Band der Reihe „Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats 1945–1962“, bearbeitet von Dr. Oliver Braun (München), entstand die erste Edition der Historischen Kommission auf XML-Basis. Das neue Konzept ermöglicht es, ohne großen Zusatzaufwand, einen vollwertigen gedruckten Band und eine digitale Version mit zahlreichen Such- und Verlinkungsfeatures herzustellen. Vor allem aber ist es darauf ausgelegt, dass die Bearbeiter und Bearbeiterinnen ihren Editionstext in vollwertigem TEI-XML herstellen können, ohne technische Vorkenntnisse zu benötigen. Dank einer speziell eingerichteten Arbeitsumgebung im Programm                Oxygen XML Editor
             können sie ihre bisher gewohnte Arbeitsweise weitgehend beibehalten. Unser Vortrag möchte dieses neue Editionskonzept und die Arbeitsumgebung vorstellen sowie von den Erfahrungen berichten, die wir bei der Herstellung des Bands 9 der Bayerischen Ministerratsprotokolle gemacht haben.
            
         Die Edition „Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats 1945–1962“, die seit Anfang der 1990er Jahre
                , dank Förderung durch den Freistaat Bayern, bei der Historischen Kommission entsteht, ist eines der wichtigsten Forschungsprojekte zur bayerischen Zeitgeschichte. In bisher acht Bänden, die die Jahre 1945 bis 1951 abdecken, dokumentieren die ausführlichen Gesprächsprotokolle der Ministerratssitzungen das Handeln der Bayerischen Staatsregierung. Sie geben Einblick in die Fragen und Herausforderungen der Nachkriegszeit in Bayern, erst unter amerikanischer Kontrolle, dann in der noch jungen Bundesrepublik. Deutlich lassen sich aus Ihnen die Kontroversen und die teilweise heftig geführten Diskussionen zwischen den Kabinettsmitgliedern herauslesen. Nicht selten gleichen dabei die vor 70 Jahren geführten Debatten zu Themen wie Flüchtlingen, Verkehrspolitik und Bildungswesen verblüffend den aktuellen politischen Auseinandersetzungen in Bayern und Deutschland. Die ersten acht Bände der Edition (bis 1952) stehen im Volltext retrodigitalisiert auch online zur Verfügung.
         
         
            
            Abbildung 1: Ein Protokoll aus der Edition in seiner XML-Grundform, …
         
         Die Arbeiten an dem hier vorgestellten Editionskonzept begannen im Jahr 2014. Ausgangsbasis war damals das Projekt 
                ediarum
             der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Dumont/Fechner 2015). Während es Inspiration und eine wertvolle technische Grundlage lieferte, ergaben sich rasch Anforderungen, die mit dem damals verfügbaren Werkzeugen von 
                ediarum nicht vollständig zu erfüllen waren. Und so begannen Matthias Reinert und Maximilian Schrott (beide München), Mitarbeiter in der Abteilung „Digitale Publikationen“ mit der Entwicklung eines eigenen Ansatzes. Dessen Kerngedanke ist es, dass der Bearbeiter möglichst gar keine Berührungspunkte mit der XML-Syntax der Dokumente hat. Stattdessen soll er sich voll auf die Arbeit am Editionstext konzentrieren können. Dennoch legt Herr Dr. Braun teils komplexe Strukturen auf Basis des TEI Lite Schemas in den Protokolltext an und baut während der gesamten Editionsarbeit interne und externe Verknüpfungen in den Text ein. So wird das Projekt mit Metainformationen angereicht, die vor allem bei der digitalen Veröffentlichung im Internet einen Mehrwert bringen. Entscheidend unterstützt wird er dabei durch den 
                Oxygen XML Editor. Dieses leistungsstarke XML-Bearbeitungsprogramm, bietet die Möglichkeit eine stark individualisierte Arbeitsumgebung einzurichten. 
            
         Die wichtigsten Bestandteile dieser Arbeitsumgebung für unser Editionsprojekt sind Operationen und Stile. Die Operationen sind eine Reihe von vorbereiten Funktionen, die eine Eingabe des Bearbeiters entgegen nehmen, daraus XML-Fragmente generieren und in den Text einfügen. Sie werden entweder aus Standardoperationen, die der 
                Oxygen XML Editor bietet, konfiguriert oder können selbst über eine Java-Schnittstelle programmiert werden. Herr Dr. Braun löst sie nach Bedarf über Buttons in der Menüleiste des Editors aus. Die Operationen ermöglichen es ihm mit wenigen Mausklicks und Eingaben in Textmasken komplexe Strukturelemente wie den Protokollkopf einzufügen, den Protokolltext in Tagesordnungspunkte und Unterpunkte zu gliedern oder Verweise auf andere Abschnitte und Fußnoten innerhalb des Editionskorpus zu setzen. Auf diese Weise kann Herr Dr. Braun das XML seiner Editionsdokumente bequem und ohne Angst vor lästigen Flüchtigkeitsfehlern bearbeiten und das mit minimalem Einarbeitungsaufwand.
            
         Die Stile werden über Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) eingerichtet. Mit diesen kann die Darstellung der XML-Dokumente in 
                Oxygen XML Editor weitreichend angepasst werden. Für die Bayerischen Ministerratsprotokolle fiel der Entschluss, das XML-Markup, das oft als störend empfunden wird, größtenteils auszublenden und nur den reinen Editionstext darzustellen. Die semantischen Strukturen werden stattdessen über Formatierung, Textsetzung und farbliche Markierungen kenntlich gemacht. Herr Dr. Braun kann zwischen mehreren hinterlegten Stilen wechseln, die jeweils einen bestimmten Schritt des Workflows besonders unterstützen.
            
         
            
            Abbildung 2: … in der Darstellung der Arbeitsumgebung …
         
         Zusammengenommen ermöglichen Operationen und Stile ein bequemes und produktives Arbeiten in XML. Durch das vollständige Verlagern der Syntax in den Hintergrund, sinkt die Einstiegshürde für XML-unkundige Bearbeiter. Gleichzeitig ist die Arbeit schneller, bequemer und weniger fehleranfällig, als wenn das Markup von Hand eingegeben werden müsste. Und der Blick des Bearbeiters auf den Text wird nicht durch unübersichtliche XML-Element-Konstruktionen versperrt.
         Eine neu hinzugekommene Aufgabe für Herrn Dr. Braun während der Editionsarbeit ist die Markierung der registerrelevanten Entitäten (Personen, Orte, Schlagwörter, Gesetze, Quellen und Literaturtitel) im Text. Die systematische Referenzierung dieser Textstellen erhöht den Grad der thematischen Verknüpfung innerhalb der Edition enorm und ermöglicht ein hohes Maß an Erschließ- und Durchsuchbarkeit für die digitale Präsentation. Kernstück dieser Verknüpfungsarbeit ist die Registerdatenbank (RDB). In diese trägt der Bearbeiter sämtliche registerrelevanten Entitäten im TEI-Format ein, ebenfalls unterstützt durch die Arbeitsumgebung. Da Herr Dr. Braun zwar an verschiedenen Orten aber alleine an seinen Editionstexten arbeitet, schien es zunächst unnötig die RDB als 
                eXist-Datenbank einzurichten. Stattdessen handelt es sich um eine Reihe von einfachen XML-Dateien, die jeweils einen einzelnen Entitätstypen beinhalten. Diese Lösung spart Wartungsaufwand und vermeidet einen Onlinezwang während der Arbeit, ohne dass sich dadurch ein merkbarer Nachteil ergab. Die Sicherung der RDB-Dateien, wie auch der Editionsdokumente, erfolgt stattdessen über 
                Sync+Share
            , das Cloud-Speicherangebot des Leibniz-Rechenzentrums. Dieses sorgt gleichzeitig für den Austausch der Arbeitsdateien mit den technischen Betreuern.
            
         Vom Text aus kann Herr Dr. Braun über entsprechende Operationen den jeweils benötigten RDB-Eintrag heraussuchen und eine Referenz auf diesen hinterlegen. Zusätzlich zu den Registerinformationen wie Personen- und Ortsname kann die RDB auch weiterführende Daten zu ihren Einträgen speichern. Zum Beispiel die geographischen Koordinaten eines Ortes, Normdaten-Identifier (GND) oder biographische Informationen zu den Personen. Diese können während der Bearbeitung und später in der digitalen Präsentation genutzt werden, um zusätzlichen Funktionen zu realisieren.
            
         Während sich Herr Dr. Braun auf seine Editionsarbeit konzentrieren kann, kümmert sich die Abteilung Digitale Publikationen der Historischen Kommission um die technische Umsetzung. Zu Projektbeginn prüfte sie, in Absprachen mit dem Bearbeiter, die Anforderungen des Editionsprojekts. Auf dieser Basis wurde dann entschieden, welche Phänomene des Editionstextes in XML kodiert werden mussten und wie. Aus diesen Überlegungen entstanden schließlich die digitalen Editionsrichtlinien. Anhand dieser richtete Maximilian Schrott dann die Editionsumgebung in 
                Oxygen XML Editor ein, designte die Stile und programmierte die Operationen. Nach dieser Erstkonfiguration leistete er Herrn Dr. Braun während des gesamten Bearbeitungszeitraums fortlaufend Support. Er verbesserte Fehler in der Arbeitsumgebung, entwickelte diese auf Basis seines Feedbacks weiter und überwachte die korrekte Form der Editionsdokumente. Zum Ende der Editionsarbeit hin übernahm die Abteilung Digitale Publikation schließlich die Umwandlung des Editionstextes in die gedruckte Form.
            
         
            
            Abbildung 3: … und in der finalen PDF-Druckfassung.
         
         Denn auch wenn die Veröffentlichung einer hochwertigen, digitalen Version im Fokus des Editionskonzepts steht, sollte auch der neunte Band der Bayerischen Ministerratsprotokolle noch gedruckt erscheinen. Die PDF-Vorlage für den Druck wird dabei direkt aus den erstellten XML-Dateien erzeugt. Als Satzprogramm dient das in den 
                Oxygen XML Editor integrierte 
                Apache-FOP
            . In dieses werden die Editionsdateien mittels einer XSL-Transformation überführt. So lässt sich in weniger als einer Minute eine vollständige Druckversion des kompletten 1000seitigen Druckbandes im gewünschten Layout erstellen. Der finale Satz erfolgt somit komplett intern, ohne Zuarbeiten durch den Verlag. Der automatisierte Satz funktioniert insgesamt sehr gut, es bleiben aber vereinzelte Mängel. Vor allem Zeilen-, Spalten- und Seitenumbruch müssen an einigen Stellen manuell nachgearbeitet werden. Auch bei der Erstellung der gedruckten Version ergeben sich durch die Anreicherungsarbeiten in XML Vorteile. So kann durch die wortgenaue Kennzeichnung der registerrelevanten Entitäten und die Verknüpfung mit der RDB auch das Druckregister halbautomatisch erstellt und dem Bearbeiter so eine besonders mühsame Arbeit erspart werden.
            
         Das abgeschlossen Pilotprojekt wird von Seiten der Historischen Kommission als sehr erfolgreich eingestuft. Die Arbeit im 
                Oxygen XML Editor wurde von Herrn Dr. Braun als angenehm empfunden, die Drucklegung wurde pünktlich abgeschlossen und es konnten wertvolle Erfahrungen zur Verbesserung der Arbeitsumgebung und des Workflows gesammelt werden. Der Komfort für den Bearbeiter und die Qualität der Ergebnisse wird freilich durch eine vergleichsweise hohen Einrichtungs- und Supportaufwand erkauft. Diese Mehrarbeiten werden aber von der technischen Betreuung geleistet. Eine zusätzliche Belastung für den wissenschaftlichen Editor wird weitestgehend vermieden. Die Veränderungen in seinem Workflow sind zwar merkbar, aber nicht einschneidend. In der jetzigen Form funktioniert die Zusammenarbeit zwischen Bearbeiter und Technikern für beide Seiten sehr fruchtbringend. Außerdem sind die gewonnen Erfahrungen und Programmierarbeiten zum größten Teil für andere Projekte wiederverwendbar. Die Historische Kommission sieht sich deshalb in ihrem Entschluss bestätigt, zukünftig verstärkt auf das digitale, XML-basierte Editionskonzept zu setzen. Neben den noch ausstehenden Bänden der Bayerischen Ministerratsprotokolle sind bereits drei Briefeditionsprojekte in Arbeit, die auf diesem Ansatz beruhen.  Weitere Projekte befinden sich in der Vorbereitungs- und Planungsphase. 
            
         Der neunte Band der Bayerischen Ministerratsprotokolle ist im Oktober 2019 gedruckt erschienen. Die Veröffentlichung im Internet wird sich noch bis voraussichtlich 2022 verzögern. Dann endet mit dem Erscheinen des 10. Bandes, die mit dem Verlag vereinbarte Exklusivitätsperiode im Druck. Der Inhalt von Band 9 und der RDB können somit zum bestehenden Webangebot der Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats hinzugefügt werden. Ein größeres Funktionsupdate für die Website, das hiermit einhergehen soll, befindet sich derzeit noch in der Konzeptionsphase. Es soll das Webangebot um zahlreiche neue Features erweitern, die die Anreicherungen und Vernetzungen im Editionstext für die User zugänglich macht. Noch geprüft wird, welche Verlinkungsmöglichkeiten zu externen Webangeboten und Normdatenbanken umgesetzt werden können. Außerdem gibt es Überlegungen für spezialisierte Recherche- und Visualisierungsmöglichkeiten, zum Bespiel mittels der in der RDB erfassten Orte auf Karten.
            
      
      
         
            
      Das Kabinett Ehard III 18.Dezember 1950 bis 14. Dezember 1954, Band 3 8.1.1953–29.12.1953. bearb. von Oliver Braun, München [2019] (= Die Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats. 1945-1962, Hg. von der Historischen Kommission bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften durch Andreas Wirsching und von der Generaldirektion der Staatlichen Archive durch Margit Ksoll-Marcon, Band 9).
    
            
               http://www.tei-c.org ; alle URLs in diesem Artikel wurden zuletzt am 25.09.2019 aufgerufen.
    
            
               http://oxygenxml.com
            
            
      Die Protokolle des Bayerischen Ministerrats 1945-1962 [ehemals 1945-1954], Hg. von der Historischen Kommission bei der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Generaldirektion der Staatlichen Archive Bayerns, 9 Bände, bearbeitet von Karl-Ulrich Gelberg [Bände 1-5] und Oliver Braun [Bände 6-9], 1995-2019.
    
            
               www.bayerischer-ministerrat.de
            
            
               http://www.bbaw.de/telota/software/ediarum
            
            
               https://exist-db.org
            
            
               https://syncandshare.lrz.de
            
            
               https://www.dnb.de/DE/Professionell/Standardisierung/GND/gnd_node.html
            
            
               https://xmlgraphics.apache.org/fop/
            
            
      Die wissenschaftliche Korrespondenz des Historikers Karl Hegel (1813-1901), bearbeitet von Marion Kreis; Der Briefwechsel zwischen Adolf Harnack und Friedrich Althoff (1886-1908), bearbeitet von Claudia Kampmann; Zwischen Wissenschaft und Politik. Hans Delbrück – Ausgewählte Korrespondenz (1868-1929), bearbeitet von Andreas Rose und Jonas Klein.
    
            
      Siehe Anm. 5.
      
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Dumont, Stefan / Fechner, Martin (2012): „Digitale Arbeitsumgebung für das Editionvorhaben ‚Schleiermacher in Berlin 1808–1834‘“ http://digiversity.net/2012/digitale-arbeitsumgebung-fur-das-editionsvorhaben-schleiermacher-in-berlin-1808-1834 [letzter Zugriff 25.09.2019].
                    
               
                  Dumont Stefan / Fechner Martin (2015): „Bridging the Gap: Greater Usability for TEI encoding, in: Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 8“ http://jtei.revues.org/1242 [letzter Zugriff 25.09.2019].
                    
            
                  
         
      
   



      
         Die Entwicklungen im Bereich der digitalen Musikedition haben seit ihrer Entstehung eine Vielzahl von Projekten initiiert. Durch die Möglichkeit der Codierung und der mehrdimensionalen Darstellung musikbezogener Inhalte (vgl. Wiering 2009) konnte wesentlich zur Überwindung der Vorstellung von musikalischen Werken 
                einer festen Gestalt verholfen,und das intersektionale Arbeiten der Digital Humanities in den Musikwissenschaften verankert werden.
            
         Das Potenzial digitaler Musikedition – so zeigt es das hier vorgestellte, im 
                Zentrum Musik – Edition – Medien angesiedelte und Ende 2019 abzuschließende Dissertationsprojekt – erschöpft sich jedoch nicht an der Bearbeitung des Werk-Faktors und des notenschriftbasierten Quellenmaterials. Digitale Edition eröffnet durch ihr Potenzial der tiefen und mehrdimensionalen Erschließung eines Gegenstandes auch das Potenzial, den zu edierenden musikbezogenen Gegenstand auszuweiten. Sie suggeriert somit die Möglichkeit, Musik nicht alleine mit Bezug auf ihren logischen Inhalt zu erschließen und dessen editorische Darstellung durch die optische und akustische Domäne musikbezogener Quellen zu flankieren, sondern Musik im Sinne 
                gelebter Wirklichkeiten zu repräsentieren, in Musik also auch im editorischen Sinne mehr zu sehen als Notentext. 
                Digitale Musikedition eröffnet im Sinne der Digital Humanities somit ein Erkenntnispotenzial, das es ermöglicht, aus editorischer Sicht die grundlegende Frage zu stellen, was Musik ist.
            
         Die Arbeit zeigt dabei, dass der Versuch, Musikedition mit digitalen Mitteln über den Notentext hinaus auszuweiten, Erkenntnis über den Gegenstand „Musik“ offenbart und geht von der kulturwissenschaftlich inspirierten Prämisse aus, dass Musik ein vom Handeln geprägtes Ereignis ist. Am Beispiel einer dichten Beschreibung eines Ausschnitts einer Konzert-Aufzeichnung des Sängers Marius Müller-Westernhagen, wird die Vielfalt des Komplexes „Musik“ verdeutlicht und der Frage nachgegangen, auf welcher entitätenbezogenen Basis dieses musikbezogene Handeln in editorische Kontexte integrierbar ist, um nicht nur digitale Notenedition, sondern digitale Musikedition im umfassendsten Sinne zu betreiben – als dichte Beschreibung mit digitalen Mitteln. Neben der Beleuchtung bisheriger musikwissenschaftlicher Editionspraxis und damit verbundener Prinzipien, gilt es, das Wesen digitaler Notenedition vorzustellen, um zunächst zu verdeutlichen, dass diese unter der Nutzung der xml-basierten MEI- und TEI-Standards weitgehend die Prinzipien traditioneller Notenedition in das Digitale transferiert hat und qua der Struktur des Codes an der Edition von Meisterwerken festhält. Kulturwissenschaftliche Erkenntnisse (wie die Bedeutung musikbezogener Handlungen) sind hier kaum in editorischen Kontexten wiederzufinden oder in diese integrierbar. Diese Arbeit verdeutlicht durch experimentelle Anreicherung einer MEI-Codierung die Notwendigkeit der grundsätzlichen ontologischen Erschließung des (handlungsbezogenen) Gegenstands „Musik“ sowie die Notwendigkeit des grundsätzlichen Lösens vom bisherigen werkbezogenen Blickwinkel.
         Bestehende Projekte entwickeln bereits vielfältige, durch digitale Techniken ermöglichte Insellösungen, die damit beginnen, die Betrachtung des Komplexes „Musik“ auszuweiten. Doch der Faktor des Werkes scheint hier ein schwer zu überwindendes Hindernis. Um in diesem Kontext die (auch editorische) Betrachtung von Musik in einen größeren Zusammenhang zu stellen, frage ich, was Musik ist und stelle im Zusammenhang mit Christopher Smalls Konzept des 
                Musicking einen handlungsbezogenen Musikbegriff vor. (Small
                 1998) Als Verifizierung seiner These und zur Überbrückung von in seiner Arbeit vorzufindenden Defiziten, wird der Begriff des Musicking zunächst ontologisch differenziert. Das Musicking kann somit auf der Basis von fünf grundlegenden Musicking-Entitäten – Akteur, Ding, Ereignis, Text, Raum – präzisiert werden. Diese werden als ontologische Basis einer Musikedition vorgeschlagen, die den Status von Musik als Handeln anerkennt und widerspiegelt. Der Begriff der Musikedition wird dabei präzisiert und vom Komplex der Noten- oder Werkedition unterschieden. Das Projekt verdeutlicht so die Notwendigkeit, diesen Ansatz als Ontologie des Musicking weiter auszubauen, um Musik mit digitalen Mitteln einer „wirklichen“ Musikedition zuzuführen und – im Sinne der Digital Humanities als „intersection“ (vgl. Nyhan/Flinn 2016:1.) – Edition als digitale kulturwissenschaftliche Edition zu betreiben. Bestehende, in Insellösungen manifestierte Bestrebungen zu Edition, Codierung und Erforschung musikbezogener Kontexte können durch das vorgeschlagene Prinzip aufgegriffen werden, welches mittels einer „Partitur des Musicking“ u.a. mit Techniken der Graphenvisualisierung einen editorischen Rahmen für alle bisher durchgeführten Konzepte vorschlägt.
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Babbitt, Milton (1965): „The Use of Computers in Musicological Research“, in: 
  Perspectives of New Music 3/2 74–83.

               
                  Grotjahn, Rebecca / Iffland, 
                  Joachim (2018): „Digitale Musikedition und die Wissenschaft der Populären Musik“, in: 
  Die Musikforschung 71/IV 379–393.

               
                  Iffland, Joachim (2018): „Materialität und Schriftlichkeit“, in: 
  Zentrum Musik – Edition – Medien  https://zenmem.de/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=33718295 [letzter Abruf 19. September 2019).

               
                  Kaden, Christian (2004): 
  Das Unerhörte und das Unhörbare. Was Musik ist, was Musik sein kann, Kassel/Stuttgart.

               
                  Kepper, Johannes (2011): 
  Musikedition im Zeichen neuer Medien. Historische Entwicklung und gegenwärtige Perspektiven musikalischer Gesamtausgaben, Diss., Paderborn 2009, Norderstedt.

               
                  Kepper, Johannes / 
                  Pugin, 
                  Laurent (2017): „Was ist eine Digitale Edition? Versuch einer Positionsbestimmung zum Stand der Musikphilologie im Jahr 2017“, in: 
  Musiktheorie 32/4 347–363.

               
                  McCarty, Willard (2003): „Humanities Computing“, in: 
  Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science, DOI: 10.1081/E-ELIS 120008491, New York 1224– 1235.

               
                  McCarty, Willard (2016): „Becoming Interdisciplinary“, in: 
  Schreibman, Susan / Siemens,   Ray / Unsworth, John (eds.): 
  A New Companion to Digita l Humanities, Chichester 69–83.

               
                  Nyhan, Julianne / 
                  Flinn,
                   Andrew (2016): 
  Computation and the Humanities. Towards an Oral History of Digital Humanities, Cham. 

               
                  Small, Christopher (1998): 
  Musicking. The Meanings of Performing and Listening (Music/Culture), Middletown.

               
                  Veit, Joachim (2015): „Musikedition 2.0. Das ‚Aus‘ für den edierten Notentext?“, in: 
  editio 
                  29/1 187–197.

               
                  Veit, Joachim / 
                  Richts,
                   Kristina (2018): „Stand und Perspektiven der Nutzung von MEI in der Musikwissenschaft und in Bibliotheken“, in: 
Bibliothek – Forschung und Praxis 42/2 292–301.

               
                  Walser, Robert (2016): 
  The Christopher Small Reader (Music/Culture), Middletown.

               
                  Wiering, Frans (2009): „Digital Critical Editions of Music: A Multidimensional Model“, in: 
  Crawford, 
                  Tim / Gibson, 
                  Lorna: 
                        Modern Methods for Musicology. Prospects, Proposals, and Realities, Farnham 23–45.

            
         
      
   



      
         Kochtraditionen, ob regional oder international, sind eine der herausragendsten Elemente der europäischen Kultur und ein wichtiger Bestandteil der europäischen Identität. Aber die Fragen nach ihrem Ursprung, den Einflüssen und ihrer Entwicklung sind nach wie vor unklar. In den letzten Jahrzehnten kam die Forschung zu zwei wichtigen Schlussfolgerungen, welche mittlerweile die Forschungsbestrebungen prägen: Erstens gibt es keine quantitativen Studien über den Ursprung und die Entstehung der regionalen Küche in Europa; zweitens sind erst ab dem Mittelalter Handschriften mit Tausenden von Kochrezepten überliefert, was wohl als die Geburt der modernen europäischen Küche angesehen werden kann (vgl. Flandrin & Hyman 1988, Laurioux 2005). Auf dem europäischen Kontinent stellen frühneuhochdeutsche, mittelfranzösische und mittellateinische Rezepte den größten Teil der kulinarischen Überlieferung dar, die mehr als 80 Manuskripte und etwa 8000 Rezepte umfasst. Das Projekt “Cooking Recipes of the Middle Ages” bereitet die Kochrezeptüberlieferung von Frankreich und dem deutschsprachigen Raum auf, um ihre Herkunft, ihre Beziehung und ihre Migration innerhalb Europas zu analysieren (vgl. thematisch ähnliche Studien mit unterschiedlicher Fokussetzung: Hieatt 1995 mit linguistischem Fokus, Flandrin 1984, Adamson 1995, Carlin 1989, Adamson 2002, Karg 2007 allgemein und van Winter 1989, Hyman 2005, Laurioux 2002 mit Fokus auf spezielle Gerichte). Die Partner, das Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung der Universität Graz und das Laboratoire CESR (Centre d’Etudes Supérieures de la Renaissance) der Universität Tours werden diese mehrsprachigen Texte mit Hilfe von digitalen Standards aufarbeiten und sie mit aktuellen quantitativen und qualitativen Forschungsmethoden untersuchen. Der Vergleich der französischen und deutschen Ernährungsgeschichte eignet sich besonders gut für diese Aufgabe, da Frankreich einen kulturell prägenden Einfluss auf die deutschsprachigen Völker hatte. 
         Kochrezepte sind kulturell aufgeladene, flüchtige Texte; die erhaltenen Niederschriften stellen daher nur ein punktuelles Zeugnis, eine individuelle Zubereitungsweise eines Gerichts (Hieatt 1985, 26) in Raum und Zeit dar. Das inhaltliche Verständnis dieser Rezepte, ihre möglichen Entstehungs- und Anwendungskontexte und ihre Überlieferung ist zudem kein einfacher Prozess, denn die Fachbegriffe, Zutaten, Utensilien, Verfahren und Bräuche der damaligen Zeit, die in den Rezepten eher öfter implizit als direkt genannt werden, sind auch für Sprach- und Geschichtswissenschaftler, die sich auf das Thema spezialisiert haben, immer wieder eine Herausforderung. Ihre Entwicklung sollte daher am besten diachron und räumlich analysiert werden, was mittlerweile mit digitalen geisteswissenschaftlichen Methoden verhältnismäßig leicht möglich ist – vorausgesetzt, die entsprechenden Daten liegen vor. Im aktuellen Projekt werden die historischen Texte auf mehreren Ebenen erschlossen: So werden die Texte nicht nur neu transkribiert und philologisch-editorisch bearbeitet (vgl. Klug, Kranich 2015), sondern auch in unterschiedlichen Wissensgebieten semantisch angereichert. Das schafft jene Spielräume, die nötig sind, um Analysen wie maschinengestützte Abgleiche von Zutaten, Kochprozessen oder Kochutensilien, die Suche nach Rezepttradition und -migration oder standardisierte philologische Vergleiche, wie z.B. Kollationierungen, durchzuführen. Die Basis unserer Daten sind customized TEI/XML-Dokumente mit einem zusätzlichen adaptierten Schema, das die semantische Annotation von Kochrezepten im Allgemeinen erleichtern soll. 
         Die Rezeptüberlieferung – in Form einzelner Rezeptsammlungen – wird mithilfe einer , die sich an den Handschriftenbeschreibungen renommierter Bibliotheken orientiert und die in Kooperation mit der Abteilung für Sondersammlungen der Grazer Universitätsbibliothek entstanden ist, räumlich und zeitlich fixiert. Besonderes Augenmerk wird dabei auf Informationen zur Handschriftenentstehung (materiell wie auch inhaltlich) und auf die Schriftbeschreibung bzw. den Schreibhandbefund der Rezeptsammlungen gelegt, wobei erstere Informationen meist den Katalogen entstammen, letztere aus der Arbeit mit den Texten kommen. Die Grundlage des Projekts ist die einheitliche Erfassung der überlieferten Texte durch eine hyperdiplomatische Neutranskription der historischen Quellen: Als Arbeitsumgebung fungiert Transkribus, wo das Textlayout automatisch erkannt und die Texte manuell mittels proprietären Codierungen erfasst werden. Mithilfe mehrerer Transformationsschritte wird aus den Rohdaten die Basis für die elektronische Quellenabbildung erstellt, die sich an germanistisch-editorischen Richtlinien orientiert. Die Quellentexttranskription verzeichnet dabei nicht nur das unterschiedliche Schriftzeicheninventar, sondern auch alle textstrukturierenden Elemente. Das gesamte Zeicheninventar ist in einer nach den Richtlinien der TEI erstellten Zeichenbeschreibung erfasst. Die Beschreibung stützt sich dabei auf die theoretischen Ergebnisse zur Beschreibung von Zeichen aus dem DigiPal-Projekt und verwendet außerdem die Zeichenidentifikatoren der Medieval Unicode Font Initiative (vgl. Böhm, Klug 2020). Die so produzierten Daten sind nicht nur der Ausgangspunkt für die wissenschaftlichen Fragestellungen im Projekt, sondern bieten eine solide Grundlage für viele weitere Forschungsfragen aus Germanistik/Linguistik, Paläographie usw. Diese Erarbeitungsstufe wird nach editorischen Richtlinien normalisiert und gibt im Rahmen des Webauftritts in Form einer Text-Bild-Synopse detaillierten Einblick in die historische Quelle.
            
         Aus den Transkriptionsdaten wird außerdem eine auf Zeichenebene normalisierte, in Sinneinheiten untergliederte Textfassung geschaffen, in der die semantischen Informationen annotiert werden. Diese Sinneinheiten umfassen neben dem eigentlichen Rezept und Rezepttitel Eingangs- und Schlussformeln, Handlungsanweisungen, Küchen- und Serviertipps, Hinweise auf medizinische und religiöse Aspekte und selbstverständlich Zutaten, Gerichte und Küchenutensilien. 
         Den Kern der digitalen Forschungsstrategie bildet das Semantic Web beziehungsweise die Anbindung und Integration unserer Daten an Linked Open Data. Wir sind innerhalb der Geisteswissenschaften in der vorteilhaften Position, dass sich unser Projekt zu einem großen Teil mit Lebensmittelzutaten befasst, d.h. mit Tieren, Pflanzen und Pilzen. Das sind Forschungsgebiete, in denen sich bereits eine signifikante Menge an relevanten Ontologien etabliert haben und die gut an die Linked Open Data Cloud, einschließlich der allgemeinen Wissensdatenbanken Wikidata und DBPedia angeschlossen sind. Ontologien werden, wenn auch mit unterschiedlichen Schwerpunkten und Granularität der Daten, außerdem bereits erfolgreich für die Repräsentation von Kochrezepten (Hoehndorf & Lange 2018, Sam et al. 2014, Ribeiro et al. 2006) und in deren Analyse eingesetzt (Chow & Grüniger 2019, Jovanovic et al. 2015, Vadivu & Waheeta Hopper 2010). In unserem digitalen Forschungsansatz setzen wir zwar teilweise auch auf Textähnlichkeiten, der größte Teil unserer Analyse basiert jedoch auf dem Vorkommen von Zutaten, Kochprozessen bzw. Zubereitungshinweisen und Kochutensilien. Weitere Entitäten, die wir für die Analyse der Rezepte heranziehen sind Serviervorschläge sowie medizinische, kulturelle und religiöse Aspekte in den Texten. Die Annotation dieser Entitäten gestaltet sich schon aufgrund ihrer schieren Menge in historischen Kochrezepten als sehr komplex. Neben den Möglichkeiten zuvor unbekannte Beziehungen zwischen den Quellen und deren Entitäten zu finden, war das Arbeiten außerhalb von Sprachbarrieren ein Hauptargument für die Entscheidung, Semantic Web-Technologien in den Mittelpunkt des Projekts zu stellen. 
            
         Durch die Verwendung von 
                Konzepten, im Sinne einer Idee oder eines mentalen Bildes und nicht eines 
                Begriffes, versuchen wir, historische und sprachliche Grenzen zu überwinden. Ein konkretes Beispiel für diese Diskrepanz zwischen Begriff und mentaler Vorstellung liefert uns die österreichische / süddeutsche Variante für Kartoffel: "Erdapfel" ("erdaphel" im Frühneuhochdeutschen) wird etwa in einem Manuskript aus der Zeit um 1488 erwähnt, lange bevor die Kartoffel von Südamerika nach Europa importiert wurde, was uns zeigt, dass das Konzept von "Erdapfel" ein anderes gewesen sein muss (wahrscheinlich jede Art von Rübe) als das heutige Konzept des Erdapfels. Wie oben bereits erwähnt, war es also nötig einen Workflow zu finden, der nicht nur die philologische, sondern auch die semantische Komplexität der Rezepte widerspiegelt. Während die phrasenartigen Informationseinheiten manuell annotiert werden, erfolgt die Annotation auf Wortebene semiautomatisch, indem die Texte mithilfe von XSLT- und Python-Skripten und individuellen Vokabularien, vorgehalten als CSV Dateien, angereichert werden, die alle darauf ausgerichtet sind, die Varianz der historischen Sprachstufen auszugleichen. Für die frühneuhochdeutschen Texte stand uns aus einem früheren Projekt eine Liste mittelalterlicher Pflanzennamen und ihrer Übersetzungen in modernes Englisch und Deutsch sowie ihrer mittelalterlichen Variantendiktionen zur Verfügung. Dies gab uns die Möglichkeit, mit Hilfe der von OpenRefine bereitgestellten Reconciliation Service API, einen teilautomatisierten Prozess zur Annotation von Wikidata-Konzepten zu starten. Die daraus resultierenden Daten bildeten den Grundstock für die zuvor genannten Vokabularien. Ähnliche Listen wurden von den Projektpartnern in Frankreich erstellt, die mithilfe des von den französischen Kollegen entwickelten Tools “Heterotoki” in einem kollaborativen Arbeitsschritt konsolidiert werden können. Sobald jeder Begriff mit einem Konzept verbunden ist, werden diese Konzepte verwendet, um die Zutaten innerhalb der eigentlichen Rezepttexte in den TEI-Dokumenten anzureichern. Ein entscheidender Faktor dieses semiautomatischen Prozesses bleibt jedoch die menschliche Interpretation der angereicherten Einheiten und die Entscheidung für ein konkretes bereits bestehendes Konzept bzw. die Erstellung eines neuen Konzepts in Wikidata.
            
         Wir befinden uns derzeit mitten in dieser semantischen Annotationsphase. Ist diese abgeschlossen, bieten sich mannigfaltige Analysemethoden an. Sobald die Einheiten der einzelnen Rezepte mit Konzepten ausgestattet sind, kann die Analyse des Projekts übereinstimmende oder abweichende Essgewohnheiten, Textmigration sowie den Einfluss der Nachbarländer auf die jeweilige Küche aufzeigen. Die Implementierung von Ontologien aus den Naturwissenschaften wie FoodOn oder SNOMED ermöglicht es uns, Verbindungen von historischen Essgewohnheiten zu modernen Konzepten von Lebensmitteln herzustellen und neues Wissen für den Bereich der Ernährungsgeschichte zu generieren. Die Ontologiedaten werden zusammen mit den Entitäten in einem Triplestore gespeichert und können mit Hilfe von SPARQL Queries befragt werden. Die Ergebnisse dienen als Grundlage für eine räumliche und zeitliche Visualisierung der Daten.
            
          Die Speicherung, Analyse und Dissemination der Projektdaten erfolgt über das vom Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung in Graz entwickelte Repository GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management). Innerhalb dieser auf Langzeitarchivierung ausgerichteten Infrastruktur wird auf den Triplestore “Blazegraph” über einen Webservice zur Speicherung und Abfrage von RDF-Triples zugegriffen.
            
      
      
         
            
               https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/
            
            
      Describing Handwriting I-VII; http://www.digipal.eu/blog
            
            
               https://folk.uib.no/hnooh/mufi/
            
            
      Für eine Übersicht an Ontologien in diesen Bereichen siehe: 
      http://www.ontobee.org/, 
      http://aims.fao.org/, 
      https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/, 
      https://agclass.nal.usda.gov/about.shtml, 
      http://zbw.eu/stw/version/latest/thsys/70498/about.de.html.
      
	Alle sind an die Linked Open Data Cloud angeschlossen indem eine oder mehrere Serialisierungen in OWL und/oder RDF(S) vorliegen. 
      
            
            
               http://medieval-plants.org
            
            
               https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Reconciliation-Service-API
            
            
               https://github.com/ponchio/heterotoki
            
            
               http://foodon.org/
            
            
               https://browser.ihtsdotools.org/
            
            
               https://gams.uni-graz.at
            
            
               https://www.blazegraph.com/
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Adamson, M. W. (Ed.)  (1995): Food in the
      Middle Ages. A Book of Essays. New York, London:
      Garland. Adamson, M. W. (Ed.). (2002). Regional Cuisines of
      Medieval Europe: A Book of Essays. New York, London: Routledge.
      
               
                  Amoia, M. / Martínez, J.M.M.  (2019): SaCoCo Diachronic Corpus [WWW Document]. URL 
	http://fedora.clarin-d.uni-saarland.de/sacoco/ (accessed 1.7.20).
      
               
                  Böhm, A.  /  Klug, H.: Quellenorientierte
      Aufbereitung historischer Texte im Rahmen digitaler Editionen:
      Das Problem der Transkription in mediävistischen
      Editionsprojekten. In: [Titel steht noch nicht fest] Hrsg. von
      Ingrid Bennewitz und Martin Fischer (= Bamberger
      interdisziplinäre Mittelalterstudien.) [in Vorbereitung]
      
               
                  Carlin, M. /  Rosenthal, J. T. (Eds.)
      (1998): Food and Eating in Medieval Europe. London: Hambledon
      Press.
      
               
                  Chow, A. E. / Ninger, M. G.  (o. J.): 
	Multimodal Event Recognition with an Ontology For Cooking Recipes. 12.
      
               
                  Dooley, D. M. / Griffiths, E. J. / Gosal, G. S. / Buttigieg, P. L. / Hoehndorf, R. / Lange, M. C.,  / …  / Hsiao,
	W. W. L.  (2018): FoodOn: A harmonized food ontology to increase global food traceability, quality control and data integration. 
	Npj Science of Food, 2(1), 23. 
	https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-018-0032-6
               
               
                  Flandrin, J.-L. (1984): «Internationalisme,
      nationalisme et régionalisme dans la cuisine des XIVe et XVe
      siècles: le témoignage des livres de cuisine». In Manger et
      boire au Moyen âge. Actes du Colloque de Nice (15-17 octobre
      1982). (pt. 2, p. 75-91). Paris.
      
               
                  Flandrin, J.-L.  /  Hyman, P. (1988):
      “Regional tastes and cuisines: Problems, documents, and
      discourses on food in Southern France in the 16th and 17th
      centuries”. Food and Foodways 1-3, p. 221-251.
      
               
                  Gloning, T.,  (2000): Monumenta Culinaria et Diaetetica Historica. Corpus of culinary & dietetic texts of Europe from the Middle Ages to 1800. Corpus älterer deutscher Kochbücher und Ernährungslehren [WWW Document]. URL 
	http://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm (accessed 1.7.20).
      
               
                  Hammad, R. /  Hassouna, M.  (2011): 
	Multi-Language Semantic Search Engine. 6.
      
               
                  Hieatt, C.  (1995): Sorting through the
	Titles of Medieval Dishes: What Is, or Is Not, a “Blanc
	manger”. In M. W. Adamson (Ed.), Food in the Middle Ages. A
	Book of Essays. (pp. 25-43). New York, London: Garland.
      
               
                  Hyman, P.  /  M.  (2005): «Les associations de saveurs dans les livres de cuisine français du XVIe siècle». In 
	Le Désir et le Goût. Une autre histoire (XIIIe-XVIIIe siècles). Actes du colloque international à la mémoire de Jean-Louis Flandrin (Saint-Denis, septembre 2003). Dir. Odile Redon, Line Sallman et Sylvie Steinberg. (p. 135-150). Saint-Denis: Presses Universitaires de Vincennes.
      
               
                  Karg, S. (Ed.) (2007): Medieval Food
      Traditions in Northern Europe. Copenhagen: National Museum of
      Denmark.
      
               
                  Klug, H. W. /  Kranich, K.  (2015): “Das Edieren von handschriftlichen Kochrezepttexten am Weg ins digitale Zeitalter. Zur Neuedition des Tegernseer Wirtschaftsbuches.” In T. Bein (Ed.), Vom Nutzen der Editionen. Zur Bedeutung moderner Editorik für die Erforschung von Literatur- und Kulturgeschichte. (pp. 121-137). Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.
               
                  Lamé, M. /  Pittet, P. (2018):
      Heterotoki: Non-st / ructured and heterogeneous terminology alignment for Digital Humanities data producers. 12.
      
               
                  Laurioux, B.  (2005): «Les voyageurs et la gastronomie en Europe à la fin du Moyen âge ». In Le Désir et le Goût. Une autre histoire (XIIIe-XVIIIe siècles), Actes du colloque international à la mémoire de Jean-Louis Flandrin (Saint-Denis, septembre 2003). Dir. Odile Redon, Line Sallman et Sylvie Steinberg. (p. 99-117). Saint-Denis, Presses Universitaires de Vincennes.
               
                  Ribeiro, R. / Batista, F. / Pardal, J. P.  / Mamede, N. J. /  Pinto, H. S.  (2006): Cooking an Ontology. In J. Euzenat & J. Domingue (Hrsg.), 
	Artificial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Applications (S. 213–221). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
      
               
                  Sam, M. / Krisnadhi, A. A. / Wang, C. / Gallagher, J. /  Hitzler, P. (2014): 
	An Ontology Design Pattern for Cooking Recipes – Classroom Created.
      
               
                  Vadivu, G. / Hopper, S. W.  (2010): Semantic Linking and Querying of Natural Food, Chemicals and Diseases. 
	International Journal of Computer Applications, 
	11(4), 35–38. 
	https://doi.org/10.5120/1567-2093
               
               
                  van Winter, J. M. (1989):
	“Kochen und Essen im Mittelalter.” In B. Herrmann
	(Ed.). Mensch und Umwelt im
	Mittelalter. (pp. 88-100). Frankfurt am Main: Fischer
	Taschenbuch Verl.
      
            
         
      
   



      
         Der folgende Beitrag stellt das Forschungsvorhaben und erste Ergebnisse des DFG geförderten Projekts "Synoptische Edition des kabbalistischen Traktats 
Keter Shem Ṭov mit englischer Übersetzung, Stellenkommentar und rezeptionsgeschichtlichen Studien" vor.

         Der im 13. Jahrhundert auf Hebräisch verfasste Traktat 
Keter Shem Ṭov (“Krone des
guten Namens”) ist einer der wichtigsten
Einführungstexte in die esoterischen Lehren der
jüdischen Kabbala. Er wird häufig Abraham ben Axelrad
von Köln zugeschrieben, der möglicherweise ein Schüler
von El
            ‘azar von Worms (ca. 1176–1238) und Ezra ben Salomo von Gerona (um 1240) war. Der Traktat verbindet die in der spanischen Kabbala klassisch ausgeprägte Symbolik der zehn Sefirot bzw. Manifestationen der Gottheit mit solchen Deutungen des Tetragrammatons, d.h. des vierbuchstabigen („guten“) Gottesnamens, wie sie aus der Literatur der „Deutschen Frommen“, den 
Ḥaside Ashkenaz, bekannt sind. 
Keter Shem Ṭov ist der älteste bekannte Text, der diese beiden mystischen Traditionen vereint. Er wird in verschiedenen Versionen in etwa 100 Handschriften bezeugt, die sich voneinander deutlich in Umfang und Struktur unterscheiden. Die Herkunft dieser Handschriften umfasst ashkenazische, sefardische, italienische, byzantinische und orientalische Provenienzen. Die ältesten handschriftlichen Textzeugen stammen bereits aus der zweiten Hälfte des 13. Jahrhunderts und sind somit nur wenige Jahre nach der Komposition dieses Traktats entstanden. Der Traktat wurde nicht nur in Kreisen der jüdischen Kabbala, sondern auch von christlichen Kabbalisten rezipiert.
            
         
            Das Ziel des Projekts, das für drei Jahre von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) bewilligt wurde, ist eine kritische Edition der verschiedenen Versionen dieses Traktats in Form einer Spaltensynopse, die sowohl in einer Druckausgabe als auch in einer digitalen und interaktiven Edition online verfügbar gemacht werden soll. Eine englische Übersetzung des Textes, ein detaillierter Stellenkommentar und Studien zur Geschichte seiner Rezeption werden die Edition ergänzen.
            
         Für die Kollationierung und Analyse der Textvarianten kommt das
webbasierte Werkzeug LERA zum Einsatz, das
im Rahmen des Projekts weiterentwickelt wird. Die ersten
transkribierten Textfassungen – in UTF-8 codierte Textdateien – konnten bereits mit dem Werkzeug verglichen werden. Abbildung 1 vermittelt einen ersten Eindruck der Oberfläche von LERA und zeigt beispielhaft den Vergleich von vier verschiedenen Textfassungen.
            
         
            
               
                Abbildung 1: Auszug einer mit LERA erstellten Synopse für vier Textfassungen von Keter Shem Ṭov. Im Ausschnitt zu sehen sind je zwei alignierte Absätze der vier Fassungen mit den farblich hervorgehobenen Textvarianten. Unter dem zweiten Absatz ist zudem der Variantenapparat eingeblendet.
            
         
         Ein nächster Arbeitsschritt besteht darin, an das Werk und das Hebräische angepasste Vergleichsfilter zu entwickeln, um spezifische Textvarianten auf Wunsch ausblenden zu können. Beispielsweise enthält 
                Keter Shem Ṭov verschiedenartige Bezeichnungen für "Gott", die in ausgeschriebenen oder abgekürzten Formen auftreten und oftmals mehrdeutig sind, sodass ein einfacher Wörterbuchansatz fehlschlägt. Wesentlicher Bestandteil des Textes sind zudem zitierte Bibelverse, die neben ihrer orthografischen Varianz auch in unterschiedlicher Länge wiedergegeben werden. Viele Textfassungen enthalten dabei nur die ersten Wörter; das Wissen um den vollständigen Vers setzt der Verfasser voraus. So entstehen Textvarianten, die vom System gesondert hervorgehoben oder verborgen werden sollen, was auf Basis entsprechender Auszeichnungen realisiert wird. Eine teilautomatisierte Erkennung, die den manuellen Aufwand dafür reduziert, ist derzeit in Entwicklung.
            
         Ein wesentlicher Aspekt des Projektes ist der Umgang mit sehr vielen Textfassungen, der mit voranschreitender Transkribierung weiterer Manuskripte stetig an Bedeutung gewinnt. LERA wurde ursprünglich für die Verarbeitung und Darstellung umfangreicher, aber weniger Textfassungen konzipiert (Bremer et al. 2015), obgleich seitdem für andere Editionsvorhaben angepasst, siehe bspw. (Gründler und Pöckelmann 2018, Roeder 2019). Um den Anforderungen von 
                Keter Shem Ṭov
             gerecht zu werden, sind verschiedene Erweiterungen in Arbeit. So wird die bisherige synoptische Darstellungsform mit je einer Spalte pro Textfassung um eine zeilenweise bzw. partitursynoptische Darstellung ergänzt. Über die Nutzeroberfläche soll es möglich sein, einzelne Textfassungen dynamisch ein- und auszublenden, was mit Hilfe der bereits integrierten Übersichtsleiste realisiert werden kann. Es ist eine dynamische Auswahl der Leithandschrift geplant, was neben der Anpassung der Oberfläche auch die Modifizierung des Vergleichsalgorithmus notwendig macht, da dieser die Textfassungen derzeit stets gleichrangig betrachtet. Es wird angestrebt diese interaktive Eingriffsmöglichkeit durch geschickte Vorberechnung möglichst effizient zu gestalten, damit für den Nutzer des Systems keine Wartezeiten entstehen. Ferner ist das Zusammenfassen mehrerer ähnlicher Handschriften in Gruppen angedacht. Der synoptische Vergleich findet dann auf Basis dieser Gruppen statt und wird größere Textunterschiede aufzeigen, während ein Apparat auch die kleinsten Änderungen innerhalb einer Gruppe aufschlüsselt.
            
         
            Anmerkungen
            Diese Arbeiten werden durch die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) [Projektnummer 414786977] im Rahmen des Projekts „Synoptische Edition des kabbalistischen Traktats 
                    Keter Shem Ṭov mit englischer Übersetzung, Stellenkommentar und rezeptionsgeschichtlichen Studien“ unter Leitung von apl. Prof. Dr. Gerold Neckerund Prof. Dr. Paul Molitor gefördert.
                
         
      
      
         
             Homepage des Projekts:https://kabbalaheditions.org
             LERA – Locate, Explore, Retrace and Apprehend complex text variants, siehe https://lera.uzi.uni-halle.de
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Abrams, Daniel (2013): 
"Kabbalistic Manuscripts and Textual Theory:
Methodologies of Textual Scholarship and Editorial Practice in the
Study of Jewish Mysticism", Jerusalem / Los Angeles: Cherub Press.
                    
               
                  Bremer, 
                  Thomas /
                   Molitor, 
                  Paul / 
                  Pöckelmann, 
                  Marcus / 
                  Ritter, 
                  Jörg
                   / Schütz, 
                  Susanne (2015):
"Zum Einsatz digitaler Methoden bei der Erstellung und Nutzung genetischer Editionen gedruckter Texte mit verschiedenen Fassungen – Das Fallbeispiel der Histoire philosphique des deux Indes von Guillaume Thomas Raynal" in: 
Editio, Internationales Jahrbuch für Editionswissenschaften, Hrsg. R. v. Nutt-Kofoth, B. Plachta und W. Woesler, Band 29, Heft 1, S. 29–51, de Gruyter.

               
                  Gründler, Beatrice / Pöckelmann, Marcus (2018): 
"Adjusting LERA For The Comparison Of Arabic Manuscripts Of Kalīla
wa-Dimna", in: Book of Abstracts of the
29. International Annual Conference of Digital Humanities, DH2018,
Mexico City, pp. 467–468.

               
                  Idel, Moshe (2007): 
"Ashkenazi Esotericism and Kabbalah in Barcelona", in:
Hispania Judaica Bulletin 5, S. 69–113.

               
                  Jellinek, Adolph (1988):
  "Kleine Schriften zur Geschichte der Kabbala",  Hildesheim: Olms, S. 29–48.

               
                  Oron, Michal (2013/14): 
"Ha-Sifrut ha-parshanit le-
                  ʿeser Sefirot", in: Yoram Ben-Na‘eh et. al. (Hg.), 
                  ʾAsupa le-Yosef, FS Joseph Hacker, Jerusalem: Shazar, S. 212–229 (Hebr.).

               
                  Roeder
                  , Torsten (2019): 
"Genesis and Variance: From Letter to Literature", in:
Book of Abstracts of the 19th Annual Conference and Members’ Meeting of the Text Encoding Initiative Consortium(TEI), Graz, pp. 92–93.

               
                  Scholem, Gershom (1933): 
"Index to the Commentaries on the Ten Sefirot", Qiryat Sefer 10, S. 498–515 (Hebr.).

            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einführung: Handschriftenforschung und Digitale Transformation
            Wenn sich auch in den Geisteswissenschaften so etwas wie ein „Digital Turn“ oder eine „Digitale Transformation“ (Pousttchi 2017) beobachten lässt, wirft das unweigerlich die Frage auf, inwiefern die Einführung digitaler Prozesse in geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung Konsequenzen für den Aufbau bzw. das Design von konkreten Forschungsprojekten hat.
            In folgendem Vortrag soll diese Frage an einem Fallbeispiel aus dem Bereich der Jüdischen Studien entwickelt werden. Hier wurde unlängst von Gerben Zaagsma herauspräpariert, dass durch die nunmehr in großem Umfang verfügbaren digitalen Ressourcen zu jüdischer Geschichte und Kultur sich "die Sicherung, Bereitstellung und Analyse des in alle Welt verstreuten vielsprachigen und mehrschriftlichen Quellenmaterials“ als eine der zukünftigen Schlüsselaufgaben stellt (Zaagsma 2019:3ff.). 
            Dies lässt sich in besonderem Maße an dem Teilbereich der Handschriftenforschung exemplifizieren: Gerade durch die großen Digitalisierungsinitiativen der letzten Jahre an hebräischen Manuskripten, v.a. National Library of Israel, der Polonsky Foundation in Zusammenarbeit mit der British Library und der Bodleian Library stehen der wissenschaftlichen Community umfangreiche Quellenbestände zur Verfügung, die erst die Grundlage für weitere inhaltliche Tiefenerschließung, Edition und Corpusanalyse bilden.
            Betrachtet man weiter das Teilgebiet der wissenschaftlichen Erforschung des hebräischen Bibeltextes, so lässt sich zeigen, dass forschungsgeschichtlich gesehen die Editionspraxis hebräischer Bibelhandschriften bereits teilweise auf digitale Prozesse zurückgreifen kann, etwa in computerlinguistischer Hinsicht durch die langjährigen Projekte des Eep Talstra Centre for Bible and Computer (ETCBC; van Lit 2019) oder durch die elektronische Edition des Westminster Leningrad Codex (WLC). Ob man dies bereits als Symptom eines digitalen Transformationsprozesses betrachten sollte, der jenseits der Einführung einzelner Tools und Verfahren übergreifende Veränderungen in Fragestellung, Methodologie und Methodenkritik sichtbar macht, ist damit noch nicht ausgemacht. Immerhin gilt nach wie vor die Print-Edition der "Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia" auf Grundlage der Handschrift Ms. Fircovitch B19a als eine der massgeblichen kritischen Textausgaben für Theologie und hebräische Bibeltextforschung und bildet damit noch den Stand und die Möglichkeiten der analogen Bibeltextkritik ab.
                
            Hinsichtlich der Perspektive von primär digitalen wissenschaftlichen Editionen der Hebräischen Bibel stellt sich infolgedessen die Frage nach der Anwendbarkeit bereits etablierter Verfahren; während sowohl im WLC als auch im "Digital Mishnah Project" XML-Textauszeichungen zum Einsatz kommen (entweder teilweise oder vollständig entlang der TEI P5 Spezifikationen implementiert), finden XML-basierte "best practices“ im Bereich linksläufiger Schriftsysteme wie dem Hebräischen bislang nur zögerlich Akzeptanz, zumal unter Einsatz von XML-Quelltext-Autorensystemen wie oXygen ganz basale handwerkliche Probleme das Schreiben von rechtsläufigen Tagsets und linksläufigen Schriften zur Herausforderung macht. So konstatiert auch noch das DARIAH Wiki: „Solange dieses Problem nicht grundsätzlich gelöst ist, wird die Akzeptanz von TEI und/oder XML in Hebraistik und Arabistik gering sein.“. Gleichwohl berührt dies eher die Frage, inwiefern sich solche technischen Hürden durch geeignete grafische Benutzerschnittstellen nehmen lassen, die die systemischen Anforderungen bidirektionaler Unicode-Texte von anwendungsseitigen Annotationsebene wegabstrahieren. 
                
         
         
            Textcodierung: Modelle
            Inhaltlich bedeutsamer scheint aber die mittlerweile ausführlich beschriebene Problematik zu sein, dass sich XML als semi-strukturierte, hierarchisch organisierte Markup-Sprache mit seinen strikten Regeln zur Wohlgeformtheit und Validität von Auszeichnungen nur bedingt dazu eignet, Phänomene zu annontieren, die nicht linear/hierarchisch, sondern mit Überlappungen oder sich überschneidenden Sequenzen strukturiert sind. Ebenso zwingt es die Bearbeitenden, die dokumentenzentrierte und die textzentrierte Perspektive einer zu edierenden Quelle durch zwei unterschiedliche Kodierungsstrategien zu lösen (Brüning/Henzel/Pravida 2013; Pierazzo 2017); gleichzeitig belastet die Verarbeitung von internen wie externen Verweisstrukturen im Dokument (Lesartvarianten, Zitate, Querbezüge) die Kodierung damit, die referentielle Integrität von Links zuverlässig verwalten zu können. Innovative Lösungsansätze werden für dieses Problem unter anderem entlang des Modells von Textvarianten-Graphen beschrieben (Schmidt 2008; Schmidt 2009; Schmidt/Colomb 2008:498) oder unter Verwendung von "Labelled Property Graph“-Systemen wie der Graphendatenbank Neo4J diskutiert (Kuczera 2016a, Kuczera 2016b). 
            An dieser beispielhaften Gegenüberstellung verschiedener Datenmodellierungsansätze einen Unterschied zwischen Standardverfahren/Best Practice und Innovation auszuloten, der bereits eine implizite Wertung von Innovation als „fortschrittlich“ mitmeint, griffe sicherlich zu kurz - gleichwohl spannt sich durch die in der Literatur diskutierten Anwendungsfälle durchaus ein Spannungsfeld auf: Einerseits belastet der Einsatz spezialisierter Datenbankmanagementsysteme die Anforderungen an Offenheit und Langzeitverfügbarkeit von zu speichernden Forschungsdaten; auch die Neumodellierung von zu erhebenden Forschungsdaten schneidet im Sinne der FAIR-Prinzipien (Wilkinson / Dumontier / Aalbersberg, 
                    et al. 2016) zunächst von Anschlussmöglichkeiten ab, sind doch neuartige Datenmodelle, möglicherweise eben noch nicht „interoperable“ und „reusable“. 
                
            Andererseits bedeutet auch das Anwenden bestehender 
                    best practices eine interpretative Einschränkung: Mit der Umsetzung standardisierter Auszeichnungsschemata, sei es TEI-XML, eine bestimmte RDF-Ontologie oder Datenbankstruktur lässt sich am Quellenmaterial nur beobachten, was sich innerhalb der Unterscheidungsmöglichkeiten des jeweiligen Schemas bezeichnen lässt. Die Praxis der XML-basierten Quellenannotation zeigt hier, dass gerade bei steigenden Komplexitätsgraden am Material sich der Focus stärker in Richtung auf Einhaltung der Schema-Compliance und weg von der Beschreibung neuer Merkmalskategorien bewegt. Gute Indikatoren für dieses Phänomen sind beispielsweise vermehrter Einsatz von Standoff-Markup, individuelle, d.h. projektbezogene Schema-Erweiterungen, aber auch steigende Mehrdeutigkeiten im Markup bestimmter Phänomene wie etwa Marginalien in Handschriften (Estill 2016).
                
            Dieses hier am Beispiel zweier Modellierungsstrategien angedeutete Spannungsverhältnis zwischen Standardisierung und Innovation lässt sich gerade im Rahmen des Projektdesigns produktiv nutzen, zwingt doch zum einen das Einführen digitaler Methoden in die Quellenerschliessung zu einer strengen Formalisierung des eigenen Forschungsprozesses, zum anderen gewinnt die Perspektive der Datenmodellierung (Owens 2011) eine größere Bedeutung. Beides hat nicht zuletzt auch entscheidenden Einfluss auf die Auswahl der zum Einsatz kommenden Technologie-Stacks.
         
         
            Fallbeispiel: Corpus Masoreticum
            Am folgenden Fallbeispiel soll entwickelt werden, wie die skizzierten Überlegungen in einem konkreten Projekt umgesetzt werden können: Das von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft geförderte Langzeit-Editionsvorhaben „Corpus Masoreticum“, das an der Hochschule für Jüdische Studien Heidelberg angesiedelt ist, befasst sich mit dem sogenannten masoretischen Text in mittelalterlichen Bibelcodices. In der heutigen Forschung meint der Begriff der Masora alle meta-textuellen Elemente zum Konsonantentext der Hebräischen Bibel. Dazu gehören Grapheme, grammatische, syntaktische und statistische Notizen, Referenzen und Verweise. Ab dem 12. Jh. entstehen im Kulturraum Aschkenas (Nord-Frankreich und Deutschland) hebräische Bibel-Kodizes, in denen die Masora mit mikrographischer Schrift in ornamentalen Formen auf der Seite platziert wurde und als Fabelwesen, vor allem aber als zoomorphe Gestalten (Hunde, Pferde, Hasen, Gazellen, Vögel, Fische) und sogar als anthropomorphe Darstellungen gestaltet werden - hierfür wurde der Begriff der Masora figurata zur Unterscheidung von linearer Masora magna geprägt. Sie kann darüber hinaus Zitate aus Kommentarliteratur enthalten, die weit über die üblichen quantitativen und referentiellen Annotationen zum hebräischen Konsonantentext hinausgingen (vgl. Ms Vat. ebr. 14). Als Beispiel für in diesen masoretischen Metatexten häufig enthaltenes Listenmaterial lassen sich die sogenannten „Okhla-Listen“ herausgreifen, in denen als bewahrenswert gedachte Textphänomene und Schreibungen in unterschiedlichen Strukturen und Layouts dem Bibeltext mitgegeben werden und ihrerseits auf verschiedene extern überlieferte Rezensionen dieser Listen referieren (als Überblick: Liss/Petzold 2016). 
            Bereits oberflächliche Untersuchungen an diesem sehr speziellen Quellenmaterial zeigen, dass hier besonders komplexe Anforderungen an das zu definierende Editionsdatenmodell gestellt werden: Zu dokumentieren ist nicht nur linearer Text, sondern hochgradig vernetzte interne und externe Verweisstrukturen nicht nur mit Bezug auf Lesartvarianten, sondern auch auf Kommentarliteratur und Listenmaterial mit spezifischen Listenmustern, die auf extern tradiertes Listenwissen verweisen. Darüber hinaus bedarf die doppelte Lesbarkeit von Masora figurata als Text und Bild gleichermaßen in ihrem Bezug zum Bibeltext eines besonderen Dokumentationsverfahrens. 
            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 1: Überblick über das beispielhafte mise-en-page von Bibeltext, Masora parva, Masora Magna und Masora figurata in Ms Vat ebr. 14, Fol. 85v. Prototyp einer Visualisierungssoftware für digitale Erschliessung hebräischer Bibelcodices. Quelle: 
                  
               
            
         
         
            Implementierung von Modellen und Workflows
            Durch die netzwerkartige Struktur der in die untersuchten Handschriften eingebetteten Metatexte lag es nahe, die Beschreibung von Text als Daten von vornherein als Graph zu modellieren; der „labelled-property“-Ansatz von Graphdatenbankensystemen wie Neo4J macht es durch seine sogenannte „whiteboard-friendliness“ möglich, einfache Modellskizzen rasch in lauffähige digitale Speichermodelle zu implementieren. Im Editionsworkflow wird zunächst der Import von Handschriftendigitalisaten samt Metadaten über IIIF-kompatible Archive realisiert und die Handschriftendaten im Importprozess in Graphendaten als Knoten und Kanten umgewandelt. Ab hier werden über eine grafische Benutzeroberfläche erzeugte Texttranskriptionen kontextbezogen als Datenknoten verlinkt, wobei der Bezug zum Digitalisat über die Kodierung von Text als SVG-Textpfaden erhalten bleibt. Transkriptionen werden bei Bedarf weiter tokenisiert, um weitere Metadaten oder Kontextrelationen in den Graphen integrieren zu können. Aus dem so generierten Text- bzw. Knowledge Graph lassen sich Subsets (Datenaggregate) generieren, die im späteren Prozess sowohl als TEI-XML, RDF-Graph oder auch als angereicherte IIIF-Manifeste (Text, Übersetzung, Kommentar) ausgeliefert werden können. 

            
               
                  
                  Abbildung 2: Beispielgraph anhand Cod. Vat. Ebr. 468, folio 1v, Darstellung in Neo4J. Quelle: Liedtke 2019 (in Vorbereitung) 
               
            
            Die technischen Komponenten sind stark modularisiert und, wo möglich, als Microservices implementiert, so dass die einzelnen Ressourcen der Edition mit REST-APIs ausgeliefert und abgefragt werden können. Die Softwarearchitektur ist als Docker-Container-Umgebung in einer skalierbaren Cloud-Computing Landschaft realisiert, die vom heiCloud-Service des Rechenzentrums der Universität Heidelberg bereitgestellt wird, wobei die Rahmenbedingungen von Langzeitarchivierung und Nachnutzbarkeit in Zusammenarbeit mit Fachdiensten der Universitätsbibliothek Heidelberg gewährleistet werden.
                
         
         
            Ausblick
            Bezieht man das Spannungsverhältnis von Standardisierung und Innovation digitaler Prozesse in den architektonischen Aufbau eines geisteswissenschaftlichen Forschungsprojektes ein, lässt sich diese Dynamik produktiv für die Entwicklung eigener Workflows nutzen und öffnet Spielräume für das Modellieren der eigenen Forschungsdaten. Die formale Beschreibung eines digitalen Datenmodells kann dann methodenkritisch dazu verwendet werden, die im Prozess anstehenden Ergebnisse wieder an die Ausgangsfragestellung rückzubinden und Modelle auf ihre Plausibilität zu prüfen. Die Umsetzung in Technologie-Stacks oder digitale Frameworks führt im gezeigten Fallbeispiel zu der Konstruktion einer quasi „hybriden“ Editionsumgebung und beschränkt den digitalen Anteil eines Projektes nicht nur auf das Ausliefern von „Tools“, sondern betrachtet den Aspekt der digitalen Transformation als integralen Bestandteil des gesamten Forschungsprozesses. 
            
               
               Abbildung 3: Corpus Masoreticum als DH-Projekt (Schema). Quelle: Liedtke 2019 (in Vorbereitung)
            
         
      
      
         
            
               http://etcbc.nl
            
            
               http://tanach.us/
            
            
               http://dev.digitalmishnah.umd.edu/
            
            
               https://wiki.de.dariah.eu/display/publicde/3.5+Judaistik+und+Hebraistik
            
            
      Die auch im nachfolgenden Fallbeispiel verwendete Community-Version von Neo4J ist unter einer GPLv.3 Lizenz als Open Source verfügbar, ist also im strengen Sinne keine proprietäre Software – die Entwicklung wird aber massgeblich von Neo4J Inc. als kommerziellem Unternehmen vorangetrieben.
    
            
               https://neo4j.com/developer/guide-data-modeling/#whiteboard-friendly
            
            
               https://heidata.uni-heidelberg.de/
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Estill, Laura (2016): “Encoding the Edge: Manuscript Marginalia and the TEI.” 
                        Digital Literary Studies 1, no. 1. https://journals.psu.edu/dls/article/view/59715/59912.
                    
               
                  Kuczera, Andreas (2016a): “Graphbasierte Digitale Editionen.” Blog. 
                        Mittelalter. Interdisziplinäre Forschung Und Rezeptionsgeschichte (blog), April 19, 2016. https://mittelalter.hypotheses.org/7994.
                    
               
                  Kuczera, Andreas (2016b): “Digital Editions beyond XML – Graph-Based Digital Editions.”, in: 
                        Proceedings of the 3rd HistoInformatics Workshop on Computational History (HistoInformatics 2016), edited by Marten Düring, Adam Jatowt, Johannes Preiser-Kappeller, and Antal van Den Bosch. Krakow, 2016. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1632/paper_5.pdf.
                    
               
                  Liedtke, Clemens (2019): 'How am I supposed to read this?' Challenges and Opportunities of Medieval Western Masorah as a Digital Scholarly Edition", in: J. Leipziger/H. Liss/K. J. Petzold (eds.), 
                        Philology and Aesthetics: Figurative Masorah in Western European Manuscripts (Judentum und Umwelt), Frankfurt am Main et al.: Peter Lang (in Vorbereitung)
                    
               
                  Liss, Hanna / Petzold, Kay Joe (2016): “Die Erforschung der westeuropäischen Bibeltexttradition als Aufgabe der Jüdischen Studien. Ein halbes Jahrhundert Forschung und Lehre über das Judentum in Deutschland.“, in: 
                        Orchidee oder Mimose. Versuch einer Standortbestimmung der Jüdischen Studien, edited by Andreas Lehnardt and Guiseppe Veltri. Berlin et al, 2016.
                    
               
                  Owens, Trevor (2011): “Defining Data for Humanists: Text, Artifact, Information or Evidence?” 
                        Journal of Digital Humanities 1, no. 1. http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/defining-data-forhumanists-by-trevor-owens/.
                    
               
                  Pierazzo, Elena (2017): “Facsimile and Document-Centric Editing.”, in: 
                        Creating a Digital Scholarly Edition with the Text Encoding Initiative, edited by Marjorie Burghart. https://www.digitalmanuscripts.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2017/09/05-Digital-Facsimiles-EP.pdf.
                    
               
                  Pousttchi, Key (2017): “Digitale Transformation.”, in: 
                        Enzyklopädie der Wirtschaftsinformatik. http://www.enzyklopaedie-der-wirtschaftsinformatik.de/lexikon/technologien-methoden/Informatik--Grundlagen/digitalisierung/digitale-transformation/digitale-transformation/?searchterm=digitale%20transformation.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Desmond (2008): “What’s a Multi-Version Document?” 
                        Multi-Version Documents (blog), May 3. http://multiversiondocs.blogspot.com/2008/03/whats-multi-version-document.html.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Desmond / Colomb, Robert (2009): “A Data Structure for Representing Multi-Version Texts Online.” 
                        International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 67, no. 6 (June 2009): 497–514. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.02.001.
                    
               
                  Schmidt, Desmond (2009): “‘Merging Multi-Version Texts: A Generic Solution to the Overlap Problem.’ Presented at Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009, Montréal, Canada, August 11 - 14, 2009,” Proceedings of Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009, 2 (2009). 
                        https://doi.org/10.4242/BalisageVol3.Schmidt01.
                    
               
                  Wilkinson, M. / Dumontier, M. / Aalbersberg, I. 
                  et al.
                   (2016): “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship.” 
                        Sci Data 3
                        , 160018. doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.18
                    
               
                  Zaagsma, Gerben (2018): “#DHJewish – Jewish Studies in the Digital Age.” 
                        Medaon. Magazin für Jüdisches Leben in Forschung und Bildung, no. 12: 1–11.
                    
               
                  Zundert, Joris J. van / Andrews, Tara L. (2016): “Apparatus vs. Graph: New Models and Interfaces for Text.”, in: 
                        Interface Critique, edited by Florian Hadler and Joachim Haupt, 139:183–206. Berlin: Kulturverlag Kadmos.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Die Komponenten: DraCor und forTEXT
            
               DraCor
               Mit ELTeC (European Literary Text Collection; 
https://github.com/COST-ELTeC) und DraCor gibt es mittlerweile zwei europäische Initiativen, die eine korpusbasierte Infrastruktur für die digitalen Literaturwissenschaften aufbauen, wobei sich DraCor (Drama Corpora Project; 
https://dracor.org) der Sammlung TEI-kodierter Dramen in verschiedenen Sprachen widmet (vgl. Fischer u.a. 2019). DraCor liefert über seine API etwa Netzwerkdaten zu Dramen aus, die auf der Kookkurrenz von Sprecherïnnen basieren und es ermöglichen, die Kommunikationsstrukturen mithilfe von Network-Analysis-Metriken zu erforschen. Darüber hinaus bietet die Plattform mit ezlinavis (Easy Literary Network Analysis Visualisation) ein didaktisches Tool an, das den Einstieg in die systematische Erhebung von Netzwerkdaten erleichtert. Außerdem wurde aus DraCor heraus mit dem 
Dramenquartett (vgl. Fig. 1) ein Kartenspiel entwickelt, mit dem das Verständnis von Netzwerkmetriken ebenso wie die typologische und historische Vielfalt von Dramennetzwerken spielerisch entdeckt und erlernt werden kann (vgl. Fischer u.a. 2018 und Fischer/Schultz 2019).

               
                  
                  Figure 1: Beispielkarte aus dem Dramenquartett (Rück- und Vorderseite)
               
            
            
               forTEXT
               
                  
                  Figure 2: Die Startseite des Disseminationsportals forTEXT.net
               
               Das DFG-Projekt 
  forTEXT (https://fortext.net; vgl. Fig. 2) bietet in diesem Zusammenhang einen Methodeneintrag (vgl. Schumacher 2018b), eine (Gephi-)Lerneinheit (vgl. Schumacher 2019b), ein Fallstudien-Video, vier Tutorialvideos sowie praktische Anwendungen in der Lehre. Hierbei sind jeweils unterschiedliche Abstraktionsgrade und verschiedene Arten der Vermittlung abgedeckt: Der Methodeneintrag ist eine abstrakte, sprachlich-theoretische Beschreibung der Methode mit dem Schwerpunkt der Anschlussfähigkeit an die traditionelle Literaturwissenschaft. Die Lerneinheit ist eine konkrete Klick-für-Klick-Einführung für Autodidakten aus der Zielgruppe junger Geisteswissenschaftlerïnnen in Form einer Text-Bild-Kombination.
  
               Die Videos vermitteln die Methode über eine Text-Bild-Audio-Kombination: Das Methodenvideo bietet eine Fallstudie zum Figurennetzwerk von 
  Emilia Galotti. Es vermittelt die Methode an eine autodidaktische Zielgruppe geisteswissenschaftlicher Studentïnnen und wählt einen Einstieg über das ,traditionelle’ Thema, taucht in technisch-theoretische Hintergründe ein und schließt dann wieder an das literarische Thema an. Die textbasierte Thematik wird so auf eine Bildebene überführt, die DH-Tool-Grafiken mit strichmännchenartigen figurativen Darstellungen koppelt (vgl. Fig. 3).
  
               
                  
                  Figure 3: Vorschaubild eines forTEXT-Fallstudien-Videos
               
               Angesprochen werden hier theoretische, strukturelle und emotionale autodidaktische Vermittlungsmuster (zur Bedeutung von Emotionen für autodidaktisches Lernen vgl. Mega u.a. 2014). Auf der Tonebene ist ein erklärender Duktus vorherrschend. Die ,selfmade’-Anmutung der Videos vermittelt, dass die autodidaktische Erarbeitung der Inhalte Betrachterïnnen und Erstellerïnnen des Videos miteinander verbindet (vgl. Horstmann & Schumacher 2019).
               Die Tutorial-Reihe schließlich funktioniert ähnlich wie die Lerneinheit als Schritt-für-Schritt-Anleitung und bietet die Möglichkeit, die Arbeit mit Gephi als Screencast zu erlernen. Das Tutorial-Video zur Nutzung des DraCor-Tools ezlinavis verknüpft die praktische Erstellung von Netzwerken mit der Nutzung der Ressource TextGrid Repository (vgl. Horstmann 2018) und den Methoden Named Entity Recognition (vgl. Schumacher 2018a) und Annotation in CATMA (vgl. Jacke 2018 und Schumacher 2019a).
            
            
               Das Dramenquartett als Erweiterung des Disseminationsmodells in forTEXT
               Die Dissemination einer digitalen Methode wie der Netzwerkanalyse durch ein nicht-digitales Kartenspiel bietet Möglichkeiten, die die bisher genannten digitalen Medien nicht abdecken konnten. Die Spielerïnnen werden in einer nicht-digitalen Umgebung mit den funktional reduzierten Ergebnissen einer digitalen Analyse konfrontiert, können diese visuell und haptisch erfahren und spielerisch explorieren. Der empfohlene Spielmodus ist ,Supertrumpf’, bei dem Werte der Netzwerke verglichen werden. Die Spielregeln sind online veröffentlicht
  (https://dramenquartett.github.io/). Neben einem neuen und vor allem kompetitiven Blick auf Dramen – der die relationale Perspektive auf figürliche Kopräsenzen hervorhebt – wird zusätzlich die Neugier auf die den Netzwerken zugrunde liegende Methode geweckt, sodass in didaktisch-produktiver Hinsicht der Prozess einer Art 
  Reverse Engineering im Sinne einer Mustererkennung auf unterschiedlichen Komplexitätsstufen angestoßen werden kann. Der Weg hin zu einem Umgang mit digitalen Ressourcen und Tools wie DraCor, ezlinavis und sogar die Anwendung eines komplexeren Tools wie Gephi ist damit geebnet, die kritische Methodenreflexion kann folgen. Dieser niedrigschwellige Zugang fügt sich in das auf Zugänglichkeit und Benutzerfreundlichkeit konzentrierte Disseminationsmodell von forTEXT ein und erweitert dieses durch den zusätzlichen Abbau von Schwellenängsten oder Vorbehalten gegen digitale Methoden.
  
               Die im Folgenden vorgestellte, reflektierte und erprobte Pipeline geht von einer ersten theoretischen Annäherung durch forTEXT-Tutorials aus, auf die eine spielerische Vertiefung der spezifischen Objektkonstitution qua Netzwerkanalyse und der entsprechenden Metriken mittels des Dramenquartetts folgt. Anschließende Arbeitsphasen könnten, wie in 3. skizziert, z. B. die formalisierte Erstellung, Gestaltung und Analyse von Dramennetzwerken mittels ezlinavis und Gephi oder die konkrete Bearbeitung von literarhistorischen Forschungsfragen mittels DraCor umfassen.
            
         
         
            Epistemische und didaktische Implikationen
            
               Epistemische Dimensionen des Medienwechsels
               Der quantifizierende Zugriff auf Dramentexte kann als „radikale ,Anästhetisierung’ der Objekte” (Trilcke, im Erscheinen) beschrieben werden. Auf die qua Formalisierung erfolgende Anästhetisierung, bei der die ursprüngliche ästhetische Dimension des literarischen Kunstwerks zunächst ausgesetzt wird, folgt jedoch eine reästhetisierende Transformation im Zuge der Diagrammatisierung (vgl. ebd.). Die Dramen werden somit zunächst zwar nicht mehr primär als textuelle Artefakte wahrgenommen, dennoch aber als ästhetische Artefakte in Form ihrer netzwerkartigen Repräsentation, wodurch andere epistemische Dimensionen angesprochen und andere epistemische Praktiken vollzogen werden können (vgl. Trilcke und Fischer 2018). Dabei ist der Weg zurück zum Dramentext vom Kartenspiel über die digitale Darstellung der entsprechenden Netzwerke dadurch geebnet, dass Medien in Form „transkriptiver Bezugnahmen” (Jäger 2010, 301) generell intermedial aufeinander Bezug nehmen und Übersetzungsprozesse somit keine einseitig vorgegebene Richtung haben.
               
               Ein entscheidender Vorteil digitaler Diagramme ist die Möglichkeit der Interaktion (vgl. Horstmann, im Erscheinen): Netzwerke lassen sich je nach Wahl des Layoutalgorithmus unterschiedlich darstellen, ein semantischer Zoom ermöglicht überdies, zusätzliche Informationen des Ausgangsmaterials zu visualisieren. Dramennetzwerke in einer festgelegten (und damit nicht mehr veränderbaren) Form als Spielkarte zu drucken, bedeutet daher in erster Linie eine funktionale Reduktion. Gerade diese funktionale Reduktion eröffnet jedoch didaktische Spielräume: Das Wissen, dass die abgedruckten Netzwerke ebenfalls in digitaler Form vorhanden und dort sogar manipulierbar sind, wird im Laufe des Spielprozesses die Neugier auf diese Funktionsvielfalt steigern, sodass der Übergang in die ,digitale Arbeit’ fließend stattfinden kann und nicht mehr als etwas kategorial anderes empfunden wird. Die Interaktion zwischen Benutzerïnnen und Netzwerken als konzeptioneller Bestandteil digitaler Netzwerkdarstellungen wird übertragen auf die Interaktion zwischen den Spielerïnnen, wodurch nicht zuletzt die von Jenkins (2006, 2) sog. 
  participatory culture im nicht-digitalen Bereich eine Entsprechung erfährt.
  
            
            
               Ansprechen unterschiedlicher Lerntypen 
               Das Kartenspiel entfaltet seinen didaktischen Mehrwert auch, weil es situational gerahmt ist: Es wird in kollektiven Unterrichtsphasen eingesetzt, die darauf abzielen, sich einem abstrakten Unterrichtsgegenstand auf spielerische Weise anzunähern. Da Menschen in ihrer Rolle als 
  visual beings vor allem ihren Sehsinn als einen wichtigen Wahrnehmungskanal nutzen, um Informationen zu verstehen (vgl. Ward et al. 2010), stellen Visualisierungen bei der Präsentation von wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnissen ein wichtiges, den Verstehens- und Erinnerungsprozess begünstigendes Element dar. Der Einsatz des Kartenspiels greift darauf zurück und spricht unter den vier Lerntypen (auditiv, haptisch, kommunikativ und visuell) v. a. visuelle, aber auch kommunikative Lerntypen an, indem das Spiel die Kommunikation über Fachinhalte fokussiert und Sprache als Medium des Lernens einsetzt (vgl. Anselm und Werani 2017).
  
               Im Fokus steht der Versuch, nicht nur kumulatives bzw. assimilatives Lernen zu initiieren, wodurch v. a. begrenztes, anwendungsorientiertes Wissen oder thematisch, anwendungsorientiertes Wissen produziert werden würde (vgl. Illeris 2010). Die – von der konkreten Kenntnis des Spielprinzips ,Supertrumpf‘ unabhängige – spielerische Aktivierung unterschiedlicher Sinneskanäle und die damit einhergehende Diskussion über Fachinhalte zielt auf die Einleitung akkommodativer und transformativer Lernprozesse und darauf, über Fachwissen in relevanten Kontexten frei verfügen zu können.
            
            
               Anwendung in der universitären Lehre und Lehrerïnnenbildung
               Das im Wintersemester 2019/2020 an der Universität Hamburg durchgeführte Seminar „Digitale Literaturwissenschaft und pädagogische Praxis” hat unterschiedliche Standardverfahren und Werkzeuge erprobt, die gegenwärtig in der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft eingesetzt werden. Dieses Feld wird zunehmend auch für Lehrerïnnen insbesondere im gymnasialen Bereich relevant: Bereits die heutige Schülerïnnengeneration zählt zu den 
  digital natives, für die der Umgang mit digitalen Medien und Werkzeugen selbstverständlich ist, die aber zugleich in Schule und/oder Studium in eine vertiefte 
  data literacy eingeführt werden müssen. Der Transfer von Digital-Humanities-Methoden in den schulischen Bereich kann deshalb als wichtige Herausforderung identifiziert werden. Gleichzeitig geht es darum, das vernetzte Denken zu fördern, mithin literaturwissenschaftliche und fachdidaktische Zugänge zu 
  einem Gegenstand stark zu machen. Um in Seminaren kein starres Wissen zu produzieren, auf das die angehende Lehrkräfte in der nächsten Phase ihrer Ausbildung – dem schulischen Alltag – nicht zugreifen können, muss die Kooperation zwischen Fachdidaktik und Fachwissenschaft gefördert werden. Neben der Einarbeitung in die Methoden steht deshalb die Frage der Komplexitätsreduktion und des schulischen Anwendungsbezuges im Zentrum des Seminars, wofür das DraCor-Kartenspiel exemplarisch herangezogen und getestet wird. Die konzeptionelle Einbettung des Kartenspiels in eine didaktische Heranführung an digitale Methoden ergänzend, wurde damit sowohl in diesem als auch im Seminar „Gender modellieren – Genderrollen und -stereotype in der Literatur des 19. Jahrhunderts”, das ebenfalls im Wintersemester 19/20 an der Universität Hamburg angeboten wurde, eine praktische Anwendung durchgeführt, deren Erfolg qualitativ evaluiert wurde. Damit soll auch ein Beitrag zur Evaluation konkreter DH-Lehrformen geleistet werden.
  
            
            
               Erste Ergebnisse
               Um den Effekt des Dramenquartetts auf den Lernerfolg der Studierenden zu untersuchen, wurde eigens ein Testverfahren entwickelt, das die Wissensstände vor und nach dem Einsatz des Quartetts mess- und v. a. vergleichbar macht. Das Verfahren setzt sich aus fünf aufeinander aufbauenden Phasen zusammen:
               (1) 
                        Vorab: Gruppeneinteilung und eigenständige Vorbereitung (Gruppe 1: Methodenbeitrag/Lerneinheit, Gruppe 2: Video-Tutorials)
                    
               Vorbereitend befasst sich ein Teil der Lerngruppe mit schriftlichen forTEXT-Lernmaterialien zur digitalen Netzwerkanalyse, während der andere Teil die Video-Fallstudien und -Tutorials konsultiert.
               
               (2)
                         Praxisphase 1: Erste Umfrage
               
               Ausgangspunkt der Erhebung stellt folglich ein gruppenspezifisch relativ homogener Wissensstand dar, der grundlegende Kenntnisse über die Methode der digitalen Netzwerkanalyse beinhaltet. Um die Wissensstände beider Gruppen vor dem Einsatz des Quartetts zu erfassen, wurde eine Umfrage entworfen und zu Beginn des Seminars in Einzelarbeit mit dem Audience Response System ARSnova durchgeführt. Die Umfragen adressieren mit jeweils neun Fragen drei Anforderungsbereiche (I: Reproduktionsleistung, II: Reorganisation- und Transferleistung, III: Reflexion und Problemlösung). Den Anforderungsbereichen entsprechend beinhalten sie Single-Choice-, Multiple-Choice- sowie Freitextfragen.
               (3)
                         Praxisphase 2: Einsatz des Dramenquartetts
               
               Nach der ersten Quizphase wurde die gesamte Testgruppe in Kleingruppen eingeteilt, die im Supertrumpf-Modus das Dramenquartett spielen.
               (4)
                         Praxisphase 3: Zweite Umfrage
               
               Eine zweite Umfrage erfasst den Wissensstand beider Gruppen, nachdem sie das Dramenquartett gespielt haben.
               (5)
                         Auswertung der Umfrage: Erste Ergebnisse und Ausblick
               
               Die Auswertung des ersten Testdurchlaufs, der mit 11 Teilnehmenden durchgeführt wurde, verweist auf einen lernförderlichen Effekt des Dramenquartetts. Im Rahmen der ersten Quizrunde wurden 43% der Fragen, nach der zweiten Umfrage 52% der Fragen richtig beantwortet. Darüber hinaus verweist ein erster Blick auf die Freitextantworten darauf, dass der spielerische Zugang die intrinsische Motivation, sich über den Seminarkontext hinaus mit digitaler Netzwerkanalyse auseinanderzusetzen, steigert. Das erarbeitete Verfahren zur vergleichenden Lernstandserhebung hat sich bewährt und wird in einem weiteren Seminar eingesetzt, um den Einfluss einer spielerischen Wissensvermittlung auf Kompetenz- und Wissensstand zu untersuchen.
            
         
         
            Ausblick: zukünftig mögliche Arbeitsfelder
            Das Projekt lotet das didaktische Potenzial von Gamification-Ansätzen in den DH konzeptionell und praktisch aus, indem es das DraCor-Kartenspiel mit Tools und Tutorials in einer didaktischen ,Pipeline‘ verbindet und damit in die Disseminationsstrategie von forTEXT integriert. Der damit entwickelte Prototyp eines Konzepts, das auch fachdidaktisch Weiterentwicklungspotenzial birgt, ermöglicht diverse Adaptionen und Transformationen: in Hinblick auf die Netzwerkanalyse literarischer Texte, in Hinblick auf andere Methoden der Digital Humanities sowie in Hinblick auf das didaktische Szenario einer Verzahnung von analogen und digitalen Ansätzen.
            So ließen sich auf der Grundlage der Netzwerkdaten aus anderen DH-Projekten, etwa zu Romanen, andere generische Karten-Sets entwerfen, wobei auch die – durch ezlinavis in Kombination mit Gephi ermöglichte – kollaborative Erstellung eigener Sets denkbar ist. Diese selbstständige Erstellung von Karten-Sets würde nicht zuletzt auch den haptischen Lerntyp ansprechen. Eine Weiterentwicklung der didaktischen Engführung von Analogem und Digitalem ließe sich über eine Verzahnung des Kartenspiels mit der digital-interaktiven Repräsentation der einzelnen Dramen auf DraCor vornehmen (z. B. über QR-Codes). Unter didaktischen Gesichtspunkten bietet sich des Weiteren die Möglichkeit, kreativ-produktionsorientierte Elemente in die skizzierte Pipeline einzubauen, etwa indem die Lernenden Netzwerke ,erfinden‘, die sie zunächst händisch zeichnen und dann – den Schritt in den digitalen Raum machend – mittels ezlinavis formal erfassen müssen.
            Der im Projekt durchgeführte Testlauf soll in diesem Sinne zu einer weiteren Diskussion über didaktische Potenziale sowohl von Gamification-Ansätzen als auch der Verzahnung von analogen und digitalen Lehrmitteln anregen und damit grundsätzlich der Reflexion über didaktische Szenarien dienen, die den spielerischen, kreativen Übergang zwischen lebensweltlich vertrauten Situationen und der Abstraktion digitaler Forschungsprozesse gestalten.
         
      
      
         
            
                Vgl. 
               https://fortext.net/ressourcen/videos/fallstudien/analyse-der-figurennetzwerke-in-lessings-emilia-galotti.
    
            
                Vgl. 
               https://fortext.net/ressourcen/videos/tutorials/netzwerkanalyse-und-literaturanalyse.
    
            
                Vgl. 
               https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supertrumpf.
    
            
      Zum Diagrammatikbegriff vgl. etwa Krämer 2016.
    
            
                Zu intermedialen Übersetzungsprozessen vgl. Schmid, Veits und Vorrath 2018.
            
            
                Beide Seminare richten sich ausdrücklich an Studierende ohne technische Vorkenntnisse. Es ist also davon auszugehen, dass die Personen beider Testgruppen über keinerlei Vorbildung bezüglich Methoden der digitalen Netzwerkanalyse verfügen.
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Anselm, Sabine / Werani, Anke (2017): 
  Kommunikation in Lehr-Lernkontexten. Bad Heilbrunn: Klinkhardt.

               
                  Fischer, Frank / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Trilcke, Peer / Wolf, Jana (2018): „Dramenquartett – Eine didaktische Intervention“, in: 
  DHd 2018. Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. Konferenzabstracts, 397–398. DOI: 
  https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.5926363.v1.

               
                  Fischer, Frank / Schultz, Anika (2019): „Dramenquartett – Eine didaktische Intervention“. Unter Mitarbeit von Christopher Kittel, Carsten Milling, Peer Trilcke und Jana Wolf. 32 Blatt in Kartonbox, Farbdruck. Bern: edition taberna kritika 2019. (Spielanleitung: 
  https://dramenquartett.github.io/)

               
                  Fischer, Frank / Börner, Ingo / Göbel, Mathias / Hechtl, Angelika / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Trilcke, Peer (2019): „Programmable Corpora. Die digitale Literaturwissenschaft zwischen Forschung und Infrastruktur am Beispiel von DraCor“, in: Sahle, Patrick (ed.): 
  DHd 2019. Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts, 194–197.

               
                  Horstmann, Jan (2018): „TextGrid Repository“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/ressourcen/textsammlungen/textgrid-repository [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Horstmann, Jan (im Erscheinen): „Textvisualisierung: Epistemik des Bildlichen im Digitalen”, in: Huber, Martin / Krämer, Sybille / Pias, Claus (eds.): 
  Wovon sprechen wir, wenn wir von Digitalisierung sprechen? Gehalte und Revisionen zentraler Begriffe des Digitalen, CompaRe: Fachinformationsdienst Allgemeine und Vergleichende Literaturwissenschaft.

               
                  Horstmann, Jan / Schumacher, Mareike (2019): „Social Media, YouTube und Co: Multimediale, multimodale und multicodierte Dissemination von Forschungsmethoden in forTEXT“, in: Sahle, Patrick (ed.): 
  DHd 2019. Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts, 207–211. DOI: 
  10.5281/zenodo.2596095.

               
                  Illeris, Knud (2010): 
  Lernen verstehen. Bedingungen erfolgreichen Lernens. Bad Heilbrunn: Klinkhardt.

               
                  Jacke, Janina (2018): „Manuelle Annotation“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/routinen/methoden/manuelle-annotation [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Jäger, Ludwig (2010): „Intermedialität – Intramedialität – Transkriptivität: Überlegungen zu einigen Prinzipien der kulturellen Semiosis”, in: Deppermann, Arnulf / Linke, Angelika (eds.): 
  Sprache intermedial: Stimme und Schrift, Bild und Ton. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter 299–324. DOI: 
  10.1515/9783110223613.299.

               
                  Jenkins, Henry (2006): 
  Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York, London: New York University Press.

               
                  Krämer, Sybille (2016): 
  Figuration, Anschauung, Erkenntnis. Grundlinien einer Diagrammatologie. Berlin: Suhrkamp.

               
                  Mega, Carolina / Ronconi, Lucia / De Beni, Rossana  (2014):
  „What makes a good student? How emotions, self-regulated learning, and motivation contribute to academic achievement”, in:
   Journal of Educational Psychology, 
                  Vol 106(1), 121–131.
               
               
                  Odebrecht, Carolin / Burnard, Lou / Navarro Colorado, Borja / Eder, Maciej / Schöch, Christof (2019): „The European Literary Text Collection (ELTeC)”, in: 
  DH 2019. Complexities. Utrecht University. [Poster.]

               
                  Schmid, Johannes C. P. / Veits, Andreas / Vorrath, Wiebke (eds. 2018): 
  Praktiken medialer Transformationen. Übersetzungen in und aus dem digitalen Raum. Bielefeld: transcript. DOI: 
  10.14361/9783839441145.

               
                  Schumacher, Mareike (2018a): „Named Entity Recognition (NER)“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/routinen/methoden/named-entity-recognition-ner [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Schumacher, Mareike (2018b): „Netzwerkanalyse“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/routinen/methoden/netzwerkanalyse [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Schumacher, Mareike (2019a): „CATMA“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/tools/tools/catma [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Schumacher, Mareike (2019b): „Netzwerkanalyse mit Gephi“, in: 
  forTEXT. Literatur digital erforschen. URL: 
  https://fortext.net/routinen/lerneinheiten/netzwerkanalyse-mit-gephi [letzter Zugriff 12. September 2019].

               
                  Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank (2018): „Literaturwissenschaft als Hackathon. Zur Praxeologie der Digital Literary Studies und ihren epistemischen Dingen”, in: Huber, Martin / Krämer, Sybille (eds.): 
  Wie Digitalität die Geisteswissenschaften verändert: Neue Forschungsgegenstände und Methoden (Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften, 3). DOI: 
  10.17175/sb003_003.

               
                  Trilcke, Peer (im Erscheinen): „Small Worlds, Change Rates und die Netzwerkanalyse dramatischer Texte. Reflexionen aus dem Rabbit Hole”, in: Jannidis, Fotis / Winko, Simone / Rapp, Andrea / Meister, Jan Christoph / Stäcker, Thomas (eds.): 
  Digitale Literaturwissenschaft. DFG-Symposium Villa Vigoni, 2017. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter.

               
                  Ward, Matthew / Grinstein, Georges / Keim, Daniel (2010): 
  Interactive Data Visualization. Foundations, Techniques, and Applications. Wellesley: Peters.

            
         
      
   



      
         Die kulinarische Tradition ist eine der prägendsten Elemente der europäischen Kultur und sie stellt einen großen Teil der nationalen Identitäten dar. In den letzten Jahrzehnten kam die Forschung zu zwei wichtigen Schlussfolgerungen in Bezug auf dieses Thema: Erstens, es gibt keine quantitativen Studien über die Herkunft und die Bildung von regionalen Küchen in Europa. Zweitens, im Mittelalter entstehen wesentliche Quellen: Manuskripte mit tausenden von Kochrezepten. Damit kann das Mittelalter als die Wiege der modernen europäischen Küche angesehen werden. Auf dem europäischen Kontinent bilden lateinische, mittelfranzösische und frühneuhochdeutsche Rezepte den Großteil der kulinarischen Überlieferung.
         Das vorliegende internationale Projekt (ANR-17-CE27-0019-01, fwf I 3614) zielt darauf ab, die interkulturelle Forschung der mittelalterlichen Kochrezepte und deren Wechselbeziehung mithilfe eines interdisziplinären Ansatzes zu verwirklichen. Das Projekt nimmt die Kochrezeptüberlieferung von Frankreich und den deutschsprachigen Ländern als Korpus – dieses umfasst mehr als 80 Manuskripte und an die 8000 Rezepte – und untersucht sie in Hinblick auf ihre Entstehung, ihre Beziehung untereinander und ihre Migration durch Europa. Der Vergleich der französischen und deutschen Kulinargeschichte eignet sich besonders für diese Aufgabe, da Frankreich seit jeher einen kulturell prägenden Einfluss auf deutschsprachigen Völker hatte!
         Die Partner, das Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung der Universität Graz und das Laboratoire CESR (Centre d’Etudes Supérieures de la Renaissance) der Universität Tours werden diese mehrsprachigen Texte nach modernen Standards aufarbeiten und sie mit aktuellen quantitativen und qualitativen Forschungsmethoden untersuchen. Für eine computergestützte Analyse werden die Rezeptsammlungen und die darin enthaltenen Texte und deren Metadaten in TEI/XML (Digitale Transkription und Edition) modelliert und mit Semantic Web Technologien analysiert (Digitale Annotation und Datenvisualisierung). Die Daten werden einer Langzeitarchivierungsinfrastruktur (GAMS, Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung Graz) zugeführt, in der sie weiter erforscht werden können. Alle Rezepte werden mithilfe von Vokabularien für Zutaten, Kochprozesse und Kochutensilien sowie kulturhistorisch relevanten Metadaten (z. B. in Bezug auf religiöse, kulturelle oder medizinische Aspekte) angereichert. Aufgrund dieser Informationen wird das Projekt über die Sprachgrenzen hinweg konkurrierende oder abweichende Essgewohnheiten, Textmigration sowie den gegenseitigen Einfluss der Nachbarländer auf ihre jeweilige Küche zu Tage fördern. Für die Analyse der deutschsprachigen Texte werden außerdem NLP-Methoden für historische Sprachstufen herangezogen, um Textverwandtschaften innerhalb dieser Überlieferung untersuchen zu können. Die Forschungsdaten und die Auswertungsergebnisse werden die Grundlage für eine räumliche und zeitliche Visualisierung und statistische Auswertung bilden, die neue Ansätze zur Interpretation des historischen und kulturellen Vermögens fördern wird.
         Die im Projekt erarbeiteten Workflows und Daten werden ganz im Sinne des Open Science Gedanken und den FAIR-Prinzipien für die Nachnutzung zur Verfügung gestellt:
         Der Transkriptionsworkflow und die Transkriptionsprinzipien (Theorie und Praxis, in Kooperation mit KONDE) können zur Gänze nachgenutzt werden. Da die Manuskripte mit Transkribus
                 transkribiert wurden, steht ein trainiertes HTR-Modell zur Verfügung mit dem eine automatische Handschriftenerkennung von ähnlichen Texten denkbar ist. Das Annotationsvokabular (Zutaten, Speisen, Küchengeräte, Zubereitungsweisen) wird samt der zugewiesenen semantischen Wikidata-Konzepte zur Verfügung gestellt und stellt somit eine essentielle Basis für die Forschung im Bereich Kulinarhistorik dar. Die Konzepte in Wikidata werden falls vorhanden kontrolliert und gegebenenfalls mit weiteren Daten (wie etwa Links zu relevanten Ontologien wie FoodO oder SNOMED) von unserer Seite angereichert. Noch nicht vorhandene Konzepte werden von uns neu erstellt und mit allen nötigen Daten (Statements) versehen. Die Nutzung von Wikidata verfolgt neben praktischen Überlegungen hauptsächlich das Ziel, die im Projekt gewonnenen Daten auf einfache Art und Weise für die Community bereitzustellen und eine weitere Bearbeitung dieser Daten zu ermöglichen. Überdies hinaus werden von uns auch die Annotationsskripte (Python und XSLT) für die Übertragung der Annotationsvokabularien nach TEI/XML zum Download angeboten. 
            
         Die überlieferten Texte werden durch eine hyperdiplomatische Neutranskription der historischen Quellen einheitlich erfasst und stehen als TEI/XML ebenfalls zur weiteren Nutzung zur Verfügung. Die Quellentexttranskription verzeichnet dabei nicht nur das unterschiedliche Schriftzeicheninventar, sondern auch alle textstrukturierenden Elemente. Das gesamte Zeicheninventar ist in einer nach den Richtlinien der TEI erstellten Zeichenbeschreibung erfasst. Die Beschreibung stützt sich dabei auf die theoretischen Ergebnisse zur Beschreibung von Zeichen aus dem DigiPal-Projekt und verwendet außerdem die Zeichenidentifikatoren der Medieval Unicode Font Initiative (vgl. Böhm, Klug 2020). Die so produzierten Daten sind nicht nur der Ausgangspunkt für die wissenschaftlichen Fragestellungen im Projekt, sondern bieten eine solide Grundlage für viele weitere Forschungsfragen aus Germanistik/Linguistik, Paläographie usw. Die Textdaten werden für eine Nutzung durch NLP Tools auch als Plaintext angeboten und die Handschriftenabbildungen sind je nach Nutzungsbedingungen der Bibliotheken frei verfügbar. 
            
         Darüber hinaus wird aus dem CoReMA-Projekt heraus ein Modell für die Integration weiterer Texte in die Forschungsumgebung bereitgestellt. Das Projekt soll fachliche Impulse für alle betroffenen Disziplinen der mittelalterlichen und frühneuzeitlichen Geschichte, Kulinargeschichte, Digitale Edition und Digital Humanities liefern.
      
      
         
            
               http://www.digitale-edition.at/
            
            
               https://transkribus.eu/Transkribus/
            
            
               https://www.wikidata.org
            
            
               http://foodon.org/
            
            
               https://browser.ihtsdotools.org/
            
            
      Describing Handwriting I-VII; http://www.digipal.eu/blog
            
            
               https://folk.uib.no/hnooh/mufi/
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Adamson, M. W. (Ed.)  (1995): Food in the Middle Ages. A Book of Essays. New York, London: Garland. Adamson, M. W. (Ed.). (2002). Regional Cuisines of Medieval Europe: A Book of Essays. New York, London: Routledge.
      
               
                  Amoia, M., Martínez, J.M.M.  (2019): SaCoCo Diachronic Corpus [WWW Document]. URL 
	http://fedora.clarin-d.uni-saarland.de/sacoco/
	(accessed 1.7.20).
      
               
                  Böhm, A. & Klug, H.: Quellenorientierte Aufbereitung historischer Texte im Rahmen digitaler Editionen: Das Problem der Transkription in mediävistischen Editionsprojekten. In: [Titel steht noch nicht fest] Hrsg. von Ingrid Bennewitz und Martin Fischer (= Bamberger interdisziplinäre Mittelalterstudien.) [in Vorbereitung]
      
               
                  Carlin, M., & Rosenthal,
	J. T. (Eds.).  (1998): Food and Eating in Medieval Europe. London: Hambledon Press.
      
               
                  Flandrin, J.-L.  (1984): «Internationalisme, nationalisme et régionalisme dans la cuisine des XIVe et XVe siècles: le témoignage des livres de cuisine». In Manger et boire au Moyen âge. Actes du Colloque de Nice (15-17 octobre 1982). (pt. 2, p. 75-91). Paris.
      
               
                  Flandrin, J.-L. & Hyman, P.  (1988): “Regional tastes and cuisines: Problems, documents, and discourses on food in Southern France in the 16th and 17th centuries”. Food and Foodways 1-3, p. 221-251.
      
               
                  Gloning, T.,  (2000): Monumenta Culinaria et Diaetetica Historica. Corpus of culinary & dietetic texts of Europe from the Middle Ages to 1800. Corpus älterer deutscher Kochbücher und Ernährungslehren [WWW Document]. URL http://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm
	(accessed 1.7.20).
      
               
                  Hieatt, C.  (1995): Sorting through the Titles of Medieval Dishes: What Is, or Is Not, a “Blanc manger”. In M. W. Adamson (Ed.), Food in the Middle Ages. A Book of Essays. (pp. 25-43). New York, London: Garland.
      
               
                  Hyman, P. & M.  (2005). «Les associations de saveurs dans les livres de cuisine français du XVIe siècle». In 
	Le Désir et le Goût. Une autre histoire (XIIIe-XVIIIe siècles). Actes du colloque international à la mémoire de Jean-Louis Flandrin
	(Saint-Denis, septembre 2003). Dir. Odile Redon, Line Sallman et Sylvie Steinberg. (p. 135-150). Saint-Denis: Presses Universitaires de Vincennes.
      
               
                  Karg, S. (Ed.).  (2007): Medieval Food Traditions in Northern Europe. Copenhagen: National Museum of Denmark.
      
               
                  Klug, H. W., & Kranich, K. (2015): “Das Edieren von handschriftlichen Kochrezepttexten am Weg ins digitale Zeitalter. Zur Neuedition des Tegernseer Wirtschaftsbuches.” In T. Bein (Ed.), Vom Nutzen der Editionen. Zur Bedeutung moderner Editorik für die Erforschung von Literatur- und Kulturgeschichte. (pp. 121-137). Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.
      
               
                  Laurioux, B. (2005): «Les voyageurs et la gastronomie en Europe à la fin du Moyen âge ». In Le Désir et le Goût. Une autre histoire (XIIIe-XVIIIe siècles), Actes du colloque international à la mémoire de Jean-Louis Flandrin (Saint-Denis, septembre 2003). Dir. Odile Redon, Line Sallman et Sylvie Steinberg. (p. 99-117). Saint-Denis, Presses Universitaires de Vincennes.
      
               
                  van Winter, J. M.  (1989). “Kochen und Essen im Mittelalter.” In
      B. Herrmann (Ed.). Mensch und Umwelt im
      Mittelalter. (pp. 88-100). Frankfurt am Main: Fischer
      Taschenbuch Verl.
      
            
         
      
   



      
         Die journalistische Gattung der „Spectators“ des 18. Jahrhunderts stellt ein wichtiges Kulturerbe aus der Zeit der Aufklärung dar. Die Zeitschriften entsprachen dem demokratischen Ideal, kulturelle und moralische Fragen in nicht-akademischen Kreisen zu verbreiten und Werte der Aufklärung wie Weltoffenheit, Toleranz, intellektuelle Kritik und soziale Verantwortung zu popularisieren. Ausgehend von den englischen Modellzeitschriften 
                The Tatler (1709-1711), 
                The Spectator (1711-1712 bzw. 1714) und 
                The Guardian (1713) hat sich dieses journalistische Genre über ganz Europa mittels Übersetzungen, Adaptionen und Imitationen verbreitet. Auf Basis des mehrsprachigen Korpus (derzeit Italienisch, Spanisch, Französisch, Englisch, Deutsch, Portugiesisch) der Digitalen Edition 
                The Spectators in the International Context (Ertler et al.) zeigt das Poster die Ausbreitung zentraler Themen des Aufklärungsdiskurses, wie etwa Theater, Sitten und Bräuche, Frauen- und Männerbild. 
            
         Anhand der Untersuchung von populären Themen mit maschinellen Methoden präsentiert der Beitrag zentrale Linien des Transfers von Diskursen innerhalb des Genres der Spectators und reflektiert damit den Zeitgeist des 18. Jahrhunderts. Mit Hilfe einer Kombination aus 
                close reading, 
                distant reading und Visualisierungsmethoden wird aufgezeigt, welche Themen lokale Relevanz hatten und welche länderübergreifend in den Diskurs aufgenommen wurden. Innerhalb letzterer soll zwischen Themen kontrastiert werden, die in unterschiedlichen Sprachgemeinschaften unabhängig voneinander Relevanz erlangt hatten, und jenen, die durch Imitation und Übersetzung verbreitet wurden.
            
         Als Fallbeispiel kann das Thema Theater angeführt werden, das in zahlreichen Zeitschriften unterschiedlicher Länder unabhängig voneinander diskutiert wurde. Während in Frankreich das neoklassizistische Theater im 18. Jahrhundert bereits vollends etabliert und somit als Thema in den Spectators weniger relevant war, erlebten Italien und Spanien eine bewegte nationale Theaterdiskussion. Seit dem 16. Jahrhundert hatte sich das italienische Theater stetig weiterentwickelt. Im 18. Jahrhundert wurde es jedoch als Repräsentationsmedium für ein modernes Italien auserkoren und erlebte eine massive Veränderung. Unabhängig davon wurde auch in Spanien der politische Streit zwischen Progressisten und Traditionalisten über das Thema des Theaters ausgetragen: Spanische Intellektuelle versuchten zunehmend durch kulturelle Reformen den intellektuellen Anschluss an Europa zu schaffen und lieferten sich mit Traditionalisten einen regelrechten Streit über eine radikale Reform des Theaters nach neoklassizistisch französischem Vorbild. (Vgl. z.B. Guinard 1973, 133-138; Ertler 2003, 120-124)
         Die Basis der Untersuchungen bildet das Korpus von etwa 4000 Texten, das im 
                close reading-Verfahren hinsichtlich der narrativen, thematischen und sachorientierten Inhalte annotiert und mittels des XML/TEI Standards (TEI Consortium 2019) ausgezeichnet wurde. Der Vorteil der TEI Kodierung für die Analyse ist neben der quantitativen Auswertung der Metadaten, Schlagworte und Entitäten die Möglichkeit von Untersuchungen auf Basis der narrativen Textstruktur. So können nicht nur der gesamte Text, sondern in den Zeitschriftentexten ausgezeichnete narrative Erzählformen (wie etwa Traumsequenzen oder Leserbriefe) separiert voneinander analysiert und kontrastiert werden. Neben der quantitativen Auswertung der manuell zugewiesenen Themen wird Topic Modelling (z.B. Blei et al. 2003, 
                Jelodar et al. 2019, Kuang et al. 2015) eingesetzt, um diese Annotationen zu bestätigen und zu ergänzen und neue Perspektiven auf die Rezeption des Materials zu eröffnen. Abb. 1 und 2 zeigen einen Vergleich der manuellen und der maschinellen Auswertung von Themen: Es zeigt sich eine Übereinstimmung beider Herangehensweisen dahingehend, dass die maschinelle Auswertung das verstärkte Auftreten des Themas Theater in den Ausgaben 18-27, 37-46 und 68-78 bestätigt.
            
         
            
             Abbildung 1: Statistische Auswertung der manuell zugewiesenen Themen (in rosa z.B. “Theatre Literature Arts”) auf die Ausgaben des El Pensador.
         
         
            
            Abbildung 2: Topic Modelling: Verteilung des Topics “Comedia & Theatro” (mit den 10 häufigsten Wörtern comedia, theatro, poetas, pueblo, pieza, amor, accion, nacion, pasion, tragedia) auf die Ausgaben des El Pensador. 
         
         Darüber hinaus werden die (manuellen und maschinellen) Annotationen verwendet, um das zeitliche Auftreten ausgewählter Themen innerhalb einer Sprachgemeinschaft und sprachenübergreifend zu analysieren. Als Referenz für diese Untersuchungen dient das Zeitschriftennetzwerk der Spectators: Dieses stellt die Abhängigkeit von Zeitschriften unterschiedlicher Sprachgemeinschaften hinsichtlich Übersetzung, Adaption und Imitation dar.
         
            Der wissenschaftliche Beitrag des Posters und der dem Beitrag zugrunde liegenden Arbeit am Projekt 
                Distant Spectators: Distant Reading for Periodicals of the Enlightenment – einer Kooperation zwischen dem Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung und dem Institut für Romanistik der Universität Graz, sowie dem Institute of Interactive Systems and Data Science der Technischen Universität Graz und dem Know-Center Graz – kann in zwei Aspekte unterteilt werden. Einerseits kann durch die Anwendung von 
                distant reading-Methoden die Liste der manuell selektierten Themen erweitert und feiner granuliert werden. Dieser Zugang relativiert die vorab generierte Leseerwartung und ermöglicht somit einen unvoreingenommenen Blick auf den Text sowie die Analyse größerer, ggf. noch nicht annotierter Korpora. Andererseits wird durch die vorgestellte Arbeit die öffentlich zugängliche Digitale Edition der Spectators (Ertler et al.) zusätzlich (semi-automatisiert) angereichert und durch auf den TEI-Annotationen basierende Visualisierungen augmentiert. Dies ist ein erster explorativer Schritt in Richtung intelligentes maschinelles Lernen im Kontext der Spectators und eröffnet neue Wege der Erschließung, Analyse und Präsentation dieser multilingualen literaturwissenschaftlichen Ressource.
            
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Ertler, K.; Fuchs, A.; Fischer, M.; Hobisch, E.;
  Scholger, M.; Völkl, Y. (Hg.)  (2011-2019): 
  The Spectators in the International Context, https://gams.uni-graz.at/spectators.

               
                   Ertler, K. (2003): 
  Moralische Wochenschriften in Spanien. José Clavijo y Fajardo: ‚El Pensador’. Tübingen: Gunter Narr.

               
                   Guinard, P.  (1973): 
  La Presse espagnole de 1737 à 1791. Formation et signification d’un genre. Paris: Centre de recherches hispaniques.

               
                  Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I.  (2003): Latent dirichlet allocation. 
  Journal of machine Learning research, 3 (Jan), 993-1022.

               
                  Jelodar, H., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Feng, X., Jiang, X., Li, Y., & Zhao, L. (2019): Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and Topic modeling: models, applications, a survey. 
  Multimedia Tools and Applications, 78 (11), 15169-15211.

               
                  Kuang, D., Choo, J., & Park, H.  (2015): Nonnegative matrix factorization for interactive topic modeling and document clustering. In 
  Partitional Clustering Algorithms (pp. 215-243). Springer, Cham.

               
                  TEI Consortium  (2019): eds. 
  Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. July 2019. http://www.tei-c.org/P5/.

            
         
      
   



      
         Digitale Editionen stellen als digitalisierte und tiefenerschlossene Textressourcen eine wertvolle Quelle zur Nachnutzung innerhalb großflächiger linguistischer und literaturwissenschaftlicher Analysen dar (Rybicki, 2019). Zusätzlich werden innerhalb von digitalen Editionsprojekten selbst immer öfter textanalytische Verfahren eingesetzt.
         Das am Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung der Universität Graz entwickelte und betriebene Repositorium GAMS (Geisteswissenschaftliches Asset Management System) umfasst als Forschungsdateninfrastruktur Daten von mehr als hundert Forschungsprojekten aus verschiedenen Wissenschaftsbereichen. Digitale Editionen und Textsammlungen machen dabei, neben neben digitalen Sammlungen aus dem Kulturerbebereich, den Großteil der im Repositorium vorhandenen Bestände aus.
            
         Um die bereits im Repositorium vorhandenen Textressourcen in geeigneten Formaten nachnutzbar bereitzustellen, beziehungsweise diesen Aspekt im Zuge laufender und zukünftiger Projekte berücksichtigen zu können, wurden während der letzten Monate Adaptierungen an der GAMS-Infrastruktur vorgenommen, die mit diesem Poster erläutert und dargestellt werden sollen.
         
            Technischer Hintergrund
            GAMS ist eine registrierte, trusted Repositoriumsinfrastruktur, die auf der Free and
Open Source Software Fedora Commons
basiert. Sie setzt auf eine OAIS-konforme Architektur und verfolgt
eine weitgehend XML-basierte Content-Strategie. GAMS ermöglicht seinen
Benutzer*innen die Verwaltung und Veröffentlichung von Ressourcen aus
Projekten mit permanenter Identifizierung und Anreicherung mit
Metadaten. Ein speziell entwickelter Client (Cirilo) stellt Funktionalitäten für Massenoperationen an den gespeicherten Objekten zur Verfügung. (Stigler/Steiner 2018)
                
         
         
            Objekt Modell
            
               Content Models definieren komplexe digitale Objekte, die dem Fedora-Objektmodell entsprechen. Sie sind speziell auf die Anforderungen, die Forschungsdaten aus unterschiedlichen geisteswissenschaftlichen Bereichen an Langzeitarchivierung und Datendissemination stellen, ausgelegt. Für wissenschaftliche Editionen wird beispielsweise ein speziell entworfenes 
                    TEI Content Model eingesetzt.
                
            Jedes Modell enthält einen primären Datenstrom, der die Inhaltsdaten des Objekts enthält, zum Beispiel ein TEI-Dokument. Zusätzliche Datenströme können Metadaten (z.B. Dublin Core), weitere Inhaltsdaten oder aus dem primären Datenstrom derivierte Daten enthalten (z. B. aus dem TEI-Dokument extrahierte RDF Daten).
            Für die jeweiligen Modelle definierte Services kombinieren und transformieren Datenströme zu Präsentationsinhalten, auf die in verschiedenen Ausgabeformaten über im Content Model definierte Schnittstellen zugegriffen werden kann. Ein häufig verwendetes Format zur Dissemination ist HTML, was die Präsentation der Daten über eine dynamisch erzeugte Webseite ermöglicht.
            
               Contexte, als spezielle Containerobjekte, ermöglichen es, einzelne Inhaltsobjekte in größere Einheiten zusammenzufassen und zu organisieren. Sie enthalten wiederum eigene Datenströme und Disseminationsmethoden.
                
         
         
            Anpassungen für Textressourcen
            Zur Verwaltung und Bereitstellung von im GAMS vorliegenden Textressourcen wie auch dezidiert linguistischen Forschungsdaten wurde das bestehende TEI Content Model angepasst und erweitert. Über den Cirilo Client können Objekte als Text- bzw. Sprachressourcen gekennzeichnet werden. So gekennzeichnete Objekte werden dann automatisch mit für das CMDI Framework (Goosen et al., 2015) aufbereiteten, komponentenbasierten Metadaten und einem eigenen Handle Identifier versehen. Solche Daten können dann geharvestet werden und über das Virtual Language Observatory (Van Uytvanck et al., 2012) der CLARIN Infrastruktur als Sprachressource gefunden werden.
                
            Der OAI-Endpoint des Repositoriums wurde dementsprechend angepasst. Auf inhaltlicher Ebene wurde ein XML-basiertes Konfigurationsformat eingeführt, das es erlaubt, auf den Ausgangsdaten operierende Pipelines bzw. Toolchains zu definieren und als Massenoperation zu triggern. Ein Anwendungsfall hierfür ist beispielsweise Preprocessing zur Aufbereitung der Daten für darauf aufbauende Analyseschritte. Per Default wird eine, auf dem an der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften entwickelten XSL-Tokenizer (Schopper, 2019) basierende Pipeline ausgeführt, was einerseits ein tokenisiertes TEI-Dokument als separaten Datenstrom im Objekt erzeugt, und andererseits die Daten als Plain Text, im von den im Rahmen von CLARIN entwickelten Weblicht Tools verwendeten 
                    Text Corpus Format (TCF), sowie im von gängigen Corpus Tools verwendeten 
                    Vertical-Format bereit stellt. Diese Daten können daraufhin direkt mit den genannten Tools verarbeitet und analysiert werden. Wie der Tokenizer ist auch die Pipeline selbst projektbezogen anpassbar und kann aus mehreren Transformationsschritten bestehen, darunter beispielsweise auch die Möglichkeit, die jeweiligen Texte via TreeTagger (Schmid, 1995) zu annotieren.
                
            Die über diese Pipelines erzeugten Datenformate können benutzerdefiniert gekapselt und mit dem primären TEI-Datenstrom als Objekt im Repositorium langzeitarchiviert werden. Durch die Speicherung der Verarbeitungspipeline gemeinsam mit den zu verarbeitenden Daten wird jeder Prozessierungsschritt dokumentiert und nachvollziehbar gemacht, was wesentlich für die Nachnutzung ist.
            Für die Aggregation mehrerer TEI Objekte zu einem verarbeitbaren Corpus wurde ein sogenanntes 
                    Corpus Context Model geschaffen. Diesem Modell entsprechende Objekte können vom Benutzer selbst über den 
                    Cirilo Client angelegt und mit entsprechenden Textobjekten befüllt werden.
                
            Dieser spezielle Context stellt über die entsprechenden Datenströme Dublin Core wie auch CMDI Metadaten bereit. Die VERTICAL Datenströme der zugeordneten TEI-Objekte werden zu einem Datenstrom aggregiert, welcher bei Bedarf in einem Corpus Management System (Vorzugsweise NoSketch Engine) indiziert und über dieses abgefragt werden kann. Das aggregierte Corpus kann außerdem als ZIP-Datei heruntergeladen werden. 
            Die beschriebenen Features stehen für sämtliche im Repositorium vorhandenen Textressourcen, also nicht nur für genuin linguistische Daten zur Verfügung. Das bedeutet, dass etwa bestehende, im Repository vorhandene Digitale Editionen mit geringem Aufwand auch für linguistische Analysen verfügbar gemacht werden können.
         
      
      
         
            
               http://gams.uni-graz.at/
            
            
               https://www.re3data.org/
            
            
               https://www.coretrustseal.org
            
            
      Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository Architecture,
      https://duraspace.org/fedora
            
            
      European Research Infrastructure for Language Resources and Technology, 
      https://www.clarin.eu/
            
            
               http://weblicht.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Goosen T., et al.  2015. CMDI 1. 2: Improvements in the CLARIN Component Metadata Infrastructure. Selected papers from the CLARIN 2014 Conference, pp. 36-53. 
        https://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11755/91536b93-31cb-4f4a-8125-56f4fe0a1881.
      
               
                   Rybicki, J.  (2019). Keynote at the 2019
	TEI Conference and members meeting “What is text, really? TEI
	and beyond”.
      
               
                   Schmid, H.  (1995):
	Improvements in Part-of-Speech Tagging with an Application to German. Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop. Dublin, Ireland.
      
               
                   Schopper, D.  (2019). XSLT-Tokenizer (Software), 
        https://github.com/acdh-oeaw/xsl-tokenizer.
      
               
                   Van Uytvanck, D., et al. (2012). Semantic metadata mapping in practice: the Virtual Language Observatory. Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), pp. 1029-1034. 
        http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/437_Paper.pdf.
      
            
         
      
   



      
         ODD (One Document does it all) ist eine Metasprache, entwickelt im Kontext der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), zur (formalen) Beschreibung und Dokumentation von XML Schemata. ODD bildet die Grundlage (d.h. den Quellcode) der Richtlinien und Schemata sowohl der Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) als auch der Music Encoding Initiative (MEI). Aber ODD ist nicht auf diese bestehenden Codierungsrichtlinien beschränkt; so lässt es sich auch zur Beschreibung anderer bestehender XML-Dialekte benutzen (beispielsweise HTML [4]), oder zur Entwicklung eigenständiger Codierungsrichtlinien in ganz anderen Kontexten, wie etwa im Falle von Music Performance Markup (MPM) [1].
         Das grundlegende Designprinzip von ODD folgt einem Literate Programming Ansatz, d.h. in einem ODD-Dokument sind sowohl die Code-Bestandteile zur Beschreibung der Grammatik eines Schemas als auch die menschenlesbare Beschreibung – und Exemplifizierung – dieser Regeln miteinander verwoben [6]. Im Kontext der TEI und MEI Communities wird dies insbesondere von digitalen Editionen genutzt. Der besondere Anreiz liegt für diese Unternehmungen hierbei darin, dass die Dokumentation (im ODD-Format) der jeweils spezifischen Nutzung der TEI bzw. der MEI-Richtlinien gewissermaßen das digitale Pendant zu herkömmlichen Editionsrichtlinien darstellt.
         Aus „Endnutzersicht“ wird ODD meist zur Maßschneiderung von TEI oder MEI Schemata genutzt. Die aktive Weiterentwicklung von ODD hat jedoch interessante neue Möglichkeiten eröffnet; so ist es neuerdings mittels so genanntem ODD-Chaining [2] auch möglich geworden, eigene Editionsrichtlinien nicht unmittelbar von den TEI- oder MEI-Richtlinien abzuleiten, sondern vermittelt von anderen ODD-Anpassungen. Dies wird beispielsweise im Deutschen Textarchiv genutzt, um die Richtlinien zur Auszeichnung von Drucken bzw. von Manuskripten von einem gemeinsamen DTA Basisformat abzuleiten [3].
         Solchen Anwendungsfällen von ODD werden jedoch meist nur wenige „Eingeweihte“ gewahr, da die häufig eine Verständnisbarriere für die Mechanismen von ODD vorliegt. Diesem soll der vorliegende Workshop entgegenwirken. Deshalb ist der ganztägige Workshop speziell auf die Bedürfnisse von Einsteigern ausgerichtet. Es werden sowohl die notwendigen theoretischen Hintergründe vermittelt, als auch praktische Hilfestellungen zum Erstellen eines ersten eigenen Schemas bzw. dessen Dokumentation vermittelt. Hierfür wird im ersten Teil des Workshops zunächst als niederschwelliger Einstieg der von Raffaele Viglianti neu entwickelte webbasierte ODD-Editor „Roma“ [5] vorgestellt und damit die Erstellung einfacher Anpassungen des TEI-Schemas verwendet; dazu gehören etwa Operationen wie das Hinzufügen oder Entfernen von ganzen teilbereichen des Schemas (Modulen), von einzelnen Elementen oder Attributen, sowie das Einschränken von Attributwerten auf geschlossene Listen.
         Im zweiten Teil des Workshops sollen dann durch direktes Bearbeiten des ODD-Quelldokuments erweiterte Funktionen wie Modularisierung, ODD-Chaining oder das Generieren von Schemata mit mehreren Namespaces erläutert werden.
         Der Workshop ist als Hands-On-Session konzipiert, in der die Teilnehmer an Ihrem eigenen Laptop direkt Erfahrungen sammeln sollen. Das Tutoren-Team steht ihnen dabei stets mit Rat und Tat zur Seite.
         
            Formalia
            
               Maximale Zahl der möglichen Teilnehmerinnen und Teilnehmer: 25
               benötigte technische Ausstattung: Beamer; die Teilnehmer*innen sollen eigene Laptops mit vorinstalliertem oXygen-XML-Editor mitbringen. Eine oXygen-Lizenz zur Nutzung im Workshop wird gestellt
            
         
         
            Beiträger
            
               Peter Stadler
                Wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter an der Carl-Maria-von-Weber-Gesamtausgabe an der Universität Paderborn und Mitglied des TEI Councils. Zu seinen Forschungsgebieten zählen digitale Musik- und Briefeditionen.
            
            
               Raffaele Viglianti
                Research Programmer am Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) at the University of Maryland und Mitglied des TEI Councils. Seine Forschung kreist um Textwissenschaft und digitale Editionen mit einem Fokus auf Musik.
            
            
               Benjamin W. Bohl
                Research Software Engineer der Bernd Alois Zimmermann-Gesamtausgabe und in seiner Mitgliedschaft im MEI Board als Co-chair des MEI Technical Teams eingesetzt. In seiner Forschung befasst er sich mit Datenmodellierung und -haltung in digitalen Editionsprojekten mit plurimedialen Gegenständen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  [1] Berndt, Axel / Bohl, Benjamin W. (2018): Music Performance Markup: Formale Beschreibung musikalischer Interpretationen. In: Editio Bd. 32 (2018), Nr. 1, S. 185–204.
               
                  [2] Burnard, Lou: ODD chaining for beginners, 
               
               
                  [3] Deutsches Textarchiv: Schema und Dokumentation der DTABf Schema, http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat/schema.html
               
                  [4] Holmes, Martin 2018: Using ODD for HTML, in Proceedings of of the Text Encoding Initiative Conference and Members Meeting The Markup Conference, Tokyo, Japan, September 9–13 2018. Pages 240–241, 
               
               
                  [5] TEI Consortium: Roma ODD Editor, https://romabeta.tei-c.org
               
                  [6] Viglianti, Raffaele: One Document Does-it-all (ODD): a language for documentation, schema generation, and customization from the Text Encoding Initiative, 
               
            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            
               Aktuelle Diskussionen über ständig wachsende Möglichkeiten der Erfassung, Speicherung und Analyse großer Datenmengen lassen uns vergessen, dass sowohl Wissenschaft als auch Behörden bereits seit Jahrhunderten Praktiken zur Datenerhebung und -verarbeitung entwickelt haben (Borck 2017, Oertzen 2017). So wurden bereits im 17. Jahrhundert astronomische und meteorologische Beobachtungsdaten in Formularen und Tabellen erfasst, in Zahlen und Symbolen kodiert und in Karten und Diagrammen visualisiert (Daston 2011, Mendelsohn 2011, Hess 2011). Auch die empirische Erfassung von personenbezogenen Körperdaten nahm ihren Anfang in den Praxisjournalen frühneuzeitlicher Ärzte, die alle Symptome, Zustandsmerkmale und Reaktionen sowie den Krankheitsverlauf, die Medikamentierung und den Heilungsprozess ihrer Patienten genau dokumentierten (Geyer-Kordesch 1990, Stolberg 2007). Nicht einmal das von den Anhängern der 
               Quantified Self
               -Bewegung praktizierte 
               Self-Tracking
                (Lupton 2016) gehört gänzlich dem 21. Jahrhundert an, wie die Tagebücher zahlreicher religiöser Selbstoptimierer aus dem 17. und 18. Jahrhundert zeigen.
            
            
               Eines der ambitioniertesten historischen 
               Self-Tracking
               -Projekte waren zweifellos die 
               Observationes in me ipso factae
                des pietistischen Arztes Johann Christian Senckenberg (1707–1772). In ihnen protokollierte er tagtäglich sein gesamtes Körper- und Seelenleben, um seinen Lebenswandel zu vervollkommnen. Neben Ernährung, Stoffwechsel, Körperaktivität sowie Schlaf- und Ruhephasen notierte er auch alle Reizempfindungen, Körperreflexe und Gemütszustände sowie alle spürbaren Umwelt- und Witterungseinflüsse (Faßhauer 2017). Zeitweise brachte er auf diese Weise täglich bis zu 5.000 Wörter zu Papier, so dass auf den Gesamtzeitraum von dreizehn Jahren gerechnet ca. 14.000 Seiten mit 12.600.000 Wörtern zusammenkamen. Der Beitrag beleuchtet zunächst den epistemischen Zweck dieses riesigen frühneuzeitlichen Datenpools, aus dem derzeit in Frankfurt ausgewählte Bände digital ediert werden (Faßhauer 2018), und setzt sie mit zeitgenössischen Positionen zum Verhältnis von Daten und Theorie in Beziehung. Anschließend wird die Möglichkeit einer Analyse dieser Daten mit modernen 
               Distant-reading
               -Methoden und deren Vereinbarkeit mit dem epistemischen Ziel des religiösen Autors diskutiert.
            
         
         
            Selbstbeobachtung und Anti-Rationalismus
            
               Wenn ein Selbstoptimierer des digitalen Zeitalters beschließt, seine Lebenszeit effizient zu nutzen, seinen Körper gesund zu erhalten oder seine Finanzen zu organisieren, bezweckt er damit meist größtmöglichen persönlichen Erfolg und Selbstzufriedenheit im Diesseits. Ein religiöser Self-Tracker des 18. Jahrhunderts hatte hingegen zu allererst sein Seelenheil und seine Erlösung nach dem Tod im Sinn. Diese konnte jedoch nur erlangen, wer die ihm anvertrauten Gottesgeschenke auf Erden treulich verwaltete, pflegte und mehrte. Genau wie für materielle Güter galt dies auch für Gesundheit und Wissenskapital. Nach Auffassung religiöser Gelehrter wie Senckenberg war der Mensch seit dem Sündenfall jedoch geistig so zerrüttet, dass er durch seine Verstandeskräfte zu keinen verlässlichen Erkenntnissen gelangen konnte. Insbesondere theoretische Modelle, die durch „künstliches syllogisiren der Vernunfft“ dem Verstand der Gelehrten („ex mente Doctorum“) entstiegen sind, repräsentierten nur fragmentarisches oder abstraktes Wissen. Zudem müssten ohnehin „alle Regulae universaliores erstlich ab experientia in particularibus“ abgeleitet werden, deren Vielfalt jedoch so viele Ausnahmen aufzeige, „daß die Regulae selbst wieder darüber zernichtet werden“ (Senckenberg 1735: 1r/v, Faßhauer 2017). Sichere medizinische Erkenntnisse waren deshalb nur „ohne Praeoccupation von einer vorher gefassten Hypothesi“ durch mehrfach wiederholte unmittelbare Selbsterfahrung zu erlangen, deren Resultate möglichst vollständig aufgezeichnet und induktiv ausgewertet werden mussten. Auf diese Weise ließen sich Vergleiche mit Aufzeichnungen aus ähnlichen Situationen herstellen, wobei einzelne Faktoren miteinander korreliert, auf ihre Relevanz und Rolle im Gesamtkontext befragt und als mögliche Ursachen oder Auswirkungen anderer Faktoren in Betracht gezogen werden konnten.
            
            
               Ganz ähnliche Überzeugungen wie Senckenberg äußerte der amerikanische Journalist Chris Anderson, als er im Jahre 2008 das Ende der Theorie und den Beginn des Datenzeitalters verkündete. Auch er ging dabei von der Prämisse aus, dass Theorien die Realität nur verzerrt wiedergäben und letztlich allein in den Hirnen der Wissenschaftler existierten: „The scientific method is built around testable hypotheses. These models, for the most part, are systems visualized in the minds of scientists”. Stattdessen verwies er wie Senckenberg auf die Möglichkeit, durch Erhebung und Speicherung einer möglichst großen Datenfülle ungleich genauere und verlässlichere Aussagen über die Welt in ihrer ganzen Komplexität zu treffen. War der Verzicht auf die Suche nach letztgültigen Kausalitäten bei Senckenberg noch religiös motiviert, entspringt er bei Anderson aus der pragmatischen Erkenntnis, dass die Verfügbarkeit nie gekannter Datenmengen die Notwendigkeit zur Hypothesenbildung schlichtweg erübrige, da sie unter den verschiedensten Gesichtspunkten miteinander korreliert werden könnten. Durch ihre maschinelle Auswertbarkeit gerieten zudem auch Einzelheiten und Muster ins Blickfeld, die der theoriegeleiteten Forschung entgingen: „Correlation supersedes causation, and science can advance even without coherent models, unified theories, or really any mechanistic explanation at all“ (Anderson 2008). Seither wurde gegen Andersons These wiederholt eingewandt, dass bereits die Erstellung von Datensätzen auf theoretischen Prämissen und Selektionskriterien beruhe (boyd/Crawford 2012; Boellstorff 2014). Zudem stelle jede Datenanalyse eine subjektive Interpretation innerhalb bestimmter kultureller, dogmatischer oder ideologischer Kontexte dar, so dass eine hypothesenfreie Datenauswertung unmöglich sei. Die gleiche Problematik lässt sich auch für die Aufzeichnungen Senckenberg aufzeigen: Außer Thermometer und Barometer stand ihm nur sein eigenes Bewusstsein als Messinstanz zur Verfügung, das alle Empfindungen und Wahrnehmungen zwangsläufig subjektiv registrierte, filterte und interpretierte und dabei den protokollierten physischen und seelischen Befindlichkeiten selbst unterworfen war. Auch erfolgte die Aufzeichnung der Daten allein durch seine eigene schreibende Hand, die auf körperliche Irregularitäten ebenso empfindlich reagierte wie auf seelische Erschütterungen und Stimmungsschwankungen. Waren Körper und Bewusstsein anderweitig okkupiert, konnte die Datenerfassung entweder gar nicht oder nur rückwirkend und durch das Gedächtnis vermittelt erfolgen.
            
            
               
               Abbildungen 1a und 1b: Selbstbeobachtung in Senckenbergs Tagebuch, Dezember 1732 (Manuskript und TEI/XML-Transkription) 
            
         
         
            Datengetriebenes Distant Reading?  
            
               Senckenbergs riesiger Datenpool konfrontiert seine modernen Leser mit einem so mikroskopisch detaillierten Bewusstseinsstrom, dass ein Verständnis seiner Erkenntnisse im 
               close reading
               -Modus nahezu unmöglich ist. Die digitale Erschließung einzelner Bände im Rahmen der 
               Frankfurter Auswahledition
                ermöglicht nun eine Annäherung an das umfangreiche Textmaterial aus der Makroperspektive (Abb. 1a–b). Der Literaturwissenschaftler Franco Moretti hat dieses Vorgehen bekanntlich als „distant reading“ bezeichnet, da Distanz hier statt eines Hindernisses eine Bedingung der Erkenntnis darstelle: „it allows you to focus on units that are much smaller or much larger than the text“. Die Reduktion von Senckenbergs umfangreichen Beobachtungsdaten auf abstrakte Schemata scheint jedoch zunächst im Widerspruch zu seiner Absicht zu stehen, die ganze Vielfalt der natürlichen Erscheinungsformen unverkürzt zu erfassen. Auch Moretti hat auf dieses Problem hingewiesen: „If we want to understand the system in its entirety, we must accept losing something. We always pay a price for theoretical knowledge: reality is infinitely rich; concepts are abstract, are poor” (Moretti 2013: 48–49). Die irreversible Reduktion von Texten auf abstrakte Schemen, die in der Forschung sogar als gewaltsame Zerstörung des eigentlichen Untersuchungsgegenstandes beschrieben worden ist (Bradley 2012), kann nur in solchen Forschungsumgebungen vermieden werden, die – wie etwa die Voyant Tools (Sinclair und Rockwell 2003) – einen flexiblen Wechsel zwischen der Text- und der Grafikebene und damit zwischen dem 
               close
               - und 
               distant reading
               -Modus ermöglichen (Jänicke 2016: 20–23). Ein möglicher Ausgangspunkt für eine Fernlektüre ist die Identifizierung von Schlüsselwörtern, die hier anhand von Häufigkeitskriterien erfolgt. Werden in der Liste einzelne Keywords ausgewählt, kann deren Verteilung im Korpus angezeigt werden. Eine Visualisierung der markantesten körperlichen Empfindungen Senckenbergs zwischen August und Dezember 1732 zeigt zum Beispiel, dass im November und Dezember Spannungs- und Druckgefühle vorherrschten, während er im Oktober hauptsächlich Stiche und Zuckungen verspürte, im August und September aber frei von derlei Empfindungen war (Abb. 2). Ein Blick auf die Kollokationen dieser Begriffe zeigt, in welchen Körperteilen sie am häufigsten bemerkbar waren (Abb. 3). Allerdings stellen derlei Festlegungen auf bestimmte Untersuchungszeiträume oder Körperempfindungen bereits Arbeitshypothesen dar, die mit einer bestimmten Erwartungshaltung einhergehen und das Ergebnis dadurch nicht unmaßgeblich präformieren. Die oben aufgezeigte Unmöglichkeit des von Senckenberg projektierten theoriefreien Wissenserwerbs spiegelt sich deshalb unmittelbar in der digitalen Korpusanalyse wider, die gleichfalls nicht rein datengetrieben bzw. ohne hypothetische Vorüberlegungen erfolgen kann. 
            
            
               
               Abbildung 2: Häufigkeit von Körperempfindungen zwischen August und Dezember 1732 
            
            
               
               Abbildung 3: Verteilung von Druckempfindungen auf verschiedene Körperteile 
            
            
               Auch Senckenbergs Essgewohnheiten lassen sich nur mit begriffsbasierten Suchabfragen analysieren. Die Suche nach dem Schlüsselwort „bibi” (ich trank) im Kontext der fünf angrenzenden Wörter zeigt beispielsweise, dass Senckenberg zwar überwiegend Wasser und Tee trank, aber bereits an dritter Stelle der Wein folgte (Abb. 4). Berücksichtigt man jedoch auch andere Getränke wie Kaffee, Bier, Alantwein und Milch sowie die entsprechenden lateinischen Begriffe, so ergibt sich aus dem Verhältnis zwischen alkoholfreien und alkoholischen Getränken das eher moderate Verhältnis von 253 zu 105. Übermäßiger Alkoholkonsum konnte jedoch Gottes Unwillen hervorrufen und durch körperliche und mentale Beschwerden bestraft werden, die sich gleichfalls in den Aufzeichnungen niederschlagen. Die Akribie der Senckenbergischen Selbstbeobachtung ermöglicht es, Vergleiche zwischen den in mehreren solcher Situationen auftretenden Symptomen anzustellen, die als Muster visualisiert und auf Ähnlichkeiten und Abweichungen durch Begleitfaktoren untersucht werden können. Abb. 5 zeigt etwa, dass sich die körperlichen Auswirkungen des Weinkonsums im warmen Monat September (a), den der Diarist für zahlreiche Freiluftaktivitäten nutzte, deutlich von denen im kälteren November (b) unterscheiden, welchen der Autor größtenteils daheim verbrachte. Noch aussagekräftiger sind die Ergebnisse einer Symptomanalyse auf Wochen- oder Tagesbasis. Dabei ist weniger bedeutsam, ob und wie die Symptome kausal zusammenhängen: Wichtiger ist es zu zeigen, dass und auf welche Weise sie gemeinsam auftreten, und wie sich verschiedene Situationen voneinander unterscheiden.
            
            
               
               Abbildung 4: Meistkonsumierte Getränke zwischen August und Dezember 1732 
            
            
               
               Abbildung 5a: Korrelationen zwischen Weinkonsum und Körperempfindungen in zwei verschiedenen Situationen 
            
            
               
               Abbildung 5b: Korrelationen zwischen Weinkonsum und Körperempfindungen in zwei verschiedenen Situationen 
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Anderson, Chris (2008): “The End of Theory. Will the Data Deluge Make the Scientific Method Obsolete?” in:
  Edge, http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/anderson08/anderson08_index.html
  [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Borck, Cornelius  (2017): „Big Data. Praktiken und Theorien der Datenverarbeitung im historischen Querschnitt“, in:
  Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Wissenschaften, Technik und Medizin (NTM)  25.4, 399–405.

               
                  Boyd, Danah und Crawford, Kate  (2012): “Critical Questions for Big Data”. In:
  Information, Communication & Society 15:5, 662–679, DOI: 10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878 [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Boellstorff, Tom  (2014): „Die Konstruktion von Big Data in der Theorie“. In: Reichert, Ramón (Ed.):
  Big Data. Analysen zum digitalen Wandel von Wissen, Macht und Ökonomie, Bielefeld, 105–131.

               
                  Bradley, Adam James  (2012): 
  Violence and the Digital Humanities Text as Pharmakon, in:
  Proceedings of the Digital Humanities 2012. 
                  http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/HamburgUP_dh2012_BoA.pdf
  [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Daston, Lorraine  (2011): “The Empire of Observation, 1600–1800”, in: Daston, Lorraine / Lunbeck, Elizabeth (eds.): 
  Histories of Scientific Observation, Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 81–113.

               
                  Faßhauer, Vera  (2017): 
  Sacra à Deo in corde discenda, natura ex natura. Die Observationes Johann Christian Senckenbergs als medico-theologische Aufzeichnungspraktik“, in:
  Berichte zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte  40, 225–246.

               
                  Faßhauer, Vera  (2018): “Accessing, Editing and Indexing Large Manuscript Collections: The Selected Edition of J. Chr. Senckenberg’s Journals.” In:
  Knowledge Organization for Digital Humanities. Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Knowledge Organization WissOrg’17 of the German Chapter of
  the International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO), 30th November – 1st December 2017, Freie Universität Berlin, ed. Christian Wartena, Michael Franke-Maier and Ernesto de Luca, Berlin 2018, 31–36.
  https://refubium.fu-berlin.de/bitstream/handle/fub188/20535/ProcWissOrg2017.pdf
  [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Geyer-Kordesch, Johanna  (1990): „Medizinische Fallbeschreibungen und ihre Bedeutung in der Wissensreform des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts“, in:
  Medizin, Gesellschaft und Geschichte  9, 7–19.

               
                  Hess, Volker (2011): „Das Material einer guten Geschichte. Register, Reglements und Formulare“, in: Dickson, Sheila / Goldmann, Stefan / Wingertszahn, Christof (eds.):
  Fakta, und kein moralisches Geschwätz. Zu den Fallgeschichten im Magazin zur Erfahrungsseelenkunde (1783–1793), Göttingen: Wallstein, 115–139.

               
                  Jänicke, Stefan  (2016): 
  Close and Distant Reading Visualizations for the Comparative Analysis of Digital Humanities Data, Diss. Leipzig.
   [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Lupton, Deborah  (2016): 
  The Quantified Self. A Sociology of Self-Tracking, Cambridge: Polity Press.

               
                  Mendelsohn, J. Andrew  (2011): “The World on a Page: Making a General Observation in the Eighteenth Century”, in: Daston, Lorraine / Lunbeck, Elizabeth (eds.): 
Histories of Scientific Observation, Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 396–420.

               
                  Moretti, Franco  (2013): Distant Reading, London/New York: Verso.

               
                  Oertzen, Christine von  (2017): „Die Historizität der Verdatung: Konzepte, Werkzeuge und Praktiken im 19. Jahrhundert“, in: 
  Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Wissenschaften, Technik und Medizin (NTM)  25.4, 407–434.

               
                  Senckenberg, Johann Christian  (1732):
  Tagebücher, Bd. 2: Observationes in me ipso factae, August–Dezember 1732, Senckenbergisches Archiv, Na 31, 2, UB Frankfurt am Main, Digitalisat unter 
  
  [letzter Zugriff 20. Dezember 2019].

               
                  Senckenberg, Johann Christian (1735): 
Briefentwurf an einen unbekannten Empfänger, 24. Januar 1735, Senckenbergisches Archiv, Mp. 57, UB Frankfurt am Main.

               
                  Sinclair, Stéfan / Rockwell, Geoffrey (2003): Voyant Tools. 
  http://‌voyant-tools.org.

               
                  Stolberg, Michael (2007): „Formen und Funktionen medizinischer Fallberichte in der Frühen Neuzeit (1500– 1800)“ in: Süßmann, Johannes / Scholz, Susanne / Engel, Gisela (eds.): 
Fallstudien: Theorie – Geschichte – Methoden. Berlin: Trafo, 81–89. 

            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung
            Digitale Analyseverfahren verändern immer intensiver die Forschungsweise der GeisteswissenschaftlerInnen und mit dem wachsenden Spielraum der Methoden wächst auch die Anzahl an Fragen, die sich vor allem an den Grad der Genauigkeit und wissenschaftliche Relevanz dieser Methoden richtet. Das Topic Modeling gewinnt als eine Methode für automatische Erkennung von versteckten thematischen Strukturen in großen Textmengen (Blei 2012: 8) immer mehr an Beliebtheit, erweckt aber auch Unsicherheiten. Daher beschäftigt sich diese Arbeit mit den Möglichkeiten und Problemen des Topic Modeling am Beispiel von Briefen und stellt unter anderem die Fragen, 1) wie Topic Modeling in der Analyse von Briefkorpora eingesetzt werden kann und 2) wie die Qualität der Ergebnisse dieses Prozesses beeinflusst werden kann. 
         
         
            Forschungsmaterial
            Das Forschungsmaterial besteht aus Briefen des Grazer Sprachwissenschaftlers Hugo Schuchardt (1842-1927). Die umfangreiche und mehrsprachige Korrespondenz dieses schon seinerzeit sehr geschätzten Wissenschaftlers ist seit 2007 Teil des Digitalisierung-Projektes 
                    Hugo Schuchardt Archiv (Hurch 2019). Für die Topic-Modeling-Analyse werden 2261 Briefdateien im TEI-Format in Betracht gezogen, da die restlichen zurzeit noch in keinem entsprechenden Format vorhanden sind. Der Vorteil einer solchen Methode ist es aber, dass das gleiche Modell jederzeit auf eine erweiterte Menge an Daten anwendbar ist. Eine Besonderheit dieses Korpus ist, dass Schuchardt in mehreren Sprachen korrespondiert hat, von denen hier elf repräsentiert sind (Abbildung 1). Daher wird das Modell für einzelne Sprachen separat angewendet. Dies ist insofern eine Herausforderung, weil 1) Vorgänge den jeweiligen Sprachen angepasst werden müssen (wie etwa die Lemmatisierung), 2) der Textumfang bei vielen Sprachen nicht ausreichend ist und daher nicht auf alle Sprachen effektiv angewendet werden kann und 3) die verschiedenen Ergebnisse pro Sprache verglichen werden sollten. Ein weiteres Problem für das Topic Modeling ist die große Diskrepanz in den Textlängen der einzelnen Dateien (Abbildung 2), da die Korrespondenz auch kürzere Formen wie Postkarten und Telegramme beinhaltet. So enthalten etwa die kürzesten deutschsprachigen Dateien etwa drei Tokens, die längste jedoch 3947. Dies ist aber ein Zustand, den viele Briefkorpora in der Realität begegnen, da wir als ForscherInnen selten einem ‚idealen‘ Korpus gegenüberstehen. Die Auseinandersetzung mit solchen Problemen ist ein fester Bestandteil unserer Arbeit.
                
            
               
                Abbildung 1: Anteil der einzelnen Sprachen im Briefkorpus
            
            
               
                Abbildung 2: Menge der deutschsprachigen Briefdateien nach ihrer Anzahl der Tokens
            
         
         
            Methode
            Für die Beantwortung der Forschungsfragen war zuerst die Literaturrecherche nötig, und zwar erstens zum Topic Modeling, zweitens zur Textsorte Brief und drittens zu dieser Korrespondenz. Um eine genauere Vorstellung zum Forschungsstand des Topic Modeling zu bekommen, wurden wissenschaftliche Aufsätze und Anwendungsbeispiele in Betracht gezogen, wie etwa Blei 2010, Jagarlamudi/Daumé 2010, Boyd-Graber/Blei 2012, Riddell 2015, Vulić et al. 2015, Bock et al. 2016, Andorfer 2017, Fechner/Weiß 2017, Schöch 2017, Murakami et al. 2017 und Arora et al. 2018. Zudem wird am genannten Korpus Topic Modeling mit Hilfe der Programmiersprache 
                    Python (Python Software Foundation 2001-2019), der Software MALLET (McCallum 2002-2019) und der Anweisungen der Jupyter-Notebooks von DARIAH-DE (DARIAH-DE 2019) vollzogen. Darüber hinaus werden verschiedene Tools zur Vorverarbeitung evaluiert – z. B. 
                    spaCy (Explosion AI 2019) und DTA::CAB (Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften 2011-2018) für die Lemmatisierung – sowie verschiedene Tools und Parameter für die Topic-Modellierung – z. B. 
                    Topics Explorer (DARIAH-DE 2018) – und die daraus resultierenden Ergebnisse und Erfahrungen verglichen. 
                
         
         
            Ergebnisse
            Obwohl es sich um ein laufendes Projekt handelt, gibt es bereits einige relevante Ergebnisse und Schlussfolgerungen. 
            1) Die Vorverarbeitung stellt einen wichtigen Schritt in der Topic-Modellierung dar und beeinflusst die Ergebnisse. Dabei spielen nicht nur die eingesetzten Tools eine Rolle, sondern auch die gewählte Vorgehensweise.
            2) Die Lemmatisierung, auf die beim Topic Modeling oft verzichtet wird, ermöglicht mehr semantische Differenz in den Topics. 
            3) Der unterschiedliche Textumfang von einzelnen VerfasserInnen kann zu falschen Ergebnissen führen, wenn die Topics pro VerfasserIn analysiert werden.
            4) Entscheidungen über Parameter wie Optimierungsintervall, Topic- und Iterations-Anzahl können die Ergebnisse beeinträchtigen und müssen immer projektspezifisch getestet werden, bis ein sinnvolles Resultat vorliegt. Das ‚Sinnvolle‘ zu erkennen ist eine Herausforderung, die fachwissenschaftliches Verständnis verlangt. 
            Die Inkonsistenz der Topics und manchmal verwirrende Ergebnisse zeigen, dass die naive Anwendung eines Topic-Modeling-Tools nicht immer befriedigend sein kann. Intensivere Beschäftigung mit den einzelnen Schritten und Ergebnissen kann sich jedoch positiv auf den Erfolg der Analyse auswirken. Die weitere Arbeit wird zeigen, ob und welchen Mehrwert Topic Modeling bei der Analyse der Schuchardt-Korrespondenz leisten kann, die durch 
                    close reading nicht erreicht werden können. 
                
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Andorfer, Peter (2017): 
"Turing Test für das Topic Modeling. Von Menschen und Maschinen
erstellte inhaltliche Analysen der Korrespondenz von Leo von
Thun-Hohenstein im Vergleich", in: 
Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften 2. http://zfdg.de/2017_002 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Arora, Sanjeev / Ge, Rong; Halpern, Yoni / Mimno, David / Moitra, Ankur / Sontag, David / Wu, Yichen / Zhu, Michael (2018): 
  "Learning topic models - provably and efficiently",  in: 
  Communications of the ACM 61 / 4: 85–93. 10.1145/3186262.

               
                  Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften (ed.) (2011-2018): 
  Das DTA-Basisformat. http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/doku/basisformat/ [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Blei, David M. (2010): 
 "Introduction to Probabilistic Topic Models", in: 
 Semantic Scholar.
 https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5f10/38ad42ed8a4428e395c96d57f83d201ef3b3.pdf
 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Blei, David M. (2012): 
  "Topic Modeling and Digital Humanities", in: 
  Journal of Digital Humanities 2 / 1: 8–11.
  http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-1/topic-modeling-and-digital-humanities-by-david-m-blei/ [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Bock, Sina / Du, Keli / Huber, Michael / Pernes, Stefan / Pielström, Steffen (2016): 
  Der Einsatz quantitativer Textanalyse in den Geisteswissenschaften. Bericht über den Stand der Forschung. (= DARIAH-DE working papers 18). Göttingen: GOEDOC – Dokumenten- und Publikationsserver der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen. http://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/pub/mon/dariah-de/dwp-2016-18.pdf [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Boyd-Graber, Jordan / Blei, David (2012): 
  Multilingual Topic Models for Unaligned Text. http://arxiv.org/pdf/1205.2657v1 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  DARIAH-DE (2018): 
  Topics Explorer. V. 2.0.1. https://github.com/DARIAH-DE/TopicsExplorer [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  DARIAH-DE (2019): 
  DARIAH Topics. Easy Topic Modeling in Python. V. 2.0.1. https://github.com/DARIAH-DE/Topics [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Explosion AI (2019): 
  spaCy. V. 2.1.6. https://github.com/explosion/spaCy [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Fechner, Martin / Weiß, Andreas (2017): 
  "Einsatz von Topic Modeling in den Geschichtswissenschaften: Wissensbestände des 19. Jahrhunderts", in: 
  Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften 2. http://zfdg.de/2017_005 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Hurch, Bernhard (2019): 
  "Hugo Schuchardt Archiv". Institut für Romanistik, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz (ed.). https://schuchardt.uni-graz.at [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Jagarlamudi, Jagadeesh / Daumé, Hal (2010): 
  "Extracting Multilingual Topics from Unaligned Comparable Corpora",  in: Gurrin, Cathal (ed.): 
  Advances in information
  retrieval. Proceedings 444–456. (= Lecture notes in computer science 5993). Berlin / Heidelberg / New York: Springer.

               
                  McCallum, Andrew Kachites (2002-2019): 
  MALLET. A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit. V. 2.0.8. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Murakami, Akira / Thompson, Paul / Hunston, Susan / Vajn, Dominik (2017): 
  "‘What is this corpus about?’: using topic modelling to explore a
  specialised corpus", in: 
  Corpora 12 / 2: 243–277. https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/10.3366/cor.2017.0118 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Python Software Foundation (2001-2019): 
  Python. V. 3.7.4. https://github.com/python [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Riddell, Allen (2015): 
  Text Analysis with Topic Models for the Humanities and Social Sciences — Text Analysis with Topic Models for the Humanities and Social Sciences. DARIAH-DE Initiative (ed.). https://liferay.de.dariah.eu/tatom/ [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Schöch, Christof (2017): 
  "Topic Modeling Genre. An Exploration of French Classical and
  Enlightenment Drama",
  in:  Digital Humanities Quarterly 11 / 2. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000291/000291.html [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

               
                  Vulić, Ivan / Smet, Wim de / Tang, Jie / Moens, Marie-Francine (2015): 
  "Probabilistic topic modeling in multilingual settings. An overview
  of its methodology and applications",  in: 
  Information Processing & Management 51 / 1: 111–147. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306457314000739 [letzter Zugriff 27. September 2019].

            
         
      
   



      
         
            Einleitung 
            Vorliegender Posterbeitrag geht davon aus, dass digitale Editionen Produkte teils formalisierender, teils interpretierender Prozesse sind und damit in ein herausforderndes „Spiel- und Spannungsfeld“ geraten. Sie sind einerseits Standards verpflichtet, vermitteln jedoch andererseits – bedingt durch Editionsentscheidungen wie Auswahl der Quellen, Modellierung und Präsentation – eine bestimmte Sicht auf das edierte Material, welche durch Wissen und Erkenntnisinteressen der jeweiligen Herausgeber*innen geprägt ist. 
            Somit stellt sich aber die Frage, welche Spielräume den Herausgeber*innen und welche den Benutzer*innen bei der digitalen Erschließung von Quellen zugestanden werden und wie letztere damit umgehen, dass die ihnen zur Verfügung gestellten Ressourcen bereits durch andere vorgeformt sind. Um hierauf Antworten zu finden, haben die Autorinnen das etablierte Rezensionsorgan „RIDE – A review journal for digital editions and resources“ (https://ride.i-d-e.de/) herangezogen und die Äußerungen der Rezensent*innen als stellvertretend für die Perspektiven von Nutzer*innen untersucht. 
         
         
            RIDE als Untersuchungskorpus 
            RIDE wird vom Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik verantwortet und möchte gemäß der Eigendefinition, „ExpertInnen ein Forum zur kritischen Auseinandersetzung“ mit Editionen bieten und damit dazu beitragen, „die gängige Praxis zu verbessern und die zukünftige Entwicklung voranzutreiben“ (RIDE 2019). Insofern gehen aus den bereits erschienenen Rezensionen auch Überlegungen hervor, wie Editionen in Zukunft konzipiert werden könnten. Zudem ist der Kriterienkatalog von Patrick Sahle (in Zusammenarbeit mit Georg Vogeler und anderen Mitgliedern des IDE erstellt, vgl. http://www.i-d-e.de/publikationen/weitereschriften/kriterien-version-1-1/), an dem sich Gutachter*innen orientieren, einerseits „Bewertungsgrundlage“ und andererseits „Checkliste für Wissenschaftler [d.h. für die Ersteller*innen digitaler Editionen]“ (vgl. Henny 2017). Nicht zuletzt sind dadurch auch Minimalanforderungen für das zeitgemäße Edieren formuliert (vgl. Schnöpf 2013: 75), welche dazu beitragen, die Qualität digitaler Editionen zu sichern. 
            Zum Zeitpunkt der Untersuchung waren auf der Website „ride.i-d-e.de“ im Zeitraum von 2014 bis 2019 bereits sieben Bände zu „wissenschaftlichen Editionen“ mit insgesamt 35 Rezensionen in deutscher und englischer Sprache veröffentlicht worden. Die Daten dieser Rezensionen stehen auf GitHub (https://github.com/i-d-e/ride) zur Verfügung und wurden für die Untersuchung heruntergeladen und als Textkorpus mit insgesamt 161.553 Token aufbereitet. Die Auswertung erfolgte korpusbasiert mithilfe der Suche nach ausgewählten Keywords (etwa: „leider“, „Vorteil“ oder „wünschenswert“), um relevante Textstellen schnell auffinden zu können, sowie über ein „close reading“-Verfahren, um das Verständnis der einzelnen Kontexte zu sichern. Dabei wurden die Belegstellen in Anlehnung an Sahles Kriterienkatalog inhaltlich sortiert und ausgehend von mehreren Fragen ausgewertet: 
            
               In welchen Bereichen digitaler Editionen sehen sich Rezensent*innen durch Vorannahmen und Interpretationen eingeschränkt?
               In welchen Bereichen digitaler Editionen wäre aus Sicht der Rezensent*innen mehr Formalisierung/Standardisierung wünschenswert?
               Welche Maßnahmen schlagen Rezensent*innen vor, um neue Spielräume zu eröffnen und verschiedene Interpretationsmöglichkeiten offen zu halten?
            
         
         
            Ergebnisse und Ausblick
            In der Auswertung der 35 Rezensionen zeigt sich unter anderem, dass Gutachter*innen es zunehmend schätzen, wenn den Nutzer*innen digitaler Editionen möglichst viele unterschiedliche Perspektiven auf die jeweiligen Daten ermöglicht werden. So wird etwa die „Möglichkeit verschiedener Präsentationsmodi“ als positiv hervorgehoben, wohingegen das Fehlen von Faksimiles als Defizit gewertet wird. Der als ideal angenommene Zugang zu den Daten beinhaltet zudem in fast allen Rezensionen die Downloadbarkeit der XML/TEI-Dateien.
            Diese Beobachtungen sprechen dafür, dass großes Interesse daran besteht, Daten nachzunutzen und damit zu eigenen Einschätzungen und Interpretationen zu gelangen – ein potentieller Mehrwert, welcher teils auch deutlich formuliert wird: „Die Zurverfügungstellung der Transkription in XML oder einem anderen für die Nachnutzung der Daten geeigneten Format wäre wünschenswert und wertvoll.“ Gegeben ist diese Option im überwiegenden Teil bislang rezensierter Editionsprojekte jedoch nicht, wie die von RIDE selbst generierten Auswertungen offenbaren (vgl. Chart Nr. 20 und Nr. 23 unter https://ride.i-d-e.de/data/charts/). Somit ergibt sich hier ein erster möglicher Ansatzpunkt für die Optimierung zukünftiger digitale Editionen. 
            Genauso zeigt sich aber auch im Bereich der Dokumentation digitaler Editionsprojekte noch Verbesserungsbedarf. Schließlich machen Rezensent*innen mehrfach auf das Fehlen editorischer Richtlinien aufmerksam und thematisieren – wie in folgendem Fall – die fehlende Transparenz und „Selbstverortung“ (Schnöpf 2013: 72) der ihnen gegebenen Ressourcen: „I do not doubt that the transcribers and editors had a clear idea of what they were doing, but they have not documented it in the edition and so the user (and the reviewer) can only retrospectively deduce what that idea might have been.” 
            Zu diesen (und weiteren gefundenen) Kritikpunkten kommt freilich erschwerend hinzu, dass Nutzer*innengruppen mit ihren Forschungspraktiken, Forschungsprozessen und Motivationen sehr heterogen sein können (vgl. Kramer 2016, Hewing/Mandl/Womser-Hacker 2016) und „[k]omplexe digitale Ressourcen [...] auch an die Benutzer höhere Anforderungen [stellen]“ (Sahle 2013: 262). Es gilt hier also, neue Interaktionsmuster zu entwickeln, um die Kluft zwischen Editor*innen und Nutzer*innen zu überbrücken. In diesem Sinne soll der Posterbeitrag durch abschließende Empfehlungen abgerundet werden, wie Nutzer*innen in Zukunft (noch) erfolgreicher an digitale Editionen herangeführt werden könnten.
         
      
      
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                  Henny, Ulrike (2018): „Reviewing von digitalen Editionen im Kontext der Evaluation digitaler Forschungsergebnisse“, in: Kamzelak, Roland S. / Steyer, Timo (eds.): 
                        Digitale Metamorphose: Digital Humanities und Editionswissenschaft (= Sonderband der Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften 2) 10.17175/sb002_006.
                    
               
                  Hewing, Ben / Mandl, Thomas / Womser-Hacker, Christa (2016): “Methods for User-Centered Design and Evaluation of Text Analysis Tools in a Digital History Project”, in: 
                        ASIST Annual Meeting Proceedings. 
                        Joining Research and Practice 53: 1–10 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pra2.2016.14505301078 [letzter Zugriff 30. Dezember 2019]. 
                    
               
                  Kramer, Michael J. (2016): 
                        The Digital Humanities Reader. http://www.michaeljkramer.net/the-digital-humanities-reader/ [letzter Zugriff 30. Dezember 2019]. 
                    
               
                  Sahle, Patrick (2013): 
                        Digitale Editionsformen. Zum Umgang mit der Überlieferung unter den Bedingungen des Medienwandels. Teil 1–3: Befunde, Theorie und Methodik (= Schriften des Instituts für Dokumentologie und Editorik 7–9). Norderstedt: BoD. 
                    
               
                  Schnöpf, Markus (2013): „Evaluationskriterien für digitale Editionen und die reale Welt“, in: 
                        HiN - Humboldt im Netz. Internationale Zeitschrift für Humboldt-Studien 27: 69–76.
                    
            
         
      
   



      
         Schulbücher transportieren gesellschaftliche und staatlich sanktionierte Werte und Normen. Als Quellengattung stellen sie einen vielversprechenden Gegenstand für zahlreiche wissenschaftliche Fragestellungen dar. Schulbücher werden in zahlreichen Bibliotheken gesammelt, aber in den seltensten Fällen werden sie systematisch erschlossen und für die Digitalisierung genießen sie in der Regel keine hohe Priorität.
         Im Rahmen der digitalen Schulbuchbibliothek GEI-Digital wurden in den letzten 10 Jahren historische deutsche Schulbücher der Fächer Geschichte, Geographie und Politik, sowie Realien- und (Erst-)Lesebücher von den Anfängen der Schulbuchproduktion im 17. Jahrhundert bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkriegs digital zugänglich gemacht (Hertling/Klaes 2018). Digitalisiert und integriert wurden dabei sowohl Schulbücher aus den Beständen der Forschungsbibliothek des Georg-Eckert-Instituts – Leibniz-Institut für internationale Schulbuchforschung (GEI) als auch Schulbücher aus zahlreichen Partner-Bibliotheken im deutschsprachigen Raum. Die externen Schulbuchbestände wurde dem GEI zum Zwecke der Digitalisierung im Rahmen von Kooperationen leihweise überlassen oder als Fremddigitalisate virtuell in die GEI-Digital-Sammlung integriert.
            
         Die bibliothekarische Erschließung des historischen Schulbuch-Korpus folgt den spezifischen Bedürfnissen der Schulbuchforschung. Typisches Kennzeichen von Schulbüchern sind dabei viele Ausgaben und die unterschiedlichen Bände eines Schulbuchs. Neben Angaben zum Verlag und Erscheinungsjahr werden zusätzlich auch Schulfächer und Schulstufen als deskriptive Metadaten erfasst. Sie stehen auf GEI-Digital als MARCXML, Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS) oder Dublin Core (DC) zur Nachnutzung zur Verfügung. Die Erschließung umfasst auch die intellektuelle Verknüpfung der Schulbuchautoren mit Normdateneinträgen in der Gemeinsamen Normdatei (GND), um das Korpus für biographische Forschungsansätze zu öffnen. Darüber hinaus werden die digitalisierten Schulbücher in Form einer Tiefenerschließung in ihrer Struktur erschlossen und die Elemente, wie Titelblätter, Inhaltsverzeichnisse, Abbildungen etc. im Metadata Encoding & Transmission Standard (METS) ausgewiesen.
         Die über 1,5 Millionen in GEI-Digital gescannten Seiten wurden zudem einer Optical Character Recognition (OCR) unterzogen und stehen als durchsuchbare Volltexte über eine OAI-PMH-Schnittstelle zur Verfügung. Die Resultate der Volltexterkennung werden im Zuge des Digitalisierungsworkflows im XML-Schema Analyzed Layout and Text Object (ALTO) ausgegeben.
         Mit GEI-Digital ist für die Digital Humanities ein einzigartiges
Korpus mit über 6.100 digitalisierten Schulbüchern entstanden, dass
die gesamte Epoche der deutschen Schulbücher von deren Entstehung bis
1918 mit hoher Vollständigkeit virtuell zusammenführt. Die
Digitalisate und Daten werden in zahlreichen
Digital-Humanities-Projekten bereits nachgenutzt, z.B. im Projekt
„Welt der Kinder“ (Heuwing/Weiß 2018 und
Nieländer/Weiß 2018), in dem das Korpus mit Topic Modeling-Verfahren
untersucht wurde . Das Portal GeoPortOst nutzt u.a. das in GEI-Digital vorhandene Kartenmaterial für Georeferenzierungen. 

         In einem nächsten Schritt ist geplant, das Korpus in dem von CLARIN
betriebenen Virtual Language Observatory (VLO)nachzuweisen, um es für weiterführende und
v.a. linguistische Analysen zugänglich zu machen. Voraussetzung für
einen Nachweis ist die Repräsentation der digitalisierten Schulbücher
in derComponent MetaData Infrastructure
(CMDI). CMDI stellt ein Framework zur Verfügung, um Profile für Metadaten für die Beschreibung und Benutzung bereitzustellen. 
            
         Ausgehend von Metadatenformaten, die sich v.a. an bibliothekarischen Standards orientieren, werden auf dem Poster Anforderungen und Strategien für Mapping-Prozesse als Grundlage für Digital-Humanities-Projekte präsentiert. Im Mittelpunkt stehen dabei die in GEI-Digital gemachten Mapping-Erfahrungen mit den Formaten METS/MODS, TEI, CMDI und Dublin Core (DC) und die Herausforderung ihrer jeweiligen Interoperabilität.
         In einem ersten Schritt In einer Machbarkeitsstudie stellte sich im Projekt GEI-Digital ein Mapping von METS zu CMDI als undurchführbar heraus (Fallucchi/De Luca 2019). Ein Mapping von Dublin Core (DC) zu CMDI als CLARIN-Empfehlung ist mit Blick auf die Besonderheiten der Erschließung von Schulbüchern insbesondere mit Blick auf die für die Forschung wichtigen Ausgabebezeichnungen und Bandangaben stark verlustbehaftet. Vor dem Hintergrund werden derzeit alternative Optionen diskutiert, die auf dem Poster aufgezeigt und erörtert werden sollen. Eine Möglichkeit stellt die Anreicherung von Dublin Core-Metadaten und ihre Konvertierung in CMDI dar. Eine weitere Option besteht in der Umwandlung von textbasierten ALTO-Dateien in CMDI.
      
      
         
            
      Projektwebseite GEI-Digital – die digitale Schulbuch-Bibliothek:: 
      
            
            
      Projektwebseite Welt der Kinder: 
            
            
      Projektwebseite GeoPortOst: Portal für
      thematische und versteckte Karten zu Ost- und Südosteuropa:
      
            
            
      CLARIN Virtual Language Observatory:
    
            
         
         
            
               Bibliographie
               
                   Fallucchi, Francesca / De Luca, Ernesto William
(2019): “Connecting and Mapping LOD and CMDI Through Knowledge Organization” Springer, Cham, pp. 291-301.
               
                   Hertling, Anke / Klaes, Sebastian (2018): Historische Schulbücher als digitales Korpus für die Forschung: Auswahl und Aufbau einer digitalen Schulbuchbibliothek, in: Maret Nieländer / Ernesto William De Luca (eds): Digital Humanities in der internationalen Schulbuchforschung - Forschungsinfrastrukturen und Projekte. Göttingen: V&R unipress 21–44
               
                   Hertling, Anke / Klaes, Sebastian  (2018): »GEI-Digital« als Grundlage für Digital-Humanities-Projekte: Erschließung und Datenaufbereitung, in: Maret Nieländer / Ernesto William De Luca (eds): Digital Humanities in der internationalen Schulbuchforschung - Forschungsinfrastrukturen und Projekte. Göttingen: V&R unipress 45–68
               
                   Heuwing, Ben / Weiß, Andreas  (2018): Suche und Analyse in großen Textsammlungen: Neue Werkzeuge für die Schulbuchforschung in: Maret Nieländer / Ernesto William De Luca (eds): Digital Humanities in der internationalen Schulbuchforschung - Forschungsinfrastrukturen und Projekte. Göttingen: V&R unipress 145-170
               
                   Nieländer, Maret / Weiß, Andreas  (2018): »Schönere Daten« – Nachnutzung und Aufbereitung für die Verwendung in Digital-Humanities-Projekten, in: Maret Nieländer / Ernesto William De Luca (eds): Digital Humanities in der internationalen Schulbuchforschung - Forschungsinfrastrukturen und Projekte. Göttingen: V&R unipress 91-116
            
         
      
   



        
            Computer-aided collation is like a power loom that inevitably tangles up threads caught in the machinery. Automating a tedious process magnifies the complexity of error-correction, calling for new tooling to help us smooth the weaving process. For the DH 2022 conference we seek to share our efforts in the 
                Frankenstein Variorum project (hereafter referred to as 
                FV) to automate corrections to machine-assisted collation and thereby to refine our collation pre-processing and post-processing algorithms. 
            
            
                FV began during the recent 1818-2018 bicentennial celebrating the first publication of Mary Shelley's novel and exists now as a partial working prototype. We are constructing a digital variorum edition that highlights alterations to the novel 
                Frankenstein over five key moments from its first drafting in 1816 to its author’s final revisions by 1831. Source "threads" for the 
                FV collation "weave" include two well established digital editions:
                 the Pennsylvania Electronic Edition (
                    PAEE)
                 an early hypertext edition produced at the University of Pennsylvania in the mid 1990s by Stuart Curran and Jack Lynch, and
                 the Shelley-Godwin Archive's edition of the manuscript notebooks (
                    S-GA)
                 published in 2013 by the University of Maryland. That interface relies on a backend processing pipeline that involves the software collateX in collating textual data, including markup, from each edition. To finalize our work requires iterative efforts to refine our collation and post-processing algorithms.
            
            The Gothenburg Model, conceptualized by the developers of collateX and Juxta in 2009 (see
                 https://collatex.net/doc/) , organizes a series of distinct and iterative stages in a workflow for automated collation. These stages involve tokenizing and normalizing the texts to be collated, determining at what points the texts align and diverge, and visualizing the results of collation.  Our current efforts on the 
                FV involve post-processing the software-generated collation data. We seek to automate the identification of common patterns of misalignment and to produce a more accurate rendering of collation units mapped to the S-GA edition.
            
             
            At ADHO 2022, we wish to discuss these two efforts with 
                1. improving collation alignment, and 
                2. improving our visualization of the S-GA edition within our variorum.
            
            
                1. Improving collation alignment: We are applying XSLT to seek out patterns of “spurious alignment” generated by our collation software, collateX. The collation algorithm tends to err optimistically, seeking alignment of completely divergent passages on single words like “and” or “the.” One solution to this is to remove these words entirely during the pre-processing stage, but we rejected this approach because we consider the changes from “and” to “or”, or “the” to “an” to be significant. Since we generate collation output as critical apparatus markup in TEI-conformant XML, we are opting to locate patterns of divergence using XSLT as a post-processing stage. 
                 
            
            
                2. Improving our visualization of the S-GA edition:  Representing the 
                S-GA edition accurately is a challenge because we needed to 
                re-sequence its encoding to prepare it for tokenization and normalization in our collation algorithm. In the 
                S-GA's TEI markup, marginalia in the manuscript notebook pages were encoded at the ends of each page file, and they were given attributes that indicate their insertion points in the running flow of the text. It was necessary to re-sequence the order of text on the page to move the marginalia from the end of each file to its insertion point so that we could prepare a continuous sequence of text—the thread of the 
                S-GA—to compare with the threads of the other four editions. Resequencing the 
                S-GA meant following a clearly signaled trail of ids and pointers in the original encoding. While it would indeed be convenient to display the re-sequenced TEI in our edition viewer, we seek instead to 
                map our collation data back onto the original source document by pulling the source document’s code into our reading interface. We seek to apply the information we learned from the collation to point back to specific passages in the source document, identifying them by line and string position in the original files in order to pull those particular passages into our interface viewer. This is an ambitious challenge involving stand-off pointers that require counting characters in the source document for precise identification of a variant passage in the 
                S-GA’s original encoding. 
            
             
            We need to improve our stand-off pointing mechanism to the 
                S-GA edition. Our interface needs to pinpoint in the original
                 S-GA files the precise location of the variant passages identified by the collation process. To improve this, we are revisiting the process of re-sequencing the document in the first place. We are retracing our steps in the early XSLT written for the project to set clearer markers to identify the locations of marginalia passages in the original 
                S-GA files. Those markers need to be delivered to the collation output XML, to assist in calculating the XPath and string locations of variant passages in the source S
                -GA.
            
            At ADHO 2022 we will share our efforts in both of these areas, in the hope of encouraging lively discussion in the text scholarly community. If we are to smooth the tangled webs of collation, perhaps we need to be able to follow our own complex algorithms backwards to the threading of the machine.
        
    



        
            
                Introduction and motivation
                In a 2020 talk entitled “A Hornbook for Digital Book History”, Whitney Trettien weaves together many of the strands that have led book history, bibliography, media studies, and the digital humanities to have become deeply entangled in recent years. She convincingly argues for the potential of Book History done digitally “to build connective tissue across scattered collections” and advocates “using the digital tools at our disposal in order to see the big picture of the past”.
                    
                        
                            https://rarebookschool.org/rbs-online/a-hornbook-for-digital-book-history/. She shares this vision of a continuum of print and digital with other influential voices at the intersection of book history, media studies, and the digital humanities, among them Henrike Laehnemann, Sarah Werner, and Matt Kirschenbaum to name but a few.
                        
                    
                
                It is in this vein that this paper presents the motivation for and realisation of a new open-access open scholarship platform (currently in public beta) named PRISMS.
                    
                        
                            https://www.prisms.digital/
                        
                     The aim of the PRISMS Open Scholarship platform is two-fold:
                
                
                    It offers a publication platform for digital scholarly editions, with full-text (preferably encoded in TEI) and facsimiles, and any accompanying materials, such as introduction, editorial statement, critical apparatus, contextual source materials, bibliography, and indices;
                    It facilitates the semantic annotation of these editions and their related scholarship (in any format) by enabling easy-to-perform formal ontological modelling (based on the CIDOC-CRM family of ontologies
                        
                            
                                http://www.cidoc-crm.org/
                            
                        ), and thus hopes to contribute to providing the abovementioned “connective tissue” not only for scattered collections, but to overcome the artificial print/digital divide.
                    
                
                PRISMS was born out of the realization that digital editions do not break with the historicity or materiality of the sources they organize and present, but instead remediate and extend them in ways that enable new forms of access, engagement, presentation, and analysis. PRISMS conceptualizes digital editions as living entities that perform rather than merely document the remediation they engage in.
                The scholarship that underpins each digital edition provides the essential context for these remediation processes, and collectively they sustain the knowledge network that supports all academic engagement with the texts from any disciplinary viewpoint. PRISMS is designed to allow for the collaborative and collective modelling of this continuum of digital editions and scholarship by placing digital editions, their material and contextual basis, and the resulting academic engagement in a linked context, building on the standards and tools provided by the Semantic Web.
                We believe that this type of formalization is beneficial for the purposes of this project in at least three ways: firstly, ontologies facilitate modelling with reduced reliance on implicit knowledge through an explicit, shared conceptualization of the domain. Secondly, formal models encourage collaboration as they can be shared, re-used, adapted (forked), enhanced, aggregated, and developed collaboratively. Thirdly, as a form of knowledge representation, visualization, and preservation, formal models support computational processing and ultimately reasoning, and can develop alongside the mental models and human reasoning we engage in as scholars. PRISMS facilitates scholarship that is based on these principles
                    
                         Ground-breaking research projects in this domain include the 
                            ResearchSpace platform and the 
                            Sphaera CorpusTracer project.
                        
                    .
                
            
            
                Approach and implementation
                The PRISMS Open Scholarship platform integrates the task of publishing digital editions with the need for analytical and modelling tools to perform the type of knowledge representation that connects the material, digital, and the scholarship that builds on them. PRISMS aims to support digital editors, book historians, experts in media and cultural studies, librarians, literary scholars, and of course digital humanists, to ensure a wide range of domain expertise, disciplinary practices, and methodological approaches are reflected in the platform. To this end, the PRISMS platform hosts a variety of tools alongside the digital editions, which can be categorized as component tools (such as text-based tools, image-based tools, XML-based tools, etc.) and workbench tools (those available across document types and editions).
                
                    
                    Figure 1 
                        Some of the built-in analysis and visualization tools in PRISMS. Voyant-Tools is shown alongside a relation being made between two editions, and some highlighted annotations
                    
                
                The former category of tools is useful for any type of close scholarly work, and in PRISMS these tools include a bookmarking tool, an annotation tool (initially focussing on texts and images, but with a vision to extend annotation capabilities across all media types), the ability to keep research records (and other forms of note-taking, e.g. transcriptions, translations etc.) in the form of notebooks, and integration of Voyant Tools
                    
                        
                            https://voyant-tools.org/
                        
                     for statistical analysis and a variety of visualisations of texts. The latter category includes the ability to participate in the shaping of the knowledge graph by modelling concepts and relationships, an easy way to organize research materials, and the ability to download, share, and publish contributions for the benefit of all.
                
                
                    
                    Figure 2 
                        Modelling both the material legacies and digital remediation processes with Linked Data technologies and Cytoscape.js
                    
                
                All semantic modelling work, e.g. with regard to the provenance of the material and digital manifestations of an edition, can be performed both directly in a visual representation of the graph using Cytoscape.js or via a set of customizable HTML forms. All resulting triples are stored in an RDF-native graph database (using the abovementioned ontologies) for long-term preservation, collaboration, and re-use. Every user of PRISMS has both read access to this global graph that underpins the platform and unlimited access (via SPARQL Update operations) to a private graph. By default, everything in PRISMS is private. Everything contributors add is immediately visible to them, and they can conduct their scholarship in complete privacy, without delay or interference. Only when the user decides to publish their contributions will they be made available to everyone. Depending on the type of contribution made, there are options to share, download, and/or publish them. All contributions made to the PRISMS platform are stored in standard formats, e.g. the W3C Web Annotation Data Model for annotations and relations.
            
            
                Contribution and further work
                PRISMS has been launched with corpora from the EEBO-TCP
                    
                        
                            https://textcreationpartnership.org/tcp-texts/eebo-tcp-early-english-books-online/
                        
                    , ECCO-TCP
                    
                        
                            https://textcreationpartnership.org/tcp-texts/ecco-tcp-eighteenth-century-collections-online/
                        
                    , EVANS-TCP
                    
                        
                            https://textcreationpartnership.org/tcp-texts/evans-tcp-evans-early-american-imprints/
                        
                    , the DTA extended core corpus
                    
                        
                            https://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/
                        
                    , and the Taylor Editions
                    
                        
                            https://editions.mml.ox.ac.uk/
                        
                     scholarly editions platform. And it is easy to add new editions to the platform either as part of a dedicated digital scholarly editing process, for which training is provided, or by simply adding a IIIF manifest and using a built-in XML-aware or standard text-editor to start transcribing and adding contextual materials. The platform already supports the addition and semantic annotation of a wide range of primary and secondary materials, such as facsimiles in IIIF, a transcription of a source text, a PDF of a journal article, a video of a theatrical performance, an audio book, an image, or a 3D-model of a sculpture mentioned in a text, etc. 
                
                
                    
                    Figure 3 
                        A view of the PRISMS workbench, with three editions of Faust loaded, and an aggregation of primary and research materials in support of a performance analysis, with a facsimile, two videos, and an audio book
                    
                
                Moving forward, we will continue to work on integrating the digital research and tools important to PRISMS’ users (e.g. reference manager, images taken in reading rooms, items deposited in institutional repositories). With end of the beta phase, the project also intends to provide access to the entire PRISMS knowledge graph through regular data dumps and a public SPARQL endpoint. We envision that over time, PRISMS will evolve both as a powerful discovery tool and a personal research tool.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Ciotti, F. (2015) “Digital methods for Literary Criticism.” Lecture slides. University of Rome Tor Vergata, 
                        http://didattica.uniroma2.it/files/scarica/insegnamento/161783-Informatica-Umanistica-Lm-Per-Il-Llea/37175-Slide
                    
                    Ciula, A. and Marras, C. (2016) “Circling around texts and language: towards 'pragmatic modelling' in Digital Humanities.” 
                        
                            Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ)
                         10.3 
                        http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/3/000258/000258.html
                    
                    Ciula, A. and Eide, Ø. (2107) “Modelling in digital humanities: Signs in context.” 
                        
                            Digital Scholarship in the Humanities
                         32: i33–i46. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw045
                    
                    Ciula, A., Eide, Ø, Marras, C. and Sahle, P. (2018) 
                        Models and Modelling between Digital and Humanities — A Multidisciplinary Perspective. 
                        Historical Social Research (HSR) Supplement 31.
                    
                    Eide, Ø. (2015)
                         Media Boundaries and Conceptual Modelling: Between Texts and Maps. Pre-print manuscript, 
                        https://www.oeide.no/research/eideBetween.pdf
                    
                    Kirschenbaum, M. and Werner, S. (2014) “Digital Scholarship and Digital Studies: The State of the Discipline.” 
                        Book History 17, 406-458 
                        https://www.academia.edu/15995371/Digital_​Studies_​and_​Digital_​Scholarship_​The_​State_​of_​the_​Discipline
                    
                    Kräutli, F. and Valleriani, M. (2018) “CorpusTracer: A CIDOC database for tracing knowledge networks.” 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 33(2): 336-346. 
                        https://pure.mpg.de/rest/items/item_2472866_10/component/file_3002633/content
                    
                    Laehnemann, H. (2022) “History of the Book blog.” 
                        https://historyofthebook.mml.ox.ac.uk/
                    
                    Oldman, D., Doerr, M. and Gradmann, S. (2016) “Zen and the Art of Linked Data: New Strategies for a Semantic Web of Humanist Knowledge.” In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., Unsworth, J. (eds.) 
                        A New Companion to Digital Humanities. Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell, 251-273.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Cuneiform is one of the earliest writing systems in the world, usually written by pressing a stylus on moist clay tablets, creating a three-dimensional script. It is a logo-syllabic script, like Chinese or Japanese writing systems (Veldhuis, 2012; Kwan, 2014; Francis, 2020). There are close to a thousand cuneiform signs, not all of which were used simultaneously—usually about 200-300 signs were used at once. Additionally, the forms of these signs changed drastically during the 3,000 years in which this writing system was in use. Cuneiform tablets are available for OCR in three main formats: (a) 3D or 2D+ models, the most accurate representation, but these are still relatively rare and expensive to produce; (b) 2D images of cuneiform objects, which are fast growing in quality and ubiquity; and (c) hand-copies, 2D drawings made by scholars of the inscribed signs. These are still commonly used in the field, and are the majority of available representations of cuneiform writing. Furthermore, cuneiform writing and all the languages using it, are low-resource languages, which raises difficulties when implementing some computational methods (Hedderich et al., 2021). Although the number of digital texts is steadily growing in recent years, the gap is still substantial, and significant efforts are needed for digitization.
            The best results for character recognition of cuneiform signs or strokes thus far have been achieved from 3D models (Mara et al., 2010; Fisseler et al., 2013; Fisseler et al., 2014; Rothacker et al., 2015). Work on hand-copies, or 2D projections of 3D models which look like hand-copies, are also showing promising results (Mara and Krömker, 2013; Bogacz et al., 2015a; Bogacz et al., 2015b; Bogacz et al., 2016; Massa et al., 2016; Bogacz and Mara, 2018; Yamauchi et al., 2018), as well as some work on 2D images (Rusakov et al., 2019; Rusakov et al., 2020; Dencker et al., 2020; see also Bogacz and Mara, forthcoming). These results, nevertheless, are limited in scope because of lack of labeled data, lack of 3D models, or, most often, a lack of an accessible way for cuneiform specialists to use the models developed.
            With this gap in mind between the specialists and the code, the set of CuRe tools (Cuneiform Recognition) of the 
                Babylonian Engine project was created as an online interactive platform for scholars.
                
                     Funded by the Ministry of Science & Technology, Israel, Grant 3-16464.
                 The idea was that already in the design and initial training of machine learning (ML) models, humans, particularly experts, should take an active part. The ML models are envisioned as “co-workers” which provide likely suggestions to the user, aiding the process of cuneiform scholarly edition publication, and improving as the user corrects them. This way, it is not only the ML models that benefit from the corrections and labeled data created by experts, but also the experts can enjoy a designated work environment for any type of cuneiform text, and download the results of their work–already advancing cuneiform scholarship.
            
            Our main tool, CuRe (Cuneiform Recognition), takes images of hand-copies as input, either uploaded by the user or one of the images in the CuRe dataset of copyright-free hand-copies of Neo- and Late Babylonian documents (see demo, the full platform will be available in the near future). Hand-copies were chosen for initial training because they are more ubiquitous than 2D images or 3D models, and many hand-copies are still missing full publication of their textual editions. The signs are detected using a Faster R-CNN ResNet 50 model (detectron2), and then given suggestions for their value with ResNet-18 (Figure 1). The two stages of the model are also split for the user. First, the user corrects the segmentation, and then they are given the suggested readings. The models currently perform with ca. 92% accuracy for sign identifications, checked against a validated test set, and we are constantly enlarging the dataset and retraining the model.
            
            We are in the process of developing another stage in this tool: stroke recognition from 2D images. Identifying the strokes—the constituent parts which make up a cuneiform sign—is drastically simpler than identifying the whole (similar to text recognition for Japanese in Liang et al., 2015). While the signs changed drastically in the 3,000 years in which cuneiform was in use, the strokes and writing technique remained similar. Furthermore, since there are only three main stroke types (horizontal, vertical, and oblique), it is much quicker to obtain a large corpus of examples of each, as compared to collecting enough samples for every sign and its variant forms. There have been no previous attempts of identifying strokes from 2D images. After identification using Faster R-CNN ResNet 50, vector images are created with schematic representations of the strokes, which are quite like hand-copies (Figure 2).
            The final goal is for the user to create a digital text using OCR in three stages: receiving and correcting (a) stroke identification, (b) sign detection, and (c) the identification of the sign values. This process creates additional validated training data for all our models, constantly improving them, while avoiding multiplying the error rates in the final result—the digitized text. Since the models are already approximately 80%-90% accurate (and rising), the amount of corrections is not too cumbersome, and it is already able to save a significant amount of time that experts usually spend on deciphering cuneiform texts.
            To conclude, designing ML models as part of a human-in-the-loop pipeline application has the following benefits: (a) people are incentivized to create the data needed for training; (b) breaking down the “reading” process of the OCR, allows for less mistakes in the final digitized text; (c) the ML models are used from their inception in a real-world scenario, providing real-world value to the research community. Furthermore, we believe the CuRe tool-set can also be a valuable learning environment for cuneiform students or any interested laypeople. The advantage for cuneiform studies is thus twofold: growing a database of available digital editions for research, and creating a learning environment which can help disseminate knowledge on some of the oldest civilizations in human history. The digital editions created will be downloadable in the standard formats of the field (ATF, TEI/XML, and JSON). We believe that this work pipeline—breaking down the OCR process and developing human-in-the-loop ML models—is an effective way for solving OCR for additional low-resource and complex writing systems (compare Hashimoto et al., 2018 on Japanese), or for that matter, NLP applications for diverse low-resource languages (Wang et al., 2021).
            
                
            
            Figure 1: A screenshot of the CuReI-tool from the Babylonian Engine website, currently in deployment, see 
                demo
            
            
                
            
            Figure 2: A section of cuneiform writing with ground truth and identified labels for horizontal strokes (top), and a vectorized representation of the strokes (bottom). The grayscale on the strokes signifies the certainty level of the model (tablet image: 
                YPM BC 16773 © Yale Babylonian Collection, courtesy of Klaus Wagensonner)
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bogacz, B., Gertz, M. and Mara, H. (2015a). Character Retrieval of Vectorized Cuneiform Script. In 13th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2015). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 326–30. 10.1109/ICDAR.2015.7333777.
                    
                    
                        Bogacz, B., Gertz, M. and Mara, H. (2015b). Cuneiform Character Similarity Using Graph Representations. In Wohlhart, P. and Lepetit, V. (eds), 20th Computer Vision Winter Workshop. Graz: Verlag Der Technischen Universität Graz, pp. 105–12.
                    
                    
                        Bogacz, B., Howe, N. and Mara, H. (2016). Segmentation Free Spotting of Cuneiform Using Part Structured Models. In 15th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR 2016). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 301–6. 10.1109/ICFHR.2016.0064.
                    
                    
                        Bogacz, B. and Mara, H. (2018). Feature Descriptors for Spotting 3D Characters on Triangular Meshes. In 16th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR 2018). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 363–8.
                    
                    
                        Bogacz, B. and Mara, H. (forthcoming). Digital Assyriology - Advances in Visual Cuneiform Analysis. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage.
                    
                    
                        Dencker, T. et al. (2020). Deep Learning of Cuneiform Sign Detection with Weak Supervision Using Transliteration Alignment. PLOS ONE, 15(12), p. e0243039. 10.1371/journal.pone.0243039.
                    
                    
                        Fisseler, D. et al. (2013). Towards an Interactive and Automated Script Feature Analysis of 3D Scanned Cuneiform Tablets. In Scientific Computing and Cultural Heritage 2013. http://www.cuneiform.de/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/scch2013_fisseler.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Fisseler, D. et al. (2014). Extending Philological Research with Methods of 3D Computer Graphics Applied to Analysis of Cultural Heritage. In Klein, R. and Santos, P. (eds), Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage (GCH 2014). Goslar: The Eurographics Association, pp. 165–72. 10.2312/gch.20141314.
                    
                    
                        Francis, N. (2020). New Research on the Adoption and Transformation of Chinese Writing. Chinese Language and Discourse, 11(1), pp. 134–45. 10.1075/cld.19007.fra.
                    
                    
                        Hashimoto, Y. et al. (2018). Minna de Honkoku: Learning-Driven Crowdsourced Transcription of Pre-Modern Japanese Earthquake Records. In ADHO / EHD 2018 - Mexico City.https://dh-abstracts.library.cmu.edu/works/6312 (accessed 9 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Hedderich, M. A. et al. (2021). A Survey on Recent Approaches for Natural Language Processing in Low-Resource Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. NAACL-HLT 2021. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2545–68. 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.201.
                    
                    
                        Kwan, T.-W. (2014). Phenomenological Interpretation of the “Six Ways” of Chinese Script Formation. In Gordin, Sh. (ed.), Visualizing Knowledge and Creating Meaning in Ancient Writing Systems. Berliner Beitrage zum Vorderen Orient. Gladbeck: PeWe-Verlag, pp. 157–202.
                    
                    
                        Liang, J. et al. (2015). Character-Position-Free On-Line Handwritten Japanese Text Recognition. In 2015 3rd IAPR Asian Conference on Pattern Recognition (ACPR). Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: IEEE, pp. 231–5. 10.1109/ACPR.2015.7486500.
                    
                    
                        Mara, H. et al. (2010). GigaMesh and Gilgamesh – 3D Multiscale Integral Invariant Cuneiform Character Extraction. In Artusi, A. et al. (eds), The 11th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage. VAST: International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage. The Eurographics Association. 10.2312/VAST/VAST10/131-138.
                    
                    
                        Mara, H. and Krömker, S. (2013). Vectorization of 3D-Characters by Integral Invariant Filtering of High-Resolution Triangular Meshes. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2013). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 62–6. 10.1109/ICDAR.2013.21.
                    
                    
                        Massa, J. et al. (2016). Cuneiform Detection in Vectorized Raster Images. In Čehovin, L. Mandeljc, R. and Štruc, V. (eds), 21st Computer Vision Winter Workshop. Ljubljana: Slovenian Pattern Recognition Society.
                    
                    
                        Rothacker, L. et al. (2015). Retrieving Cuneiform Structures in a Segmentation-Free Word Spotting Framework. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing (HIP 2015). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 129–36. 10.1145/2809544.2809562.
                    
                    
                        Rusakov, E. et al. (2019). Generating Cuneiform Signs with Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Historical Document Imaging and Processing. HIP ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 19–24. 10.1145/3352631.3352632.
                    
                    
                        Rusakov, E. et al. (2020). Towards Query-by-Expression Retrieval of Cuneiform Signs. In 2020 17th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR). pp. 43–8. 10.1109/ICFHR2020.2020.00019.
                    
                    
                        Veldhuis, N. (2012). Cuneiform: Changes and Developments. In Houston, S.D. (ed.), The Shape of Script: How and Why Writing Systems Change. Santa Fe, N.M.: SAR Press, pp. 3–23.
                    
                    
                        Wang, Z. J. et al. (2021). Putting Humans in the Natural Language Processing Loop: A Survey. In Blodgett, S.L. et al. (eds), Proceedings of the First Workshop on Bridging Human–Computer Interaction and Natural Language Processing. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 47–52.https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2021.hcinlp-1.8.
                    
                    
                        Yamauchi, K., Yamamoto, H. and Mori, W. (2018). Building A Handwritten Cuneiform Character Imageset. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). Miyazaki, Japan: European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 719–22. https://aclanthology.org/L18-1115.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                A partir del creciente interés suscitado por humanistas y estudiosos del mundo clásico en la investigación y tratamiento digital de datos sobre la Antigüedad clásica, y más en concreto sobre el teatro y la transmisión de los trágicos griegos y latinos, se aborda en el presente en el presente artículo una presentación de los estudios más relevantes realizados durante las últimas dos décadas (2001-2020). Es innegable que el campo de las Humanidades Digitales aplicado a la investigación textual de nuestros clásicos antiguos está abriendo nuevas líneas de actuación que acercan la investigación a la enseñanza y ofrecen nuevas perspectivas en el campo de la enseñanza en entornos virtuales sobre el teatro de época clásica. El presente artículo evidencia finalmente el gran avance en el campo del análisis computacional puesto al servicio de la interpretación textual tradicional y su repercusión en performance y tratamiento estructural de las piezas trágicas más representativas de la Antigüedad clásica.
            
            
                Propuesta de investigación: Partiendo de la premisa de que las humanidades digitales son un campo de investigación al servicio de los estudiosos del mundo antiguo, filólogos, estudiosos del teatro clásico e historiadores de la Antigüedad clásica, se ofrece una aproximación a la interpretación del teatro clásico a partir de los estudios realizados por humanistas digitales en las últimas dos décadas. Las ediciones digitales y los estudios de crítica textual, junto al análisis computacional del léxico teatral de época clásica permiten actualmente obtener resultados cuantitativos que a su vez redundarán en resultados cualitativos sobre la enseñanza en entornos virtuales y puesta en escena del teatro clásico. 
            
            
                Marco metodológico: La entrada de las tecnologías digitales en el mundo de las humanidades y del teatro es una realidad que confirma la nueva dimensión cultural de la sociedad actual. Los modelos educativos en entornos virtuales también ponen de manifiesto la transformación en la enseñanza del siglo XXI, se hacen eco de los nuevos retos docentes y ofrecen innovadoras perspectivas en aplicaciones digitales al ámbito académico. Luego de entender el contexto de crecimiento dinámico social en el que se insertan las Humanidades Digitales como disciplina, cabe citar la constitución de Proyectos de investigación, formación de Asociaciones, grupos específicos de investigación en un campo determinado, la celebración de Congresos 
                ad hoc y la proliferación de revistas sobre el Humanidades Digitales de carácter internacional. Los materiales publicados en el ámbito de estudio teatral de la Antigüedad clásica conforman el propósito de análisis del presente trabajo y la metodología de investigación establecida se basa en la identificación de los estudios relevantes, temática de su contenido y transferencia de la información a otros ámbitos de estudio, a partir de su aplicación y divulgación. 
            
            
                Discusión de naturaleza crítica: La interpretación del drama griego y latino a la luz de las Humanidades Digitales plantea una discusión de naturaleza crítica, la cual pretende arrojar luz sobre el 
                status quaestionis en torno al tratamiento digital de textos teatrales clásicos. El acercamiento al estudio del teatro clásico a través de aplicaciones como Shiny DraCor, la marcación en lenguaje XML-TEI y el análisis cuantitativo del léxico puede dar lugar a nuevas interpretaciones filológicas acerca de los patrones del teatro clásico, su estructura interna y su proyección hacia el público. Concretamente a partir de los resultados cuantitativos disponibles actualmente, se persigue extraer unos hallazgos cualitativos que nos permitan interpretar los modelos de performance teatrales objeto de estudio, mediante el cotejo de patrones tradicionales de la tragedia antigua, que a su vez incluye el análisis de la presencia tanto de personajes principales y secundarios, como de intervenciones por parte del coro dentro de una misma pieza dramática. La interrelación resultante puede ser confirmada o desestimada por la evidencia de los datos digitales extraídos, ayudando sobremanera al estudio de las redes sociales implícitas en el teatro clásico antiguo. Todo el proceso será tratado partiendo de las obras conservadas de los trágicos griegos Esquilo, Sófocles y Eurípides y podrá extenderse al análisis estructural de otras piezas teatrales clásicas. Se persigue asimismo una aplicación real de estos resultados en el aula considerando aspectos pedagógicos y académicos que ayuden al docente a trasladar los resultados de investigación en HD sobre teatro clásico antiguo. En cuanto a la relación entre investigación y puesta en escena, serán los datos digitales sobre reconstrucción en 3D los que ayuden a ofrecer una visión de los espacios teatrales en entornos virtuales no disponible hasta el momento. Ello hará posible describir nuevas herramientas para el análisis textual digital aplicadas a los textos teatrales clásicos, que podrían producir importantes ideas disciplinarias y trasladar de forma efectiva las actuales investigaciones en HD al aula dentro de un futuro muy cercano.
            
            
                Valor de la contribución teórica a las humanidades digitales: Los resultados obtenidos ayudan a demostrar que actualmente los humanistas digitales y estudiosos de la época clásica, quienes se dedican a investigar sobre teatro de origen griego y latino, centran sus investigaciones principalmente en el análisis digital cuantitativo de datos, con el fin de llegar a comprender las relaciones dialógicas entre personajes centrales dentro de una misma obra o entre piezas distintas. Se hace necesario, por ende, profundizar en el sentido propedéutico del proceso de enseñanza-aprendizaje de los distintos modelos de teatro, que se están ofreciendo en las aulas actuales, cada vez más integradas en entornos virtuales; y se consideran campos abiertos a la exploración y la investigación los análisis cuantitativos y estadísticos, el tratamiento digital de textos y el análisis de la estructura de los patrones teatrales, entre otras vías de investigación. Cabe señalar además la necesidad de seguir indagando en el campo de las realidades virtuales, especialmente en las réplicas de espacios teatrales en el mundo antiguo, reconstrucciones en 3D de artefactos antiguos y patrones artísticos, considerados nuevas áreas de investigación y futuras líneas de desarrollo y prospectiva. Los avances tecnológicos, así como su directa implementación en la investigación dedicada al drama clásico, resultan enormemente fructíferos para los estudios académicos en torno a problemas de interpretación, representación escénica y crítica textual tradicionales, que podrán ser reconsiderados desde la nueva perspectiva que ofrecen los tratamientos digitales en del campo de las Humanidades, contribuyendo a acercar al gran público el teatro clásico.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    
                        Bozia, E. (2018). Reviving Classical Drama: virtual reality and experiential learning in a traditional classroom. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 12(3): 1-19.
                    
                    
                        Laan, N. M. (1995). Stylometry and Method: the Case of Euripides. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing. 10(4): 271-278.
                    
                    
                        Slaney, H. (2017). Motion Sensors: Perceiving Movement in Roman Pantomime. In Betts, E. (ed.) 
                        Senses of the Empire: Multisensory Approaches to Roman Culture. Routledge. New York and London (2017): 159-175
                    
                    
                        Vervain, C. Performing ancient drama in mask: The case of Greek new comedy. 
                        New Theatre Quarterly. 20(3), pp. 245-264.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Establishing English as the 
                lingua franca in Academia has contributed to what has become known as “linguistic injustice” (see Van Parijs, 2002; Hyland, 2016; Politzer-Ahles et al., 2016; Soler, 2020). This idea states that second-language learners are at a disadvantage when using the new language. The predominance of English and the difficulties that a poor command of the language can pose have been a relevant concern in Digital Humanities (DH) (see Mahony, 2019, p. 384; Galina, 2014, p. 314). When discussing the consequences and possible solutions to the English-speaking bias in DH, the literature focuses on the following problems: i) the lack of translations of research output (see Galina, 2013); ii) issues of connectivity, for example, the so-called “digital divide” (Galina, 2014, p. 314; Mahony, 2019, p. 385); iii) the unavailability of data sources in languages other than English to quantify DH (Galina, 2014, p. 310); iv) problems with digital standards such as Unicode and TEI (see Fiormonte, 2012, pp. 67-69; Mahony, 2019, p. 374); and v) increasing the number of sources of textual information in languages other than English (see Galina, 2014, p. 314). In this sense, multilingual DH critiques seem to be centered on the deficiencies of non-English-language resources rather than on the level of accuracy of digital analytical tools.
            
            The aim of this work is twofold. Firstly, to distinguish a phenomenon that produces a new type of linguistic injustice, which we label as “the paradox of Anglocentric multilingualism.” This paradox arises when a multilingual philosophy is pursued in constructing complex systems of analysis in a digital environment (digital platforms, ontologies). However, these systems imply advantages in the study of English over other languages. The injustice derives from a poor level of precision in the output of technology when analyzing non-English languages. Secondly, we contend that multilingual DH should address the different challenges posed by this paradox. Multilingual DH needs to deal with the deficiencies of tools’ performance as well as those of language resources, because this disadvantage makes it difficult for any cross-linguistic study to provide reliable empirical data in (dis)proving linguistic intuitions.
            To illustrate some of the potential problems derived from the paradox, this work will detail the difficulties we have faced in a cross-linguistic study on color terms (Bordonaba-Plou and Jreis-Navarro, forthcoming), when using the Arabic corpus arTenTen (Arts et al., 2014) and the Spanish corpus esTenTen (Kilgariff and Renau, 2013) in Sketch Engine. We will study the different performances of the tool in Arabic and Spanish, compared to English, to point out the weaknesses of this tool in a multilingual arena, making it possible to improve it and enriching the critical and inclusive framework of multilingual DH. Two main issues emerged in our inquiries. Firstly, the lists of collocations provided by the Sketch Word tool are of differing types and usefulness. For example, in Spanish, the tool provides lists like those in English (enTenTen20), i.e., lists based on a functional perspective. However, in Arabic, the researcher has fewer lists available, and those only reflect grammatical categories and the collocation position (left or right). This shortcoming of the tool means it does not provide a complete perspective on the linguistic behavior of the term. Secondly, the analyses conducted by the tool show different degrees of accuracy in Part of Speech (PoS) tagging. In Spanish, the PoS tagger classifies proper nouns as modifiers and verbs. For example, it invents 
                paular “to paul” (from the proper name Paula),” or 
                rodrigar “to Rodrigo” (from the proper name Rodrigo).” In Arabic, the PoS tagger does not cover cliticization in smart search. Cliticization is the most important phenomena in Arabic morphology and a big challenge in computational analysis (Habash, 2010, pp. 47-50). For example, the tagger reads 
                bāhit “pale” as if the prepositional particle proclitic 
                b+ “with/in” were attached to the non-existent inflected base word 
                āhit. These inaccuracies imply that the statistical scores –MI-score (Hunston, 2002, p. 71; Baker, 2006, p. 101), t-score (Hunston, 2002, p. 73), and Log Dice (Gablasova, Brezina and McEnery, 2017, p. 164)– cannot be used with total confidence.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arts, T., Belinkov, Y, Habash, N., Kilgarriff, A. and Suchomel, V. (2014). arTenTen: Arabic Corpus and Word Sketches. 
                        Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences, 
                        26(4): 357-371.
                    
                    
                        Baker P. (2006). 
                        Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis. Continuum.
                    
                    
                        Bordonaba-Plou, D., and Jreis-Navarro, L. M. (forthcoming). A cross-linguistic study of color terms in Arabic and Spanish. In Bordonaba-Plou, D. (ed.), 
                        Experimental Philosophy of Language: Perspectives, Methods and Prospects. Springer.
                    
                    
                        Fiormonte, D. (2012). Towards a cultural critique of the Digital Humanities. 
                        Historical Social Research, 
                        37(3): 59-76.
                    
                    
                        Gablasova, D., Brezina, V., and McEnery, T. (2017). Collocations in corpus‐based language learning research: identifying, comparing, and interpreting the evidence. 
                        Language Learning, 
                        67(S1): 155-179.
                    
                    
                        Galina Russell, I. (2013). Is there anybody out there? Building a global Digital Humanities community. 
                        Humanidades Digitales, http://humanidadesdigitales.net/blog/2013/07/19/is-there-anybody-out-there-building-a-global-digital-humanities-community/ (accessed 15 August 2021)
                    
                    
                        Galina Russell, I. (2014). Geographical and linguistic diversity in the Digital Humanities. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 
                        29(3): 307-316.
                    
                    
                        Habsh, N. Y. (2010). 
                        Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing. Morgan & Claypool.
                    
                    
                        Hunston, S. (2002). 
                        Corpora in Applied Linguistics. Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Hyland, K. (2016). Academic publishing and the myth of linguistic injustice. 
                        Journal of Second Language Writing, 
                        31: 58-69.
                    
                    
                        Kilgarriff, A., and Renau, I. (2013). esTenTen, a vast web corpus of Peninsular and American Spanish. 
                        Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
                        95: 12-19.
                    
                    
                        Mahony, S. (2018). Cultural diversity and the Digital Humanities. 
                        Fudan Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences, 
                        11: 371-388.
                    
                    
                        Van Parijs, P. (2002). Linguistic Justice. 
                        Politics, Philosophy and Economics, 
                        1(1): 59-74.
                    
                    
                        Politzer-Ahles, S., Holliday, J. J., Girolamo, T., Spychalska, M. and Berkson, K. H. (2016). Is linguistic injustice a myth? A response to Hyland (2016). 
                        Journal of Second Language Writing, 
                        34: 3-8.
                    
                    
                        Soler, J. (2020). Linguistic injustice and global English: Some notes from its role in academic publishing. 
                        Nordic Journal of English Studies, 
                        19(3): 35-46.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Sumerian is a language of utmost importance to the cultural heritage of all humankind. As the very first written language, it has a vast literature spanning thousands of years (4th to 1st millenium BC) and ranges from genres as diverse as poems and songs over mythological and historical treatises, laws and letters to contracts and administrative records.
                So far, much of this data remained underexplored and accessible to experts only. Although portals such as the Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative (CDLI) provided much of the textual data in digital form, very little of it had been translated and/or annotated, and if so, only at the level of morphological glosses (Cunningham et al., 2006; Zólyomi et al., 2008). In order to improve access to these texts for both a larger audience and machines, we developed an innovative annotation workflow (Chiarcos et al. 2018) and now provide the first syntactically annotated corpus of Sumerian, 
                    ETCSANS: The Electronic Text Corpus of Syntactically Annotated Neo-Sumerian. Our talk describes its creation, access strategies and usage scenarios. With respect to the syntactic annotation of cuneiform languages, some progress has recently been reported for Akkadian (Gordin et al. 2020, Sahala 2021), with similar challenges in orthography and sparsity, but for Sumerian, the situation is more complicated because of a number of unusual features of the language as a linguistic isolate (Bansal et al., 2021).
                
                The ETCSANS corpus is the result of the project 
                    Machine Translation and Automated Annotation of Cuneiform Languages (MTAAC, 2017-2020), and serves as a tool for the study of economy and society of the Neo-Sumerian period (2100-2000 BCE). ETCSANS complements two other corpora for Sumerian, the Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature (ETCSL, primarily Post-Sumerian), and the Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Royal Inscriptions (ETCSRI, all periods, for a limited domain), but these provide morphosyntactic annotations only. Prior to ETCSANS, no corpora have been published that also provide syntactic or semantic analyses for Sumerian. In order to facilitate the usability of ETCSANS for concrete research questions, we adopt a semantics-oriented approach to syntax, and to facilitate its usability beyond Assyriology, we followed the Universal Dependencies (UD). We discuss advantages and downsides of this approach and provide an overview and rationale for a number of notable cases where we had to deviate from UD conventions to account for philological and Assyriological requirements.
                
                Aside from its Assyriological, philological and historical relevance, we addressed (and solved) a number of typical challenges arising in DH projects, namely, the diversity and sparsity of existing data (dictionaries, morphological annotations), the limited capacities to create highly specialized annotations on a restricted budget, and the challenge to overcome technological barriers between different disciplines and infrastructures in the process. We systematically employ RDF as a middleware to integrate heterogeneous resources, automated pre-annotation, moderated crowdsourcing for quality control and the support for Linked Data as exchange and import mechanism. Machine learning also played a major role in the project, however this contribution focuses on the creation of data as a necessary prerequisite of machine learning. For this purpose, we had to resort to rule-based methods and manual refinements.
                ETCSANS is accessible in different forms. We provide developer access for the annotated data via a public GitHub repository (
                    ). The native format is a tabular format (CDLI-CoNLL), from which Linked Data and TEI exports are being generated. The TEI export is designed for local querying by means of the TEITOK corpus management system (Janssen 2018). All three formats can be accessed from the CDLI API along with the associated inscribed artifacts, their original transliterations, object metadata, bibliography, and visualizations. These data are available in their native formats as well as in RDF, and linked with each other. All ETCSANS-related content, code, data and documentation is open source and available from our GitHub repositories. This also includes graphical user interfaces for search, visualization and manual annotation/revision of ETCSANS data as part of the larger CDLI framework.
                
                With a total of 24,460 syntactically annotated texts, the ETCSANS core corpus covers about 22% of the overall Neo-Sumerian textual data. It consists of three subcorpora for which we could bootstrap syntax annotations in a semi-automated fashion, based on the domain (transaction subcorpus: 22,276 texts, 1,742,634 tokens, see Fig. 1 for an example), the possibility of annotation projection (parallel subcorpus: 1,572 texts, 46,321 tokens) or the existence of specialized morphological annotations (royal subcorpus: 612 texts, 9,133 tokens). Given the complexities of Sumerian writing and the specific nature of the Sumerian language, manual annotation focused on morphology, whereas manual syntax annotation is limited to a small evaluation corpus (11,220 tokens). The extended ETCSANS corpus contains another 47,476 texts (1,775,582 tokens), for which we provide automated annotations for morphology and named entities and a generic, rule-based annotator that exploits the explicit morphological marking of phrase structure boundaries in Sumerian morphology.
                
                    
                        
                    Fig. 1 Excerpt from a transaction text: “For 8 gan2 (~2.8 ha) [of acre] 7 gur (~2,100 l) rations and beer, first time, and for 18 gan2 (~6.5 ha) [of acre] 31.5 gur (~9,450 l), second time, for Ur-Enlilla.” (P101040)
                
                Overall, ETCSANS syntax annotation is largely derived from manual annotation or translations rather than directly manually created. Given the amount of data and the high degree of specialization required for doing the annotation, this is unavoidable, but from a methodological view, it presents a challenge that we would like to discuss with the wider DH audience, as we deal with (and delineate) different levels of trust and reliability, the possibilities (and limitations) for manual corrections and editorial decisions regarding the annotation, and, finally, the development of communication strategies to clarify potential and pitfalls of semiautomated annotations and their usage for future research in the humanities in a way that is transparent to scholars and laymen alike. At the time of writing, evaluation is still on-going. Preliminary results indicate that the different strategies we employed for bootstrapping annotations (two different approaches on rule-based annotation over manual morphology, annotation projection, ensemble combination of several such methods) differ greatly in the types of errors they produce, so that the focus of our current work is on developing methods to provide context-sensitive confidence scores for our annotations.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bansal, R., et al. (2021). How Low is Too Low? A Computational Perspective on Extremely Low-Resource Languages. In 
                        Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: Student Research Workshop, 44–59. 
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., et al. (2018). Annotating a low-resource language with LLOD technology. 
                        Information, 9:11, 290.
                    
                    Cunningham, G., et al. (2006). 
                        The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature. Oxford Text Archive Core Collection.
                    
                    Gordin, S. et al. (2020). Reading Akkadian cuneiform using natural language processing. 
                        PloS one, 
                        15:10, e0240511.
                    
                    Janssen, M. (2018). Dependency Graphs and TEITOK: Exploiting Dependency Parsing. In 
                        International Conference on Computational Processing of the Portuguese Language, Springer, Cham
                        , pp. 470-478.
                    
                    Sahala, A. (2021). 
                        Contributions to Computational Assyriology. PhD Dissertation, University of Helsinki.
                    
                    Zólyomi, G., et al. (2008). 
                        The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Royal Inscriptions. URL: 
                        , Budapest (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Extensive efforts have been made to create digital corpora for major European dramatic traditions. A recent corpus hub is DraCor (Fischer & Börner, 2019), offering programmatic access to theater collections in 11 languages.
                
                    
                        lists corpora and languages. Our first 25 TEI-encoded Alsatian plays were also accepted in DraCor.
                    
                
            
            The creation of such corpora was accompanied by computational literary research on their traditions. Focusing on German and French drama (immediately relevant for our work), one may name projects like DLINA (Fischer et al., 2017),
                
                    
                        
                    
                 QuaDramA and Q:TRACK (Reiter, 2020)
                
                    
                        
                    
                 or 
                Emotions in Drama (cf. Schmidt et al., 2021), for German; for French, studies like Schöch’s (2017), or works in the 
                Revue Historiographique du Théâtre’s special issue on Digital Humanities and theater (Galleron, 2017).
                
                    
                        Journal for Theater Historiography. Special issue: 
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Alsatian refers to Germanic varieties from Alsace (Eastern France), the main oral communication language in the area for over 14 centuries, until their decline vs. French in the last third of the 20th century (Huck et al., 2007: 11–17). Despite Alsatian’s mainly oral status, it has a rich theatrical tradition, where comedic and popular genres predominate (Gall, 1974). Unlike major European traditions, digital resources for Alsatian theater are scarce, which precludes related computational literary research. To help make such research feasible, our project
                
                     MeThAL, “Towards a macroanalysis of theater in Alsatian” (
                        )
                    
                 is building a large TEI-encoded corpus of Alsatian theater, annotated with rich metadata, and making this corpus publicly available in formats appropriate for research and for the non-specialist community, covering mostly the 1870-1940 period. Our proposal discusses the relevance of developing such materials, in terms of opportunities for (computational) literary studies (CLS) and natural language processing (NLP), besides their potential to promote linguistic diversity through the digital medium.
            
            Our corpus both complements and challenges existing knowledge of Alsatian theater. Earlier studies on the corpus period (Cerf, 1972, 1975; Huck, 1998, 2005; Hülsen, 2003) examined plots, plays’ social groups, and dialect representation in character speech, based on corpora with under 40 plays. Annotating the characters’ socio-professional groups in 109 plays (Ruiz Fabo and Werner, 2021) revealed the importance of artisans in plays set in small towns, contrary to claims in earlier studies, which presented agricultural professions as almost exclusive in such settings (Cerf, 1972: 340). The corpus also has potential for comparisons with the two hegemonic dramatic traditions that surround Alsatian theater: French and German. Hülsen (2003: 98 ff.) described the influence of German popular comedy in Alsatian theater, based on thirteen major Alsatian plays around 1900. Our corpus could be used for a larger-sample comparison, covering a longer period, with German and French plays from the same timeframe. A concrete first aspect to compare could be the 
                dramatis personae, following our work on character annotation, cited above.
            
            Digital literary collections for under-resourced languages also benefit NLP. Current NLP models like contextual embeddings (e.g. Devlin et al., 2018) require large amounts of text, yet unavailable for languages like Alsatian. However, the NLP community is interested in improving the viability of these technologies for low-resource languages, and in developing corpora in such languages (cf. Bernhard et al., 2019). Increasing the availability of Alsatian electronic text contributes to this effort and is a test-bed for new technology developments.
            Towards our goals, we selected a varied corpus mixing major and lesser-known works. We performed optical character recognition (OCR) on National Library digitizations,
                
                     Numistral portal, BNU Strasbourg:
                        
                    
                 creating 25 TEI plays (300,000 tokens). OCR was also manually corrected for 28 further plays, awaiting TEI conversion. Bibliographical metadata were transcribed for 359 plays, and the settings and 
                dramatis personae for 257 plays (2,253 characters). We also annotated characters’ social variables when possible (gender, professional group, estimated social class, age). Synopses were written for 38 plays. TEI materials are publicly available
                
                    
                        
                    
                 and accepted at the DraCor platform. Publication with a DOI on open repository Nakala was also carried out.
                
                     Nakala set 
                        contains our data
                    
                
            
            A corpus exploration interface exposes all data.
                
                    
                        
                    
                 Reiter et al. (2017) warn that a graphical user interface does not always help literary research. However, our project intends to promote public interest in Alsatian beyond research, and we believe that a web interface is a suitable means. Our interface gives access to all plays with corrected OCR output, TEI-encoded or not, searching by author, author gender, dates or publisher. It also allows filtering the corpus based on the presence of characters with different social attributes (professional group, social class, gender, see Figure 1). We believe that such navigation workflows are an attractive way for the public to engage with the corpus and with the social picture it conveys, and will assess this hypothesis with a user sample. Character co-occurrence is also relevant for research on plot and for sociolinguistic studies on character speech representation according to social variables. 
            
            Regarding limitations, male authors predominate, even if we sought variety. There are only five female authors, with 14 plays. Deeper research in non-digitized collections should counter this bias. Note also that sexism and racism are present in the corpus, and, even if the interface targets the general public, it does not at this point provide means that would help non-specialists be aware of these biases and critically question such social representations. This is important future work.
            In sum, we present a digital corpus of plays in Alsatian varieties with rich metadata, including character annotations for social variables. TEI encoding is ongoing; where not available, corrected OCR output is provided. This material helps CLS research on Alsatian theater, impossible before given lack of a corpus, and has shown potential to challenge existing knowledge on the tradition. The texts also have relevance for NLP research on low-resource languages. To promote interest in the corpus’ language varieties, a corpus exploration interface opens up these resources to the community.
            
                
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                    Character cooccurrences in cast list per professional group. 
                        Top: Plays by female authors. 
                        Bottom: Plays by male authors. Proportion of female characters with profession in cast list is 45.71% with female authors and 11.30% with male authors.
                    
                
            
            Acknowledgements
            We thank further project members, Dominique Huck and Pascale Erhart, for advice on corpus selection and other project aspects. We also thank all interns who contributed to corpus or interface development: Nathanaël Beiner, Andrew Briand, Lena Camillone, Hoda Chouaib, Audrey Deck, Barbara Hoff, Valentine Jung, Salomé Klein, Audrey Li-Thiao-Te, Kévin Michoud and Vedisha Toory.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bernhard, D., Bras, M., Erhart, P., Ligozat, A.-L. and Vergez-Couret, M. (2019). Language Technologies for Regional Languages of France: The RESTAURE Project. 
                        International Conference Language Technologies for All (LT4All): Enabling Linguistic Diversity and Multilingualism Worldwide. Paris, France 
                         (accessed 14 January 2020).
                    
                    
                        Cerf, E. (1972). Le théâtre alsacien de Strasbourg, miroir d’une société (1898-1939). 
                        Saisons d’Alsace(43).
                    
                    
                        Cerf, E. (1975). Les contes merveilleux du théâtre alsacien de Strasbourg. 
                        Revue des sciences sociales de la France de l’Est, 
                        4: 3–30.
                    
                    
                        Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. and Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. 
                        ArXiv:1810.04805 [Cs]
                         (accessed 6 December 2020).
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F. and Börner, I. (2019). Programmable Corpora: Introducing DraCor, an Infrastructure for the Research on European Drama. 
                        Digital Humanities 2019. Utrecht, p. 5.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, F., Göbel, M., Kampkaspar, D. and Kittel, C. (2017). Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis: Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts. 
                        Digital Humanities 2017. Montreal, pp. 437–41.
                    
                    
                        Gall, J.-M. (1974). 
                        Le théâtre populaire alsacien au XIXe siècle. (Recherches et Documents XIX). Strasbourg: Istra.
                    
                    
                        Galleron, I. (ed). (2017). 
                        Revue d’Historiographie Du Théâtre, Numéro 4 :  Études Théâtrales et Humanités Numériques.
                    
                    
                        Huck, D. (1998). D’r Herr Maire (1898) de Gustave Stoskopf. Entre ethnologie et littérature : les Alsaciens en auto-représentation. 
                        Recherches Germaniques, 
                        28: 163–90.
                    
                    
                        Huck, D. (2005). Le «Théâtre Alsacien de Strasbourg» et la production dramaturgique de ses fondateurs (1898-1914). 
                        Culture et Histoire Des Spectacles En Alsace et En Lorraine : De l’annexion à La Décentralisation (1871-1946). Peter Lang, pp. 198–222.
                    
                    
                        Huck, D., Bothorel-Witz, A. and Geiger-Jallet, A. (2007). L’Alsace et ses langues. Eléments de description d’une situation sociolinguistique en zone frontalière. In Abel, A., Stuflesser, M. and Voltmer, L. (eds), 
                        Aspects of Multilingualism in European Border Regions: Insights and Views from Alsace, Eastern Macedonia and Thrace, the Lublin Voivodeship and South Tyrol. Bozen/Bolzano: EURAC Research (Europäische Akademie / Accademia Europea / European Academy), pp. 13–101 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Hülsen, B. von (2003). 
                        Szenenwechsel im Elsass: Theater und Gesellschaft in Strassburg zwischen Deutschland und Frankreich 1890-1944. Leipziger Universitätsverlag.
                    
                    
                        Reiter, N. (2020). Möglichkeiten Quantitativer Dramenanalyse. 
                        Comparatio. Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Literaturwissenschaft, 
                        12(2): 39–52 doi:
                        10.1007/978-3-476-04516-4_16. 
                         (accessed 7 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Reiter, N., Kuhn, J. and Willand, M. (2017). To GUI or not to GUI?. 
                        INFORMATIK 2017. Gesellschaft für Informatik 
                         (accessed 13 November 2019).
                    
                    
                        Ruiz Fabo, P. and Werner, C. (2021). Exploration du théâtre alsacien à travers ses listes de personnages pendant la période 1870-1940. 
                        Humanistica 2021. Rennes (online): Zenodo doi:
                        10.5281/zenodo.4762733. 
                         (accessed 8 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, T., Dennerlein, K. and Wolff, C. (2021). Emotion Classification in German Plays with Transformer-based Language Models Pretrained on Historical and Contemporary Language. 
                        Proceedings of the 5th Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature. Punta Cana, Dominican Republic (online): Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 67–79 
                         (accessed 7 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C. (2017). Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        011(2).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            The Theravada Buddhist texts consists of a huge number of scriptures and commentaries. The main parts of them are handed down in one of the Middle Indo-Aryan languages called Pali or Magadhi. So far, they have occupied the most important position in the study of Buddhist literature, since they can be read more strictly than Chinese translations, Sanskrit manuscripts and so on.
            Around the turn of the millennium, the Vipassana Research Institute (India), the Dhammakaya Foundation (Thailand) and Mahidol University (Thailand) released a voluminous amount of the digitized texts of the Theravada Buddhist texts written in Pali language. Now that it is possible to read them on personal computers and perform full-text search, most of Buddhologists use the digitized texts for their research instead of printed books and concordances.
            However, I wonder if this can be called “digital shift”. We are only reading the digital texts on personal computers, without digitalizing our research at all. Our research method is still the same as before. In order to renew our philological study of the Theravada Buddhist texts and to achieve the digital shift in the true sense, I feel certain that it is essential to structuralize the digital texts. This is the reason why I started to mark up the structure of the scriptures and their commentaries in accordance with Text Encoding Initiative P5 Guideline.
            In this poster presentation, I will point out some problems which I encountered when trying to apply the Text Encoding Initiative P5 Guideline to the complicated structure of the annotation system of the Theravada Buddhist texts. To give an example concisely here,  may not be available to structuralize the annotation system. This is because the commentaries of the Theravada Buddhist texts sometimes cite sentences from other sources or include popular verses. In these cases, it is necessary to use  indicating a quotation and  and  indicating a verse and a group of verses. However,  cannot include ,  and  according to the Text Encoding Initiative P5 Guideline. In the first place, “gloss” (Gk. Glossa, Lat. Glossa) is a simple note or comment added to a piece of writing to explain a difficult word or phrase in the line spacing and margins, based on the definition of 
                A Dictionary of the English Bible and Its Origins. While “Gloss” is dependent on the main text, the commentaries of the Theravada Buddhist texts are independent of the main texts, i.e. the scriptures. In order to overcome these difficulties and structuralize the annotation system accurately, I decided to adopt  with @type as an alternative to . As in the above example, I will show the other difficulties of encoding and how to solve them in accordance with Text Encoding Initiative P5 Guideline in this presentation.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Gilmore, Alec. (2000). 
                        A Dictionary of the English Bible and Its Origins. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press.
                    
                    TEI Consortium. (2021). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange 4.3.0, https://tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/Guidelines.pdf (accessed 31 March 2022).
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction: The Purpose of Research
                We have been analyzing accounting books in order to understand the economic history of the early Spanish empire. This presentation focuses on the double-entry accounting books of the Salamanca company in Burgos, a city in northern Spain, in the mid-sixteenth century. This paper reports our materials, analytical framework, progress, and prospect. In this research, data mining from the accounting book, structured with the Text Encoding Initiative /DEPCHA, has enabled historical insights into the unique terminology of accounting, the balance of payments, and the tendency of abbreviation.
            
            
                Materials
                Our materials are found among the accounting books in the Archive of Burgos Provincial Congress (Table 1). We picked out as an example a pair of accounting books based on the double-entry method (classified as CM32 and CM108). In this method, two types of books are required. One is the journal (diario in Spanish), in which all transactions are recorded chronologically. The other is the ledger (libro mayor), where each transaction in the journal must be transcribed twice, one on the left page as a debit transaction, and the other as a credit on the right (cf. Figure 1). This double transcription, a quintessential characteristic of the method, must be encoded with TEI. 
                Each transcription in the ledger has at least two sections: the detail of the transaction on the left; the value of the transaction on the right. On average, the left section contains information such as the name of the debtor, date and place of transaction, merchandise and its price and quantity, names of other parties involved, terms of the transaction, and page number of the corresponding transcription. As of March 2022, we have marked up 12 folios of the ledger, which contains 197 entries.
                
                    
                
                Table 1: List of Accounting Books kept in ADPB
                
                    
                
                Figure 1: Credit and debit entries in the ledger
            
            
                Analytical Framework
                For the markup of accounting records, XBRL might be a possible candidate framework (Anderson et al. 2016). However, this modern framework seems to be not suitable enough to capture all the elements of the historical records, not present in the contemporary ones. Instead, we have chosen DEPCHA, an extended TEI schema. DEPCHA has developed a domain ontology, based on the concept of ‘Transactiongraphy’ (Tomasek and Bauman, 2013), for extracting machine-readable data in RDF format from transactional information in accounting records in the TEI or CSV format. A member of the DEPCHA, states that their future challenge is to normalize the vocabulary of words such as "currency" and "item" in accounting records that emerge from various case studies and to build an interoperable data model for open data (Pollin, 2019), but at present, there are not so many case studies. Furthermore, concrete examples of double-entry books, which are considered as the basis of accounting practice in the modern world, have not sufficiently been marked up using the DEPCHA scheme. Our research will contribute to filling this gap and giving practical feedback to DEPCHA. We also think that more normalized TEI/DEPCHA can make the analysis of historical financial data more efficient, when the scale of data becomes bigger.
            
            
                Progress and prospect
                Let us explain our markup policy. As mentioned earlier in the materials section, the correspondence between transactions is displayed across each of the left and right pages, so the facing page needs to be structured as a coherent space when marking up. (cf. Markup 1). While following DEPCHA's recommended policy of using  tags to structure the transaction information in a tabular form, we ensure that the @ana attribute value is entered in a human-readable form—though it is not completely machine-processable at the moment—, so that the correspondence between the left and right pages is clearly indicated. In addition, the reference relationships between the diary and ledger are also structured (cf. Markup 1).
                
                    
                
                Markup 1: Tagging an Entry in the Ledger
                We will demonstrate our achievements using the above-mentioned mark-up files to conduct analyses, as follows: (1) identification of abbreviated person names, (2) accounting terms and abbreviations, and (3) checking the balance of payments; all of them is available to browse at our page .
                We prospect to mark up more accounting books kept in the same archive, and launch trend and network analyses using metadata, e.g. time, name of person/company, place, commodity, and price. And we will also investigate more proper way of displaying our analysis. We would like to share our framework with the researchers pursuing similar themes to improve the analytical frameworks and tools for the study of economic history.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Anderson, C., Eide, O., Orlowska, A., Pindl, K., Tomasek, K. and Vogeler, G. (2016). Modeling semantically Enhanced Digital Edition of Accounts (MEDEA) for Discovery and Comparison on the Semantic Web. Humanities Commons. 
                        https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:24347/ (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        GAMS (2017). DEPCHA - Digital Edition Publishing Cooperative for Historical Accounts 
                        DEPCHA - Digital Edition Publishing Cooperative for Historical Accounts
                        http://gams.uni-graz.at/archive/objects/context:depcha/methods/sdef:Context/get?mode=howto (accessed 1 June 2019).
                    
                    
                        Pollin, C. (2019). Digital Edition Publishing Cooperative for Historical Accounts and the Bookkeeping Ontology. 
                        Proceedings of the Doctoral Symposium on Research on Online Databases in History, 
                        http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2532/paper1.pdf (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Tomasek, K. and Bauman, S. (2013). Encoding Financial Records for Historical Research. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative (Issue 6), 
                        http://journals.openedition.org/jtei/895 (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            This presentation addresses considerations for TEI-based encoding of Classical Chinese texts that are glossed in Japanese from the 9th to 12th centuries (
                kunten materials; called Sino-Japanese glossed materials here). This tradition extends to nowadays, and some modern Japanese glosses have been digitally encoded (See SAT Daizōkyō Text Database Committee, 2020, for a limited encoding). Taking examples from a well-studied 9th-century glossed text, this presentation identifies barriers to encoding using an established coding framework, the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), and discusses possible solutions. Despite their importance to Japanese philology, these materials have recently not received due attention. Identifying difficulties in encoding and establishing an encoding model for these unfamiliar materials will remove an important barrier to further study.
            
            These materials were produced by the process of vernacular reading. Beginning in the 8th century, a body of Classical Chinese texts was read in the Japanese language. The challenges of reading these Classical Chinese texts in Japanese lie in the typological differences between the source and target languages, which glosses seek to resolve. One is a difference in the basic word order; while Classical Chinese is a subject–verb–object (SVO) language, Japanese is an SOV language. Another is in morphology, as Japanese expresses syntactic relations with case particles and other periphrases, but Chinese largely depends on word order.
            Japanese glosses are devices to record such vernacular readings on the surface of the original texts. Whereas phonogram is one of the major devices in glossing, in order not to scatter the text surface, schemata of marks borrowed from Chinese and Korean practices ("poyin" and tone glosses) were also employed. As each Chinese character generally represents a single word in the Chinese language, glosses are added to each character. The schemata set out rules for reading marks in a particular position over the surface of a character. However, the order for reading the marks is never given, even though as many as five marks may be added. Moreover, even successfully deciphering the glosses does not always produce a complete sentence, and codebreakers are forced to fill the gap. It should also be mentioned that a single manuscript may record several reading attempts that span centuries.
            When encoding the glosses, it is imperative to group and relate every gloss for the same character to the others, as each gloss constitutes an intended reading. The current TEI framework offers encoding methods for most cases but has some problems due to this requirement. Samples of TEI encoding will be shown to demonstrate effectiveness of the encoding models, taking example from a 9th-century glossed text, known as the Saidaiji scroll of the 
                Suvarṇa-prabhāsa sutra (or 
                Sutra of the golden light), which is copied in 762 and glossed in the year around 830 (in white pigment) as well as the year 1097 (in vermilion).
            
            The most problematic case is the treatment of marks. Currently, TEI does not have an element for marks representing a text rather than a textual signal (). In an earlier study of the encoding of glossed materials in a specially crafted XML schema (Takada, 2010), a decoded reading of the mark was encoded. This is a possible solution because interpreting the position of a mark is to interpret what the mark represents. However, it is desirable to introduce a dedicated element for marks that the encoder wishes to leave uninterpreted, whether through customization or the expansion of the TEI framework itself. Another attempt is Yanagihara et al. (2022), where the 830 glosses of the scroll in question is decoded and encoded, with the intention of incorporating it into a diachronic corpus of the Japanese language. This nature let them encode this material as if it were written in Japanese: i.e., reordering the original text into the Japanese word order. Too, there should also be a way to preserve the original context.
            As discussed earlier, preserving the original glosses means encoding the contested texts. We discuss the possible encoding methods, such as 1) , 2) expanding abbreviation, and 3) gaiji modules. Other incompatibilities between the TEI framework and the needs of encoding glossed materials are also discussed.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        SAT Daizōkyō Text Database Committee. (2020). Shoomangyoo gisho. https://21dzk.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SAT/sat_tei.html (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Takada, T. (2010). Description for constructing the transcribed text of glossed material using XML. 
                        IPSJ SIG Technical Report, 
                        2010-CH-85(5): 1–8.
                    
                    
                        Yanagihara, E., Kondo, A., Takada, T. and Tsukimoto, M. (2022). Kunten shiryoo kundoku bun koopasu sakusei no igi, shuhoo, soshite kadai. Tsuuji koopasu shinpojyuumu 2022, Tachikawa: NINJAL, March 2022.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                The Historiographical Institute in the University of Tokyo has provided a digital archive called “SHIPS” with about 40 different databases (a total of 5.6 million data) and about 20 million images of historical materials related to Japan from the 8th to the 19th century. Based on these accumulated data, we aim to establish a system that supports historical data analysis and visualization by applying information technology to realize the advancement and efficiency of the historical research process and the multifaceted dissemination of research results, including educational use. For this purpose, we build a knowledge base about people, places, and historical facts, and create an application that utilizes this knowledge base. This is an effort to elucidate the effects of data-driven methods on the research process of history. This study targets 2 historical painting materials; Wako Zukan and Shoho Ryukyu Kuniezu, owned by the Historiographical Institute.
                The construction of a data-driven infrastructure for historical information research is a theme actively pursued both in Japan and abroad. In Europe, the Time Machine Project [3] is underway, and in Japan, for example, ROIS/Collaborative Open Data Center for the Humanities is conducting historical big data research [1]. We will also carry out research using international standards such as TEI, IIIF, and RDF to build a highly interoperable research infrastructure that can be linked to these research results. It will enable the utilization of research resources across institutions and countries.
            
            
                Case 1: Wako Zukan
                The Wako Zukan is a historical document depicting the appearance of Japanese pirates in the 16th century. This is a picture scroll over five meters long and depicts the story of the Ming dynasty's defeat of the Japanese pirates who attacked from across the sea, but since there are no characters in the picture scroll to determine the character of the scroll, reading it has been a major challenge. 
                We have developed a digital storytelling feature that utilizes IIIF annotations to solve this problem. The annotations are displayed along with the screen transitions of the scroll, and the image portions are magnified. The IIIF's Choice function also provides a comparison screen with infrared photographs. These functions enable us to express the contents of the picture scroll interactively.
                
                    
                
                Fig. 1 Digital storytelling using IIIF annotations and infrared photographs.
                We have also developed a text viewer using IIIF and TEI. It displays several types of text on the left, images in the center, and maps and lists of people and places on the right. These data are structured by TEI and displayed with each other. This supplementary information supports the reading of the text.
                
                    
                
                Fig. 2 Text viewer that displays several types of text, images, and maps in conjunction.
                These features have enabled us to incorporate the knowledge that historians have been deciphering.
            
            
                Case 2: Shoho Ryukyu Kuniezu
                The Shoho Ryukyu Kuniezu are large-scale maps with a maximum length of over 7 meters and were produced nationwide in 1644 under the orders of the Edo Shogunate. It is the oldest large-scale pictorial map of the Ryukyu Islands and has attracted much attention because of its rich topographical and textual information, but the problem was that it was difficult to handle due to its size.
                We developed a system that provides functions including viewing high-resolution images and text searches of written information to solve this problem. Annotations were assigned to each place name, giving information on classification and latitude/longitude.
                
                    
                
                Fig. 3 Annotations and searches for place names written in kuzushiji.
                It also provides a function to superimpose the sketch map with a modern map based on the coordinate information given to the annotations (Fig. 4 Left). In addition, a comparison of kuniezu from different periods released by the National Archives of Japan revealed differences in the precision of topographical rendering (Fig. 4 Right).
                
                    
                
                Fig. 4 Comparison of images with modern maps and materials from other institutions.
                Structuring the data with annotations enables us to solve the problem of reading kuzushiji, which is a high hurdle for many users. In addition, metadata for place names enables the data to be overlaid on modern maps, making it possible to expand the use of the data to include research other than historical studies.
            
            
                Conclusion
                We describe the construction of a knowledge base for building a data-driven infrastructure for historical information research. We have published these applications [2][4] in December 2021. These applications' actual and potential use will be reported at the conference.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Asanobu KITAMOTO and Mika ICHINO and Chikahiko SUZUKI and Tarin CLANUWAT.
                         (2018). 
                        Historical Big Data: Reconstructing the Past through the Integrated Analysis of Historical Data. Eighth Conference of Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH2018),
                        pp.67-69.
                    
                    
                        Shoho Ryukyu Kuniezu Digital Archive.
                        https://www.hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp/collection/degitalgallary/ryukyu/en/ (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Time Machine Europe.
                        https://www.timemachine.eu/ (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Wakozukan Digital Archive.
                        https://www.hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp/collection/degitalgallary/wakozukan/en/ (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
                    Introduction
                
                Social network analysis (Abraham et al., 2009) plays an important role in the computational analysis and quantification of dramas (Moretti, 2011; Trilcke et al., 2015; Fischer et al., 2017).
                Usually, these networks are based on the co-presence of stage characters. In such a network, each node represents a character and edges between nodes indicate if two characters co-occurred on stage, i.e. if they appeared in the same scene.
                For other types of literary texts such as novels, there have been several works on what type of information the edges could be based on, such as adjacent quoted speech (Elson et al., 2010), topic frequencies (Celikyilmaz et al., 2010), social events (Agarwal et al., 2012) or similarities of word embeddings (Wohlgenannt et al., 2016). However, for dramatic texts, the majority of research on social networks only uses the co-occurrence of characters as a basis for edges.
                In this paper, we propose to not only model when characters interact on stage, but also when a character is mentioned by another character while this character is not present. This follows the approach by Agarwal et al. (2012) and Agarwal et al. (2010) who model different types of social events, including characters mentioning and thinking about one another.
                As Agarwal et al. (2012) already point out, many of the social events described in Agarwal et al. (2010) do not normally occur in historical literary works. For dramatic texts, there are further restrictions, e.g. thinking about another character will not occur in dramatic texts, but is a frequent occurrence for the novel 
                    Alice in Wonderland, used by Agarwal et al. (2012).
                
                We therefore focus on the social event of characters mentioning each other, while the mentioned character is not present on stage.
                    
                        Called “Cognition Event” in Agarwal et al. (2010).
                     In order to access this information, we make use of a corpus of annotated co-references and speaker tags.
                
            
            
                
                    Application of Co-reference Networks
                
                The following networks are constructed on data from 31 plays annotated for co-reference (Pagel & Reiter, 2020).
                    
                        The data used in this paper is available at 
                            .
                        
                     These annotations build upon the TEI-annotations of the DraCor initiative (Fischer et al., 2019), which provides the co-presence information.
                    
                        TEI-XML available from 
                            
                        
                    
                
                Figure 1 shows the application of a co-reference network on Gotthold Ephraim Lessing’s
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 1: Network of
                    Miß Sara Sampson with co-reference information. Node size is scaled according to weighted degree.
                
                play 
                    Miß Sara Sampson. Each node represents a character in the play and each edge represents a mention made by one character about another character. The direction of the
                
                mention is indicated by arrows, while the arrow points towards the character being mentioned. The weights on each edge indicate how often the character in question is mentioned by another character. Nodes are scaled in size according to their weighted degree, which is the sum of all incoming and outgoing weights of a node (Barrat et al., 2004). It can be observed that the three main characters of the play 
                    Mellefont, 
                    Sara and 
                    Marwood receive a higher weighted degree compared to the other characters, showing that the network models character importance to a certain degree, just like a co-presence network would.
                
            
            
                
                    Comparison to Co-presence Networks
                
                Comparing the network in Figure 1 to the co-presence network of the same play in Figure 2 reveals commonalities and differences between the two approaches. Again, the three main characters are exponated compared to other side characters, however, the overall weighted degrees are much smaller. It is noticeable that 
                    Sir William, Sara’s father, holds much less importance in the co-presence network, while he has much more weight compared to other characters in the co-reference network in Figure 1. Furthermore, 
                    Marwood has the same degree value as 
                    Betty, Sara’s maidservant, while in the co-reference network, it becomes clear that Marwood holds a more important role in the social configuration of the play compared to Betty.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 2: Network of 
                    Miß Sara Sampson with co-presence information. Node size according to weighted degree.
                
                A reader of the play will be able to make several observations: Sir William is often not present on stage, but plays an important role in the plot and in the decision making of Sara and Mellefont. Furthermore, Marwood plays a more important role in the overall plot of the play than Betty does. However, quantitatively, this only really becomes apparent when comparing and juxtaposing the two different networks.
                We can also see this complementary nature when abstracting away from looking at the pure networks and comparing the development of weighted degree during the course of the play.
                Figure 3 shows the current weighted degree for the three characters 
                    Sara, 
                    Mellefont and 
                    Marwood when constructed from information available for each scene of the play. For example, for Scene 1, a co-presence network with all co-presences of the character in this scene is constructed and the weighted degree is computed based on this network. The same is done for all further scenes and separately for all coreferent mentions of a character. We can clearly see that especially Marwood and Sara are frequently mentioned in scenes from which they are physically absent.
                    
                        This type of observation can also be explored in a comparison of active and passive stage presence, see for example Willand et al. (2020).
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 3: Development of weighted degree per scene for co-presence and co-reference in 
                    Miß Sara Sampson.
                
                Lastly, when looking at a comparison of all annotated 31 plays, seen in Table 1, the overall averaged values for different centrality measures, namely degree, betweenness, closeness and eigenvector centrality (cf. Newman, 2010, chap. 7), are higher for co-reference networks than for co-presence networks, except for closeness
                    
                        The fact that closeness is lower for co-reference networks when compared to co-presence networks is to be expected, since networks with a fewer number of edges have a higher chance to receive higher closeness values per node. However, as the difference is rather small, it is difficult to make generalisations about the differences between the two network types with regards to closeness and based on the data.
                    . At the same time, the standard deviations for the measures are comparable. This shows that while capturing the same phenomenon, which is the importance of characters in the social constellations of the plays, individual characters receive higher importance depending on co-presence or co-reference, and as such, the complementary information that both approaches provide can also be seen on a larger scale.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Centrality Measure
                        Mean
                        Standard Deviation
                    
                    
                        Co-presence
                        Degree
                        0.48
                        0.28
                    
                    
                        Betweenness
                        0.04
                        0.08
                    
                    
                        Closeness
                        0.44
                        0.18
                    
                    
                        Eigenvector
                        0.41
                        0.31
                    
                    
                        Co-reference
                        Degree
                        0.55
                        0.30
                    
                    
                        Betweenness
                        0.05
                        0.09
                    
                    
                        Closeness
                        0.43
                        0.18
                    
                    
                        Eigenvector
                        0.47
                        0.33
                    
                
                Tab. 1: Mean values for different centrality measures in either the co-presence or co-reference networks and standard deviation.
            
            
                
                    Conclusion
                
                We have presented the conception and application of social networks for German theatre plays. The approach can easily be applied for dramas of other languages with annotated co-presence and co-reference information. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the currently widely used co-presence networks can be complemented by the use of co-presence networks and it appears to be beneficial to use both types of information when conducting network analysis on larger collections of texts, in order to access different layers of character importance. This was shown both on the level of single plays as well as on the level of a small corpus. One way to quantitatively capture the different perspectives the two types of networks contribute has been shown by using averaged centrality measures. There are also potential shortcomings of the approach, e.g. a comparison of the two networks would not capture characters which are mentioned but never appear on stage. Furthermore, additional approaches of comparing the network types may be developed, for instance comparing the networks more directly by utilising distance measures.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Abraham, A., Hassanien, A.-E., & Snášel, V. (2009). 
                        Computational Social Network Analysis: Trends, Tools and Research Advances. Springer Science & Business Media.
                    
                    Agarwal, A., Corvalan, A., Jensen, J., & Rambow, O. (2012). Social Network Analysis of Alice in Wonderland. 
                        Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, 88–96. https://aclanthology.org/W12-2513
                    
                    Agarwal, A., Rambow, O., & Passonneau, R. J. (2010). Annotation Scheme for Social Network Extraction from Text. 
                        Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, 20–28. https://aclanthology.org/W10-1803
                    
                    Barrat, A., Barthélemy, M., Pastor-Satorras, R., & Vespignani, A. (2004). The architecture of complex weighted networks. 
                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
                        101(11), 3747–3752. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0400087101
                    
                    Celikyilmaz, A., Hakkani-Tur, D., He, H., Kondrak, G., & Barbosa, D. (2010). The Actor-Topic Model for Extracting Social Networks in Literary Narrative. 
                        Proceedings of the NIPS 2010 Workshop – Machine Learning for Social Computing. https://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~denilson/files/publications/nips2010.pdf
                    
                    Elson, D., Dames, N., & Mckeown, K. (2010). Extracting Social Networks from Literary Fiction. 
                        Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 138–147. https://aclanthology.org/P10-1015
                    
                    Fischer, F., Börner, I., Göbel, M., Hechtl, A., Kittel, C., Milling, C., & Trilcke, P. (2019). Programmable Corpora: Introducing DraCor, an Infrastructure for the Research on European Drama. 
                        Proceedings of DH2019: “Complexities.” https://zenodo.org/record/4284002
                    
                    Fischer, F., Göbel, M., Kampkaspar, D., Kittel, C., & Trilcke, P. (2017). Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis. Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts. 
                        Book of Abstracts of the DH2017 Conference.
                    
                    Moretti, F. (2011). Network Theory, Plot Analysis. 
                        Pamphlets of the Stanford Literary Lab, 
                        2, 2–11.
                    
                    Newman, M. (2010). 
                        Networks: An introduction. Oxford University Press.
                    
                    Pagel, J., & Reiter, N. (2020). GerDraCor-Coref: A Coreference Corpus for Dramatic Texts in German. 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), 55–64. http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2020/pdf/2020.lrec-1.7.pdf
                    
                    Trilcke, P., Fischer, F., & Kampkaspar, D. (2015). Digital network analysis of dramatic texts. 
                        DH2015 Conference Abstracts.
                    
                    Willand, M., Krautter, B., Pagel, J., & Reiter, N. (2020). Passive Präsenz tragischer Hauptfiguren im Drama. In C. Schöch (Ed.), 
                        DHd 2020 Spielräume: Digital Humanities zwischen Modellierung und Interpretation. Konferenzabstracts (pp. 177–181). https://zenodo.org/record/3666690
                    
                    Wohlgenannt, G., Chernyak, E., & Ilvovsky, D. (2016). Extracting Social Networks from Literary Text with Word Embedding Tools. 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Language 
                        Technology Resources and Tools for Digital Humanities (LT4DH), 18–25. 
                        
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Our knowledge of 17th century Italian manuscript culture is very limited, given the complexity of the surviving documents, with most textbooks and contributions ending their investigation towards the end of the 16th century. However, thanks to the employment of digital tools it is now possible to reconstruct the history of culture and manuscript circulation of this century. 
            This proposal aims at showing the current progress of my doctoral research, based on the reconstruction of the seventeenth century Florentine manuscript culture. During my research I have collected and implemented 4.814 bibliographic records of Italian manuscripts that are preserved in the most important Florentine libraries (BNCF, Laurenziana, Riccardiana, Moreniana and Marucelliana). These data, of both a codicological and textual nature, have been used for statistical and quantitative analysis with the aim of reconstructing the Florentine manuscript culture of the 17th century, thanks to the new methods of distant reading. 
            The project started by cataloguing more than four thousand 17th century manuscripts that were kept in several libraries in Florence [fig. 1]. 
            
                
            
            Fig. 1 A sample of the manuscript corpus in each library
            Following the idea that “a large number of manuscripts cannot be studied in the same way as a single one” (
                Derolez, 2006), the initial corpus of manuscripts was parceled out into an Excel set of records and then was transformed into a database (the so-called 
                MIV17), using the XML-TEI schema. The choice of using the XML-TEI standard was made to simplify the future sharing of data with other similar digital projects and archives, such as MOL (
                Manus OnLine), while ensuring the durability of the data. The TEI model for MS Description was then modified and the dataset was implemented using the EAC-CFP standard to create and connect Authority and Corporate Bodies files, containing any information about manuscript responsibility and Florentines cultural environment. 
            
            This large corpus of bibliographic and codicological information was used as the starting environment for statistical and quantitative analysis. By exploring the possibilities given by the distant reading methods it was possible to match and picture the recurrence of common characteristics, like the relation between the support dimension and the literary genres, the typologies of texts subjected to the handwritten circulation, the mix between printed and handwritten parts in the same 
                codex, the presence of dedications and their relation with the format or the type of book. 
            
            On the other hand, a more socio-cultural focused approach led me to define two possibilities of circulation: the so-called horizontal one (for copies and transmissions between academics, literary congregations, acquaintances), and the vertical one, which intends the manuscript as an object of luxury, collection or a gift. 
            
                
            
            
                Fig. 2 Range of manuscript (blue) and print (grey) circulation
            
            These preliminary studies have also led to highlight certain points of interest, such as the methods of handwritten transmission in a specific cultural environment, like Literary Academies, or the existence of social networks of readers, and they were useful to underline few aspects of the complex relation between the printed book and the manuscripts [see fig. 2]. 
            Although these studies are still in the experimental phase, sharing the collected data can bring new information and stimulate new approaches to the study of the manuscript culture in the 17th-century Italy. Divulgation is, in fact, another central point of this project; an open access interface will be published to give researchers the possibility to use the collected data, combining targeted searches and statistical matches, following the idea of micro and macro analysis. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Burlinson, Christopher, «Manuscript and Print, 1500-1700», Oxford Handbooks, Online (2016): DOI:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935338.013.86. 
                    Derolez, Albert, «The Codicology of Italian Renaissance Manuscripts: Twenty Years After». pp. 233-240, Manuscripta 50.2 (2006). 
                    Jocker, Matthew, L. «Macroanalysis: Digital Methods & Leteraty History». University of Illinois Press, (2013). 
                    McKitterick, David. «The invention of Rare Books: Private Interest and Public Memory, 1600-1840». Cambridge University Press (2020). 
                    McKitterick, David. «Print, Manuscript and the search of order, 1430-1830». Cambridge University Press (2006). 
                    Moretti, Franco. «Distant reading». Verso books (2013). 
                    Richardson, Brian, «Manuscript Culture in Renaissance Italy» Cambridge University Press, (2009). 
                    Stephan, Jänicke, Greta, Franzini, Muhammad Faisal, Cheema e Gerik Scheuermann «On Close and Distant Reading in Digital Humanities: A Survey and Future Challenges». Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2015), R. Borgo, F. Ganovelli, and I. Viola (Editors) (2001): 
                        https:/
                        /www.informatik.uni
                        -leipzig.de/~stjaenicke/Survey.pdf 
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            We introduce the Postil Time Machine, a novel research project dedicated to the study of knowledge transfer in 16th century Europe, with a particular focus on the situation in Lithuania. The project is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG, 2021-2024) as a collaboration between Baltic studies and computational linguistics and pursues historical-philological as well as technological research questions.
            In terms of philology, the project will provide the digital edition and linguistic annotation of the Old Lithuanian Lutheran postils and their Latin, German, and (in the case of the Bible passages) Greek and Hebrew sources, the detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis of the intertextual relations among the Lithuanian texts and of the relations between them and their respective foreign-language sources. The term ‘postils’ originally referred to Bible commentaries (Latin post illa verba textus “after these words from the scripture”), but later came to mean pericope sermons, and during the time covered by our project referred to an annual cycles of homilies. The study of postils and their transnational, theological and cross-lingual ties with political and theological movements (and the literature of said movements) at the time can provide a window into the formative period of Protestant faith. Furthermore, the postils covered here are among the oldest textual witnesses for the Baltic languages, and thus are of particular importance for the study of Lithuanian in the context of Indo-European studies and comparative linguistics (Gelumbeckaite, 2018).
            In terms of technology, project goals include the development of a language technology stack for Old Lithuanian, the automated, cross-lingual detection of intertextual relations and citations, and the digital edition of the texts and their relations. While the first two aspects are innovative applications of existing technologies to a novel (and due to the sparsity and heterogeneity of available data, challenging) domain, the digital edition has somewhat larger implications for Digital Humanities as a whole: In the project we bring together four distinct types of data for different applications:
            
                manual annotation/IGT: Manual linguistic annotation is performed using the Field Linguist’s Toolbox, standard software for the annotation of interlinear glossed text, which produces an idiosyncratic text format.
                automated annotation/CoNLL: The automated annotation is performed using state-of-the-art NLP software that produces CoNLL-TSV, a tabular data format. For training NLP tools, we convert Toolbox data to CoNLL.
                intertextual relations/Linked Data: Intertextual relations are manually annotated in Toolbox and automatically detected as part of the NLP workflow, but subsequently stored as a knowledge graph separate from the text and published as Linked Data. This facilitates interoperability with other initiatives working on intertextual relations and theological discourse.
                digital edition/TEI: The digital edition of text and annotations uses TEI and an XML stack.
            
            While these solutions and the technologies behind are all well established, their combination has proven to be challenging on different levels, and this is where a major contribution of the project lies. These challenges include the limited interoperability between IGT and CoNLL formats, a lack of agreement about how to represent IGTs in TEI, and the conjunct usage of TEI and LOD technologies. Focusing on the latter aspect, we have been advocating the use of RDFa for this purpose (Tittel et al., 2018), as this is (at the moment) the only W3C-compliant way to implement a TEI-LOD bridge in inline XML (Chiarcos and Ionov, 2018). After more than a decade of discussion, this suggestion has eventually led to a novel TEI customization for TEI+RDFa (see 
                ). Our project represents the first application of this novel customization to a large-scale edition project and aims to demonstrate its scalability, robustness and, as a specific benefit, the application of off-the-shelf RDF technology to digital editions (as well as human-readable representations generated from it) created in this way.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Chiarcos, Ch., and Ionov, M. (2018), Linking the TEI: Approaches, Limitations, Use Cases. Paper presented at DH2019, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
                    Gelumbeckaitė, J. (2018). Predigtkultur in Litauen: Corpus der altlitauischen Postillen. In Reformatio Baltica (pp. 573-586). De Gruyter.
                    Tittel, S., Bermúdez-Sabel, H., & Chiarcos, C. (2018). Using RDFa to link text and dictionary data for Medieval French. Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan.
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                
                    How may we model gender to account for its diversity while remaining simple enough to implement and query?
                
                We address why gender diversity needs to be represented in databases, especially when confronted with historical sources. Analysing examples of gender modelling in established metadata schemata and descriptive data models, we propose a model that strikes a balance between an atomic and flexible ontology that returns valid results even for naïve data queries. We introduce the use of 
                    gender qualifiers, which allow nuanced statements on how the gender information was formulated. Use of the proposed modelling strategies are demonstrated following the Wikibase data model.Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy in the context of the Cluster of Excellence Temporal Communities: Doing Literature in a Global Perspective – EXC 2020 – Project ID 390608380.
                
            
            
                
                    Archiving the colonial concept of the gender binary
                
                
                    Historical research shows the gender binary to be a modern and colonial organising principle. Scholars have traced transgender identities throughout European history (Betancourt, 2020; Feinberg, 1996; Mauriello, 2019; Moyer, 2015) and examined how colonialism has affected Indigenous gender systems. Various communities in North America, Asia and Africa did not adhere to a gender binary before the imposition of colonial knowledge regimes (Amadiume, 2015; Hinchy, 2020; Neil & Garcia, 2009). Many Indigenous societies accepted genders beyond male 
                    and female (Cleves, 2014; Herdt, 1994; Mirandé, 2016; Roscoe, 1998; Slater & Yarbrough, 2011). Archives carry the imprint of colonial and heteronormative gender regimes (Arondekar, 2009; Ćosić et al., 2014). A critical modelling practice should therefore reflect the constructed nature of gender in the archival record and its limited temporal and geographical scope (see also Flanders & Jannidis, 2015, pp. 14–15). 
                
            
            
                Status quo: Representation of gender in established standards
                
                    Established metadata schemes do not adequately model the diversity of gender. Most standards use binary models, which only allow for the expressions 
                    male and 
                    female. The German National Library’s Integrated Authority File, for example, includes the concepts 
                    male, 
                    female and 
                    not known (Deutsche Nationalbibliothek, 2019a, 2019b). In this way, it is similar to the system standardised by ISO 5218 (International Organization for Standardization, 2004). This vocabulary is inadequate even assuming it only catalogues purported biological sex, which are more diverse than this, e. g. intersexuality. Moreover, post-structural feminists argue that a distinction between sex and gender cannot be maintained (Butler, 2006).
                
                Some binary models include an 
                    ‘other’ category, such as the specification for vCard (Perreault, 2011). TEI guidelines include vCard and ISO 5218 vocabularies as examples to use for values of the element  (Text Encoding Initiative Consortium, 2021). However, being identified with a category of 
                    other can be a stigmatising experience as well as one of othering (Kronk et al., 2021; Puckett et al., 2020). Othering also occurs in Wikidata’s model, where a cis person’s gender is recorded as 
                    female, while a trans person’s gender is 
                    transgender female, thus drawing a distinction in gender between cis and trans individuals.
                
            
            
                
                    Introducing gender qualifiers
                
                
                    By distinguishing gender (with expressions such as 
                    female, 
                    male, 
                    non-binary, and more) from 
                    gender modality, a concept proposed by Ashley (pre-published) as an umbrella term that includes but is not limited to transgender and cisgender modalities, we make it possible for more precise information on a person’s gender. Nonetheless, we avoid using the term gender 
                    identity, because historical sources seldom include gender self-identification, but instead are based on presumed or ascribed gender. In order to create a reliable data basis, we believe it indispensable to make explicit how the gender-specific information was formulated. We therefore propose extending gender information with qualifying statements. The terminology assembled in the GSSO ontology (Kronk & Dexheimer, 2020), which includes 
                    assumed,assumed gender: ‘The assumption of a person’s gender based on any predefined characteristics and biases.’
                    experienced
               experienced gender: ‘The gender with which a person identifies.’ (we propose using the term 
                    self-identified instead), 
                    lived,lived gender: ‘The gender in which an individual lives their everyday life. This is usually a combination of performance of expected gender roles and gender expression, and may not represent a person’s actual gender.’ and 
                    recorded
               recorded gender: ‘Gender as recorded by any of various institutions, organisations, writings, etc.’ gender, appears especially suitable to this task. However, while the GSSO lists non-Western genders such as hijra, muxe and X-gender as ‘culturally specific’ non-binary gender identities (Kronk & Dexheimer, 2020), we propose to instead place all gender instances on one level, countering the Eurocentrism in subsuming all genders under the concepts of non-binary and transgender (Kravitz, 2021).
                
                
                    Examples
                    
                        The qualifier value 
                        self-identified gender should only be used if there is evidence of the gender identity given by the respective persons themselves. This is more often the case with contemporary, non-historical individuals (Figure 1). But historical exceptions exist: 18th-century preacher Public Universal Friend (Figure 2), for instance, who publicly identified as being reborn genderless and requested to be referred to without pronouns from 1776 on (Moyer, 2015, pp. 12–13).
                    
                    Where there is no personal record available, the 
                        self-identified gender cannot be determined. Diné weaver and healer Hastiin Tł’a (1867–1937), for instance, was a nádleehi, a Diné Two-Spirit person. According to Naruszewicz (2016, pp. 2–3), weaving and the ceremonial duties of healers were gendered activities within the Diné tribe, and only nádleehi were allowed to follow both. The fact that Tł’a was both suggests that Tł’a’s gender can be assumed as nádleehi (Figure 3). We suggest using 
                        assumed gender as a qualifier in this case and whenever there are only weak indicators (e.g. gendered pronouns, titles, occupations) available. This might also be the case when we are confronted with gender information derived from authority files, because there are no indicators available on how the information was determined in the first place.
                    
                    Sometimes a gender may be recorded, but the reliability of the record is questionable or sources are contradictory. Throughout his life, 19th-century politician Murray Hall (Figure 4) presented male and registered a male name upon migrating to the US. When he died, his body was examined and his gender was posthumously legally determined to be female (Nelson, 2014, pp. 137–145). National media ridiculed him as a ‘passing woman,’ a term that carried an accusation of deception and trickery. In a case like this, we suggest users of the model settle on an approach that allows marking some statements as preferred over others. In the Wikibase context, so-called ranks may be used to emphasise or de-emphasise statements of the same property: The statement of recorded gender being female should be assigned a rank of 
                        deprecated to highlight that 
                        lived gender and 
                        self-recorded gender are more credible sources than the official record. Colonial records should be treated in the same fashion, especially when dealing with terms employed by colonial administrations, missionaries or ethnographers. Records from Christian missionaries, for instance, do not ascribe Tł’a a nádleehi gender but rather that of ‘berdache,’ a derogatory colonial term (Naruszewicz, 2016, p. 12; Figure 3).
                        
                            
                            Modelling examples for Laxmi Narayan Tripathi and Yuu Watase. Controversial hijra rights activist Tripathi has identified as transgender as well as hijra, which she has described as a kind of transgender identity. Due to its flexibility, our model allows entering both hijra and transgender as her gender modality. Manga artist Watase self-identifies being X-gender, but there is no information available on their gender modality.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            Modelling example for Public Universal Friend. Before the announcement, the Friend’s gender was recorded as female. However, the example is somehow exceptional: The Friend’s announcement is not retroactive in scope (i. e. the Friend has not always identified as genderless), but is valid from 1776 onward. The flexibility of the model allows us to add date qualifiers to the statement and thereby accurately record this special case.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            Modelling example for Hastiin Tł’a. A qualifier specifies nádleehi as assumed gender and berdache as recorded gender. A Wikibase rank is used to mark the inaccurate and offensive nature of the colonial term. Whether it is appropriate to enter the term at all is subject to discussion. With no information on how Tł’a self-identified, it is impossible to determine gender modality.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            
                            Modelling example for Murray Hall. Our entry for Murray Hall identifies both female and male as values of gender. A qualifier specifies female to be a recorded gender, taking into account the fact that Hall was recorded as female upon death. The male value carries two gender qualifier values: lived and self-identified gender. This gives credit to the fact that census and naturalisation records contain information provided by Hall in person. Given the hostile ridicule that his dead body was subjected to, it is impossible to determine whether Hall was, in fact, trans, leaving gender modality undefined.
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Querying
                    
                    
                        One advantage of this approach is that a SPARQL query for persons and the value of their 
                        gender property returns valid and readable results. Using Wikibase, ranks may be applied to indicate the reliability of statements.Although we chose Wikibase as a suitable environment for this task, we wish to highlight that our approach may also be adapted to other systems. For instance, statements based on self-identification should be designated as preferred compared to statements that are based on records or assumptions. Queries would then, by default, only return the highest-ranked statements. Those wishing to go further in their analysis may explicitly query the gender qualifiers attached to a statement and receive the full range of nuances that the model is able to represent (Table 1).
                    
                    
                        
                            30
                            41
                            41
                            41
                            43
                            47
                        
                        
                            Figure
                            Item
                            Gender
                            Gender qualifier
                            Rank
                            Gender modality
                        
                        
                            1
                            Laxmi Narayan Tripathi
                            hijra
                            self-identified gender
                            normal
                            transgender
                        
                        
                            1
                            Yuu Watase
                            X-gender
                            self-identified gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            2
                            Public Universal Friend
                            agender
                            self-identified gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            2
                            Public Universal Friend
                            female
                            recorded gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            3
                            Hastiin Tł'a
                            nádleehi
                            assumed gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            3
                            Hastiin Tł'a
                            berdache
                            recorded gender
                            deprecated
                            
                        
                        
                            4
                            Murray Hall
                            male
                            lived gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            4
                            Murray Hall
                            male
                            self-identified gender
                            normal
                            
                        
                        
                            4
                            Murray Hall
                            female
                            recorded gender
                            deprecated
                            
                        
                    
                    Table 1. SPARQL query results for all examples made thus far, including all gender statements and qualifiers. Sorted by order of appearance. Note the inclusion of deprecated gender statements, which would be withheld automatically when only querying for the gender property.
                
            
            
                Closing remarks and prospects
                
                    In order to represent gender in the context of formalised data environments, we propose a modelling strategy that allows one to make explicit how the gender information was formulated in the first place. This enables researchers to make more informed choices. We hope that by distinguishing between different qualities of gendered information, our model can challenge essentialised notions and make cultural, geographical and temporal positions on gender explicit. It can thereby function as a tool that sparks discussion, uncertainty and scholarly self-reflection.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Amadiume, I. (2015). 
                        Male Daughters, Female Husbands: Gender and Sex in an African Society. 2nd ed. (Critique Influence Change). London: Zed Books.
                    
                    
                        Arondekar, A. (2009). 
                        For the Record: On Sexuality and the Colonial Archive in India. (Next Wave: New Directions in Women’s Studies). Durham: Duke University Press, doi:
                        10.1515/9780822391029.
                    
                    
                        Ashley, F. ‘Trans’ is my gender modality: A modest terminological proposal. In Erickson-Schroth, L. (ed), 
                        Trans Bodies, Trans Selves. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press. [Preprint]. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Betancourt, R. (2020). 
                        Byzantine Intersectionality: Sexuality, Gender, and Race in the Middle Ages. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, doi:
                        10.1515/9780691210889.
                    
                    
                        Butler, J. (2006). 
                        Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. (Routledge Classics). New York: Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Cleves, R. H. (2014). Beyond the binaries in early America: Special issue introduction. 
                        Early American Studies, 
                        12(3). University of Pennsylvania Press: 459–68.
                    
                    
                        Ćosić, M., Dollinger, J., Isop, U. and Leibetseder, D. (2014). Gegenkulturelle Archive jenseits von Familie und Geschlecht. In Guggenheimer, J., Isop, U., Leibetseder, D. and Mertlitsch, K. (eds), 
                        »When we were gender...« – Geschlechter erinnern und vergessen, vol. 5. Bielefeld: transcript Verlag, pp. 245–72 doi:
                        10.1515/transcript.9783839423974.245.
                    
                    
                        Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (2019a). GND Gender 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (2019b). GND Ontology 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Feinberg, L. (1996). 
                        Transgender Warriors: Making History from Joan of Arc to RuPaul. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
                    
                    
                        Flanders, J. and Jannidis, F. (2015). Knowledge organization and data modeling in the humanities. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Herdt, G. H. (ed). (1994). 
                        Third Sex, Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History. New York: Zone Books.
                    
                    
                        Hinchy, J. (2020). 
                        Governing Gender and Sexuality in Colonial India: The Hijra, c. 1850–1900.
                    
                    
                        International Organization for Standardization (2004). 
                        ISO/IEC 5218:2004. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Kravitz, M. (2021). Are pre-colonial genders inherently ‘nonbinary’ or ‘transgender’? 
                        An Injustice!
                        .
                    
                    
                        Kronk, C. A. and Dexheimer, J. W. (2020). Development of the Gender, Sex, and Sexual Orientation ontology: Evaluation and workflow. 
                        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
                        27(7): 1110–15 doi:
                        10.1093/jamia/ocaa061.
                    
                    
                        Kronk, C. A., Everhart, A. R., Ashley, F., Thompson, H. M., Schall, T. E., Goetz, T. G., Hiatt, L., et al. (2021). Transgender data collection in the electronic health record: Current concepts and issues. 
                        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association doi:
                        10.1093/jamia/ocab136. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Mauriello, M. (2019). Corpi dissonanti: note su gender variance e sessualità. Il caso dei femminielli napoletani. 
                        Archivio antropologico mediterraneo. Dipartimento Culture e Società - Università di Palermo doi:
                        10.4000/aam.706.
                    
                    
                        Mirandé, A. (2016). Hombres mujeres: An indigenous third gender. 
                        Men and Masculinities, 
                        19(4). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications: 384–409 doi:
                        10.1177/1097184X15602746.
                    
                    
                        Moyer, P. B. (2015). 
                        The Public Universal Friend: Jemima Wilkinson and Religious Enthusiasm in Revolutionary America. Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press, doi:
                        10.7591/9781501701450.
                    
                    
                        Naruszewicz, C. J. (2016). Beyond binary: Navajo alternative genders throughout history. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Neil, C. and Garcia, J. (2009). 
                        Philippine Gay Culture: Binabae to Bakla, Silahis to MSM. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
                    
                    
                        Nelson, L. (2014). Reanimating archiving/archival corporealities: Deploying ‘big ears’ in de rigueur mortis intervention. 
                        QED: A Journal in GLBTQ Worldmaking, 
                        1(2). Michigan State University Press: 132–59 doi:
                        10.14321/qed.1.2.0132.
                    
                    
                        Perreault, S. (2011). 
                        VCard Format Specification. (Request for Comments). RFC Editor doi:
                        10.17487/RFC6350. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Puckett, J. A., Brown, N. C., Dunn, T., Mustanski, B. and Newcomb, M. E. (2020). Perspectives from transgender and gender diverse people on how to ask about gender. 
                        LGBT Health, 
                        7(6): 305–11 doi:
                        10.1089/lgbt.2019.0295.
                    
                    
                        Roscoe, W. (1998). 
                        Changing Ones: Third and Fourth Genders in Native North America. 1. ed. New York: StMartin’s Press.
                    
                    
                        Scroll.in (2016). Why I chose to become a hijra: Laxmi in her own words Text 
                        Scroll.In
                        .
                    
                    
                        Slater, S. and Yarbrough, F. A. (eds). (2011). 
                        Gender and Sexuality in Indigenous North America, 1400–1850. Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press.
                    
                    
                        Text Encoding Initiative Consortium (2021). TEI element  
                        P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                The poster presents an ongoing doctoral research project which aims at exploiting the analytical power of network visualisation to investigate European Baroque drama from a quantitative perspective. By building and exploring a balanced corpus of 150 plays in five different languages, it attempts to provide an empirical verification of the traditional view on the evolution of seventeenth-century European dramatic literature.
            
            
                Related literature
                In the last two decades, network analysis of literary texts has established itself as a core methodology within the field of computational criticism and is now routinely employed to gain insights into social formations and character interactions within fictional worlds. Its strength lies in the extreme formalisation of texts, which are converted graphs made by characters (nodes) and their relations (edges); thus, it is possible to investigate large corpora and unearth formal patterns which close reading may overlook (cf. Trilcke, 2013; Trilcke and Fischer, 2018).
                While many authors in the field have focused on methodological and technical issues, trying to leverage Natural Language Processing techniques to automate phases of the network extraction process, others have exploited the epistemological potential of literary networks analysis to try to answer questions concerning characters’ features, textual topologies, and literary genres: a comprehensive overview on both approaches, with a wide bibliography, is provided by Labatut and Bost (2020). Furthermore, growing ‘programmable corpora’, with dedicated tools for network visualisation, are now available for research and teaching purposes (e.g. the Drama Corpora project by Fischer et al., 2019).
            
            
                Project overview 
                This investigation of European drama is based on a research corpus of 150 plays, which is currently being assembled and will be later merged into the Drama Corpora repository (
                    dracor.org). The corpus includes European plays in English, French, Spanish, German, and Italian, and covers the timespan from 1561 to 1710; despite its relatively small extension, its texts have been selected (or sampled from larger collections) with the explicit purpose of avoiding canonical bias and producing a composite and somehow ‘representative’ picture of the period investigated.
                
                In a first phase, all plays which are not already available in DraCor are being transcribed or annotated to meet the platform’s requirements, starting from structured or plain (.txt from OCRs) open-access textual sources and ending up with fully formatted XML-TEI files. Once established the corpus, character networks will be extracted from the texts by means of the DraCor scripts, which operate by linking characters by scene proximity, and visualised through Gephi (
                    gephi.org) or similar software. 
                
                The textual structures embodied by the graphs will then be compared and interpreted according to the essential metrics of network analysis, such as centrality and modularity. The main aim will be measuring patterns of similarity and divergence between contemporary plays from different linguistic milieus and following the progressive evolution of drama throughout the designated temporal frame. Results are expected to contribute to the larger critical discussion on the features of Baroque, with a particular focus on the verification of some well-established literary theories the next section describes.
            
            
                Research question and goals
                The project is meant to address the lack of comparative studies on European early modern drama, and to complement the few existing ones (e. g. Küpper, 2018) with a ‘quantitative formalist’ perspective. Such shortage of extended transnational analyses of the genre has often been explained with the assumption that each ‘local’ form of Baroque drama represents a highly idiosyncratic system, sharply separated from the others by linguistic and cultural boundaries. This theory has been notably supported by Franco Moretti, who has described the evolution of European theatre throughout the seventeenth century as a process of Darwinist ‘speciation’. In his view, indeed, the common heritage of classical and medieval drama progressively broke down into several national variations, such as the German Trauerspiel or the French théâtre classique, each one with his own set of distinctive stylistic and formal features (1994: 97-99). 
                Computational literary network analysis appears particularly suited to assess the validity of Moretti’s reconstruction, since it is able to investigate the formal structures of all dramatic traditions involved with equal effectiveness. Accordingly, this study could help to measure whether (and how) Baroque-era theatre has split along national and cultural lines – and, conversely, to which extent phenomena of transfer of formal elements, such as plots or characters’ roles, have nevertheless taken place. From this topological perspective, network-based evidence might thus contribute to a clearer understanding of the development of European dramatic literature during one of its defining periods.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Fischer, F., Börner, I., Göbel, M., Hechtl, A., Kittel, C., Milling, C. and Trilcke, P. (2019). Programmable Corpora: Introducing DraCor, an Infrastructure for the Research on European Drama. Proceedings of DH2019: ‘Complexities’. Utrecht: Utrecht University doi:10.5281/ZENODO.4284002.
                    Küpper, J. (2018). The Cultural Net: Early Modern Drama as a Paradigm. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter doi:10.1515/9783110536638.
                    Labatut, V. and Bost, X. (2020). Extraction and Analysis of Fictional Character Networks: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 52 (5): 1–40 doi:10.1145/3344548.
                    Moretti, F. (1994). Modern European Literature: A Geographical Sketch. New Left Review (206): 86–109.
                    Trilcke, P. (2013). Social Network Analysis (SNA) als Methode einer textempirischen Literaturwissenschaft. In Ajouri, P., Mellmann, K. and Rauen, C. (eds), Empirie in der Literaturwissenschaft. Münster: Brill | mentis, pp. 201–47 doi:10.30965/9783957439710_012.
                    Trilcke, P. and Fischer, F. (2018). Literaturwissenschaft als Hackathon. Zur Praxeologie der Digital Literary Studies und ihren epistemischen Dingen. In Huber, M. and Krämer, S. (eds), Wie Digitalität die Geisteswissenschaften verändert: Neue Forschungsgegenstände und Methoden. Wolfenbüttel: Herzog August Bibliothek doi:10.17175/sb003_003.
                
            
        
    



        
            The purpose of this study is to update the Hachidaishu (ca. 905–1205; about 9500 poems) dataset (Yamamoto and Hodošček 2021a, 2021b), which is already available on Zenodo/Github. We provide details on changes to 1) the data description format, 2) the Word List by Semantic Principles' labels (Kato et al. 2018), and 3) updates and item additions to the analysis program.
                The Hachidaishū is a collection of eight anthologies of classical Japanese poetry compiled by the order of Emperors during the 300 years from the Kokinshū (ca. 905), the first anthology written in Japanese kana characters, to the Shinkokinshū (1205). The main text is based on a collection of the Nijūichidaishū created by NIJL, and the text is now distributed by both NIJL and NII (National Institute of Japanese Literature 2016). Classical Japanese poetry is not only a literary work created through singing, which is of great literary value in itself, but also a work created based on the phonology of the spoken language of the time, which is an extremely valuable research material for linguistic studies of classical Japanese.
                The Japanese imperial anthologies of classical Japanese poetry (waka: wa=Japanese, ka=song) were composed over a period of 300 years using the same form and with the same divisions, called 'butate', allowing us to compare waka poems with each other. These anthologies are convenient for analyzing the historical changes in Japanese language. We have published the datasets on Zenodo and Github, which allow Japanese linguists and literary researchers to study them on the data analysis basis (Yamamoto and Hodošček 2021c). However, because the format used in these datasets was original, they were not generic enough for comparisons with other works or for use with publicly available tools.
                In order to solve these problems, we updated the datasets. The updates and additions include the following items:
            
            
                Replacing the current fixed-length data description format with TEI and JSON, which are general-purpose data description formats, so that they can be used by more analysis tools. The purpose of the JSON conversion is to provide a more self-describing and accessible version of the data, while that of the TEI conversion is to have a standard version of the dataset as a corpus going forward.
                Replaced the Word List by Semantic Principles' labels (WLSP; Kato et al. 2018) from the old version to the new version to allow us to compare them with other datasets.
                The part-of-speech (PoS) tags were previously based on the PoS numbers used in an older Japanese morphological analysis system, so we added a mapping to the Universal Dependencies tag set (17 types). This will allow us to compare lexical items, syntactic rules, and structures among different languages and works.
                We have developed tools that can be freely used on researchers’ hardware and also provide a hosted version on Google Collaborator to allow other researchers to use and analyze these datasets. For example, basic statistics, conditional string search, and visualization are available. To these tools, we have added programs that can draw graphs using bi-gram patterns, so that the structure of the vocabulary can be easily visualized.
                Since the general lexical set does not include proper nouns (names of people, places, etc.), we included data on pillow names and place names included in the Hachidaishū.
                An English bilingual dataset was created, allowing for easy generation and output of English glosses when presenting at international conferences or writing international papers.
            
            These updates will contribute to the elucidation of the characteristics and historical evolution of Japanese poetic vocabulary in more detail.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Kato S., Asahara M., and Yamazaki, M. (2018) “Annotation of ‘Word List by Semantic Principles’ Labels for the Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese”, in Proceedings of the 32nd Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation, Hong Kong: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 247-253.
                    
                    
                        Yamamoto, H. and Hodošček B. (2021a) “Hachidaishū part of speech dataset”, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4835806.
                    
                    
                        Yamamoto, H. and Hodošček B. (2021b) “Hachidaishū vocabulary dataset”, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4744170.
                    
                    
                        Yamamoto, H. and Hodošček B. (2021c) “Open source datasets of the Hachidaishū for the research of classical Japanese poetic vocabulary”, The 11th Conference of Japanese Association for Digital Humanities, Proceedings of JADH conference, Japanese Association for Digital Humanities, Vol. 2021, pp. 82-87, Sept.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
            Introducción
         
            La propuesta parte del convencimiento del gran potencial de la visualización de la información para el estudio de los textos literarios, apoyándose en la teoría de las redes sociales y técnicas de la visualización de los datos. Si el texto literario es una red de fenómenos discursivos, lo es por excelencia una obra dramática, una red de parlamentos e interacciones entre los personajes. Aplicando los instrumentos de análisis y representación gráfica, se pueden ilustrar las relaciones discursivas entre los personajes. El tratamiento de los datos permite visualizar y “medir” estas relaciones, así como evidenciar fenómenos difícilmente perceptibles en la lectura tradicional, creando nuevos conocimientos e interpretaciones. 
            
            Objetivo
         
            El propósito de esta presentación es mostrar ejemplos de visualización de texto y sus posibilidades interpretativas, basándose en los cuatro dramas rurales del autor granadino:
                 Bodas de sangre (1933),
                 Yerma (1934), 
                Doña Rosita la soltera (1935)
                 La casa de Bernarda Alba (1936). Se exploran las potencialidades de Gephi y RAWGraphs para sintetizar, sistematizar y representar los datos mediante diferentes grafos y otras representaciones infográficas (dendrogramas, diagramas aluviales, etc.). La exploración muestra los nuevos conocimientos que se pueden extraer a partir de transformación de los datos en imágenes, referentes a la estructura, composición y contenidos de las obras teatrales. 
            
            
            Método
         
            En el trabajo se aplican métodos de análisis cuantitativo y cualitativo. Los textos digitalizados en formato TEI, GEFX y CVS provienen de Drama Corpora Proyect (DraCor, disponible en: 
                https://dracor.org/). Para representar la red de conexiones entre los personajes se crearán los grafos, que representan la red de protagonistas y el peso cuantitativo de las intervenciones discursivas de cada una. Para su procesamiento y generación de representaciones gráficas se utiliza el software libre Gephi 0.9.2-beta (Gephi.org 2008-2017) y RAWGraphs (https://rawgraphs.io/). Se comparan los grafos generados por ambas herramientas con los creados por la API de
                 DraCor llamada Shiny DraCor (
                https://shiny.dracor.org/). Para visualizar las relaciones entre las palabras y unidades léxicas más significativas se recurre a los grafos léxicos. Para mapear las estadísticas textuales se rastrean otras 29 herramientas de representación gráfica incluidas en la interfaz de RAWGraphs. 
            
            
            Avance de conclusiones
         
            El interés principal de la propuesta radica en la exploración de las visualizaciones y detección de las singularidades de los elementos léxicos en el tejido del texto lorquiano. Los 
                resultados de análisis informático se confrontan con los enfoques críticos tradicionales. Se evalúa críticamente la eficacia de las técnicas de visualización para la interpretación de la obra literaria, su valor epistemológico, las posibilidades y limitaciones de las herramientas utilizadas (algunas de ellas automatizadas) y los retos que planean a los estudios literarios. Sin duda, es una vía que puede revelar tendencias y patrones inesperados y aportar claves interpretativas de interés. 
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliografía
                    Barros García, B. B. (2020). El texto literario hecho datos: F. M. Dostoievski en el marco de las Humanidades digitales y los enfoques cuantitativos. 
                        452ºF. Revista De Teoría De La Literatura Y Literatura Comparada, (23), 53–77. 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1344/452f.2020.23.3
                        
                    
                    Bastian, M., Heymann, S., & Jacomy, M. (2009). Gephi: An Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. 
                        Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 
                        3(1), 361-362. 
                        
                            https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/13937
                        
                    
                    Burley, D., Ashburn, V. (2010). Information Visualization As A Knowledge Integration Tool. 
                        Journal of Knowledge Management Practice, 11(4), 18.
                    
                    Cherven, K. (2015). 
                        Mastering Gephi Network Visualization. Packt Publishing Ltd
                    
                    Drucker, J. (2011). Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5 (1) 
                        
                            www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html
                        
                    
                    Martínez Carro, Elena. (2018) Los personajes femeninos lorquianos desde una interpretación digital, en: Álvarez Ramos, Eva y Blasco Pascual, Javier (eds.). 
                        Humanidades Digitales. Retos, Recursos y Nuevas Propuestas, Agilice Digital, Valladolid.
                    
                    Santa María, M.T., Calvo Tello, J., Jiménez, C.M. (2021). ¿Existe correlación entre importancia y centralidad? Evaluación de personajes con redes sociales en obras teatrales de la Edad de Plata, Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, Volume 36 (1), 81–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqaa015
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                Digital Scholarly Editions in the Humanities are the result of critical editing processes, in which analog documents are transcribed into a digital form, mostly with the help of markup languages. An essential step of these processes is the recognition and markup of entities such as people, places and organizations in the digital texts. The software 
                    NEISS TEI Entity Enricher (NTEE) assists this step in two ways: It provides the possibility to train custom entity taggers based on state-of-the-art neural networks and it supports manual identification of the recognized entities. The input and output format is TEI-XML (TEI Consortium, 2021).
                
                NTEE is an open source software. The program and its documentation are available at:
                
                    
                
            
            
                Description of functionality
                The core feature of the software is the fine-tuning of pre-trained neural language models for an edition-specific entity recognition task. The resulting entity tagger can then be used to mark up entities in one or more TEI files. In total, the NTEE workflow includes five subtasks: configuration, groundtruth building, training, prediction and postprocessing. They all take place in a single user interface.
                
                    
                        
                        A training data overview in the Groundtruth Builder screen
                    As a prerequisite for training, a groundtruth must be created in the 
                    Groundtruth Builder (see Fig. 1), i.e. a set of already annotated data that can be used to train an entity tagger. For this purpose, TEI files are applied as input data. Also, three configurations need to be done: The 
                    Entity Definition is simply a TEI-independent list of those entity classes to be tagged later. A 
                    TEI Read Entity Mapping (see Fig. 2) then defines which XML elements (including attribute values) correspond to these entities in the input TEI files. Finally, the 
                    TEI Reader Config can be used to exclude the content of certain XML elements from processing, as a restriction on the basic behavior of NTEE to process the complete content of the ‘tei:text’ element mandatory in the TEI standard.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Example of mapping XML elements to entities for the purpose of groundtruth building
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Configurations for training an entity tagger
                    With a given groundtruth it is possible to start the training process in the 
                    NER Trainer screen (see Fig. 3) by selecting the groundtruth and a pre-trained language model. Different models (English, French, German, Spanish, Multilingual) published on the 
                    Hugging Face hub (Wolf et al., 2020) can be selected in NTEE out of the box. After training, the resulting entity tagger is ready to be applied to multiple TEI files for entity prediction. Finally, a manual assessment of the prediction results and the identification of the entities may be carried out in the 
                    Postprocessing screen (see Fig. 4 and 5).
                
                
                    
                        
                        Display and edit recognized entities in the Postprocessing screen
                    
                
            
            
                Named Entity Recognition (NER)
                The neural networks used in NTEE are based on so-called 
                    Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERTs) (Devlin et al., 2019). This is currently one of the most widespread network architecture used to train language models that solve tasks like NER in the field of Natural Language Processing. Classically, a BERT is first pre-trained with large amounts of unlabeled text to obtain a robust language model and then fine-tuned to a downstream task like NER. In our paper (Zöllner et al., 2021), we have extensively investigated various pre-training and fine-tuning techniques to train such a BERT model as optimally as possible for entity enrichment in Digital Scholarly Editions. In NTEE, we have taken care to ensure that the provided models are usable even with limited computational resources.
                
            
            
                Named Entity Linking (NEL)
                The procedure of identifying recognized entities is called 
                    Named Entity Linking due to the fact that it is done by providing a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). For this, NTEE supports the users by delivering identification suggestions based on the entity element string using queries to a local Entity Library or the Wikidata Knowledge Graph (Bayer, 2013).
                
                The latter delivers an ontology with which it is possible to accelerate the identification process: By using Semantic Web technology the set of potential candidates is narrowed.
                The former is a JSON file, in which entities can be saved locally. On the one hand, this also accelerates the identification process due to the omission of a web query to the Wikidata Knowledge Graph in these cases. On the other hand, this enables the user to apply edition-specific knowledge in the NEL process such as unusual nicknames of persons or entities at all that are not stored in the Wikidata database.
                
                    
                        
                        Identity suggestions for an entity in the Postprocessing screen
                    
                
            
            
                Acknowledgments
                This work was funded by the European Social Fund (ESF) and the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (Germany) within the project NEISS (Neural Extraction of Information, Structure, and Symmetry in Images) under grant no ESF/14-BM-A55-0006/19.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bayer, T. (2013). The Wikidata revolution is here: enabling structured data on Wikipedia https://diff.wikimedia.org/2013/04/25/the-wikidata-revolution/.
                    
                    
                        Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. and Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. 
                        Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4171–86 doi:10.18653/v1/N19-1423. https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423.
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2021). TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange https://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html.
                    
                    
                        Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., et al. (2020). HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural Language Processing. 
                        Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations. pp. 38–45.
                    
                    
                        Zöllner, J., Sperfeld, K., Wick, C. and Labahn, R. (2021). Optimizing Small BERTs Trained for German NER. 
                        Information, 
                        12(11) doi:10.3390/info12110443. https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/12/11/443.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                The International Prosopography Interchange Format 
                This presentation intends to describe ongoing work at the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage (ACDH-CH) on the International Prosopographical Interchange Format (IPIF). It presents IPIF’s design, and explores various conceptual and technical challenges arising from its implementation. 
                IPIF is an API definition and data model enabling the sharing and querying of prosopographical data. The original IPIF paper (Vogeler et al. 2019) recognises the power of semantic web tools (RDF, OWL, SPARQL), but also highlights their shortcomings for an interoperable format, chiefly the absence of a standard data model and the complexity of SPARQL. (See Bradley 2020.) Such difficulties circumscribe uses such as ‘light-weight’ data access and querying (as opposed to complex data processing). Accordingly, IPIF opts for a simple RESTful API. 
                In addition to a reference implementation, Papilotte (Vasold 2019), IPIF is intended to be implemented on top of existing projects, allowing access to data in a standardised format and providing the facilities for federated queries and as a data discovery tool. (Vogeler et al. 2019) 
            
            
                The Data Model and API 
                To achieve maximum interoperability, IPIF adopts a version of the ‘factoid model’ (Bradley 2005). This model separates 
                    statements made about a person from the abstract idea of a 
                    person, instead attributing statements to a researcher’s interpretation of a historical 
                    source (Figure 1). This enables contradictory statements, made by distinct sources, to be recorded. As Baillie (2021) argues, this is not always desirable, some historical sources being more trustworthy than others; nevertheless, it is a requirement for an open ecosystem without any single ‘guiding hand’ that contradiction be permitted. 
                
                FIGURE 1: THE IPIF DATA MODEL 
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                The API — described in OpenAPI — is a RESTful interface, allowing direct access to the four IPIF entity types (Factoid, Source, Person, Statement), and querying of statements through graph-like traversals (Figure 2). It returns JSON-LD for each entity, comprising content and/or metadata, and embeds references to related entities. 
                The choice of Statement fields represents a highly pragmatic decision. These fields, allowing a label and a URI, were chosen to match the most obvious use-cases in prosopographical data; the 
                    statementType field allows arbitrary extension beyond these standard statement types. 
                
                
                    FIGURE 2: API EXAMPLES 
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Implementations, issues and works-in-progress 
                Since the original definition of the standard, IPIF endpoints have been implemented on top of several existing frameworks, including the ACDH-CH’s APIS platform (a Django- based platform for prosopographical projects) and as an eXist-DB module for serving TEI- XML personography data (typically from digital scholarly editions). IPIF client libraries for Python and JavaScript, allowing federated queries and data aggregation across several endpoints, have also been developed. Building these tools has afforded a wealth of practical experience, highlighting the strengths of the format and the difficulties involved in its implementation. This has led to several pragmatic decisions regarding the data model, API and the semantics of querying. 
                
                    A 
                        label field was introduced for Persons, allowing use cases such as autocompletes. The theoretically correct modelling — as a ‘naming statement’ — required too many additional requests to retrieve the appropriate information. 
                    
                    Persons and Sources allow multiple URIs (interpreted as owl:sameAs). Strictly, these should be Statements (i.e. non-definitive assertion that one Person or Source is the same as another: see Zedlitz 2009); but reconciling data from multiple endpoints is considerably easier when this information is a ‘meta’ field of a Person entity.
                    IPIF requires a Source for each Factoid. In many projects, data that would comprise an IPIF Statement is given with no source (e.g. name, death, profession of a person”). In this case, the source is taken to be the project itself. 
                    
                        TEI-XML personographies can express a factoid model by applying the @source and @resp attributes to the sub-elements of a  entry (see Schwarz 2020), 
                        but this is optional. Pragmatically, we suggest using the metadata of the TEI document as fallback (@source, @resp, ancestor::TEI/teiHeader/ titleStmt/editor etc.).
                    
                    
                        To avoid ambiguity in combining statement filters in Person queries (does person/?place=Graz&role=professor mean “a professor in Graz” or “a professor, located in Graz for any reason”?), we defined a default behaviour (both conditions apply to the 
                            same Statement) and an optional parameter independentStatements=true to allow ‘or’ conditions. 
                        
                        In this presentation, we will argue that such decisions are justified by the requirements of interoperability; and that our experiences in developing IPIF thus far contribute usefully to debates surrounded data interoperability in the digital humanities.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Baillie, James. “Alternative Database Structures for Prosopographical Research”. 
                        International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing 15, Nr. 1–2 (October 2021): 117– 32. 
                        https://doi.org/10.3366/ijhac.2021.0265. 
                    
                    Bradley, John Douglas. “A Prosopography as Linked Open Data: Some Implications from DPRR”. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 014, Nr. 2 (29 July 2020). 
                        http://digitalhumanities.org/ dhq/vol/14/2/000475/000475.html. 
                    
                    Brradley, John, and Harold Short. “Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of New-Style Prosopography”. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 20, Nr. Suppl (1 January 2005): 3–24. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqi022. 
                    
                    Pasin, Michele, and John Bradley. “Factoid-Based Prosopography and Computer Ontologies: Towards an Integrated Approach”. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 30, Nr. 1 (1 April 2015): 86–97. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqt037. 
                    
                    Vogeler, Georg, Matthias Schlögl, and Gunter Vasold. “Data Exchange in Practice: Towards a Prosopographical API (Preprint)”. Paper given at BD2019 in co-location with RANLP 2019 in Varna (2019). 
                        https://doi.org/10.17613/YW4H-5F09. 
                    
                    Schwartz, Daniel L, Nathan P Gibson, and Katayoun Torabi. “Modeling a Born-Digital Factoid Prosopography Using the TEI and Linked Data”. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 2020, 37. 
                    
                    Vasold, Gunter: Papilotte. A flexible and extensible IPIF server. 
                        https://github.com/ gvasold/papilotte (2019) 
                    
                    Zedlitz, Jasper. “Gedbas4all – New Data Model for Genealogy”. GenWiki, 2009. 
                        http:// wiki-en.genealogy.net/Gedbas4all/Article = English version of Zedlitz, Jasper. „Gedbas4all – neues Datenmodell für die Genealogie“. 
                        Computergenealogie, Nr. 04 (2009). 
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            This paper will address issues of representing identity in databases, with a particular focus on Asian identities. Identity, such as that the conference theme defines, is often far more diverse and fluid than what a binary technology tool might represent. Utilizing the Database of African American and Predominantly White American Literature Anthologies or DALA, a database of 100 years of American and African American literature anthologies, constructed to investigate questions of identity and representation, this paper calls for theory-based, historically aware, transparent approaches to encoding identity in dh tools like the database. 
            Dh projects are increasingly interested in representing identity across time, whether through analysis of census data, historical records, or literary history. Much of this work is completed using databases, with human bodies turned into binary data points contained within rigid columns, a method that is resistance to contemporary theorization of identity. This project is informed by the growing wealth of scholarship produced by algorithmic bias scholars who have been attentive to the nuances of race and gender within technological infrastructures (Noble 2018, Benjamin 2019, McIlwain 2020, Brock 2020, Steele 2021, Womack 2022?), working across issues from social justice, algorithmic bias, surveillance, and social media. Information studies also offers analysis that we might use to address bias (Drabinski 2013, Block 2020). While DAAPWALA provides interesting results, it is, in many ways, designed as a project to test how a database might use categories of identity in transparent ways, modeling both problems and possibilities within a system that is insistent upon the binary. As Tara McPherson has argued, the best digital database projects: “…wield technology against its positivist self, foregrounding the work of the interface and refusing an easy transparency and corporate tenents of ‘good’ design via the template” (2015, 495).? It is this uneasiness that I hope to explore in the paper, designed to begin a conversation within the digital humanities community about best practices for encoding identity.
            To interpret canonicity and inclusion/exclusion of authors in literary canons using a database, authors and editors must be categorized in a manner that is consistently understood throughout the body of the data, making static any categories into which individuals are encoded. For example, the database follows “good” database practices in designing the database, encoding designated vocabulary in drop down menus to regularize the selection of everything from author names to identities, adding viaf numbers, an international authority file, to further control identity and ensure interoperability. Such methods do regularize the data, something that needed to happen for comparative purposes and to insure consistency, particularly as there were numerous individuals inputting data over time, but the encoding methods are opposed to contemporary theoretical models of identity, a conundrum that will be discussed further. 
            The paper will discuss the choices made in identifying authors and editors as “Asian.” As the call for papers notes, dh has a long history in Asia. The conference theme is designed to center Asian dh scholars and their work, resisting the displacement of Asian dh work, as is often the case at ADHO conferences held in Europe and the Americas. A similar representation of identity, decentering western whiteness, is central to encoding identity within DAAPWALA. For the purposes of DAAPWALA I use the term Asian to include East Asian, South Asian, Southeast Asian, Central Asian and Pacific Islander. I will discuss the historical and cultural components that are used for categorizations, highlighting best practices used in TEI/XML encoding and library metadata standards. I argue that while we must stress interoperability, we must also account for the development of data as a representation of the local environment. In the case of the United States, and the literary anthologies I am studying, identity terms are not developed in a vacuum. Historic and contemporary racism and government policy impacted identification of groups that slip in and out of identities. I reject the use of census categories as the long history of the U.S. census is problematic and doesn’t meet the goals of DAAPWALA. I will also discuss the importance of working across national and cultural divides while also attending to the particularities of the local environment. Asian as define defined in Asian American literary anthologies does not have the same cultural markers as Asian as defined by the conference call. Further, I will discuss the importance of data base design that considers the differing ways that cultures regularize identity markers, such as names. While databases developed in the United States, for example, use a field for first name and a field for last name this is not consistent across all cultures and broader naming conventions are needed. Emphasizing the need to balance interoperability against cultural specificity, this paper asks the dh community to begin conversations about better data design.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Benjamin, R. (2019). Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for New Jim Code. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
                    
                    
                        Block, S. (2020). Erasure, Misrepresentation and Confusion: Investigating JSTOR Topics on Women’s and Race Histories. DHQ:  Digital Humanities Quarterly 14, no. 1.
                    
                    
                        Brock, A. (2020.) Distributed Blackness: African American Cybercultures. New York: New York University Press.
                    
                    
                        Drabinski, E. (2013). “Queering the Catalog: Queer Theory and the Politics of Correction.” The Library Quarterly 83, no. 2: pp. 94–111.
                    
                    
                        Gallon, K. (2016.) “Making a Case for the Black Digital Humanities.” In Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016, Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein (eds.). Minneapolis: U Minnesota P.
                    
                    
                        McIlwain, C. (2020). Black Software The Internet & Racial Justice, from the AfroNet to Black Lives Matter. New York: Oxford UP.
                    
                    
                        McPherson, T. (2015). “Post-Archive: The Humanities, the Archive, and the Database.” In Between Humanities and the Digital, Patrik Svensson and David Theo Goldberg (eds.) pp. 483–502. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Noble, SU. (2018). Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. New York: NYU Press.
                    
                    
                        Steele, CK. (2021). Digital Black Feminism. New York: NYU Press.
                    
                    
                        Womack, A. (2022) The Matter of Black Living: The Aesthetic Experiment of Racial Data, 1880–1930. Chicago: U of Chicago P.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            It is well known that the great 18th-century French 
                Encyclopédie began first as a modest translation project of Ephraim Chambers’ 
                Cyclopaedia in 1745. And, although their project grew into something much more significant, the 
                Enyclopédie editors (Diderot and d’Alembert) were not shy in incorporating translations of the 
                Cyclopaedia as filler for their expanded work. Indeed, as Paolo Quintili remarks, ‘the they left a good part of these articles almost unchanged, or with only minor changes’ (Quintili, 1996: 75). Given the scale of the two works under consideration, however, systematic evaluation of the extent of the 
                philosophes’ use of Chambers has remained, even today, a daunting task. John Lough, in 1980, framed the problem thusly:
                 ‘So far no one has had the patience to make a detailed study of the exact relationship between the text of Diderot's 
                Encyclopédie and the work of Ephraim Chambers. This would no doubt require several years of arduous toil devoted to comparing the two works article by article’ (Lough, 1980: 221).
            
            Recent developments in machine translation and sequence alignment now offer new possibilities for the systematic comparison of digital texts across languages. This paper outlines some recent experimental work in leveraging these new techniques in an effort to reduce the ‘arduous toil’ of textual comparison through automatic translation. In essence, we aimed to generate French translations of 
                Cyclopaedia articles and then use sequence alignment to identify similar passages also found in the 
                Encyclopédie [1].
            
            We examined two of the most widely-used resources in this domain, Googe Translate and DeepL. Both systems provide useful APIs as part of their respective subscription services, and both provide translations based on cutting-edge neural network language models. While DeepL provided somewhat more satisfying translations from a reader's perspective, we ultimately opted to use Google Translate for the ease of its API and its ability to parse TEI-XML. The latter is of critical importance as we wanted to keep the overall document structure of our dictionaries to allow for easy navigation between the versions. 
            Our objective here was 
                not to produce a good translation of the text, or even one that might serve as the basis for a readable edition. Rather, this machine-generated edition serves as a ‘pivot-text’ between the two corpora, allowing for an automatic comparison of the two (or three) versions using ARTFL’s highly fault-tolerant sequence alignment package, Text-PAIR [2]. In order to determine the parameters for this task, we ran a series of tests with different matching parameters on a representative selection of 100 articles where Chambers was identified as the possible source. It is important to note that even with the best parameters, which we adjusted to get favourable recall and precision results, we were only able to identify 81 of these 100 articles.
            
            Once settled on the optimal parameters, we then used Text-PAIR to generate both an alignment database, for interactive examination, and a set of static results tables. The alignment database contains some 7,304 aligned passage pairs. The system allows queries on metadata, such as author and article title as well as words or phrases found in the aligned passages. Each aligned passage is presented as a facing page representation and the user can toggle a display of the variations between the two aligned passages. As seen below, the variations between the texts can be extensive (
                fig. 1).
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1. Text-PAIR interface showing differences in the article “Air”.
            Text-PAIR also contextualises results back to the original document(s). For example, the following is the article “Almanach” by d'Alembert, showing the aligned passage from Chambers in blue (
                fig. 2).  
            
            
                
            
            
                Figure 2. Article “Almanach” with shared Chambers passages in blue.
            
            In this instance, d'Alembert reused almost all of Chambers’ original article “Almanac”, with some minor variations, but does not to appear to have indicated the source of the first part of his article.  
            To accumulate results and to refine their assessment, we developed an evaluation algorithm for each alignment, with parameters based on the length of the matching passages and the degree to which the headwords were close matches. This simple evaluation model eliminated a significant number of false positives, which we found were typically short text matches between articles with different headwords. The output of this algorithm resulted in two tables, one for matches that were likely to be valid and one that was less likely to be valid, based on these simple heuristics.
            In all, we found some 3,778 articles in the 
                Encyclopédie that upon evaluation seem highly similar in both content and structure to articles in the 1741 edition of Chambers’ 
                Cyclopaedia. Whether or not these articles constitute real acts of historical translation is the subject for another, or several other, articles. There are simply too many outside factors at play, even in this rather straightforward comparison, to make blanket conclusions about the editorial practices of the 
                encyclopédistes based on this limited experiment [3]. What we can say, however, is that of the 1,081 articles that include a ‘Chambers’ reference in the 
                Encyclopédie, we only found 689 with at least one matching passage, although even here, the recall may in fact be higher than the numbers suggest, given that some citations function more like cross-references. Nonetheless, beyond testing this ground truth, we are also left with the rather astounding fact of 3,089 articles with no reference to Chambers whatsoever, all of which seem to be at least somewhat related to their English predecessor.
            
            
                Notes:
                [1] Our two comparison datasets are the ARTFL 
                    Encyclopédie and the recently digitised ARTFL edition of the 1741 Chambers 
                    Cyclopaedia. See 
                    https://artflsrv03.uchicago.edu/philologic4/encyclopedie1117/ and 
                    https://artflsrv03.uchicago.edu/philologic4/chambers_new/. The 1741 edition was selected as it was one of the likely sources for the translation original project and we were able to work from high quality pages images provided by the University of Chicago Library. On the possible editions of the 
                    Cyclopaedia used by the 
                    encyclopédistes, see (Passeron, 2006). On Text-PAIR, see 
                    https://github.com/ARTFL-Project/text-pair.
                
                [2] See Clovis Gladstone, Russ Horton, and Mark Olsen, "
                    TextPAIR
                     (Pairwise Alignment for Intertextual Relations)", ARTFL Project, University of Chicago, 2008-2021, and, more specifically, (Olsen, Horton and Roe, 2011).
                
                [3] The question of the 
                    Dictionnaire de Trévoux is one such factor, as it is known that both Chambers and the 
                    encyclopédistes used it as a source for their own articles—so matches we find between the Chambers and 
                    Encyclopédie may indeed represent shared borrowings from the Trévoux and not a translation at all. Or, more interestingly, perhaps Chambers translated a Trévoux article from French to English, which a dutiful 
                    encyclopédiste then translated back to French for the 
                    Encyclopédie—in this case, which article is the 'source' and which the 'translation'? For more on these particular aspects of dictionary-making, see our previous article (Allen et al., 2010) and a response (Leca-Tsiomis, 2013).
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Allen, T. et al. (2010). Plundering philosophers: identifying sources of the Encyclopédie", J
                        ournal of the Association for History and Computing
                        13.1.
                    
                    
                        Leca-Tsiomis, M. (2013). The use and abuse of the digital humanities in the history of ideas: How to study the 
                        Encyclopédie. 
                        History of European Ideas 
                        39.4: 467-76.
                    
                    
                        Lough, J. (1980). The 
                        Encyclopédie and the Chambers' 
                        Cyclopaedia. 
                        SVEC 
                        185: 221-24
                    
                    
                        Passeron, I. (2006). Quelle(s) édition(s) de la Cyclopœdia les encyclopédistes ont-ils utilisée(s) ? 
                        Recherches sur Diderot et sur l'Encyclopédie 
                        40-41: 287-92.
                    
                    
                        Olsen, M., Horton, R. and Roe, G. (2011). Something borrowed: Sequence alignment and the identification of similar passages in large text collections. 
                        Digital Studies / Le Champ numérique 
                        2.1.
                    
                    
                        Quintili, P. (1996). D'Alembert ‘traduit’ Chambers. Les articles de mécanique de la 
                        Cyclopædia à l'
                        Encyclopédie. 
                        Recherches sur Diderot et sur l'Encyclopédie, 
                        21:75-90.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            In May 2018, the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into effect. This rigorous legislation on data protection and privacy, among many other things, significantly changed the way research with data from living persons is conducted since it introduced a number of obligations and restrictions to ensure a high level of protection of individuals' rights. The research community has been struggling with fulfilling these new obligations and desperately requires training, knowledge and tools to support their research under the new circumstances. 
            In reaction to this demand, the working group Ethics and Legality in Digital Arts and Humanities (ELDAH) of the European research infrastructure consortium DARIAH-EU developed the ELDAH Consent Form Wizard (CFW) , a tool that provides researchers, cultural heritage institutions and research infrastructures with GDPR-compliant consent form templates for DH research purposes. With the help of this tool, valid consent to processing personal data according to the current European legal regulations can be gathered. The CFW offers support and guidance with three main scenarios:
            
            gathering data from and/or about living people for research purposes
            communicating through mailing lists or other (digital) communication media
            collecting data and/or consent from participants as the host of an academic event
         
            The tool, which was developed based on community-driven input by (mostly) European DH researchers and administrators, has been well received and is broadly used even beyond the scope of its legal application, since colleagues from South-Africa, New Zealand and India have also been using this tool as a means to transparently provide information to and gather informed consent from their research subjects: not in order to fulfill a legal obligation but to establish a high and transparent ethical standard in their own research practices despite legal differences.
            Other than fulfilling legal and ethical community demands, the development of the CFW tool also addresses another important topic in the dissemination of DH methods and contents: the goal to create a multilingual resource. A prominent and successful example for efforts at multilingual tool development and internationalisation are the TEI Publisher and the activities of the TEI working group on Internationalisation. 
            In a legal and ethical context, multilingualism is particularly important not only in terms of increased accessibility but also as a means to create trust and accountability between researchers and their data subjects when gathering and processing personal data for research purposes. Participants in interviews, surveys and the likes need to fully understand their rights and the purposes for which their data are collected in order to make an informed decision about their participation. Therefore, having such resources available in their native language should be considered best practice. The - originally English - ELDAH CFW has already addressed this need with translations into Croatian, Italian and German. Additional translations into French, Greek, Slovene and even Hindi are already in progress, while translations into Spanish and Japanese are being planned.
            For the translation of the UI, a dedicated translation interface was developed. With the help of this interface, CFW translators can internationalize the tool to their national languages line by line, field by field, button by button. Since the tool provides not only building blocks for a consent form, but also aims to educate its users with larger informative text passages as they complete the online form, a fully automated, dictionary-based translation approach was considered too inaccurate and therefore inadequate, especially since translations of legal contexts and formulations have to be accurate and reliable. While the translation of the webform used to collect the information from the individual user of the CFW worked very well, the consequently automatically generated template for the consent form ended up with some room for improvement. Furthermore, a purely participant-driven approach to translations in a field which is subject to regular revisions and changes (because of legislation changes) poses significant problems regarding sustainability and accuracy.
            The proposed paper will discuss two important aspects, presenting the CFW as a showcase and starting point: a) the importance of tools that provide support to the global research community regarding aspects of data protection (or legal and ethical research standards in general), and b) the challenges, ways and benefits of developing such a tool as a multilingual resource.
            We would like to highlight the potential of our internationalization approach as a template for other projects, e.g. for the development of a multilingual library of terms that are commonly used on comparable interfaces. In addition, we would like to critically discuss issues that can arise in the course of translation - especially in the case of legal tech where portability and compatibility with national legislations are essential. Keeping a multilingual tool sustainable and accurate presents a tremendous challenge: we will explore how this could be achieved as a collaborative, community-driven effort and invite colleagues to share their own expertise in implementing multilingual resources.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Asef, E. / Wagner, C. / Lee, M. / Nowak, S. (2019): 
                        Workshop Report Non-Latin Scripts in Multilingual Environments: research data and digital humanities in area studies. 
                        https://blogs.fu-berlin.de/bibliotheken/2019/01/18/workshop-nls2018/
                    
                    
                        Bermúdez Sabel, H. / Cayless, H. / Meneses, L. / Nagasaki, K. / Rio Riande, G. / Scholger, M. (2019): 
                        Communicating the TEI Across Linguistic and Cultural Boundaries. 
                        https://trianglesci.org/2019/07/17/communicating-the-tei-to-a-multilingual-user-community
                    
                    
                        DARIAH-EU Working Group Ethics and Legality in Digital Arts and Humanities (2020): 
                        The ELDAH Consent Form Wizard. 
                        https://consent.dariah.eu/
                    
                    
                        e-editiones (2017): 
                        TEI publisher. 
                        https://teipublisher.com/
                    
                    
                        European Union (2019): 
                        Directive (EU) 2019/790 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single Market and amending Directives 96/9/EC and 2001/29/EC. 
                        https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/790/oj
                    
                    
                        Kamocki, P. (2021): 
                        Handouts on the processing of personal data for the purposes of language research and archiving of language resources under the General Data Protection Regulation. 
                        https://doi.org/10.14618/ids-pub-10695
                    
                    
                        Kamocki, P. / Ketzan, E. / Wildgans, J. (2018): 
                        Language Resources and Research Under the General Data Protection Regulation. 
                        http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-97562
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            The project Linked Open Dictionaries (LiODi) was funded in the eHumanities programme of the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF, 2015-2022) and conducted in collaboration between empirical linguistics and computational linguistics at the Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany.
            Our goals were two-fold. In terms of humanities, it pursued the study of language contact in the Caucasus, especially on North-Eastern Caucasian and Armenian in their contact with Kartvelian (Georgian), Iranian and Turkic (Rind-Pawlowski 2017, Chiarcos et al. 2018, Bellamy and Schreur 2021). In terms of digital methodology, the project pioneered, explored and advocated the use of RDF and Linked Data formalisms for research questions in the philologies and linguistic typology. We summarize this aspect, our achievements, experiments, and challenges encountered, and we discuss implications for the future use of Linked Data and RDF technologies in linguistics and philologies.
            While Semantic Web technology has been well established in Digital Humanities prior to the project, this was largely restricted to prosopography, entity linking and object metadata; the potential of Linked Data to achieve interoperability for dictionaries and digital editions still remained underexplored. This situation changed, and to some extent, our project laid the groundwork for subsequent DH projects that adopted technologies and formalisms developed by the project. 
            The project initiated and contributed to community standards for various language resources:
            
                OntoLex: OntoLex-Lemon is a community standard for lexical resources. Inspired by the application of Monnet-Lemon to the conjoint development of ontologies and dictionaries (Weingart and Giovannetti 2016), LiODi engaged with the W3C Community Group Ontology-Lexica for developing novel OntoLex modules for morphology (OntoLex-Morph; Klimek et al. 2019) and corpus information (OntoLex-FrAC, Chiarcos et al. 2020b)
                Ligt: We developed an RDF vocabulary for interlinear glossed text, in order to overcome technological barriers between conventionally used software used for glossing (Chiarcos et al. 2017, Ionov 2021).
                CoNLL-RDF: We developed an RDF vocabulary and a converter suite for annotations as used in NLP and corpus linguistics (Chiarcos & Fäth 2017).
                TEI+RDFa: Following a survey of the relation of TEI and RDF (Chiarcos and Ionov 2019), we proposed RDFa for an inline XML representation. Together with the Academy of Sciences in Heidelberg, Germany, and the POSTDATA project, we provided the first implementation of TEI+RDFa for a small-scale digital edition and demonstrated its benefits for linking and querying via open web services (Tittel et al. 2018).
            
            All our code and all distributable data are available over our GitHub repository (
                , 
                ). Language resources produced on this basis include the single largest collection of machine-readable open source bi-dictionaries, the ACoLi Dictionary Graph, published in accordance with Linked Data principles and using OntoLex-Lemon (Chiarcos et al. 2020a, see Fig. 1). In terms of software, notable contributions include tools for the detection of cognates and loan words and for translation inference across dictionaries (Chiarcos et al. 2020c).
            
            
                
                    
                Fig. 1. The ACoLi Dictionary graph: 3000+ bi-dictionaries (edges in the diagram) for more than 400 languages (nodes in the diagram) in machine-readable formats (OntoLex-Lemon) and published as open source, source: 
                . Colors indicate language families or regions.
            
            Furthermore, a main contribution of the project lay in documentation and dissemination of LOD technology in linguistics, language technology and philologies. On an international level, this includes the first text book on the topic (Cimiano et al. 2020), the organization of workshops and conferences, and four summer schools/datathons (SD-LLOD 2017, 2019, 2022; EUROLAN 2021). In particular, our datathons proved highly effective in disseminating LOD expertise into other LOD-affine projects and contributed to the conception of novel projects by third parties. This includes the use of LOD in academic publishing (Nordhoff 2020, Ligt), infrastructure projects and community portals (Page-Perron et al. 2017 for cuneiform: CoNLL-RDF; Mambrini and Passarotti 2018, Pellegrini et al. 2021 for Latin: OntoLex-Morph, CoNLL-RDF) and projects for digital edition and lexicography (Mondaca and Rau 2020: OntoLex and TEI+RDFa; Chiarcos et al., accepted: TEI+RDFa).
            As for key experiences, there are three main conclusions we arrived at at the end of the project:
            
                LOD and RDF technologies are ideally suited as middle-ware for DH projects. They facilitate information integration between and linking from various resources. In particular, it is not required to abandon established workflows, but only an RDF wrapper for their components.
                Existing RDF technology is sufficiently versatile to provide such an additional layer of interoperability over existing solutions and workflows with moderate effort. W3C standards and RDF serializations provide interoperability with XML (RDFa), JSON (JSON-LD), tabular formats (RDB2RDF, CoNLL-RDF), etc.
                RDF technology is generic, that is, in many cases not sufficiently optimized for real-time performance. Although we provide technology running on RDF backends (e.g., CQP4RDF, Ionov et al. 2020), we see the main benefit of RDF technology at the moment in the backend and between existing tools rather than as their basis, mostly for reasons of backward-compatibility. In the end, we moved the focus of the project from providing a designated new toolbox into the development of a technology stack that allowed researchers to continue working with their existing tools, and then integrate and link the results.
            
            Finally, we also conclude with a somewhat bitter note: The project produced considerable amounts of open source data, but we are now in a situation where we could not secure adequate long-term hosting. This is not so much because of the lack of hosting solutions, but that we found that none of the portals we explored would support depositing data dumps in a way that they provide resolvable URIs. So, we can (and do) make our open source RDF data available, but we cannot provide it as linked data, because academic solutions such as Zenodo and commercial providers such as GitHub do not allow to declare the data with the adequate mediatype but force data providers to resort to text/plain or application/octet-stream (Chiarcos 2021).
            When trying to access and process this data, especially in federated search, tools and users may thus be confronted with their SPARQL engines producing unpredictable results, as the correct format needs to be guessed heuristically, and existing SPARQL engines differ in their behaviour. In our opinion, the lack of such hosting solutions (at least in Europe) contributes significantly to the perceived instability and unreliability of LOD-based technologies. This is, however, less a technical problem than a political or administrative one, and one we would like to discuss with the community.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bellamy, K., and Schreur, J. W. (2019). Multiple Methods for Investigating Code-Switching in Batsbi Nominal Constructions. In 
                        Linguistic Forum 2019: Indigeneous Languages of Russia and Beyond (p. 20).
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., and Fäth, C. (2017). CoNLL-RDF: Linked corpora done in an NLP-friendly way. In 
                        International Conference on Language, Data and Knowledge (pp. 74-88). Springer, Cham.
                    
                    Chiarcos, C. and Ionov, M. (2019). Linking the TEI: Approaches, Limitations, Use Cases. In 
                        Digital Humanities Conference 2019 (DH2019), Utrecht University, July.
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Ionov, M., Rind-Pawlowski, M., Fäth, C., Schreur, J. W., and Nevskaya, I. (2017). LLODifying linguistic glosses. In 
                        International Conference on Language, Data and Knowledge (pp. 89-103). Springer, Cham.
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Donandt, K., Sargsian, H., Ionov, M., and Schreur, J. W. (2018). Towards LLOD-based language contact studies. A case study in interoperability. In 
                        Proceedings of LREC-2018, May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Fäth, C., and Ionov, M. (2020a). The ACoLi dictionary graph. In 
                        Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (pp. 3281-3290).
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Ionov, M., de Does, J., Depuydt, K., Khan, F., Stolk, S., Declerck, T., and McCrae, J. P. (2020b, May). Modelling frequency and attestations for Ontolex-lemon. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2020 Globalex Workshop on Linked Lexicography (pp. 1-9).
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Schenk, N., and Fäth, C. (2020c). Translation Inference by Concept Propagation. In 
                        Proceedings of the 2020 Globalex Workshop on Linked Lexicography (pp. 98-105).
                    
                    Chiarcos, C. (2021). Get! Mimetypes! Right!. In 
                        Proceedings of the 
                        3rd Conference on Language, Data and Knowledge (LDK 2021). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
                    
                    Chiarcos, C., Gelumbeckaite, J., Drach, M., and Ionov, M. (accepted). 
                        The Postil Time Machine: The Lithuanian Lutheran Postils of the 16th Century, accepted at DH2022.
                    
                    Cimiano, P., Chiarcos, C., McCrae, J. P., and Gracia, J. (2020). 
                        Linguistic Linked Data. Springer International Publishing.
                    
                    Ionov, M. (2021). APiCS-Ligt: Towards Semantic Enrichment of Interlinear Glossed Text. In 
                        P
                        roceedings of the 
                        3rd Conference on Language, Data and Knowledge (LDK 2021). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
                    
                    Ionov, M., Stein, F., Sehgal, S., & Chiarcos, C. (2020). cqp4rdf: Towards a Suite for RDF-Based Corpus Linguistics. In 
                        Proceedings of the 
                        European Semantic Web Conference 
                        (ESWC-2020). Springer, Cham.
                    
                    Klimek, B., McCrae, J. P., Bosque-Gil, J., Ionov, M., Tauber, J. K., and Chiarcos, C. (2019). Challenges for the representation of morphology in ontology lexicons. In 
                        Proceedings of eLex-
                        2019.
                    
                    Mambrini, F., and Passarotti, M. (2019). Linked Open Treebanks. Interlinking Syntactically Annotated Corpora in the LiLa Knowledge Base of Linguistic Resources for Latin. In 
                        Proceedings of the 18th International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT, SyntaxFest 2019) (pp. 74-81).
                    
                    Mondaca, F., and Rau, F. (2020). Transforming the Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries into Ontolex-Lemon. In 
                        Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2020) (pp. 11-14).
                    
                    Nordhoff, S. (2020). Modelling and annotating interlinear glossed text from 280 different endangered languages as Linked Data with LIGT. In 
                        Proceedings of the 14th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (pp. 93-104).
                    
                    Pagé-Perron, E., Sukhareva, M., Khait, I., Chiarcos, C. (2017). Machine translation and automated analysis of the Sumerian language. In 
                        Proceedings of the Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature (pp. 10-16).
                    
                    Pellegrini, M., Litta Modignani Picozzi, E. M. G., Passarotti, M., Mambrini, F., and Moretti, G. (2021). The Two Approaches to Word Formation in the LiLa Knowledge Base of Latin Resources. In 
                        Proceedings of the 
                        Third International Workshop on Resources and Tools for Derivational Morphology (pp. 101-109). ATILF.
                    
                    Rind-Pawlowski, M. (2017). Formation and function of the imperfective stems in Khinalug. In 
                        Proceedings of 
                        Historical Linguistics of the Caucasus (Paris, 12–14 April, 2017) (pp. 168-177).
                    
                    Tittel, S., Bermúdez-Sabel, H., and Chiarcos, C. (2018). Using RDFa to link text and dictionary data for Medieval French. In 
                        Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan (pp. 7-12).
                    
                    Weingart, A., and Giovannetti, E. (2016). Extending the lemon model for a dictionary of old Occitan medico-botanical terminology. In 
                        Proceedings of the 
                        European Semantic Web Conference 
                        (ESWC-2016) (pp. 408-421). Springer, Cham.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Database structures and export formats of Handwritten Text Recognition tools (e.g. Transkribus, Tesseract, eScriptorium) are usually based on a document layout hierarchy with regions/zones and lines. Interlinear or marginal additions to the main text are in separate zones and lines (Page XML, Alto XML) (Kahle et al. 2017, Stokes et al. 2021).
            While this is less problematic for documentary texts (Chagué et al. 2021), it poses a problem for those working on critical editions of literary texts with multiple textual witnesses because any such edition presupposes a running text hierarchy (books, chapters, verses), where the interlinear and marginal additions need to be inserted at the right spots. This is a precondition to using text-alignment tools such as CollatEx (Dekkers et al. 2011).
            We present a pipeline that permits to overcome this problem for Medieval Hebrew manuscripts in a semi-automatized fashion beginning with the discovery of insertion marks in the HTR process and leading to a critical edition in TEI: 
            
                We include a series of different insertion marks in the recognition training data for the HTR. Different insertion marks distinguish between interlinear and marginal additions (Stökl Ben Ezra et al. 2021). 
                Optimal matches of insertion marks with a) interlinear lines and b) marginal additions are calculated with the “Hungarian Algorithm” (Kuhn 1955). The results can be visualized via eScriptorium’s API for image annotation (see fig. 1).
                A. If there is already an e-text of a printed edition with an accepted text hierarchy, we use the Dicta synopsis-algorithm via an API (Brill et al. 2020) or alternatively a combination of global and local alignments of the Smith-Waterman (1981) and Needleman Wunsch (1970) algorithms to align the main text of the HTRed manuscript with the standard edition to calculate the places for the textual hierarchy markers. This needs to be manually verified subsequentially, especially if some of the markers for the text hierarchy should be in the interlinear or marginal additions.
                    B. If there is no printed edition, the text hierarchy markers need to be inserted manually. This is usually necessary only for one manuscript (if there is a manuscript that represents the complete text).
                
                Based on the combination of 2 and 3, the first manuscript transcription in the HTR tool can now be converted from document hierarchy to text hierarchy TEI. If there was no printed edition (3B), the text hierarchy markers of this manuscript can be used in step 3A to automatically insert them. 
                The resulting data is submitted via json to an optimized Needleman-Wunsch algorithm, Collatex or another alignment tool (Brill et al. 2020) to automatically produce an alignment between the different witnesses. For error correction, Microsoft Excel can be used or the tool in step 7. 
                Text comparison in the alignment can serve to resolve most of the abbreviations.
                The final result is fed into TEI-Publisher (Turska and Meier 2021). We hope to be able to integrate a tabular tool that allows to manually but ergonomically correct any misalignments of the automatic alignment process to produce the critical edition: 
                    https://editions.erabbinica.org/
                
                The TEI-Publisher publication includes accessibility via DTS (Distributed Text Service).
            
            Fig. 1: eScriptorium with 3 panels turned on: On the left, the image annotation panel with the triangles representing the links between marginal (blue) or interlinear (red) insertion spots and the first and last word of the insertion, the segmentation panel. In the center, the image annotation panel with the main text and the marginal and interlinear text lines. On the right, the manually corrected automatic transcription.
            
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Almas, B., Clérice, T., Cayless, H., Jolivet, V., Liuzzo, P., Romanello, M., Robie, J., and Scott, I. (2021). Distributed Text Services (DTS): a Community-built API to Publish and Consume Text Collections as Linked Data (
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03183886) 
                    
                    
                        Brill, O., Koppel, M., and Shmidman, A. (2020). FAST: Fast and Accurate Synoptic Texts. 
                        Digital Scholarship Humanities 35(2): 254-264.
                    
                    
                        Chagué, A. and Scheithauer, H.
                         (2021). page2tei - LECTAUREP [Computer software]: 
                        https://github.com/lectaurep/page2tei
                    
                    
                        Dekker, R. H. and Middell, G. (2011). Computer-Supported Collation with CollateX: Managing Textual Variance in an Environment with Varying Requirements. 
                        Supporting Digital Humanities University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 17-18 November 2011.
                    
                    
                        
                            Kahle, P., Colutto, S., Hackl, G., 
                            and 
                        
                        
                            Mühlberger
                        
                        
                            ,
                             G. (2017). 
                        
                        Transkribus - A Service Platform for Transcription, Recognition and Retrieval of Historical Documents,”
                         OST@ICDAR 2017: 19-24
                    
                    
                        
                            Kuhn, H. (1955). "The Hungarian Method for the assignment problem," 
                            Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 2: 83–97. 
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Needleman, 
                            S. and 
                            Wunsch, C. (1970). "A general method applicable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins," Journal of Molecular Biology 48 (3): 443–53.
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Smith, T
                            . and
                             Waterman, M. (1981). "Identification of Common Molecular Subsequences." Journal of Molecular Biology 147 (1): 195–197.
                        
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Kiessling, B., Tissot, R. and Gargem, E. (2021). “
                        The eScriptorium VRE for Manuscript Cultures” in Claire 
                        Clivaz and Garrick V. Allen (eds), 
                        Ancient Manuscripts and Virtual Research Environments, special issue, 
                        Classics@ 18 n.p. 
                    
                    
                        Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Brown-DeVost, B., and Jablonski, P. (2021). “Exploiting Insertion Symbols for Marginal Additions in the Recognition Process to Establish Reading Order” 
                        IWCP@ICDAR 2021.
                    
                    
                        Turska, M., Meier, W. (2021). 
                        TEI Publisher
                        http://teipublisher.com. (version 7, 2021)
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Aim of the workshop
                In the half-day workshop, DraCor (https://dracor.org), an open platform for researching plays in different languages, will be introduced using practical examples from digital drama analysis. At the center of DraCor are so-called 'Programmable Corpora'. By this we mean infrastructurally research-oriented, open, extensible, Linked-Open-Data-friendly full-text corpora, which should make it possible to address diverse research questions from the field of digital literary studies in a low-threshold way using corpora in a data-based, traceable, and reproducible way (Fischer et al. 2019).
                The workshop aims at people who
                - work or would like to work with literary texts and in particular with dramas and would like to create their own corpora for this purpose or reuse already existing corpora;
                - want to learn methods of digital drama analysis (network analysis, stylometry) or want to try them out on the basis of the Programmable Corpora approach;
                - are interested in the possibilities of researching literary texts using Linked Open Data (LOD).
                There will be a presentation of the concept of 'Programmable Corpora' as well as a demonstration of the exemplary implementation in the DraCor platform including a presentation of all components. Hands-on tutorials will give participants a practical introduction to creating and curating their own drama corpora for analysis with DraCor. Another part introduces the use of the DraCor API as well as the Python library PyDraCor by means of practical examples on the methods stylometry and network analysis. The Application Programming Interface (API) allows customized direct access to specific parts of the corpora. The possibilities for cross-corpus queries and inclusion of information from the Linked Open Data cloud using SPARQL will also be explored.
            
            
                The Concept of Programmable Corpora
                The core of DraCor consists of corpora of dramas in eleven languages (German, Russian, French, English, Italian, Swedish, Spanish, Ancient Greek, Alsatian, Latin, Bashkir and Tatar) as well as two additional author corpora (Shakespeare, Calderón), to which the platform offers a variety of possible research accesses: The dramas are encoded as XML files according to the TEI guidelines and are freely available under an open license via GitHub at https://github.com/dracor-org. They can be loaded from there, transformed or enriched by oneself if necessary, and reused for further research with any tools. 
                In addition to this "classical" modus operandi of corpus-based research, however, DraCor as an open digital ecosystem offers further interfaces and connected tools (network visualizations, Shiny App, Easy Linavis). Fundamental to this is the DraCor REST API (https://dracor.org/doc/api), which provides functions for retrieving data in different formats (TEI, JSON, plaintext, RDF, GEXF, GraphML) as well as some built-in analysis functionalities (e.g. on network metrics). The API can be used to retrieve not only structural and metadata, but also the full texts without further markup, so that methods such as stylometric analysis or topic modeling can be applied without any further intermediate step to remove markup. The DraCor API is documented in the OpenAPI standard and can be used in an interactive documentation implemented using Swagger UI (https://dracor.org/documentation/api) directly from the web browser. 
                API libraries are available for the Python (PyDraCor: https://github.com/dracor-org/pydracor) and R (rdracor: https://github.com/dracor-org/rdracor) programming languages, which allow the API functionalities to be integrated quickly and adapted to the respective programming language. For complex queries, a SPARQL endpoint (https://dracor.org/sparql) is available on the platform. This allows both cross-corpus and combined queries (federated queries), in which DraCor can be queried simultaneously with other resources available as LOD, such as Wikidata.
            
            
                Digital Drama Analysis with DraCor
                Corpus-based analyses of drama, usually using quantitative methods, have emerged as a distinct subfield of Computational Literary Studies (CLS) in recent years (cf. Willand et al. 2017; Reiter 2021). In this context, the provision of jointly curated and open resources such as DraCor has proven productive also for related disciplines such as computational linguistics (cf. for example Pagel, Reiter 2020).
                Methods operating at the word level have focused, for example, on authorship attribution (Schöch 2014) or genre classification with topic modeling (Schöch 2017). Currently, promising reconceptualizations of stylometric measures such as the measure Zeta are being developed and applied (Schöch 2018). Furthermore, on the basis of structurally annotated corpora, targeted analyses of, for example of stage directions can be performed, operating with POS information or semantic fields (Trilcke et al. 2020). 
                In the field of structural analysis, drama corpora were studied early on using network analytic approaches, beginning with the work of Stiller, Nettle, Dunbar (2003) and continuing, for example, with Moretti (2011). Typological work on, for example, the concept of Small Worlds (Trilcke et al. 2016) stands here alongside approaches to the quantitative classification of figure types (Fischer et al. 2018). 
                Although semantic technologies are now an integral part of the spectrum of methods in the digital humanities, they have rarely been applied in corpus-based CLS (on prose, for example, Frank and Ivanovic 2018; Dittrich 2017). However, the collection of metadata as Linked Data and the connection to external reference resources, especially Wikidata, allow for far-reaching query possibilities and can be profitably used for the analysis of literary corpora. For example, the DraCor corpus data does not contain detailed information on authors and performance locations. However, since the unique Wikidata identifiers are stored for the individual pieces, this information can be retrieved via federated queries in SPARQL and displayed in various visualization forms, such as a map.
            
            
                Learning objectives and timeline of the workshop
                In the first part of the workshop the concept of 'Programmable Corpora' will be introduced and discussed. Afterwards, the platform DraCor and its components will be introduced, with short practical phases during which the participants can directly try out the presented components and tools. In particular, the different possibilities for the reference and analysis of corpus data will be tested. One focus will be on the use of the API. The API functionalities will be explained with the help of interactive documentation and can be tested extensively by the participants. This will be followed by a short overview of corpus creation and the specifics of TEI encoding as used in DraCor.
                The second part of the workshop will consist of work phases in which three topics can be explored in more depth:
                (1) corpus creation and curation with DraCor: Participants will delve into TEI coding of dramas through hands-on exercises and learn how to set up a local instance of the platform using Docker, customize it if necessary, and populate it with their own corpora.
                (2) Drama analysis with DraCor API and Python: Using Jupyter notebooks with extensively documented Python code, participants will be introduced to methods of digital drama analysis using the DraCor API. The notebooks should also enable participants who have no previous experience in programming with Python to follow the individual analysis steps and to adapt them themselves in the sense of a literate programming approach. The notebooks implement concrete research questions on drama analysis, for example on the literary-historical development of network-analytical measures or on the quantitative dominance of characters.
                (3) Drama Analysis with Linked Data: The focus will be on practical analyses made possible from connecting DraCor to the Linked Open Data Cloud. The workshop will provide a brief crash course in the SPARQL query language, followed by joint queries of DraCor and Wikidata and visualization of the results.
            
            
                Organizational matters
                Number of possible participants: 25
                The Workshop will be held via Zoom. Software to be installed on local machines (Oxygen XML editor, Docker, ...) will be announced in advance. Materials will be made available on GitHub; Jupyter notebooks will be posted at (https://github.com/dracor-org/dracor-notebooks).
            
            
                Contributors / Contact details
                Ingo Börner (ingo.boerner@uni-potsdam.de) works as a research assistant in the project "CLSInfra" at the University of Potsdam on the further development of DraCor. His work focuses on data modeling and Linked Open Data.
                Frank Fischer (fr.fischer@fu-berlin.de) is Professor at the Freie Universität Berlin. His involvement with digital drama analysis goes back to the Digital Literary Network Analysis DLINA project (https://dlina.github.io), from which DraCor emerged.
                Peer Trilcke (trilcke@uni-potsdam.de) is Professor of modern German literature at the University of Potsdam. His work focuses on the research-based development of infrastructures for literary corpora and the quantitative analysis of literary texts.
                Carsten Milling (cmil@hashtable.de) is a web developer and is responsible for the development of the DraCor platform in the project "CLSInfra" at the University of Potsdam. 
                Henny Sluyter-Gäthje (sluytergaeth@uni-potsdam.de) is a research assistant at the Chair of 19th Century German Literature at the University of Potsdam. She holds a Master of Science in Cognitive Systems with a focus on computational linguistics and works on algorithmic processing of literary texts.
            
            
                Funding
                DraCor is currently being further developed within the EU Horizon 2020 funded project "CLSInfra" (grant number: 101004984, https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101004984).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Dittrich, Andreas (2017): "Intra-Connecting an Exemplary Literary Corpus with Semantic Web Technologies for Exploratory Literary Studies" in: Bański, Piotr et al. (Hg.): 
                        Proceedings of the Workshop on Challenges in the Management of Large Corpora and Big Data and Natural Language Processing (CMLC-5+BigNLP) 2017. Mannheim: Institut für Deutsche Sprache. https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-62441.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Trilcke, Peer / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Skorinkin, Daniil (2018): "To catch a protagonist: Quantitative dominance relations in german-language drama (1730–1930)" in: 
                        Digital Humanities 2018. Conference Abstracts. Mexico City: El Colegio de México / Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México / Red de Humanidades Digitales 193–201. 
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Börner, Ingo / Göbel, Mathias / Hechtl, Angelika / Kittel, Christopher / Milling, Carsten / Trilcke, Peer (2019): "Programmable Corpora: Die digitale Literaturwissenschaft zwischen Forschung und Infrastruktur am Beispiel von DraCor " in: 
                        DHd2019: »Digital Humanities: multimedial & multimodal«. Book of Abstracts. Mainz/Frankfurt a. M.: Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz / Goethe Universität Frankfurt, 194–197.
                    
                    
                        Frank, Andrew / Ivanovic, Christine (2018): "Building Literary Corpora for Computational Literary Analysis – A Prototype to Bridge the Gap between CL and DH" in: Calzolari, Nicoletta et al. (Hg.): 
                        Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). Miyazaki, Japan: European Language Resources Association.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, Franco (2011): "Network Theory, Plot Analysis " in: 
                        Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets 2. http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet2.pdf [letzter Zugriff 13.7.2021].
                    
                    
                        Pagel, Janis / Reiter, Nils (2020): "GerDraCor-Coref: A Coreference Corpus for Dramatic Texts in German" in: 
                        Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC). Marseille 55-64 http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2020/pdf/2020.lrec-1.7.pdf [Letzter Zugriff: 15.7.2021].
                    
                    
                        Reiter, Nils (2021): "Möglichkeiten Quantitativer Dramenanalyse" in: 
                        Comparatio. Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Literaturwissenschaft 12(2): 39–52.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christof (2017): "Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama" in: 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 11, Nr. 2 http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000291/000291.html [Letzter Zugriff: 15.7.2021].
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christof (2018): "Zeta für die kontrastive Analyse literarischer Texte. Theorie, Implementierung, Fallstudie" in: Bernhart, Toni et al. (Hg): 
                        Quantitative Ansätze in den Literatur- und Geisteswissenschaften. Systematische und historische Perspektiven. Berlin: de Gruyter 77–94 doi:10.1515/9783110523300-004.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christof (2014): "Corneille, Molière et les autres. Stilometrische Analysen zu Autorschaft und Gattungszugehörigkeit im französischen Theater der Klassik" in: Schneider, Lars / Schöch, Christof (Hg.): 
                        Literaturwissenschaft im digitalen Medienwandel. Beihefte zu Phin 7 http://web.fu-berlin.de/phin/beiheft7/b7t08.pdf [Letzter Zugriff: 15.07.2021].
                    
                    
                        Stiller, James / Nettle, Daniel / Dunbar, Robin I. M. (2003): "The Small World of Shakespeare's Plays" in: 
                        Human Nature 14: 397–408.
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, Peer / Fischer, Frank / Göbel, Mathias / Kampkaspar, Dario / Kittel, Christopher (2016): "Theatre Plays as ›Small Worlds‹? Network Data on the History and Typology of German Drama, 1730-1930" in: 
                        Digital Humanities 2016. Conference Abstracts. Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, Kraków 385-387 https://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/static/dh2016_abstracts.pdf [Letzter Zugriff: 15.07.2021].
                    
                    
                        Trilcke, Peer / Kittel, Christopher / Reiter, Nils / Maximova, Daria / Fischer, Frank (2020): "Opening the Stage. A Quantitative Look at Stage Directions in German Drama" in: 
                        Digital Humanities 2020. Conference Abstracts. Ottawa: University of Ottawa https://dh2020.adho.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/337_Opening​the​Stage​A​Quantitative​Look​at​Stage​Directions​in​German​Drama​.html [Letzter Zugriff: 15.07.2021].
                    
                    
                        Willand, Marcus / Trilcke, Peer / Schöch, Christof / Rißler-Pipka, Nanette / Reiter, Nils / Fischer, Frank (2017): "Aktuelle Herausforderungen der Digitalen Dramenanalyse" in: 
                        DHd 2017. Digitale Nachhaltigkeit. Konferenzabstracts. Bern: Universität Bern 175–180 doi:10.5281/zenodo.3684825.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Written signs of use
                How do we know that a medieval manuscript has actually been read? Early medieval readers of manuscripts rarely “signed” their books or included an ex libris. The modern researcher interested in whether a given manuscript was actually read looks for explicit signs of use left behind by readers: traces of interactions with the contents of the books they were reading, more often than not pen in hand. Such traces comprise a wide range of interventions.
                Despite his anonymity, perhaps the most famous reader of Old English texts is the so-called “Tremulous Hand of Worcester,” a monk of the Cathedral Priory at Worcester, who left his unmistakable mark on a significant number of Worcester manuscripts containing Old English in the first half of the thirteenth century. These manuscripts, however, were written in a form of English not readily comprehensible to him. He set out to learn to read it, and in the process left a wide range of signs of use in the books he used (some twenty manuscripts in total). The Tremulous Hand used a system of punctuation interventions in his work—distinct from the original punctuation applied by the Old English scribes who wrote the manuscripts—as a tool for construing that much older form of English (Harlow, 1959; Parkes, 1993; Johnson, 2006; Reimer, 2015; Johnson, 2021a). It was a kind of ‘interpretative pointing’, whereby he sounded out the Old English and used these punctuation interventions to work out the syntax and meaning of the text he was learning to read. Such interventions are also among the clearest indications of the parts of these texts that he was truly interested in; tracing them and subsequently mapping them out over the texts in which they appear reveals patterns of interest and is, we argue, like looking over the shoulder of the 13th-century scribe as he read these ancient books.
            
            
                Annotations as a collection tool
                In order to track, compile, and facilitate quantitative analysis of thousands of signs of use, we need a tool capable of capturing and indexing those written reading interventions from digital versions of the manuscripts. Annotations can be used to capture signs of use by delimiting and adding metadata to the part of the image where the sign appears. Although this may resemble the broader field of transcription, it differs as only a very small part of the text (the reading signs) are in scope; the aim is not to transcribe from pixels to text but to describe in an analytical perspective.
                Such a method proposes to use annotations as a collection tool. By adding specific metadata to the annotated reading signs captured, annotating the studied manuscript creates a research dataset to be used in quantitative analysis.
                The annotations are here a perfect device to bridge the close reading in context (the captured set of pixels) with the “distant reading” analysis done later on the metadata collected across the corpus of annotations (Moretti, 2013).
                Existing manuscript annotation tools focus on different tasks, such as transcription and curation, or are closely linked to one corpus (Nagasaki et al., 2016; Roddis and Cogapp, 2018; Almas et al., 2018). Our ambition is to fulfil our methodological need with a generic IIIF image annotation tool dedicated to collecting data for “distant reading” analysis.
            
            
                Tremulator application
                All of Johnson’s work on the Tremulous Hand’s interventions published thus far were facilitated by the first iteration of the Tremulator application (named after the scribe mentioned above) (Johnson, 2019; Johnson, 2021b). Development of 
                    Tremulator 2.0 was made possible by a grant from Florida State University. Tremulator 2.0 has been designed to fit our research project while at the same time targeting a wider range of applications. We set out to combine existing open source technologies related to image annotations to create a generic service for data collection.
                
                We chose to use the 
                    IIIF standards to facilitate accessibility to high resolution pictures and to benefit from existing collections already using this format around the world by employing an 
                    extended version of the existing IIIF-leaflet plugin.
                
                For all the benefits of IIIF compatibility, it is not unusual to have to work with images procured by the research team via other means. Thus the Tremulator contains a 
                    cantaloupe server to serve local files under IIIF format. By using IIIF as the common ground for image retrieval, Tremulator’s collections can mix different points of origins being a distant IIIF server or local files.
                
                The annotation shapes creation is handled as geojson geometries. To enable complex annotation description schemas, we developed a JSON-schema creation form. This form creates annotation schemas by allowing the combining of numeric, textual and list of values fields. To allow reviewing the schemas on the go, new fields can be created at any time of data collection.
                The collected data can be explored in a dedicated analysis page or exported as CSV to drive further analysis in other software.
                The ability to create multiple custom data schemas for annotations, to use the IIIF format for both local or remote images and to browse annotation picture snippets are Tremulator’s key features compared to other similar tools such as Recogito
                     Recogito, an initiative of Pelagios Commons, 
                         (accessed 11 April 2022)
                    .
                
            
            
                Discussion
                We hope to have contributed to the broad community of image analysis with software that facilitates rich data collection on images, by targeting a more generic application than the one our research project actually needs.
                So far we have focused on creating a usable web application for data collection and export. Future development will target more advanced visual analytics, such as heatmaps of image pages showing the positions of annotations.
                This tool will be of particular interest to scholars working in the fields of paleography, codicology, and other aspects of manuscript studies, but it should also appeal more broadly to anyone with an interest in the digital humanities, book history, art history, semiology, archeology and architecture, and any number of other fields for which the collection and visualization of irregular data is desirable.
            
            
                Figures
                
                    
                        
                        Tremulator’s Home page showing the list of one users’ collections
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Collection administration page
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Add pictures to a collection by uploading local images, providing remote images URLs and/or importing a IIIF Manifest
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Collection pictures gallery
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Annotations’ schema edition
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Annotation edition
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Annotations data table withsnippets and CSV export
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Annotations data as CSV in a spreadsheet software
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Almas, B., Khazraee, E., Miller, M. T. and Westgard, J. (2018). Manuscript Study in Digital Spaces: The State of the Field and New Ways Forward. 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly, 
                        012(2).
                    
                    
                        Harlow, C. G. (1959). Punctuation in Some Manuscripts of Ælfric. 
                        Review of English Studies, 
                        10: 1–19.
                    
                    
                        Johnson, D. F. (2006). Who Read Gregory’s Dialogues in Old English? In Wilcox, J. and Magennis, H. (eds), 
                        The Power of Words: Anglo-Saxon Studies Presented to Donald G. Scragg on His Seventieth Birthday. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, pp. 173–204.
                    
                    
                        Johnson, D. F. (2019). The Micro-Texts of the Tremulous Hand of Worcester: Genesis of a Vernacular liber exemplorum. In Lenker, U. and Kornexl, L. (eds), 
                        Anglo-Saxon Micro-Texts. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, pp. 225–66.
                    
                    
                        Johnson, D. F. (2021a). MS CUL Kk 3.18 and the Tremulous Hand of Worcester. In Brady, L. (ed), 
                        Essays on Old English Literature in Honor of J.R. Hall. MRTS, University of Arizona Press.
                    
                    
                        Johnson, D. F. (2021b). The Transmission and Reception of Alfredian ‘Apocrypha’. In Breay, C. and Story, J. (eds), 
                        Manuscripts in the Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms: Cultures and Connections. Dublin: Four Courts Press, pp. 98–107.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, F. (2013). 
                        Distant Reading. London: Verso.
                    
                    
                        Nagasaki, K., Tsuda, T., Muller, C. and Shimoda, M. (2016). Tagging on Buddhist Images via IIIF and TEI encoding. 
                        TEI Conference and Members’ Meeting. pp. 141–43.
                    
                    
                        Parkes, M. B. (1993). 
                        Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West. Berkeley: University of California Press.
                    
                    
                        Reimer, S. (2015). Manuscript Studies: Paleography: Punctuation 
                         (accessed 27 August 2015).
                    
                    
                        Roddis, T. and Cogapp, U. (2018). Making metadata into meaning: digital storytelling With IIIF. 
                        By N. Proctor & R. Cherry. MW18: MW.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
            
            
                Introduction
                For the past five years, we have been working on the development of infrastructure to build corpora and machine learning models for lemmatisation and morphosyntactic tagging. Ancient and medieval languages with rich morphology and high spelling variation represent a hanging fruit in the domain of these corpora. However, producing “gold” corpora is a tedious and costly task: even when the automatically produced annotations gain in quality thanks to ever more efficient models and vice versa, a significant amount of manual correction and validation work remains. 
                To reduce the cost and guarantee the interoperability of our corpora, we have built an ecosystem: (1) Pyrrha, a post-correction webapp for lemmatisation and morphosyntactic tags, (2) PyrrhaCI, a continuous integration tool for validating corpora, (3) Protogenie for merging and standardizing sometimes heterogeneous corpora, (4) Pie-Extended, a tagger taking into account the difference between real-world data training corpora and (5) Deucalion, a web service for annotation.
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Infrastructure developed at the École nationale des chartes
                    
                
            
            
                Producing data
                Pyrrha (Clérice and Pilla, 2021) is designed to accelerate the correction of lemmatisation and morphosyntactic annotation. When we started our work, our team members were using spreadsheets, which have the ability to display all tags and context at the same time. The Pyrrha web application takes up this principle of a tabular interface but adds powerful validation functionalities thanks to checklists (lexicons of lemmas and morphosyntactic tags) guaranteeing the interoperability of the newly produced corpora, as well as batch correction functionalities, inspired by PoCoto (Vobl et al., 2014), a correction interface for OCR. Both of these functionalities are at the core of Pyrrha and have proven to be useful in speeding up the correction of out-of-domain corpora (
                    cf. Figure 2). The application also allows collaboration, both for corpora and checklists, logging of corrections and export to multiple standards such as TEI and TSV.
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 2: Rolling average of the number of checked tokens per hour. Checking a token includes verifying its correctness and correcting it if necessary. Three waves of correction are visible, the first corpus was completely out-of-domain compared to the lemmatizer (Classical Latin), with the end of the corpus being very different from the rest of the corpus in terms of spelling (letters K and W appeared), themes and syntax. The second and third wave benefits of a new model, retrained on the data produced in wave 1: as a result, there is less corrections and a faster checking rate on waves 2 and 3. Wave 3 is composed of two blocs: one is Thomas More's 
                            Utopia (beginning of W3) and the other the Legenda Aurea which was nearly 100% correct, hence the effectiveness. Each wave / corpus was corrected and proofread on all categories that Pyrrha allows: Lemma, POS and morphological tags.
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Curating Corpora
                While 
                    Pyrrha produces data that should be compliant with standard reference sets, mistake happens. 
                    PyrrhaCI (Clérice et al., 2021) is meant for testing the following attributes of datasets
                
                
                    respect of reference sets;
                    cross-categorical annotations (
                        e.g. POS(dog)!=Verb);
                    
                    n-gram tagging (
                        e.g. ADJ should not be followed by VERcon).
                    
                
                Each test failure can be manually ignored for further tests, allowing for a more agile interpretation of grammar. PyrrhaCI is meant to be used as a continuous integration tool, through Github Actions or TravisCI, to validate datasets in open repositories and track the issues raised by editions.
                
                    Protogenie (Clérice, 2020b) is focused on preparing datasets for training. It is meant for the following:
                
                
                    keeping track of and using the same original train/dev/test splits while adding new data in order to have “uniform”' evaluation,
                    allowing for normalization of datasets that come from different projects in different formats,
                    adding transformation to the original dataset (while respecting (1)), such as removing the distinction between U and V in Latin, replacing labels, splitting multi-categorical tags, etc.
                
                While (1) is easily taken care of, it is, in our experience, common to find datasets with different formatting choices or data-based variations such as punctuation, capitalization, morphological tags. Protogenie enables normalization of the “behavior” of different corpora, without having to work with pre-modified files, facilitating easy update of the latter and ensuring the stability of training and performances evaluation.
            
            
                Producing new data: our lemmatization pipeline
                Our models are trained with 
                    Pie (Manjavacas et al., 2019)
                    We moved to a small fork of Pie, https://github.com/lascivaroma/PaPie, which includes tailored functionalities for our training sets., a lemmatizer with state-of-the-art results on pre-orthographic and morphologically rich languages and a relatively flexible and stable python API. Once trained, our models are served through 
                    Pie-Extended. Its first function is to bridge the gap between the real-world data and the curated training data by normalizing the first according to the latter
                    
                        E.g. in our Latin dataset shared with us by the LASLA, there was no punctuation. Unknown character can trigger weird behaviors in neural networks system, from our experience, creating issues for both the context of other lemma and its own lemmatization.
                    . It also provides features such as token
                    
                        E
                        .g. metadata token with text identifiers.
                     passthrough (
                    cf. Figure 3).
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 3: Steps for token pass-through in Pie-Extended
                    
                
                Finally, as not everyone knows how to install and run a python program in a shell, we produced the Deucalion interface (Clérice, 2020a), meant both for documenting (with complete bibliography for each model and software) and tagging. It is a software layer allowing to use Pie-Extended on the web. This Deucalion interface can be used as a stand-alone web application or an API.
            
            
                Conclusion
                Over the last five years, this infrastructure has allowed us to build a 1+ million token corpus of Old French (Camps et al., 2021), a couple of datasets in both classical and late Latin (Clérice, 2021; Glaise and Clérice, 2021), one for pre-orthographic Early Modern French (Gabay et al., 2020), and others. There are improvements we would still like to make (
                    e.g. the user-friendliness and capacities of PyrrhaCI) and we now have our eyes on 
                    data valorization, through the reuse of tools such as Blacklab (Does, de et al., 2017)
                    A demo for Latin is available at https://blacklab.alpheios.net/latin-texts/search thanks to Alpheios.. Pyrrha has made lemmatization easier for our collaborators and made it a simpler task to produce data and share them across projects. This paper will be an opportunity to present a proven ecosystem, and also to assess its benefits, its costs and shortcomings.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Camps, J.-B., Clérice, T., Duval, F., Ing, L., Kanaoka, N. and Pinche, A. (2021). Corpus and Models for Lemmatisation and POS-tagging of Old French.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T. (2020a). 
                        Flask_pie, a Pie-Extended Wrapper for Flask. https://github.com/hipster-philology/flask_pie.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T. (2020b). 
                        Protogenie, Post-Processing for NLP Dataset. Zenodo doi:10.5281/zenodo.3883585. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3883585.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T. (2021). Lemmatisation et analyse morpho-syntaxique des Priapées. https://github.com/lascivaroma/priapea-lemmatization.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T., Blotière, É. and Schmied, M.-C. (2021). 
                        PyrrhaCI. https://github.com/hipster-philology/pyrrhaCI.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T. and Pilla, J. (2021). 
                        Pyrrha. doi:10.5281/zenodo.2325427.
                    
                    
                        Does, J. de, Niestadt, J. and Depuydt, K. (2017). Creating research environments with blacklab. 
                        CLARIN in the Low Countries: 245–58.
                    
                    
                        Gabay, S., Clérice, T., Camps, J.-B., Tanguy, J.-B. and Gille-Levenson, M. (2020). Standardizing linguistic data: method and tools for annotating (pre-orthographic) French. 
                        Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Digital Tools & Uses Congress. pp. 1–7.
                    
                    
                        Glaise, A. and Clérice, T. (2021). Du IIème siècle à Thomas More, un corpus gold de latin lemmatisé et annoté en morpho-syntaxe. doi:10.5281/zenodo.1234. https://github.com/chartes/latin-non-classical-data.
                    
                    
                        Manjavacas, E., Kádár, Á. and Kestemont, M. (2019). Improving Lemmatization of Non-Standard Languages with Joint Learning. 
                        ArXiv:1903.06939 [Cs] http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.06939 (accessed 24 November 2019).
                    
                    
                        Vobl, T., Gotscharek, A., Reffle, U., Ringlstetter, C. and Schulz, K. U. (2014). PoCoTo - an Open Source System for Efficient Interactive Postcorrection of OCRed Historical Texts. 
                        Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage. (DATeCH ’14). New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 57–61 doi:10.1145/2595188.2595197. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2595188.2595197 (accessed 26 November 2018).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            On our poster, we present the 
                Dehmel digital project (Hamburg University and Hamburg State and University Library; cf. Nantke, 2022) and its automatisation-oriented workflow for indexing historical letters. The project aims to digitise and index the letters of the correspondence network of Ida and Richard Dehmel, consisting of approximately 35,000 original handwritten letters. To be able to manage this huge amount of material, manual, semi-automatic and automatic/algorithm-driven work steps are interlinked in the project's workflow. Therefore, different machine learning techniques that belong to the methodological repertoire of the Digital Humanities are combined with each other. The goal is a digital network scholarly edition of the letters that makes the personal, cultural, and social dynamics contained in the correspondences tangible and explorable (cf. Nantke et al., 2022). There, the users can choose from various medial perspectives on the documents, from facsimiles and transcriptions to registers and visualizations, to pursue their diverse (research) interests.
            
            
                The workflow
                The process of converting the handwritten originals into machine-readable representations is divided into a series of successive work stages that produce different data. Each result of the respective work steps is another layer of abstraction from the original material (see fig. 1).
                
                    
                
                Figure 1: Different results of the worklow
                In order to establish a procedure that enables the indexing of such large manuscript corpora, but also keeps a philological standard of scholarly editions in mind, we combine several procedures already established within the Digital Humanities and modify them for the use in a digital edition (see fig. 2).
                
                    
                
                Figure 2: The individual work steps in in the Dehmel digital project
                After the original letters have been translated into high-resolution image digitisations and enriched with basic metadata, we transcribe about fifty handwritten document pages of one writer manually using Transkribus (cf. READ-COOP, 2021) until the data basis for training a Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) model has been created. Following the successful training, further transcription is carried out in iterative alternation between automated transcription and manual post-correction, whereby the corrected letters are again fed into the HTR workflow as training data for a new model.
                An XML processing chain converts these transcripts into a TEI-based format and applies a classifier of the Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (cf. Manning et al., 2014) to tag persons, places, institutions and artworks. The NER-classifier is adapted to the project’s material base since it is trained manually to recognise these four different types of entities in letters from artists from the period around 1900. Recognised entities are introduced inline while retaining the references to the layout and structure of the document. For this purpose, a simplified implementation of the Separated Markup API for XML (cf. Verwer, 2020) is used (cf. Maus, 2021) which integrates classified tokens of NER and annotations of textual characteristics. The entities recognised in this way are used as the basis for the semi-automated generation of registers. These enlist all of the included people, places, institutions, and artworks and direct them back to the relevant documents. To convert the entities into stable register entries, a machine-supported data reconciliation is carried out with norm data systems and local knowledge bases. For reconciliation, we use OpenRefine (cf. OpenRefine, 2022) and the Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND) (cf. Deutsche Nationalbibliothek, 2022) as a norm data system.
            
            
                The output
                The computer-assisted disambiguation of entity types with OpenRefine (cf. OpenRefine, 2022) forms the basis for registers as well as for manually created macro comments on the central actors, institutions, and artworks of the corpus (see fig. 3).
                
                    
                
                Figure 3: The homepage of the 
                    Dehmel digital project
                
                The algorithm-driven approach explained above ultimately enables both a basic overview of the entire corpus and partial correspondences. These are visualized as a dynamic, interactive network, which includes the letter’s senders, recipients, as well as everyone mentioned within the letters, and directs back to the respective documents (see fig. 4). By linking central entities, visualisations, and digitised letters, it becomes possible to gain precise insights into the extensive corpus and use it as a scholarly edited historical source.
                
                    
                
                Figure 4: Dynamic network visualisation of the correspondences as a network created with Graph Commons (cf. Arıkan et al., 2016)
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arıkan, B., Üstün, Z., Kızılay, A., Badur, A., Erikli, F., Zıngıl, Ö., Kılıçoğlu, D., Aldatmaz, A. and Dölec, G. (2016). Graph Commons. https://graphcommons.com (accessed 22 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (2022): GND. Gemeinsame Normdatei. 
                        
                            https://gnd.network/Webs/gnd/DE/Home/home_node.html
                         (accessed 12 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Manning, C., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J., Bethard, S. J. and McClosky, D. (2014). The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit. In: 
                        Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Baltimore, Maryland: ACL, pp.55–60.
                    
                    
                        Maus, D. (2021). XML NLP Pipeline, July 23, 2021. DOI: 10.25592/uhhfdm.9443.
                    
                    
                        Nantke, Julia (ed.) with the collaboration of Sandra Bläß and Marie Flüh (2022). Dehmel digital. 
                        https://dehmel-digital.de/ (accessed 19 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Nantke, Julia, Sandra Bläß, and Marie Flüh (2022). Literatur als Praxis: Neue Perspektiven auf Brief-Korrespondenzen durch digitale Verfahren. In: Fischer, F. and Horstmann, J. (eds.): 
                        Sonderband Text Praxis. Digitales Journal für Philologie. Digitale Verfahren in der Literaturwissenschaft.
                        DOI: https://doi.org/10.17879/64059432335.
                    
                    
                        OpenRefine (2022). OpenRefine. 
                        
                            https://openrefine.org/
                         (accessed 22nd November 2021).
                    
                    
                        READ-COOP (2021). Transkribus. KI-gestützte Handschriftenerkennung. 
                        
                            https://readcoop.eu/de/transkribus/
                         (accessed 22 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Verwer, N. (2020). Plain text processing in structured documents. In: Proceedings of Declarative Amsterdam 2020. DOI: 10.1075/da.2020.verwer.plain-text-processing.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Idea
                In literary and linguistic studies, the first sentence of a narratological context is a regularly studied object (on this, among others, Alt 2020, Haubrichs 1995, Hirdt 1974, Queng 2019, Miller 1965, Neuhaus 2019, Raulff 2019, Retsch 2000, Selbmann 2019). This is hardly surprising, since the first sentence has been regarded since Wolfgang Iser's study The Act of Reading as the entrance into the text through reading, as the key point of interaction between text and reader (1976: 38). In the richness of its various forms, the first sentence reveals “the treasures of literature in nuce” (Alt 2020: 18) and, with Alain Robbe-Grillet, it could be put forward that literary history is to be written from the study of its opening sentences (1992: 38).
                A systematic, digitally supported study of “first sentences” has yet to be carried out. Occasionally, corpora of first sentences in German have been collected by hand (Beck 1992, Beck 1993, Wolkersdorf 1994) and attempts have been made to draw up a typology of the first sentence in literature on the basis of selected individual analyses (most recently Alt 2020). A systematic categorisation on the basis of a semi-automated, larger corpus of research – as presented here – seems helpful. There are similar studies that inquire into the quintessence of the poetic in literature through its countability (cf. for example Moretti 2009, also Fischer/Strötgen 2015, Fischer/Jäschke 2018a/b); a single quantifying study dealing decidedly with German-language narrative beginnings (not first sentences) can be found in the work of Herrmann 2018.
                The aim of the corpus “First Sentences in German-Language Literature” is to address the “lack of an overall view” (Alt 2020: 246) of all previous studies on first sentences. To this end, a data corpus is created and published, on which an initial evaluation will be undertaken in an interlocking of quantitative and text-analytical approaches.
            
            
                Project
                Several full-text, open access corpora (
                    Deutsches Textarchiv, 
                    Zeno, etc.), from which texts were extracted according to genre, serve as source material. It is clear that although the existing full-text offerings provide varying degrees of structural information about the respective document, the automatic delimitation of closed text units is often non-trivial and not possible reliably without individual examination (e.g. in the case of anthologies, texts with several chapters, texts in several volumes). However, this is the prerequisite for extracting the first sentences. In addition, the beginning of the "poetic text" cannot always be clearly localised automatically, e.g. due to prefaces, dedication texts or introductions.
                
                Furthermore, the delimitation of “first sentences” is a semantic problem. Sentences can be understood as grammatical-analytical units that are separated from each other by certain punctuation marks, which accommodates machine processing. However, the signs used to delimit a sentence differ and change considerably. The absolute selectivity of some punctuation marks is also questionable depending on the context, which is why sentences are sometimes to be understood as units of meaning in which punctuation marks have a structuring but not interrupting function (cf. fig. 2a/b). Should we therefore rather speak of a flowing “beginning” or “start”? Thus, areas of vagueness play into the determination of "first sentences", which in turn can affect corpus consistency and comparability.
            
            
                Evaluation
                The currently created corpuses of novels, novellas and fairytales is completely encoded in TEI, including metadata and source information, including positional information (available at 
                    ). Depending on the genre, the number of first sentences ranges between 100 and 1,000 entries. With the help of the manually and automatically created annotations, the corpus can be analysed and visualised according to various parameters, such as date of publication, text genre, gender of author, references to persons, places or time in the text (cf. Fig. 1c) or length of the entire text. In addition, it is documented which selection criteria the respective data sources were subject to and how this should be taken into account in the evaluation with regard to the balance of the corpus (cf. Hug/Boenig 2021). To disseminate the corpus, the Twitter project 
                    @satzomat was launched in 2021, which sends two first sentences daily (cf. Figures 1–3).
                
                The aim is to create a “typology of incipits” with the help of computer-philological evaluation methods and to ask to what extent genres determined certain types of first sentences in the course of history (e.g. landscape image, frame story) and whether further correlations can be determined with the help of the metadata and annotations (see the project page 
                    for more information).
                
            
            
                Figures
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 1a/b/c: Novella beginnings
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 2a/b/c: Novel beginnings
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Fig. 3a/b/c: Fairy tale beginnings
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Alt, Peter-André (2020): 
                        ‘Jemand musste Josef K. verleumdet haben …’ Erste Sätze der Weltliteratur und was sie uns verraten. München: Beck.
                    
                    
                        Beck, Harald (1992)
                        :
                        Roman-Anfänge. Rund 500 erste Sätze. Zürich: Haffmans.
                    
                    
                        Beck, Harald (1993)
                        :
                        Romanenden. Rund 500 letzte Sätze. Zürich: Haffmans.
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Strötgen, Jannik (2015): “Wann findet die deutsche Literatur statt? – Zur Untersuchung von Zeitausdrücken in großen Korpora.” Presented at the DHd2015 
                        Von Daten zu Erkenntnissen: Digitale Geisteswissenschaften als Mittler zwischen Information und Interpretation. 2. Tagung des Verbands "Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum" (DHd2015), Graz: Zenodo. 
                         [last access: 9. December 2021]
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Jäschke, Robert (2018a): “Liebe und Tod in der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek. Der DNB-Katalog als Forschungsobjekt der digitalen Literaturwissenschaft.” Presented at the DHd 2018 Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. 5. Tagung des Verbands "Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum" (DHd 2018), Köln: Zenodo. 
                         [last access: 9. December 2021]
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank / Jäschke, Robert (2018b): “Ein Quantum Literatur. Empirische Daten zu einer Theorie des literarischen Textumfangs.” DFG-Symposium “Digitale Literaturwissenschaft”. Villa Vigoni, 9.–13. Oktober 2017. [unpublished]
                    
                    
                        Haubrichs, Wolfgang (1995): “Kleine Bibliographie zu “Anfang” und “Ende” in narrativen Texten (seit 1965)”, in: Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 25, 99: 36-50.
                    
                    
                        Herrmann, Berenike (2018): “Anschaulichkeit messen. Eine quantitative Metaphernanalyse an deutschsprachigen Erzählanfängen zwischen 1880 und 1926”, in: Köppe, Tilmann / Singer, Rüdiger (eds.): 
                        Show, don’t tell: Konzepte und Strategien anschaulichen Erzählens. Bielefeld: Aisthesis 167-212.
                    
                    
                        Hirdt, Willi (1974): “Incipit. Zu einer Poetik des Romananfangs”, in: Romanische Forschungen LXXXVI: 419-436.
                    
                    
                        Hug, Marius / Boenig, Matthias (2021): Die Geschichte der Digitalen Bibliothek, oder: Aller guten Kurationen sind drei+: 
                         [last access: 9. December 2021]
                    
                    
                        Iser, Wolfgang (1976): Der Akt des Lesens. Theorie ästhetischer Wirkung. München: Fink.
                    
                    
                        Miller, Norbert (1965): 
                        Romananfänge. Versuch zu einer Poetik des Romans. Berlin: Verl. Literarisches Colloquium.
                    
                    
                        Moretti, Franco (2009): Style, Inc Reflections on Seven Thousand Titles (British Novels, 1740-1850), in: 
                        Critical Inquiry 36, I: 134-158.
                    
                    
                        Neuhaus, Stefan (2019): “Aber wehe, wehe, wehe! Wenn ich auf das Ende sehe!!” Wie in Romanen und Erzählungen durch Anfang und Ende ein Rahmen erzeugt wird, in: Neuhaus, Stefan / Weber, Petra (eds.): 
                        Anfangen und Aufhören. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink 141-157.
                    
                    
                        Queng, Jesse (2019): “Syntaktische Strukturen als poetologisches Mittel des Anfangens in der Prosa: Der erste Satz von Heinrich Bölls Irischem Tagebuch”, in: Neuhaus, Stefan / Weber, Petra (eds.): 
                        Anfangen und Aufhören. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink 89-101.
                    
                    
                        Raulff, Ulrich (2019): “Letzte Sätze”, in: 
                        Zeitschrift für Ideengeschichte 13: 129-142.
                    
                    
                        Retsch, Annette (2000): 
                        Paratext und Textanfang. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
                    
                    
                        Richardson, Brian (2008): 
                        Narrative Beginnings: Theories and Practices. University of Nebraska Press.
                    
                    
                        Robbe-Grillet, Alain (1992): “Warum und für wen schreibe ich”, in: Bühler, Karl Alfred (ed.): 
                        Robbe-Grillet zwischen Moderne und Postmoderne - "nouveau roman", "nouveau cinéma" und "nouvelle autobiographie". Tübingen: Narr.
                    
                    
                        Selbmann, Rolf (2019): “Lauter erste Sätze”, in: Neuhaus, Stefan / Weber, Petra (eds.): 
                        Anfangen und Aufhören. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink 67-87.
                    
                    
                        Wolkersdorfer, Andreas (1994): 
                        Der erste Satz. Österreichische Romananfänge 1960-1980. Wien: WUV Univ.-Verl.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Not all Humanities have been equally touched by the digital. For textual scholarship, history and linguistics, for instance, we can have a substantial number of scholarly contributions, particularly when we include experiences embodied in projects and resources. However, comparatively speaking, digital literary criticism has had few followers. An exception are Computational Literary Studies (CLS) that apply quantitative methods to large amount of literary and bibliometric data. Linked to the methods of distant reading [Moretti, 2005], this approach enjoys great success today, while web resources like Voyant, software like Gephi, and programming environments like R, have made text mining very accessible, even for those with limited computer skills. Linked to this approach, stylometry and authorship attribution are also thriving. Particularly mediatized researches are the initiatives that led to "unmasking" the identies of Robert Galbraith, a pseudonym of J.K. Rowling, and Elena Ferrante [Joula, 2015; Tuzzi and Cortelazzo, 2018]. However, literary criticism connected to close reading seems almost absent from the DH radar. The CATMA tool, designed to define personalized tagsets for (mainly) literary analysis [Meister 2020], represents a bright exception. Meister, in fact, is one of the few scholars that has engaged with digital literary criticism and digital hermeneutics; the latter has been explored also by Van Zundert (2016) and Ramsey (2011), but from a quantitative perspective. Relatively few scholars in DH have to addressed literary criticism with qualitative approaches, which are, conversely, among the most important for non-digital literary scholars.
            The reasons for this absence are probably to be found in the controversies about the use of markup within texts that have inflamed the scholarly community since the Eighties. The act of adding explicit markers in the text has been subjected to scrutiny, as it is perceived (rightly) as a harbinger of interpretation and this fact has been (and is, to a certain extent, still) perceived as an invasion, a disfigurement of the text; Cummings (2008) gives a vivid account of the debate and reflects on how it has limited the use of TEI for literary criticism. The argument goes that once the text is marked up, it cannot be reused by others because the interpretation added by the encoder would make it unusable. According to this vision, digital texts must be made available in their most neutral and objective form, and any form of annotation, including editorial, must be avoided. Sperberg-McQueen 1991 and Cummings 2008, amongst others, have tried to address the issue, and I have argued elsewhere on the hermeneutic fallacy of the category of objectivity [Pierazzo 2015]; but these methods remain far from impacting “the Humanities at large” and in particular the literary scholars [Meister 2020]. However, in order to contextualize this debate, one should go back to when this controversy was born. The urgency of those years was to put texts online, to create literary corpora for concordances and the study of word frequencies; at the time, digital acquisition of texts, the transformation of the printed into sequences of characters to be analyzed by computers (Machine Readable Form) was mostly done by hand, with an enormous expenditure of time and energy. The emphasis was therefore on making texts available and on the need of not repeating work. Researchers did not want to work with texts full of manually added codes which then had to be removed just as manually in order to reuse the texts.
            It is worth noting, though, how this discourse hides the concept of DH as a service: the goal was thought produce resources for others to do “real” research. This argument is not only dangerous, condemning DH to a mere service, but also wrong, as text, any text, can only be the result of the dialectical compromise between the source documents that contains it and scholars that interpret it (even when they “only” transcribe it), and therefore no text can ever be considered objectively neutral [Pierazzo, 2015]. Today conditions have changed: most literary texts are digitally available in many versions, not to mention the plethora of tools and methods to “get rid of” markup, therefore the objections do not stand in the same way.
            Another obstacle for the uptake of DH in literary studies is the conviction that close reading and critical interpretation only require a reader, a text, and a (printed) essay, and therefore computers, in this context, are useful as typewriters [Kirschenbaum, 2016]. Yet, the lack of experimentation and engagement of the scholarly community in DH for literary analysis does not allow for a clear assessment of the epistemological added value of using computers for one or few texts at a time. But shouldn’t be this the moment for rethinking Digital Literary Studies? Couldn’t we at least try to use markup, ontologies and other methods to understand a text, or answer questions about interpretation?
            The paper will present some experiences at the University of Tours using TEI markup for the history of ideas, and ontologies and databases for analysis of fictional entities (people and places). We have applied these methods to works by Boccaccio, the Vite by Vasari, and to a small corpus of librettos of the 17th century. These experiments are showing promising results, not only in literary terms, but also on a largely methodological perspective, with colleagues and researchers finding themselves challenged and enticed by DH heuristics.
            Conditions are ripe for experiences and discussions in order to evaluate the impact of DH in literary studies, particularly in the light of the advancements in HTR and other types of CLS that have the potentials of bringing a large amount of unknown and understudied texts into the literary arena. This could truly change our perspectives and understandings on literature, but we need to sharpen our hermeneutical tools first.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cummings, J., 2008. The text encoding initiative and the study of literature. In 
                        A companion to digital literary studies (pp. 451-76), Blackwell.
                    
                    
                        Kirschenbaum, M.G., 2016. What is digital humanities and what’s it doing in English departments?. In 
                        Defining Digital Humanities (pp. 211-220). Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Juola, P., 2015. The Rowling case: A proposed standard analytic protocol for authorship questions. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 30(1): 100-113.
                    
                    
                        Pierazzo, E., 2015. 
                        Digital scholarly editing: Theories, models and methods. Routledge.
                    
                    
                        Ramsay, S., 2011. 
                        Reading Machines: Toward and Algorithmic Criticism. University of Illinois Press.
                    
                    
                        Sperberg-McQueen, C.M., 1991. Text in the electronic age: Texual study and textual study and text encoding, with examples from medieval texts. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing, 6(1): 34-46.
                    
                    
                        Tuzzi, A. and Cortelazzo, M.A., 2018. What is Elena Ferrante? A comparative analysis of a secretive bestselling Italian writer. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 33(3): 685-702.
                    
                    
                        Van Zundert, J.J., 2016. Screwmeneutics and hermenumericals: the computationality of hermeneutics. 
                        A companion to digital humanities. (pp. 331-347) Blackwell.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                The session will describe the application of TEI guidelines to encode an idiosyncratic primary source manuscript–a volume from the collection of The William Townsend & Sons, Printers,  Stationers, and Account Book Manufacturers, Sheffield UK (1830-1910). 
                Volume 3, “Business Guide and Works Manual,” is a remarkable manuscript both for book history and cultural observations about unionization, gender roles, and credit/debit accounting. The extraordinary complexity of the manuscript’s structure requires that it be marked up to render a readable document. 
                This project is using Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines to create a digital edition, illuminating such key topics as the Townsend firm’s social networks, information on the men, women and apprentices who worked for the firm between 1830 and 1910, and the web of economic partners with whom the firm did business. The digital edition will be accompanied by documentation of editorial decisions about encoding that will serve as a potential model for other digitized volumes in the Townsend collection, as well as other complex primary sources.
            
            
                Volume 3 is the most rewarding volume, given its record of day-to-day activity in a stationery binding firm. Stationery binding is a type of underappreciated and lesser known book trade (Pickwoad, 2009). While the history of bookbinding most often refers to externally decorated bindings, stationery binding “satisfies” the inner workings of the useful book (Monk, 1912). William Townsend manufactured account books deliberately for double entry accounting. The account book itself, scholars note, changed practices from single entry to double entry accounting, a critical part of an emerging capitalist economy. Scholars agree that debit/credit bookkeeping coincided with the rise of factory industries, wage labor, and capital investment (Edwards, 1989) and that accounting in the nineteenth century was at least coincidently connected to the growth of modern capitalism (Geeson-White, 2012). 
            
            The Townsend manuscript is extraordinarily complex. It contains no obvious textual demarcations, no reliable pagination or progressive date notations. The manuscript may be considered a nineteenth-century common-place book, without the logical indices of the long tradition (Havens 2001). This index is alphabetical but subject headings are hardly informative, with entries like “thoughts and ideas” and “jottings.” It is filled with notes tucked into margins and ephemera inserted in seemingly random places. There are marginal references to God, William Shakespeare, and Charles Dickens, as well as allusions to little- or unknown authors. Volume 3 contains hundreds of addresses for individual people and proprietor-named businesses. There are specific instructions for book binding, including lists of required materials and a recipe for glue. The manuscript is messy and the markup up requires flexible language, careful interpretation, and customized editing. 
            
                The Townsend volume records the cost of doing business, and so also belongs to a genre of documents—Historical Financial Records. It provides an opportunity to examine the relationship between financial artifacts and the worlds in which they were produced and embedded (Tomasek and Bauman, 2014). However, the financial accounts in this collection are recorded in ambiguous tabular form with in-text page references to nearly indecipherable price keys. For example, Townsend provides a “key” to determine the size of an account book. The formula is figured using imperial standards for the size of a sheet of paper (i.e. Foolscap) and quarto or octavo folds of the sheet and the number of sheets. This formula, along with the type of ruling and binding, provides the necessary numbers for the arithmetic that will determine the price of an account book.
            
            
                We have encoded over 100 pages of this 400-page manuscript. The encoding has had to be innovative in the use of divisions and abstract blocks. The many tables have been difficult to represent, but the encoding reveals some logic. We have started to encode for labor in hours and wages, and in a process that allows for comparisons throughout the manuscript. We are identifying materials, with and without measurable units, and developing an adequate encoding practice. We will want to capture the methods of binding, if possible. We have yet to decipher the “keys” for calculating sizes and prices of paper, or even to understand the numbers on the page. The paper will draw upon work already underway to develop a robust markup for numbers and measurements (Kokaze, et al., 2020). 
            
            
                We are using several TEI projects as models for the Digital Townsend. Our introduction to TEI came through the 
                
                    Women Writers Project
                
                , which continues to frame our understanding of the way TEI guidelines can be used to markup complex and multi-layered documents. 
                
                    The Almanacks of Mary Moody Emerson
                
                 offers insight on producing digital editions of unconventional (and long) volumes. Additional models, including the Folger Library’s 
                
                    Early Modern Manuscripts Online
                
                , 
                
                    The Civil War Governors of Kentucky
                
                 project, 
                
                    George Washington’s Financial Papers
                
                 project. The research and experimentation in the 
                
                    Accounts of the City of Basel
                
                 is a model to consider the financial records in our volume and to determine whether the TEI guidelines are sufficient to meaningfully encode accounting practices, and the structuring of income and expenditure. 
            
            
                The Townsend collection was acquired by the Cary Graphic Arts Collection at the Rochester Institute of Technology as a part of The Bernard C. Middleton Collection of Books on the History and Practice of Bookbinding, one of the world’s most comprehensive collections on the subject, including both historical and contemporary materials from (including but not limited to) England, France, India, Japan, Portugal, Sudan, and Turkey. All volumes are digitized and publicly available through 
                RIT Libraries' Digital Collections.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Edwards, J.R.
                         (1989). A History of Financial Accounting. United Kingdom: Routledge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Geeson-White, J.
                         (2012). Double Entry: How the Merchants of Venice Created Modern Finance. 
                        W. W. Norton & Company
                        .
                    
                    
                        Havens, E
                        . (2001). Commonplace Books: A History of Manuscripts and Printed Books from
                    
                    Antiquity to the Twentieth Century. New Haven: Yale University.
                    
                        Kokaze, N. et al
                        . (2020). Toward a Model for Marking up Non-SI Units and Measurements. Journal of Text Encoding Initiatives. 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.1996
                        
                         (accessed 15 April 2022). 
                    
                    
                        Monk, L. J.
                         (1912). A Text Book of Stationery Binding. Raithby, Lawrence, and Co.
                    
                    
                        Pickwoad, N
                        . (2009). In Suarez, M. S. and Turner, M. L. (eds), The Cambridge History of the Book in Britain. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 268-290. 
                    
                    
                        Tomasek, K. and Bauman, S.
                         (2014). Encoding Financial Records. 
                        
                            http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/author/ktomasek/
                        
                         (accessed 15 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Training a gender classifier for German literature
                
                    In several (Digital) Humanities studies, it has been shown that character analysis with a scope on gender can give interesting insides into literary history (cf. Underwood 2019: 111-142, Piper 2018: 133-138). With BookNLP (Bamann 2021) there is a well-performing tool including referential gender inference in the domain of English literary fiction (cf. Underwood 2019: 114). Here, we present a classification tool that is optimized for German fiction and which does not focus on pronouns used for fictional characters but on the ascribed gendered roles (which is referred to as gender identity by Butler 2003). As a starting point, we trained the classifier to annotate the binary (and often stereotyped) gender categories “feminine”, “masculine”, and “neutral”. It is planned to include more categories for gender roles in the future. To reach high accuracy on different literary genres it was trained in an iterative domain adaptation process, which can be roughly split up into three phases (cf. phases 1–3 in table 1). 
                
                
                    
                
                
                    Table 1: Domain adaptation phases, datasets and performance values (set 1–3: CRF; set 4–6: gBERT)
                
                
                    387.000 tokens, as well as an annotated list consisting of about 7.000 names taken from dramatis personae archived in the GerDraCor-repository (cf. Fischer et al. 2019), have been included in the training corpus. Training data has been manually annotated from scratch, meaning that names and gendered roles have been tagged as either feminine, masculine or neutral. Adding genre-specific training data first leads to an optimization of classification on the specific genre the training data is taken from and second to higher accuracy in the other genres (cf. fig. 1). In the end, our classifier trained with pure CRF algorithms reached 0.86 on novellas, 0.73 on novels and 0.76 on plays. On average the classifier reaches an overall F1 score of 0.78 (Schumacher 2021). The information on gendered roles mentioned in fiction can be combined with other aspects of the analysis of fictional characters such as described features (Schumacher/Flüh 2020), emotions (Schumacher/Flüh 2020, Flüh/Schumacher 2022, Flüh/Horstmann/Schumacher forthcoming) and power structures (Schumacher/Flüh forthcoming). 
                
                
                    
                
                Figure 1: Training of a generic gender classifier
                To adapt recognition and classification to youth fantasy fiction, we tried the implementation of neural networks following a transfer learning approach (cf. phases 4–6 in table 1).
            
            
                Creating neural net-based Gender Classifiers
                
                    We used the software 
                    Neiss TEI Entity Enricher (NTEE), 
                    an implementation of a Transfer Learning (Kamath et al., 2019) approach, to create a neural net-based classifier. Large-scale language models, which are built according to a Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) architecture (Devlin et al., 2019) can be fine-tuned using ground truth data for particular NER tasks. In this process, a CRF layer is added to the models (cf. Zöllner et al, 2021: 9–10). For our investigation, we use 
                    gbert-base
                     (cf. Chan, Schweter, Möller 2021), which is pre-trained with data from the 20th and 21st centuries. 
                
                Using sets 4, 5 and 6 (cf. table 1) as ground truth datasets, we compared the performances of classifiers, trained on either generic data, genre-specific data or a combined dataset. Comparing the performance values of the differently designed models shows two things: 
                
                    
                        Using genre-specific data only for fine-tuning the pre-trained gBERT model, in this case, is more efficient than using generic data.
                    
                    
                        Using combined data for fine-tuning the pre-trained gBERT model, in this case, works best.
                    
                
                One can also see a slight difference between the training of the pure CRF-classifier and the fine-tuning of the BERT model (cf. fig. 2). For this implementation, the combination of genre-specific and generic data clearly works best (F1-score of 0.92 tested on fantasy novels). 
                
                    
                
                
                    Figure 2: Average performances of  the CRF-based and the gBERT-based classifiers
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Beauvoir, Simone de (1992): 
                        Das andere Geschlecht. Reinbek.
                    
                    Bourdieu, Pierre (2010): 
                        Die männliche Herrschaft. 1. Aufl., [Nachdr.]. Frankfurt am Main.
                    
                    Butler, Judith (2003):
                         Das Unbehagen der Geschlechter. 1. Aufl. [Nachdr.]. Frankfurt am Main.
                    
                    Chan, Branden, Stefan Schweter, Timo Möller (2020): 
                        German’s Next Language Model. 
                        
                            https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.10906.pdf
                         [Access 8th december 2021].
                    
                    Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova (2019). “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.” In: 
                        Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics 1, p. 4171–4186.
                    
                    Fischer, Frank, Ingo Börner, Mathias Göbel, Angelika Hechtl, Christopher Kittel, Carsten Milling und Peer Trilcke (2019): Programmable Corpora: Introducing DraCor, an Infrastructure for the Research on European Drama. In: Digital Humanities 2019. Utrecht, Zenodo 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4284002
                        
                        .
                    
                    Flüh, Marie, Jan Horstmann, Mareike Schumacher (forthcoming): Distant Gender Reading
                        Genderaspekte in Fantasy-Jugendromanen von 2008 bis 2020. 
                    
                        Flüh, Marie, & Schumacher, Mareike. (2022, March 7). Jung, wild, emotional? Rollen und Emotionen Jugendlicher in zeitgenössischer Fantasy-Literatur. DHd 2022 Kulturen des digitalen Gedächtnisses. 8. Tagung des Verbands "Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum" (DHd 2022), Potsdam. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6327983
                    
                    Foucault, Michel, Herculine Barbin (2012):
                         Über Hermaphrodismus: Der Fall Barbin. Frankfurt am Main.
                    
                    Kamath, Uday, John Liu, and James Whitaker (2019): 
                        Deep Learning for NLP and Speech Recognition. Cham: Springer. 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14596-5
                        .
                    
                    Manning, Christopher, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky (2014): „The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit“. In: 
                        Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, p. 55–60, 
                        
                             http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5010
                         [Access 8th december 2021].
                    
                    Connell, Raewyn (1996): 
                        Gender and power society, the person and sexual politics, Reprint Aufl. 
                        Cambridge.
                    
                    Connell, Raewyn (2015): 
                        Der gemachte Mann Konstruktion und Krise von Männlichkeiten. Geschlecht & Gesellschaft Band 8, 4. durchgesehene und erweiterte Auflage Aufl. Wiesbaden.
                    
                    Piper, Andrew (2018): Enumerations. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
                    Schumacher, Mareike, Marie Flüh (2020): “Figurengender zwischen Stereotypisierung und literarischen und theoretischen Spielräumen: Genderstereotypen und -bewertungen in der Literatur des 19. Jahrhundert”. In: Christof Schöch (Hg.): 
                        DHd2020: Digital Humanities zwischen Modellierung und Interpretation. Konferenzabstracts. o.O. 2020, S. 162–167,
                         https://zenodo.org/record/3666690#.X37-FFlCTus [Access: 26. November 2021].
                    
                    Schumacher, Mareike (2021): 
                        StanfordNER Gender-Classifier. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.5555952.
                    
                    Schumacher, Mareike, Marie Flüh (forthcoming): “Macht vs. Emotion. Handlungstreibende Muster in Günderrodes Dramen digital, distant und scalable gelesen”. In: Roland Borgers, Friederike Middelhoff, Martina Wernli (Ed.): Neue Romantikforschung, Stuttgart: Metzler.
                    Schumacher, Mareike, Marie Flüh (2021): “Digitale diachrone Korpusanalyse am Beispiel des Projekts „m*w – Gender Stereotype in der Literatur“. In: 
                        Digital humanities and gender history. Jena. DOI: 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.22032/dbt.49173
                        .
                    
                    Underwood, Ted (2019): Distant Horizons. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
                    Weitin, Thomas (2016): 
                        Volldigitalisiertes XML-Korpus. Der Deutsche Novellenschatz. Hg. von Paul Heyse, Hermann Kurz. 24 Bde. 1871–
                        1876. Darmstadt/Konstanz. URL: 
                        
                            https://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/novellenschatz/
                         [Access: 26. November 2021].
                    
                    Zöllner, Jochen, Konrad Sperfeld, Christoph Wick, and Roger Labahn (2021): 
                        Optimizing small berts trained for german NER. arXiv. URL: 
                        
                            https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.11559
                         [Access: 8th December 2021].
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Workshop Description
                This workshop will serve as an introduction to the 
                    
                        Advanced Research Consortium
                     (ARC), a vibrant community of researchers who peer review and curate digital cultural heritage materials for humanities research. 
                
                Since 2004 with the founding of
                    
                        NINES
                    , ARC has the dual goals of providing a vetting community for digital scholarship in particular fields and a technological infrastructure to support dissemination and use of this scholarship.
                     In addition to
                    
                        NINES.org
                    , ARC communities include
                    
                        18thConnect.org
                    
                    ,
                    
                        MESA-medieval.org
                    
                    , Modernist Networks (
                    
                        ModNets.org
                    
                    ), and SiRO (
                    
                        Studies in Radicalism Online.org
                    
                    ), with others currently organizing in the fields of early American studies and disability studies. The ARC community seeks to develop itself towards greater cultural inclusiveness.
                
                The workshop begins by teaching researchers how to use ARC to enhance their research through searching both open access and proprietary resources curated by field experts. Because ARC’s catalog includes a wide array of resources not generally cataloged by university libraries or other discovery services, using ARC allows for more nuanced searching, particularly for primary materials. Additionally, this portion of the workshop will preview the Corpora Dataset Studio for researchers interested in further developing their own digital projects. 
                Next, the workshop familiarizes researchers with the process of submitting their own projects or datasets for inclusion in ARC. To contribute to ARC, projects must undergo both content and technical peer review. Once peer review has been successfully passed, metadata about each digital artifact in the project is added to ARC’s catalog, which then links back to the project itself. Inclusion in ARC makes independent digital humanities projects more easily discoverable and allows for greater interoperability between different projects and proprietary data from resources such as JSTOR and Adam Matthew. Furthermore, ARC’s work with the 
                    
                        Linked Infrastructure for Networked Cultural Scholarship
                     (LINCS) project means that each included project will be enhanced through the inclusion of linked open data.
                
                Finally, the workshop will discuss the process for creating new period-specific or thematic research nodes within ARC. Historically, ARC’s nodes have been quite broad, encompassing broadly defined periods such as the eighteenth century or modernism. However, in order to facilitate greater collaboration between digital humanities projects, ARC is now developing smaller, more specific nodes to address individual scholarly communities. In order to expand our offerings, ARC seeks proposals for editorial groups who wish to serve scholarly communities with particular interests — e.g., early modern book history, eighteenth-century Caribbean literature, animal studies, Victorian children’s literature, etc. This portion of the workshop will include discussion of forming content and technical editorial boards, locating relevant projects, managing peer review, and working with the ARC office to create a user interface. 
            
            
                Workshop Instructors
                
                    Dr. Laura Mandell (
                    
                        mandell@tamu.edu
                    ) — Laura Mandell is the author of 
                    
                        Breaking the Book: Print Humanities in the Digital Age (2015)
                    , Misogynous Economies: The Business of Literature in Eighteenth-Century Britain (1999), and, recently, “Gendering Digital Literary History: What Counts for Digital Humanities,” in the New Companion to Digital Humanities (Blackwell 2016). She is Project Director of the Poetess Archive, an online scholarly edition and database of women poets, 1750-1900 (
                    
                        http://www.poetessarchive.org
                    ), Acquisitions Editor of 18thConnect (
                    
                        http://www.18thConnect.org
                    ), and Director of ARC (
                    
                        http://www.ar-c.org
                    ), the Advanced Research Consortium overseeing NINES, 18thConnect, and MESA.  She spearheaded the Early Modern OCR project or “eMOP” (
                    
                        http://emop.tamu.edu
                    ), a project concerned with improving OCR for early modern and 18th-c. texts via high performance and cluster computing, and is currently at work on a text-mining project to discover emergent genders in essays and novels comprising the Feminist Controversy debates in England, 1788-1810.
                
                
                    Dr. Bryan Tarpley (
                    
                        bptarpley@tamu.edu
                    ) — Bryan Tarpley is Associate Research Scientist of Critical Infrastructure Studies at the Center of Digital Humanities Research at Texas A&M University. He is also the Associate Director of Technology for the Advanced Research Consortium (
                    
                        ar-c.org
                    ). Dr. Tarpley’s recent software development includes the Corpora Dataset Studio, to be released open source in 2023.
                
                
                    Dr. Lauren Liebe (
                    
                        leliebe@tamu.edu
                    ) — Lauren Liebe is a postdoctoral researcher at Texas A&M University, where she serves as the project manager of the Advanced Research Consortium. Her doctoral research focused on the intertwining of politics and theatrical performance during the English Restoration. She is also the creator of Digital Restoration Drama (
                    
                        restorationdrama.org
                    ), a database of TEI-encoded Restoration playtexts. 
                
            
            
                Description of target audience and expected number of participants
                The target audience for this workshop is scholars who are interested in collaborating to form new thematic research nodes to join the Advanced Research Consortium. 
                This workshop is open to all interested participants. 
            
            
                Syllabus (3 hour workshop) 
                
                    What is ARC? (10 minutes) 
                    Using ARC (45 minutes) 
                        
                            Researching via the nodes
                            BigDIVA
                            Corpora
                        
                    
                    Contributing to ARC (40 minutes)
                        
                            Submitting for peer review
                            Peer review process
                            Metadata ingestion
                            Linked open data
                        
                    
                    Break (15 minutes)
                    Developing an ARC Node (50 minutes)
                        
                            Determining scope
                            Directors and editorial boards
                            Determining relevant resources for the research environment (digital projects, datasets, journals, library collections, proprietary digital resources)
                            Designing your Collex instance
                            ARC Office Contributions
                                
                                    Conducting Peer Review
                                    Negotiating, obtaining, and ingesting metadata from open access projects and vendors
                                    Node maintenance, including the solicitation of classroom and exhibit features. 
                                
                            
                        
                    
                    Q&A session (20 minutes)
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
                    The lyrical tradition and the 
                    Chansonnier du roi
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: BnF, fr. 844, fol. 29 (manuscrit du roi), beginning of
                            the section for the texts of the count of Bar.
                        
                    
                
                In the landscape of medieval French texts’ authorship, the lyrical poetry of the 
                    trouveres and 
                    trouveresses has the aspect of an exception: contrarily to what can be observed elsewhere, anonymity is rare, and the manuscripts mostly take care to give a clear (though often conflicting between them) attribution, even up to the point of adopting a material organisation by author (fig. 1). Yet, very little is known about the attribution of the melodies that accompany many of these texts: how often are they original? Were they composed by the 
                    trouvere himself, or by one or several other composers? Is there even a unity behind the different melodies of the work of a given author?
                
                To answer these questions, we propose to experiment in the cross examination of the text, the metrical composition and the melodies of a corpus of lyrical texts with the methods of computational stylometry. We will focus on the 
                    Manuscrit du Roi (Paris, BnF fr. 844), one of the earliest (1260-1270) and richest sources for Romance lyric poetry with its 602 compositions. The literary, musical and linguistic diversity of its contents (profane songs of French trouvères and Occitan troubadours, French motets, instrumental works and Latin sacred compositions) makes it a unique case-study.
                
                The contents of this manuscript were acquired thanks to a workflow going from layout analysis, handwritten text recognition to digital editing and ultimately stylometric analysis. Text and music are encoded following the 
                    Guidelines of, respectively, the 
                    Text Encoding Initiative (TEI, 2020) and the 
                    Music Encoding Initiative (MEI, 2020), resulting in a textual and musical edition (See, for a detailed presentation of the ongoing editorial process, Camps 
                    et al., 2021a).
                
                For the needs of the textual analysis of the text, the HTR output, after careful human correction, was then segmented into words, normalised (abbreviations expanded, allographs normalised), lemmatised and POS-tagged using deep learning methods (Table 1). Even if the scores obtained are high, cumulative errors through the different steps might remain an issue.
                
                    Table 1: Word accuracy is indicated with respect to the in-domain test set (samples set apart from training material).
                    
                        Step
                        Word acc
                        Engine
                        Data/Model
                    
                    
                        segmentation
                        96.71
                        Boudams (Clérice, 2020)
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.6500604 
                        
                    
                    
                        normalisation
                        98.01
                        Pie (Manjavacas 
                            et al., 2019)
                        
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.6500649
                        
                    
                    
                        lemmatisation
                        97.66
                        Pie (
                            ibid.)
                        
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.4320487
                        
                    
                    
                        pos-tagging
                        97.55
                        Pie (ibid.)
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.4320487
                        
                    
                
                The availability of a complete transcription of both text and musical notations paves the way for the stylometric analysis of the songs of the 
                    trouvères and 
                    trouveresses, at a level impossible until now. This is a critical issue, because disputed attributions are very numerous inside the Old French Lyrical tradition (Gatti, 2019), yet it poses specific challenges, because the components are very short (often less than 50 verses), idiolect of the text appears rather homogeneous – sharing as they are on surface the same elitist cultural tradition –, while, in the meantime, the manuscript tradition creates noise (linguistic and substantial variants, even between scribes of the same manuscript). Moreover, the field of musical stylometry is still quite new, and attribution of the text and of the melody have rarely - if ever - been addressed as a whole in this tradition.
                
                By default, scholars generally postulate that the melody and the text of a song were composed by the same person. Yet the attested musical elements (for exemple : musical curbe, modality, intervals, ambitus, motives, melismas and musical form) have usually been considered as much more influenced by the tradition than the textual ones. Nonetheless, it will be worth testing the hypothesis that song attribution may be consistently built on both textual and musical elements.
                Specifically, the Chansonnier du roi offers an interesting dossier, because it contains a subunit dedicated to the collected work of a single author (Thibaut de Champagne so-called 
                    Liederbuch). Thibaut is perhaps the most prominent of all trouvères (Barbieri, 1999), and the attribution of several songs to him is still disputed (Wallensköld, 1925; Callahan, 2010).
                
            
            
                
                    Stylometric analysis of the text
                    
                
                In order to give new insights into these disputed attributions, we performed several stylometric analyses of the text and the music.
                Stylometric analysis of the text has initially been done using features robust to noise and short text length, in particular character 3-grams (Camps 
                    et al., 2021a). Both exploratory and supervised analyses, the latter using a linear SVM , were performed to shed more light on the attribution of these components. To compensate for the imbalance between the available samples for all four authors, various upsampling and downsampling strategies (alone or in combination) were experimented, and Tomek links removal (Tomek, 1976), in combination with class weights, was found to be the best performing. Evaluation was done using a leave-one-out approach, and the models reached a global accuracy of 0.79, with a F1 score of 0.93 for Thibaut and 0.76 for Gace (Table 2).
                
                
                     Table 2: Results of the leave-one-out evaluation on the text of the songs, using character 3-grams, lemmas, part-of-speech 3-grams and lemmatised function words
                    
                        
                        character 3-grams
                    
                    
                        
                        precision
                        recall
                        f1
                        support
                    
                    
                        Blond
                        0.85
                        0.52
                        0.65
                        21
                    
                    
                        Gace
                        0.69
                        0.86
                        0.76
                        43
                    
                    
                        Gaut
                        0.71
                        0.60
                        0.65
                        20
                    
                    
                        Thib
                        0.93
                        0.93
                        0.93
                        45
                    
                    
                        —
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        accuracy
                        
                        
                        0.79
                        129
                    
                    
                        macro avg
                        0.79
                        0.73
                        0.75
                        129
                    
                    
                        weighted avg
                        0.80
                        0.79
                        0.79
                        129
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Lemmas (all)
                    
                    
                        
                        precision
                        recall
                        f1
                        support
                    
                    
                        Blond
                        0.77
                        0.48
                        0.59
                        21
                    
                    
                        Gace
                        0.70
                        0.65
                        0.67
                        43
                    
                    
                        Gaut
                        0.85
                        0.55
                        0.67
                        20
                    
                    
                        Thib
                        0.65
                        0.91
                        0.76
                        45
                    
                    
                        —
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        accuracy
                        
                        
                        0.70
                        129
                    
                    
                        macro avg
                        0.74
                        0.65
                        0.67
                        129
                    
                    
                        weighted avg
                        0.72
                        0.70
                        0.69
                        129
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        POS 3-grams
                    
                    
                        
                        precision
                        recall
                        f1
                        support
                    
                    
                        Blond
                        1.00
                        0.24
                        0.38
                        21
                    
                    
                        Gace
                        0.43
                        0.49
                        0.46
                        43
                    
                    
                        Gaut
                        0.17
                        0.05
                        0.08
                        20
                    
                    
                        Thib
                        0.43
                        0.67
                        0.53
                        45
                    
                    
                        —
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        accuracy
                        
                        
                        0.44
                        129
                    
                    
                        macro avg
                        0.51
                        0.36
                        0.36
                        129
                    
                    
                        weighted avg
                        0.48
                        0.44
                        0.41
                        129
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Lemmas (function words)
                    
                    
                        
                        precision
                        recall
                        f1
                        support
                    
                    
                        Blond
                        0.59
                        0.48
                        0.53
                        21
                    
                    
                        Gace
                        0.45
                        0.40
                        0.42
                        43
                    
                    
                        Gaut
                        0.25
                        0.30
                        0.27
                        20
                    
                    
                        Thib
                        0.62
                        0.69
                        0.65
                        45
                    
                    
                        —
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        accuracy
                        
                        
                        0.50
                        129
                    
                    
                        macro avg
                        0.48
                        0.47
                        0.47
                        129
                    
                    
                        weighted avg
                        0.50
                        0.50
                        0.50
                        129
                    
                
                Yet, the extraction of the features with the highest coefficients in the SVM models show a more contrasted result. For an author like Gace Brulé, the 3-grams seem to reveal aspects significant for our stylometric analysis and reflecting lexical and morphological preferences of the author. For instance, the high-frequency of 
                    apl, 
                    usp depends mainly of the syntagm 
                    a plaisir (written as one single word) and the words 
                    souspir/
                    souspirer respectively, which seem to be typical of Gace’s idiolect, whereas the low-frequency 
                    ete is consistent with the raffinate poet’s avoidance of the diminutive nouns and adjectives in -
                    ete, as marks of a popular register, and his apparent rare use of some abstract nouns like 
                    faussete. Yet for Thibaut’s corpus, the analysis of the most and least recurrent 3-grams seems to include features that are not of an authorial nature but reflect the particular graphemic habits of the copyist of the part of the manuscript known as Thibaut’s 
                    Liederbuch as opposed to the scribes at work in the rest of the manuscript: use of ‹o› instead of ‹ou› in particular in words like 
                    po(u)r, 
                    to(u)z, 
                    amo(u)rs, use of ‹u›, not ‹v› at the beginning of words (this last feature being even of a more graphetic nature).
                
                To bypass this inconvenient, analyses were repeated, using lemmas, part-of-speech 3-grams and lemmatised function words. Results actually were found to be less accurate (Table 2), which can either point to a less informative nature of these features (i.e., excessive suppression of information and noise generation through lemmatisation, tagging and function words selection), or to the fact that some of the performance of the 3-grams model is due to correlation between scribal practice and authorial units. If that were true, normalisations could both potentially decrease the performance of the model and increase the authorial nature of the features it uses. The relative better performance of lemmas (function and content words) in comparison to part-of-speech or function lemmas could also point towards the importance of lexical choices to discriminate between authors in the training material.
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        
                    
                
                Figure 2: Features with the 10 highest positive and negative coefficients in the linear SVM models for Gace Brulé and Thibaut de Champagne; the higher the coefficient, the more the feature would contribute to a placement on one side of the separating hyperplane or the other
            
            
                
                    Stylometric analysis of the music
                    
                
                Musical stylometry (especially of the 
                    trouvères) is a much less waymarked field. It is supposed that all composers integrate some little elements consciously or unconsciously in their compositions. A recent study observed that the troubadour Bernard de Ventadorn used in most of this songs three ascendants sounds at the beginning of verses (Chaillou-Amadieu 2016). Such methodology can be automated and show promise for the joint stylometry of text and music. In order to identify relevant features, experiments have been conducted with a variety of variables: notes, intervals, octaves n-grams, with the inclusion of syllable boundaries in the absence of noted measure, all extracted from MEI neumes notation. They were done on two different dataset: a small, controlled dataset (3x10 melodies of supposedly three authors), and an enlarged and more difficult dataset (117 melodies, with imbalanced training set of six authors).
                
                
                    Table 3: Benchmark of musical features for musical stylometry
                    
                        
                        Smaller set
                    
                    
                        n
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                    
                    
                        notes
                        0.67
                        0.80
                        0.73
                        0.67
                        0.63
                        0.70
                    
                    
                        octaves
                        0.57
                        0.53
                        0.57
                        0.60
                        0.57
                        0.63
                    
                    
                        intervals
                        0.77
                        0.80
                        0.73
                        0.70
                        0.70
                        0.53
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Larger set
                    
                    
                        n
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                    
                    
                        notes
                        0.29
                        0.38
                        0.38
                        0.38
                        0.26
                        0.26
                    
                    
                        octaves
                        0.31
                        0.44
                        0.47
                        0.41
                        0.38
                        0.47
                    
                    
                        intervals
                        0.37
                        0.40
                        0.41
                        0.43
                        0.46
                        0.40
                    
                
                Intervals or notes bigrams have proved to be the most efficient on the smaller set, while results on the larger set remain more difficult to interpret. A visualisation on the smaller set shows how these features can structure a vector space of partly authorial data clouds (fig. 
                    4), yet a benchmark of the various types of features for supervised learning gives results whose interpretation is more elusive (Table 3), apart from the obvious impact of availability of training samples (Table 3).
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        
                    
                
                Figure 3: First factor plane from principal component analysis of notes and intervals bigrams (smaller set)
                
                    Table 4: Detailed leave-one-out evaluation of the SVM linear models on intervals bigrams from the larger set (with random downsampling)
                    
                        
                        precision
                        recall
                        f1
                        support
                    
                    
                        BlonNes
                        0.21
                        0.19
                        0.20
                        16
                    
                    
                        GaBru
                        0.41
                        0.35
                        0.38
                        34
                    
                    
                        GautDarg
                        0.29
                        0.31
                        0.30
                        16
                    
                    
                        GuilVinier
                        0.29
                        0.33
                        0.31
                        12
                    
                    
                        Moniot
                        0.50
                        0.75
                        0.60
                        12
                    
                    
                        ThibChamp
                        0.68
                        0.63
                        0.65
                        27
                    
                    
                        —
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        accuracy
                        
                        
                        0.43
                        117
                    
                    
                        macro avg
                        0.40
                        0.43
                        0.41
                        117
                    
                    
                        weighted avg
                        0.43
                        0.43
                        0.42
                        117
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Discussion and further research
                    
                
                Initial results show good and average performance on the attribution of texts and melodies, with an interesting better performance for Thibaut and Gace, our two main target authors.
                Yet, important work remains to be done, on one hand, to measure the relevancy of different features both for textual and musical stylometry, going beyond simple metrics. Indeed, our work results stress the necessity to go beyond bare metrics in the evaluation of supervised model training, to actually consider the precise features on which the model bases its attributions.
                Moreover, we aim to explore features that are at the intersection of text and music, such as recurring associations between certain musical and textual features, as well as metric patterns.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Callahan, C. (2010). ‘Thibaut de Champagne and Disputed Attributions: The Case of MSS Bern, Burgerbibliothek 389 (C) and Paris, BnF fr. 1591(R)’. 
                        Textual Cultures, 5(1). Indiana University Press: 111–32 doi:
                        10.2979/tex.2010.5.1.111.
                    
                    
                        Camps, J. B., Clérice, T., & Pinche, A. (2021a). ‘Noisy medieval data, from digitized manuscript to stylometric analysis: Evaluating Paul Meyer’s hagiographic hypothesis’. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 36(Supplement_2), ii49-ii71.
                    
                    
                        Camps, J.-B., Chaillou, C., Mariotti, V. and Saviotti, F. (2021b). ‘Editing and Attributing Musical Texts: the Chansonnier du Roi and the MARITEM Project’. 
                        EADH2021: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Data, 2nd International Conference of the European Association for Digital Humanities, Krasnoyarsk, 2021 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Chaillou-Amadieu, C. (2017).
                        Philologie et musicologie. Les variantes musicales dans les chansons de troubadours. In Les noces de Philologie et de musicologie. Textes et musiques du Moyen Âge, ed. C. Cazaux-Kowalski and al. Paris: Classiques Garnier, 2017, p. 69-95.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T. (2020). ‘Evaluating Deep Learning Methods for Word Segmentation of Scripta Continua Texts in Old French and Latin’. 
                        Journal of Data Mining & Digital Humanities, 2020.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, T., Camps, J.-B. and Pinche, A. (2019). Deucalion, Modèle Ancien Francais (0.2.0). Zenodo doi: 
                        10.5281/zenodo.3237455..
                    
                    
                        Dees, A. (1987).
                        Atlas des formes linguistiques des textes littéraires de l’ancien français, Tübingen, Niemeyer.
                    
                    
                        Gatti, L. (2019).
                        Repertorio delle attribuzioni discordanti nella lirica trovierica, Roma, Sapienza Università Editrice (Online: 
                        ).
                    
                    
                        Manjavacas, E., Kádár, Á. and Kestemont, M. (2019). ‘Improving Lemmatization of Non-Standard Languages with Joint Learning’. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies Minneapolis, p. 1493–503, doi: 
                        10.18653/v1/N19-1153.
                    
                    
                        Music Encoding Initiative (2020).
                        Guidelines. Mainz 
                         (accessed 8 January 2021).
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium (2020).
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. 
                         (accessed 9 May 2015).
                    
                    
                        Tomek, Ivan (1976). ‘Two modifications of CNN’, 
                        IEEE Trans. Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 6:769–772.
                    
                    
                        Troubadour Melodies Database, 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Wallensköld, A. (1925), ed.. Thibaud IV (1201-1253 ; comte de Champagne): Les chansons de Thibaut de Champagne, roi de 
                        Navarre. 
                         (accessed 8 January 2021).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                The goal of this tutorial is to introduce participants to the principles and hands-on practice of the eScriptorium platform for the automatic and/or manual segmentation and transcription of manuscripts and printed books in a very wide range of languages, writing-systems and complex page-layouts.
            
            
                The tutorial will begin with a very brief overview of Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) and its potential and remaining challenges, particularly when applied to so-called “rare” or historical scripts. HTR has long been a goal – indeed dream – of many in the Digital Humanities and beyond, and this is now becoming realised and increasingly accessible. Relatively general models for automatic transcription can now often achieve character error rates (CER) of less than 1% even for manuscript material, while a CER of 10% or even 20% is sufficient for some types of analysis such as text identification or text-image alignment. Very large quantities of manuscript material are also becoming available, particularly with the increasingly widespread use of IIIF. Machine learning is also relatively accessible, including computers with GPUs that are sufficiently powerful to treat thousands or even tens of thousands of images of manuscript pages within a reasonable timeframe. This combination is enabling new possibilities that were not feasible only a few years ago. However, most of the existing systems were designed at least initially in European (primarily Anglophone) contexts, and the differences between these and other writing contexts may seem subtle but very often make software unusable in practice.
            
            
                eScriptorium is Free Open-Source Software
                
                     The source code is released under an MIT licence at 
                        
                            https://gitlab.com/scripta/escriptorium/
                        .
                    
                
                 designed to facilitate transcription of manuscripts in a wide variety of languages, scripts and complex layouts. The software began as part of the Scripta-PSL project which incorporated experts in dozens of scripts and languages, including Sumerian, Ugaritic, Syriac, Arabic, Hebrew, Classical and Pre-Imperial Chinese, Old and Medieval Japanese, Tibetan, Devanagari, Old Khmer, Pali, Tamil, and many more (see further 
                
                    https://scripta.psl.eu/langues/
                
                ). It is designed to interact with kraken, another Free Open-Source Software developed by Benjamin Kiessling (of the same institution as the eScriptorium team).
                
                     The source code is released under an Apache 2.0 licence at 
                        
                            http://github.com/mittagessen/kraken
                        .
                    
                
                 Kraken provides a flexible, modular HTR engine that can be run on its own or as the engine behind eScriptorium.
            
             
            
                
            
            
                Transcription (transliteration) of Old Javanese palm-leaf books with eScriptorium (courtesy of Marine Schoettel, École Française d’Extrême-Orient)
            
            
                
            
            
                The interface showing a complex page layout: page image with lines and regions (left panel); transcription aligned to the page layout (centre panel); transcription in ‘regular’ lines (right panel).
            
            
                Participants will be introduced to eScriptorium and kraken, focussing particularly on the key design decisions that distinguish them from other HTR systems. One is that the system should be as independent as possible of any assumptions about language or script. For instance, writing can be left-to-right, right-to-left, top-to-bottom then right to left (as in Japanese), or top to bottom then left to right (as in Mongolian). The writing can be on a baseline (as in English), from a top-line (as in Hebrew) or in a column (as in Chinese), and the lines can be oriented at any angle, including upside-down and therefore ‘reversed’ from the normal direction relative to the page image (so upside-down Arabic reads from left to right relative to the page orientation, and so on). Participants are therefore strongly encouraged to bring their own materials in different scripts and languages, and will learn the possibilities and limits of eScriptorium and kraken for these different cases.
            
            
                After an introductory session on the principles of HTR and of eScriptorium and kraken in particular, we will go through the different stages of the workflow, always with attention to the challenges of non-European scripts. This involves first, segmentation of pages into regions and lines; second, potentially modifying the order of lines on the page if it has not been correctly identified by the system; and, third, performing the transcription. The first and third of these are currently based on machine learning (Kiessling 2020), and so they both normally involve a process of creating ground truth data for a sample of content, training a model on the basis of this data (most likely on top of an existing one already trained on similar content), then applying this model to new images. This process in turn raises methodological questions, such as which categories of region and line types to use, which standards of transcription to use, how best to share corpora for ground truth, how to manage large character sets or abbreviations, and so on. Participants will be directed to existing work and initiatives on this topic such as SegmOnto, HTR for All, and OCR-D.
            
            
                
            
            
                Uncorrected results of automatic line detection in a previously unseen scroll (writing in Chinese from top to bottom then right to left).
            
            
                
            
            
                Manually transcribing Chinese (top to bottom then right to left)
            
            
                
            
            
                The eScriptorium interface showing lines showing mixed Hebrew (right to left) and Chinese (top to bottom or right to left). Numbers indicate the order of reading (detected automatically but correctable manually).
            
            
                eScriptorium and kraken are also designed to be as open as possible, including that data should be interchangeable and that users should not be locked into any one instance of the framework. Participants will therefore learn how to import and export images, page layout data and transcriptions in a variety of standard formats (plain text, ALTO, PAGE XML; import from IIIF manifests; transformation of export to TEI). We will also briefly discuss the strengths and limitations of these formats, particularly for the wide range of different scripts.
            
            
                As well as importing and exporting data, users of eScriptorium and kraken are also able (and actively encouraged) to import and export trained models for layout analysis and transcription, including not only sharing with other users in the same instance of eScriptorium but also publishing models on external repositories. A Zenodo community has been established to help share models, and publishing to and from Zenodo is already implemented as part of kraken and will be shortly in eScriptorium. In this way, models can be reused across different instances of the software, and no user is locked into any single instance. This has clear advantages in reducing the human effort in repeating training and ground-truth generation, and also provides a small but not insignificant step towards reducing the energy and environmental impact of machine learning, in that it reduces the need to pointlessly retrain identical models with the same ground truth. This is in contrast to many other systems of machine learning, where some or all of the software may be Open Source, and where the ground truth can sometimes be exported, but the models themselves are locked into a given instance of the system and cannot be exported, and/or the software is not sufficiently open that an entirely new instance can be set up independently.
            
            
                
            
            
                Model management in eScriptorium, including export, import, sharing and basic version control. Models shown are for manuscripts written in Hebrew
            
            
                eScriptorium also provides a web API to allow for automated execution of project-specific processes, and so a brief introduction to this will also be provided, depending on time and the interest of participants.
            
            
                Finally, eScriptorium and kraken are both freely available for anyone to download and install on their own servers, and a number of groups in different countries have already done so to our knowledge. In practice, eScriptorium can run even on a home computer for most tasks, but training on a large corpus requires relatively powerful computers and servers, and so the last part of the tutorial will be spent discussing practical questions about how to get an instance up and running, how to plan a future project with the software, and any other issues that come up during the session.
            
            Acknowledgements
            
                This work was supported by grants from the European Union (RESILIENCE RI and Vietnamica), Université Paris Sciences et Lettres (Scripta-PSL), the Mellon Foundation (OpenITI), the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research, the French Ministry of Culture (LectauRep) and the Domaine d'intérêt majeur STCN (ManuscriptologIA).
            
            
                For a full list of contributors to eScriptorium, see the GitLab repository and wiki (links below).
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Chagué, A.
                         [no date]. Prendre en main eScriptorium. 
                        
                            https://lectaurep.hypotheses.org/documentation/prendre-en-main-escriptorium
                        
                        . English version (transl. Jonathan Allen),
                        
                            https://lectaurep.hypotheses.org/documentation/escriptorium-tutorial-en
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        eScriptorium
                        [source code]: 
                        
                            https://gitlab.com/scripta/escriptorium/
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Gabay
                        , S., Camps, J.-B., Pinche, A., and Jahan C.
                         (2021). SegmOnto: common vocabulary and practices for analysing the layout of manuscripts (and more). 
                        16th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2021).
                    
                    
                        HTR United
                        
                            https://github.com/HTR-United
                        
                    
                    
                        Kiessling
                        , B. 
                        (2020). A Modular Region and Text Line Layout Analysis System. 
                        17th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR)
                        .
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B.
                         (2022). 
                        Kraken
                         [source code] 
                        
                            http://github.com/mittagessen/kraken
                        
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B.
                         (2022). 
                        Kraken
                         [project website]. 
                        
                            http://kraken.re/
                        
                    
                    
                        Kiessling
                        , B., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Miller M.
                         (2019)
                         
                        BADAM: A Public Dataset for Baseline Detection in Arabic-script Manuscript
                        
                            s
                        
                        , 
                        HIP@ICDAR
                         2019. 
                        
                            https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04041
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        Kiessling
                        , B.; Tissot, R., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Stokes P.
                         (2019) eScriptorium: An Open Source Platform for Historical Document Analysis, 
                        OST@ICDAR 2019
                        . doi: 
                        
                            10.1109/ICDARW.2019.10032
                        
                    
                    
                        Kiessling
                        , B.
                         (2019) Kraken – A Universal Text Recognizer for the Humanities. 
                        Digital Humanities Book of Abstracts
                        . doi:
                        
                            10.34894/Z9G2EX
                        
                    
                    
                        OCR-D: DFG-Funded Initiative for Optical Character Recognition Development
                        .
                        
                            https://ocr-d.de
                        
                    
                    
                        OCR/HTR Model Repository
                        .
                        
                            https://www.zenodo.org/communities/ocr_models
                        
                         
                    
                    
                        SegmOnto
                        .
                        
                            https://github.com/SegmOnto
                        
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P.A.
                         (2020). RESILIENCE tool: eScriptorium. 
                        
                            https://www.resilience-ri.eu/blog/resilience-tool-escriptorium/
                        
                        . Version française : eScriptorium : un outil pour la transcription automatique des documents. 
                        
                            https://ephenum.hypotheses.org/1412
                        
                    
                    
                        Stokes
                        , P., Kiessling, B., Tissot, R., Stökl Ben Ezra, D.
                         (2019) EScripta: A New Digital Platform for the Study of Historical Texts and Writing, 
                        Digital Humanities 2019 Book of Abstracts
                        . doi:
                        
                            10.34894/BIXSWX
                        
                    
                    
                        Stokes
                        , P.A., Kiessling, B., Stökl Ben Ezra, D., Tissot, R. and Gargem, H.
                         (2021). The eScriptorium VRE for Manuscript Cultures. 
                        Ancient Manuscripts and Virtual Research Environments
                        , ed. Claire Clivaz and Garrick V. Allen. Special issue of 
                        Classics@
                         18. 
                        
                            https://classics-at.chs.harvard.edu/the-escriptorium-vre-for-manuscript-cultures/
                        
                    
                    
                        All URLs last verified 21 April 2022.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Abstract
                In this paper, we present our reflections on whether minimal computing as a practice can extend beyond “computing done under some technological constraints” (Minimal Computing Working Group, 2021) to serving as a common ground between different digital humanities research and pedagogical dynamics between the so called Global North and South. We explore this question by commenting on our experience in developing and teaching a bilingual undergraduate course to students enrolled from both the University of Maryland, College Park in the United States and Universidad del Salvador in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The class has so far undergone two iterations (2020 - 2021) and has introduced students to global digital humanities, digital publishing and textual scholarship of bilingual Spanish and English texts, and presented minimal computing applied to Digital Scholarly Editions (DSEs) as a shared set of values including: use of open technologies, ownership of data and code, and reduction in computing infrastructure.
            
            
                Scholarly Editing Through an Open and Global Lens
                The debate over a “global digital humanities” resulted in a considerable shift in 2013 when the Global Outlook Digital Humanities (GO::DH) Special Interest Group of the Alliance for the Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) was founded. Nonetheless, despite the benefits that we could expect from a global digital humanities, it is crucial to remember that the concept of the “global” is complex and even contradictory, especially when related to technology in all its facets, including software architecture, infrastructure as hardware, and infrastructure as long-term preservation of software. 
                While not all textual scholars might rely on the same definition for DSEs, they recognize their features and uses (Sahle, 2016). Free, open standards such as the ones developed by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), along with eXtensible Markup Language (XML) technologies, such as eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT) and XQuery, and dedicated software have characterized the digital editing field. The scholarly editions themselves, however, haven’t always been successful as open products of research. While it is common practice to make TEI data publicly available, the debate over how DSEs need to be structured to be truly “open” is still ongoing and best practices have yet to be established. DSEs require substantial infrastructure and advanced technical skills, while diverse needs, capacities, priorities, languages, and academic traditions may require different features at a global scale. With that in mind, how can DSEs become global? How can DSEs be minimal?
                We propose minimal computing as a shared set of values such as the use of open technologies, ownership of data and code, and reduction in computing infrastructure. A minimal computing approach can moreover contribute to strengthening the bonds between the digital humanities community to open source software and hardware (OSSH) or other grassroots innovation movements that in many different regions, like Latin America or Africa, have been leading or co-creating open science projects inside academia (Arancio, 2021). In developing our syllabus, we focused on the following question: Could minimal computing provide a set of shared principles and technologies to empower students and scholars to work autonomously on and have more control over the future of their own projects? We further considered: What if minimal computing extended beyond “computing done under some technological constraints” by standing at the core of a global Digital Humanities commons, overcoming notions such as center and periphery, North and South? and more broadly: Could minimal computing serve as a common ground for Northern and Southern digital humanists?
            
            
                Teaching Digital Publishing with Minimal Computing
                In December 2019, we proposed a course titled Digital Publishing with Minimal Computing: Humanities at a Global Scale to the Global Classroom Initiative (GCI) program at the University of Maryland. This program offers support for the development of courses to be taught in collaboration with a higher education institution outside of the United States, with the goal of establishing courses that expose students to work that is cross-cultural, project-based, and virtual; the GCI argues that these courses mirror the work students will encounter throughout their lives. While this outcome is somewhat dependent on the students’ career choices and opportunities, it is evident that “globalization shrinks the world, bringing a wider range of cultures into closer contact than ever before” (UNESCO, 2013). Thus, preparing students to participate in a globalized world is a worthwhile goal, particularly if this can be done in a way that fosters intercultural competences.
                The course has received funding for at least three iterations between 2020 and 2022, with a blend of online and in-person learning. It is centered around a group project in which students collaborate virtually to create a bilingual (Spanish and English) digital edition of a multilingual colonial era text, a travelogue written by a Basque trader called Acarette Du Biscay, 
                    An Account of a Voyage up the River de la Plata, with a truly multilingual publishing history.
                
                Teaching through a minimal computing lens, moreover, greatly benefits from projects that exhort students to think both globally and locally by recognizing the technological affordances they have access to (as well as why and how) and by confronting the limitations and constraints that work against them, whether in hardware, software, education, network capacity, power, or indeed self-imposed limitations for pedagogical purposes. The nature of the cross-border collaboration between students is online and virtual, given their geographical separation. They attend virtual lectures and collaborate online via messaging and code sharing platforms, with the support of the instructors. This kind of engagement is often referred to as “Virtual Exchange” (Bassani and Buchem, 2019; O’Dowd, 2018) or “Collaborative Online International Learning” (COIL) (Guth, 2013).
                Our continued challenge is uncovering how our work teaching minimal computing can effectively advance a more open and global digital humanities. We aim at moving beyond the limits of the course itself, by upholding approaches to pedagogy and digital humanities research that work towards what we claim should be a core tenet for the global digital humanities community: technology owned by no one and used and contributed to by all.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arancio, 
                        J.
                         C. (2021). 
                        Opening up the tools for doing science: The case of the global open science hardware movement. International Journal of Engineering, Social Justice and Peace, 8(2), pp. 1-27. https://ojs.library.queensu.ca/index.php/IJESJP/article/view/13997/9834.
                    
                    
                        Bassani, 
                        P. S.
                         and Buchem, 
                        I. (2019). Virtual Exchanges in Higher Education: Developing Intercultural Skills of Students Across Borders Through Online Collaboration. 
                        Revista Interuniversitaria de Investigación en Tecnología Educativa, 6. https://doi.org/10.6018/riite.377771.
                    
                    
                        Guth, 
                        S. (2013). 
                        The COIL Institute for Globally Networked Learning in the Humanities. SUNY - COIL Center-SUNY Research Foundation. http://coil.suny.edu/sites/default/files/case_study_report.pdf.
                    
                    
                        Minimal Computing Working Group. (2021). 
                        About. What is Minimal Computing? https://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about.
                    
                    
                        O’Dowd, R. (2018). From Telecollaboration to Virtual Exchange: State-of-the-art and the Role of UNICollaboration in Moving Forward. 
                        Journal of Virtual eExchange, 1: 1–23. https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2018.jve.1.
                    
                    
                        Sahle, 
                        P. (2016). What is a Scholarly Digital Edition? In Pierazzo, E. and Driscoll, M. 
                        Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories and Practices, pp. 19–40. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers. https://jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1fzhh6v.6.
                    
                    
                        UNESCO, 
                        Leeds-Hurwitz, W. and Stenou, 
                        K.
                         (2013). 
                        Intercultural Competences: Conceptual and Operational Framework. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000219768.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
                    Abstract
                
                The aim of this poster is to provide an overview of the principal objectives of the CLS INFRA project, its aims and structure as well as ways to get in touch.
            
            
                Introduction
                Just as much as the exact sciences, research in the social sciences and the humanities relies on research infrastructures: no research could be conducted without academic libraries, cultural heritage institutions, and academic and mass-market publishers. The digital turn, however, not only reshaped the theoretical and methodological frameworks in several disciplines, but it also redefined the notion of research infrastructures (see e.g. Borgman 2010, Moulin et al. 2011, Kitchin 2021). Nowadays, at least in Digital Humanities, it is hard to conduct any cutting-edge research without access to the relevant digital resources, tools to analyze them, networks of collaborating teams and individuals, and efficient communication channels to disseminate the results. In particular, this applies to computational literary studies (CLS).
            
            
                An Infrastructure for CLS
                With respect to the field of computational literary studies more specifically, the digital age offers challenges and opportunities for completing research on Europe’s multilingual and interconnected literary heritage. At present, the landscape of literary data is diverse and fragmented. Even though many resources are currently available in digital libraries, archives, repositories, websites or catalogues, a lack of standardisation hinders how they are constructed, accessed and the extent to which they are reusable (Ciotti 2014). The Computational Literary Studies Infrastructure (CLS INFRA) project aims to federate these resources, with the tools needed to interrogate them, and with a widened base of users, in the spirit of the FAIR and CARE principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016, Carroll 2020). The resulting improvements will benefit researchers by bridging gaps between greater- and lesser-resourced communities in computational literary studies and beyond, ultimately offering opportunities to create new research and insight into our shared and varied European cultural heritage. CLS INFRA’s efforts are central to catering to these urgent infrastructural needs of a growing user community.
                    
                        Project website: 
                        https://www.clsinfra.io.
                    
                
                
                    Rather than building entirely new resources for literary studies, the project is strongly committed to exploiting and connecting the already-existing efforts and initiatives, in order to acknowledge and utilize the immense human labour that has already been undertaken. Therefore, the project builds on recently-compiled high-quality literary corpora, such as DraCor and ELTeC (Fischer et al. 2019, Burnard et al. 2021, Schöch et al. to appear), integrates existing tools for text analysis, e.g. TXM, stylo, multilingual NLP pipelines (Heiden 2010, Eder et al. 2016), and takes advantage of deep integration with two other infrastructural projects, namely the CLARIN and DARIAH ERICs.
                    
                        
                            See 
                            https://www.dariah.eu and 
                            https://www.clarin.eu.
                        
                    
                     
                    Consequently, the project aims at building a coherent ecosystem to foster the technical and intellectual findability and accessibility of relevant data. The ecosystem consists of (1) resources, i.e. text collections for drama, poetry and prose in several languages, (2) tools, (3) methodological and theoretical considerations, (4) a network of CLS scholars based at different European institutions, (5) a system of short-term research stays for both early career researchers and seasoned scholars, (6) a repository for training materials, as well as (7) an efficient dissemination strategy. The structure of the project with its work packages closely follows the above components of the infrastructure.
                
                The project is delivered by a geographically balanced, complementary transnational consortium of key local and national infrastructure providers, covering the full range of the project’s defined areas for integration and innovation and aligned so as to create a common infrastructural approach for computational literary studies. In particular the deep integration of both the CLARIN and DARIAH ERICs ensure the project’s long term stability and sustainability.
            
            
                Conclusion
                The key aim of our poster is to provide a wide range of stakeholders – researchers, librarians, infrastructure providers – with an understanding of our project and with contact points for specific issues as to motivate them to get involved.
            
            
                Acknowledgements
                This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101004984.
                
                    Beyond the authors of this poster proposal, we would like to acknowledge the role of the work package leads: Maciej Eder (coordinator), Justin Tonra, Christof Schöch, Karina van Dalen-Oskam, Carolin Odebrecht, Matej Ďurčo, Peer Trilcke, Frank Fischer, Julie M. 
                    Birkholz, Marco Raciti. Find out more about the team here: 
                    
                    . 
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Borgman, Christine. 2010. 
                        Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet. Cambridge, Mass. & London: MIT Press.
                    
                    
                        Burnard, Lou, Christof Schöch, and Carolin Odebrecht
                        . 2021. In search of comity: TEI for distant reading. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                         
                        14. 
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Ciotti, Fabio
                        .
                         2014. Digital literary and cultural studies: the state of the art and perspectives. 
                        Between
                         
                        4/8, 1-17. 
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Eder, 
                        Maciej
                        , Rybicki, 
                        Jan
                         and Kestemont, M
                        ike
                        .
                         
                        2016. Stylometry with R: a package for computational text analysis. 
                        R Journal
                        , 8(1): 107-21.
                        
                             
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        Fischer, Frank, Ingo Börner, Matthias Göbel, Andrea Hechtl, Christopher Kittel, P. Miling, and Peer Trilcke
                        . 2019. ‪Programmable Corpora: Introducing DraCor, an Infrastructure for the Research on European Drama‬. In 
                        Book of Abstracts of the Digital Humanities Conference 2019
                        . Utrecht: ADHO.
                    
                    
                        Heiden, Serge
                        . 2010. The TXM Platform: Building Open-Source Textual Analysis Software Compatible with the TEI Encoding Scheme. In 
                        24th Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Computation
                         
                        (pp. 10 p.). Sendai, 
                        Japan.
                         Retrieved from 
                        
                    
                    
                        Kitchin, Rob
                        . 2021. 
                        The data revolution: big data, open data, data infrastructures and their consequences
                        . 2nd edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications Ltd.
                    
                    
                        Moulin, Claudine, Arianna Ciula, and Julianne Nyhan
                        . 2011. 
                        Research Infrastructures in the Digital Humanities
                        . Science Policy Briefing 42. Strasbourg: European Science Foundation.
                    
                    
                        Schöch, Christof, Tomaz Erjavec, Roxana Patras, and Diana Santos
                         (to appear). Creating the European Literary Text Collection (ELTeC): Challenges and Perspectives. 
                        Modern Languages Open
                        .
                    
                    
                        Wilkinson, Mark D., Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Appleton, Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg
                        . 2016. The FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship. 
                        Scientific Data
                         
                        3(1). 
                        
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            This short paper introduces LEAF (the Linked Editorial Academic Framework virtual research environment), an enhanced and expanded collaborative editorial platform that supports a variety of digital scholarly projects through a pipeline of integrated tools for collaborative production and publication of scholarly and documentary collections. Funded through the Canada Foundation for Innovation and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, LEAF aims to address the challenges that face many who undertake and maintain large-scale collaborative DH projects now: namely, the need to ensure that these projects can remain operational and available to editors and audiences over the long-haul. It is only by sharing physical, software, and human infrastructures across institutions that this can be accomplished. In so doing we can support scalability, interoperability, and preservation while allowing for dynamic, iterative, and collaborative editing, and therefore ensure that our materials, collections, and editions will remain viable and accessible. The LEAF team aims to do this by integrating best practices for text encoding, annotation, and metadata standards. This short paper will report on the development of LEAF and the functionalities that it will provide. 
            The implementation, and dissemination of LEAF is built upon a collaboration to extend the Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC) built by the Universities of Alberta and Guelph (Susan Brown) with Bucknell University (Diane Jakacki), and Newcastle University (James Cummings) as founding partners. This work enhances CWRC’s functionality through collaborative software development that will ultimately support multiple instances of the LEAF platform in Canada, the US, and the UK. At Bucknell, this work will inform the Liberal Arts Based Digital Edition Publishing Cooperative and the Bucknell Digital Press, funded by an Andrew W. Mellon Digital Publishing Cooperative Implementation grant that will support an expanding portfolio of peer-reviewed digital editions and edition clusters. 
            
                The LEAF platform combines hardware, software, and personnel. LEAF is being built on a solid foundation in terms of its data models, core functionality, and code management, so that it is positioned for extension and long-term sustainability. The platform is based on the Islandora 8 framework, which combines Drupal 8 with a Fedora 5 repository for long-term preservation. The LEAF repository will customize and enhance Islandora to enable digital humanities workflows and publication needs. Enhancements include an innovative web-based editing tool that allows users to employ TEI XML along with Web Annotation and IIIF standards-compatible Linked Open Data annotations that enhance discoverability and interoperability. 
            
            
                The founding LEAF institutions are collaborating to upgrade the existing CWRC environment and produce a fully modular platform that will also be hosted on Bucknell’s servers, further tested at Newcastle University, and offered as containerized open-source code freely available for download and installation by other institutions. In particular, LEAF will facilitate the production and publication of dynamic digital scholarly editions and collections, offering multilingual transcription, translation, and image markup. Entirely browser-based, its functionality includes an in-browser XML markup editor, XML rendering tools, built-in text and data visualization tools including the Voyant Tools suite and its Dynamic Table of Contexts Browser. Overall the LEAF platform will provide a sophisticated interface for digital editions in which the XML markup is leveraged for navigation and active reading, and enhanced with Linked Open Data.
            
        
    



        
            
                
                1. Greek Papyri
                The Ancient Greek civilization used numerous materials as support for their texts. Of these, the best preserved are epigraphic texts and the papyri. We can estimate the number of extant papyri to be well over 200,000, of which only a part have been published. They are either literary texts, subliterary texts (private letters, magical texts, etc.) or documentary texts, both public and private (contracts, legal texts, etc.).
                Papyri, as we have them now, are very often fragmentary texts, usually poorly preserved. They have transmitted to our days words and expressions that we did not know from literature, and often must be interpreted within a context that can only be conjectured.
                Naturally, the chronological extent of the documents testifies to numerous changes in writing practices, and, even more importantly, reflects numerous social changes that took place in the area during these more than a thousand years.
                2. Digitization of Greek papyri
                A considerable part of all the papyri that have already been scholarly edited have been digitized thanks to several projects, many of them gathered under the aegis of Papyri.info, using as encoding scheme EpiDoc, a subset of the TEI standard adapted to the edition of ancient texts.
                Texts in this repository do not identify words separately (other than putting spaces among them), nor do they distinguish normally between words and word fragments, or words and numerals, nor do they lemmatize words.
                There are currently more than 81,000 digitized papyri in the Papy.info repository. The site's software allows basic queries within the text of the papyri (without lemmatization) and the metadata that have been incorporated from the Heidelberger Gesamtverzeichnis der Griechischen Papyrusurkunden Ägyptens (HGV) project.
                3. Callimachus
                Callimachus (https://glg.csic.es/Callimachus/) is a new project currently in development at Spain’s CCHS-CSIC, that aims to make available to all users the metadata incorporated in the digital edition of the papyri from Papyri.info, as well as the result of some calculations and estimations about the formal content of the papyri based on such metadata and the data itself. Callimachus processes all digitized papyri and presents the following information using 55 categories.
                 1. All values and attributes meaningful for the study of Greek papyri contained in the XML markup.
                 2. It puts this information in relation to the data that about each papyrus has been collected by the HGV.
                 3. Identifies words and separates them from fragments and numerals.
                 4. Performs a series of calculations on the textual content of the papyrus, such as the number of words, letters per line, editorial corrections, scribal hands, etc.
                4. The 
                    Callimachus number
                
                The Callimachus number is a decimal number between zero and one that objectively indicates the state of preservation and readability of a document. A Callimachus number 0 indicates no preservation of the contents and 1 indicates that the entire contents of the papyrus have been preserved and are visible without problems. The Callimachus number is based on an algorithm that can be used to determine the state of preservation of any ancient document.
                To calculate the Callimachus number we use the XML values and parameters of the document that indicate whether the text has been restored, whether it is fully or partially legible, etc. and perform some kind of calculations to estimate the percentage of missing text. All these calculations result in a matrix that assigns each letter (present or estimated according to the editors' judgment about the extent of the gaps) a value from 0 to 1 according to the criteria in the following table. The sum of all values is divided by the number of letters to obtain the Callimachus number:
                5. Some applications of Callimachus
                Callimachus can be used in papyrology research as well as in linguistics-related projects. One can use Callimachus to search papyri containing any specific feature, or a combination of features. For example, you can search for papyri containing any specific trait, or combination of traits. The use of Callimachus in combination with Polyphemus will allow to combine lexical information with all the data types of Callimachus.
            
        
    



        
            At first, the 
                Peanuts comic of 23 January 1952 seems easy to understand. Charlie Brown and Schroeder, two of Charles M. Schulz’s most familiar characters, talk about the music the latter is playing. Upon looking closer, the visual representation is far more complex than what is expected: Schulz reproduces the opening stanzas of Beethoven’s “Grosse Sonate für das Hammerklavier” (Piano Sonata No.29, Op.106); Schroeder, responding to Charlie Brown’s question about the piece, replies in German; and his speech is rendered in 
                Fraktur; Charlie Brown’s response is a single typographic character; and Schulz signs his name in the final panel in 
                Fraktur. 
            
            How do you train students to see the complications in this strip? One solution would be to have them read Scott McCloud’s accessible classic 
                Understanding Comics, Hilary Chute’s more recent 
                Why Comics?, or the audacious 
                How to Read Nancy by Paul Karasik and Mark Newgarden. But another solution would be to have them read the comics very closely through the act of encoding them and to then quantify their findings. In this presentation, I will discuss recent courses I have taught that have taken a digital humanities approach to Schulz’s corpus. 
            
            
                Peanuts first appeared in October 1950. As a “space-saving strip,” which meant editors could arrange its panels in different ways on the comics page, Schulz’s strip may have appeared destined to be quickly forgotten (Schulz, “An Interview” 316). Instead, he continued drawing strip after strip for the next 50 years. When the final Peanuts strip was published on 13 February 2000 (the morning after Schulz had passed away), he had singlehandedly drawn, inked, and lettered 17,897 strips, resulting in what Robert Thompson called the “longest story ever told by one human being” (qtd. in Boxer). 
                Peanuts influenced not only other comics but culture as a whole, with Charlie Brown, Snoopy, and the others being some of the most recognizable characters on earth. Compared to the strips that preceded Schulz’s, such as 
                The Yellow Kid (1895-1898), 
                Krazy Kat (1913-1944), and 
                Pogo (1948-1975), or those that followed it, including 
                The Far Side (1979-1995) and 
                Calvin and Hobbes (1985-1995), Schulz’s style of both illustration and humor was minimal. But as the preceding paragraph suggests, simplicity does not preclude complexity.
            
            For the last two years, I have taught a semester-long “Research in Digital Humanities” course that focuses on Schulz’s work. While we closely read more than four years worth of strips, we extend our understanding of Schulz’s work through the application of different digital humanities methods. First, we have collectively begun a digital edition of 
                Peanuts, encoding strips according to both TEI and the Comic Book Markup Language (CBML; see Walsh). Encoding strips allows us to precisely record features of strips, including setting, weather, activities the characters are engaged in, and whether the strips are tied to a particular holiday (see Croxall et al., 
                Peanuts Taxonomy). We tag characters who are named in the strip as well as place names, and record speech, sounds, types of speech bubbles, and diegetic text that appears in the strip. Throughout this process, the choices of what we encode are collectively determined by the class (see Croxall et al, 
                Peanuts Encoding Editorial Decisions). We discuss the encoding regularly in class sessions, as precision requires us to look carefully at both the comic and the TEI and CBML guidelines. 
            
            While we slowly build this digital edition, we also use a data set of transcriptions (similar to 
                alt-text) harvested from the 
                GoComics website that gives us the ability to search across all 50 years of the comics’ history. With these two different data sets—one small and precise, the other broad and varied—we then engage in distant reading approaches. The first year of the class was dedicated to determining character co-occurrence within the strips and analyzing the networks among Schulz’s characters (see Fig. 1). The second year found us using stylometry to determine whether the different characters had distinct speaking patterns. In the upcoming semester (Winter 2022), we will consider the bounds of season for both weather and sports. 
            
            In this presentation, I will discuss both our methods of encoding and the results of our quantifications. While drawing on the work of others who have examined comics in the terms of digital humanities (see Whitson and Salter; Dunst et al.), I extend the conversation for the first time into the convergence of comics, DH, and pedagogy.
            
                
            
            Fig. 1, Network Analysis of In-strip Character Co-Occurrence
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Boxer, S. (2000). Charles M. Schulz, ‘Peanuts’ Creator, Dies at 77. 
                        New York Times. 14 February 2000, https://www.nytimes.com/2000/02/14/arts/charles-m-schulz-peanuts-creator-dies-at-77.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm (accessed 27 April 2022). 
                    
                    Chute, H. (2017). 
                        Why Comics? From Underground to Everywhere. New York: Harper.
                    
                    Croxall, B. et al. (2020-2022). 
                        Peanuts Encoding Editorial Decisions. Google Docs, https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-4u0SHY5PW16sfcEqL8mOYl-x2JB0piXowOOpLYGn7I/edit?usp=sharing (accessed 27 April 2022). 
                    
                    Croxall, B. et al. (2020-2022). 
                        Peanuts Taxonomy. GitHub, https://github.com/briancroxall/peanuts-taxonomy (accessed 27 April 2022).
                    
                    Dunst, A. et al. (2018). 
                        Empirical Comics Research: Digital, Multimodal, and Cognitive Methods. New York: Routledge. 
                    
                    Karasik, P. and Newgarden, M. (2017). 
                        How to Read Nancy: The Elements of Comics in Three Easy Panels. Seattle: Fantagraphic Books. 
                    
                    McCloud, S. (1993) 
                        Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York: William Morrow. 
                    
                    Schulz, C. (2004). “An Interview with Charles M. Schulz.” 
                        The Complete Peanuts: 1950-1952. Seattle: Fantagraphic Books, pp. 304-337.
                    
                    Schulz, C. (2014-2016). 
                        The Complete Peanuts. 25 vols. Seattle: Fantagraphic Books.
                    
                    Schulz, C. 23 January 1952. 
                        GoComics, https://www.gocomics.com/peanuts/1952/01/23 (accessed 27 April 2022). 
                    
                    Walsh, J. A. (2012). “Comic Book Markup Language: An Introduction and Rationale.” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 6.1, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000117/000117.html (accessed 27 April 2022). 
                    
                    Whitson, R. T. and Salter, A. (2015). “Introduction: Comics and the Digital Humanities.” 
                        Digital Humanities Quarterly 9.4, http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/4/000210/000210.html (accessed 27 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Initially made available in 2019, Architectura Sinica (
                www.architecturasinica.org) is the first open-source, publicly accessible research database focusing on the timber-frame tradition of pre-modern China. Developed using the codebase of the Srophé app, and eXist DB application developed by David Michaelson (Vanderbilt University) and Dan Schwartz (Texas A&M) written in TEI, as it stands today Architectura Sinica consists of three important elements: 1. A Dynamic Site Archive of more than 140 historic (mostly religious) sites containing at least one timber-frame building thought to date from the 8
                th – 13
                th centuries; 2. a Chinese-English thesaurus of technical architecture terminology used by craftsmen and bureaucrats in pre-modern China; and 3. a bibliography of sources used in individual entries for historic sites, individual structures, and technical terminology. A fourth module dedicated to epigraphy preserved at these historic sites is planned for future development. Critical to this project is the display of public-domain images of historic sites and artifacts located within them. Curation of these images presents ongoing challenges as we seek to find a nimble platform for expanding our collection of digital photographs donated by researchers and students.
            
            Over the past two years we have successfully made Architectura Sinica work as an international, collaborative, research and teaching platform. With support from the Vanderbilt University libraries, we have established a system of developing, reviewing, and publishing new data on traditional Chinese architecture in a single calendar year. This collaboration includes faculty, librarians, and students (both undergraduate and graduate) from Vanderbilt, Southeast University 東南大學 in Nanjing, and NYU Shanghai, who work together to explore essential DH tools such as GitHub and TEI while also learning about the architectural heritage of China. We have found that this process is extremely satisfying for students and can make a seemingly esoteric topic accessible and compelling, thus sparking interest in further work in the field. 
            Our challenges currently revolve around the desire to keep the application open-source, while making it efficient to maintain. Securing storage for the code and data remains a problem. Our institution requires AWS hosting, and our current IT staff finds integrating our open-source XML codebase with AWS difficult. Additionally, although we currently house our high-resolution image files in FlickrPro, we have concerns about the long-term viability of using this commercial product. Yet other options, including JSTOR Forum (aka Artstor), which have a more sophisticated metadata structure, present challenges in cost and accessibility for international collaboration.
            Our purpose for presenting Architectura Sinica at DH 2022 in Tokyo is two-fold. First, we would like to give a short presentation of the results of our research as an example of a collaborative DH project addressing Asian material for analysis in a global context. Second, we seek feedback on the functionality of the site. We aspire to integrate GIS data, object-based, site-specific research, and philological exploration of technical terminology into a single platform to create a useful starting point for advanced research in the history of sacred sites and the built environment in East Asia. Although our current results are satisfactory, are there ways of making the process more efficient? Are eXist DB and TEI our best tools for developing cultural heritage metadata for the future? Are there better tools available for archiving and presenting visual data in an open-source environment?
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                This paper quantifies textual patterns relating to gendered assumptions in a fairly unique text, an entire “women’s encyclopedia” from 1830’s Germany, which at 10 volumes and 1,461,000 word tokens was of comparable size to contemporary general encyclopedias, but written and marketed for a female audience. We perform experiments on classifying gender of biographical entries and querying a specific textual feature, calendar dates, with context from comparison 19
                    th-20
                    th century encyclopedias from the EncycNet corpus.
                  
               
                
                Encyclopedias in the European tradition were “an element of culture and peoples’ lives” (Loveland, 2019), but while encyclopedias invite interpretation (Einbinder, 1966), their length challenges non-digital scholarship; digital humanities thus “holds promise for the study of encyclopedias” (Loveland, 2019). 
                The 
                    Damen Conversations Lexikon (“Ladies’ Conversations Encyclopedia,” hereafter 
                    DamenLex) has been the subject of little scholarly analysis. Roßbach (2015) writes that the first edition of the 
                    DamenLex “primarily aims to act as a behavioral guide for virtuous women,” Translation of quotations by Roßbach (2015) and Schaser (2016) in this paragraph are by us. but Schaser (2016) asserts that this “little known” encyclopedia is “a treasure trove for questions of cultural history.” 
                    DamenLex editor Carl Herloßsohn (1804-1849) explained its content selection in gendered assumptions and value judgments, and the extent to which the 
                    DamenLex actually followed Herloßsohn’s stated goals is the starting point of our research questions. 
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1. A sample page and illustration from the 
                            Damen Conversations Lexikon
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Related work
                Distant reading the 
                    DamenLex for ideological traces relates to issues of women and gender in 19
                    th-century Europe, women’s education and achievement, and the history of books not 
                    by, but marketed 
                    for women, in which women’s access to the written word, by controlling literacy and access to reading material, has been a source of anxiety (Jack, 2012). We would thus expect the 
                    DamenLex to display evidence of two opposing forces: women’s education and controlling ideology through explicit or implicit gender presumptions within the content, stylistics, and selection of topics.
                
                Perceptions of women readers can be traced through such texts as Ovid’s books addressed to women (e.g. 
                    Ars Amatoria) and the Confucian 
                    Four Books for Women (Mingqi, 1987). Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century texts for women on etiquette and conduct were prescriptive, supporting notions of “ideal womanhood” (Hemlow, 1960; Darby, 2000). The nineteenth century in which the 
                    DamenLex was published was “a golden age for reading, and for women’s reading in particular,” per Jack (2012), as the growth of industrialization, printing and publishing were “accompanied by wide-ranging debates about what women [...] should be encouraged to read, or discouraged — even prevented — from reading.”
                
            
            
                Gendered assumptions
                Gender bias in biographical entry subjects is an unfortunate theme in the history of the encyclopedia, with the 11
                    th Britannica, for instance, including an entry on Pierre Curie but not Marie Curie (Thomas, 1992), and Bamman and Smith (2014) estimated that only 14.8% of biographical entries in Wikipedia have women as subjects.
                
                The 
                    DamenLex’s editor explicitly included many biographies of women to appeal to women readers, suggesting experiments to classify the gender of the ~800 biographical entries in the 
                    DamenLex and almost 44,000 in comparison encyclopedias. The encyclopedias for our experiments are part of a larger set of historical reference works converted to TEI (Hagen et al., 2020): . To classify biographical entries, we trained a bag-of-words-based SVM classifier to label entries as either biography, place, object or abstract concept (with an accuracy of 0.92 for biographies). To classify the gender of each biographical entry, a rule-based approach based on Reagle and Rhue (2011) compares the ratios of male and female personal pronouns in the entry (e.g. sein/his, ihr/her). Only entries longer than 20 tokens were classified, and we only proceeded with entries for which a gender was identified. The amount of unclassified entries is low for 
                    Brockhaus 1837 (about 1%), where entries tend to be relatively long, but higher in 
                    Brockhaus 1911 (about 37%), for example.
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1809
                                
                                
                                    DamenLex
                                    1834
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1837
                                
                                
                                    Herder
                                    1854
                                
                                
                                    Meyer
                                    1905
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1911
                                
                                
                                    Wikipedia
                                    2014
                                
                                
                                    Wikipedia
                                    2015
                                
                            
                            
                                Male
                                948 (95%)
                                480 (60%)
                                957 (96%)
                                5,952 (95%)
                                26,223 (94%)
                                7,356 (94%)
                                85.20%
                                84.50%
                            
                            
                                Female
                                52 (5%)
                                329 (40%)
                                42 (4%)
                                345 (5%)
                                1,599 (6%)
                                479 (6%)
                                14.80%
                                15.50%
                            
                        
                        Table 1. Estimate of male and female biographies in historical German encyclopedias. Wikipedia results reported by Bamman and Schmith (2014) and Graells-Garrido et al. (2015)
                    
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 2. Boxplot visualizing the entry lengths of female biographies in tokens in all encyclopedias. The solid, orange line marks the median. Additionally, the median of male biography entry lengths (dotted, blue line) and the median of all entry lengths, including biographies, (dashed, green line) are given
                    
                
                From these results, 
                    DamenLex contains a much higher percentage of female biographies than all other comparison texts (Table 1) including Wikipedia, with female biographies around 40%. Two chi-squared tests (Table 4 in the appendix) reveal that there is a highly significant relationship between encyclopedia and the amount of entries on women only when the 
                    DamenLex is included in the test, confirming our hypothesis. A similar gender disparity is observed in entry lengths of of male and female biographies in the 
                    DamenLex (Figure 2). We calculated Mann-Whitney U tests for article lengths of female biographies compared to similar sized samples from male biographies for all encyclopedias (see Table 3 in the appendix). Only the 
                    DamenLex's and 
                    Brockhaus' 1911 lengths of female biographies are not significantly shorter than the male entries.
                
                Did 
                    DamenLex devote biographies to the same “notable” women as contemporary encyclopedias? The overlap is quite low: of 329 entries on women in 
                    DamenLex, only about 65 appear in at least one other encyclopedia, confirming that the editors of the comparison encyclopedias had a different perception of who "important women" were.
                
                Finally, most frequent words in 
                    DamenLex biographical entries provide insight into content differences. Among the 15 most frequent nouns in female biographies are role labels such “daughter,” “wife,” and “mother,” and family relations such as “husband” and “child.” In male biographies, in contrast, only “father” and “son” appear in the 20 most frequent nouns, while references to artistic production such as “poet,” “poem,” “opera,” and “writing” fill out the rest. Such artistic terms can also be found in female biographies, only at lower frequency ranks. Among the 50 most frequent adjectives in male entries, only a handful do not appear in the 100 most frequent adjectives in female entries: “tremendous,” “glowing,” “musical,” and “exquisite.” The first two words are typical terms to describe sublime aesthetic experiences, which aligns with contemporary gendered assumptions about aesthetics.
                
                Herloßsohn wrote that a “romantic representation” of the subjects in the 
                    DamenLex was desired: “not a tiresome enumeration of facts and the course of time, but a lively, rapidly gliding painting [...] should be given.” We thus hypothesize that the amount of calendar dates will be far lower in its entries. To investigate, we tagged encyclopedia entries with heideltime,
                  
                a multilingual temponym tagger. As Table 2 shows, the amount of dates is indeed far lower in 
                    DamenLex than comparison encyclopedias, confirming the gendered assumption that hard facts such as calendar dates were considered undesirable for women readers. Verification via the chi-squared test (Table 4 in the appendix) results that there is no statistical difference between the encyclopedias concerning the amount of dates, however.
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                21
                                37
                                37
                                37
                                37
                                37
                                37
                            
                            
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1809
                                
                                
                                    DamenLex
                                    1834
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1837
                                
                                
                                    Herder
                                    1854
                                
                                
                                    Meyer
                                    1905
                                
                                
                                    Brockhaus
                                    1911
                                
                            
                            
                                Dates
                                1.29%
                                0.73%
                                1.38%
                                1.87%
                                3.81%
                                4.32%
                            
                        
                        Table 2. Relative amount of dates found in a sample of 256 entries of similar length (about 100,000 tokens overall) per encyclopedia
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                By quantifying the ratios of male/female biographical entries in the 
                    DamenLex and comparison encyclopedias, comparative length of biographical entries, and a query of calendar dates in the texts, we provide new knowledge and add historical context to vibrant ongoing research on gender bias in encyclopedias (including Wikipedia). We agree with Schaser (2006) that the “little known” encyclopedia of the 
                    DamenLex is “a treasure trove for questions of cultural history,” and have presented evidence that distant reading of gender distribution in biographical entries and content presentation can reveal gendered assumptions in the text. This paper will include these and other experiments to quantify gendered assumptions in encyclopedia texts, and could support future work in gender bias in not only historical but also contemporary encyclopedias.
                
            
            
                Appendix
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Brockhaus 1809
                                
                                    U = 737.0, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 52, 
                                    p 
                            
                            
                                Brockhaus 1837
                                
                                    U = 758.5, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 42, 
                                    p 
                            
                            
                                Brockhaus 1911
                                
                                    U = 112124.5, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 479, 
                                    p = 0.27
                                
                            
                            
                                Herder 1854
                                
                                    U = 49367.0, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 345, 
                                    p 
                            
                            
                                Meyer 1905
                                
                                    U = 728612.0, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 1599, 
                                    p 
                            
                            
                                DamenLex 1834
                                
                                    U = 57677.5, 
                                    n1 = 
                                    n2 = 329, 
                                    p = 0.93
                                
                            
                        
                        Table 3. Results of the one-sided Mann-Whitney U tests (
                            p
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Number of entries (incl. DamenLex)
                                χ2 (5, 
                                    N = 44762) = 1635.9, 
                                    p 
                            
                            
                                Number of entries (excl. DamenLex)
                                χ2 (4, 
                                    N = 43953) = 7.7, 
                                    p = .1
                                
                            
                            
                                Number of dates
                                χ2 (5, 
                                    N = 600) = 5.03, 
                                    p = .41
                                
                            
                        
                        Table 4. Results for the chi-squared tests (
                            p
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bamman, D. and Smith, N. A. (2014). Unsupervised Discovery of Biographical Structure from Text. 
                        Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2: 363-76.
                    
                    
                        Darby, B. (2000). The more things change… the rules and late Eighteenth-Century Conduct Books for Women. 
                        Women’s Studies, 29(3).
                    
                    
                        Einbinder, H. (1966). The Myth of the Britannica. 
                        Science and Society, 30(1).
                    
                    
                        Graells-Garrido, E., Lalmas, M. and Menczer, F. (2015), First Women, Second Sex: Gender Bias in Wikipedia. 
                        Proceedings of the 26
                        th
                         ACM Conference on Hypertext & Social Media, pp. 165-74.
                    
                    
                        Hagen, T., Ketzan, E., Jannidis, F. and Witt, A. (2020). Twenty-two Historical Encyclopedias encoded in TEI: a new Resource for the Digital Humanities. 
                        Proceedings of the 4
                        th
                         joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature, pp. 112-20.
                    
                    
                        Hemlow, J. (1960). Fanny Burney and the Courtesy Books. 
                        PLMA, 65(6).
                    
                    
                        Jack, B. (2012). 
                        The Woman Reader. New Haven: Yale University Press.
                    
                    
                        Loveland, J. (2019). 
                        The European Encyclopedia: From 
                        1650 to the Twenty-first century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Mingqi, Z. (1987). The Four Books of Women: Ancient Chinese Texts for the Education of Women. 
                        B.C. Asian Review, 1(1).
                    
                    
                        Reagle, J. and Rhue, L. (2011). Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica. 
                        International Journal of Communication, 5(0).
                    
                    
                        Roßbach, N. (2015). 
                        Wissen, Medium und Geschlecht: Frauenzimmer-Studien zu Lexikographie, Lehrdichtung und Zeitschrift. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang International Academic Publishers.
                    
                    
                        Schaser, A. (2006). Rezension zu: Herloßsohn, Carl (Hrsg.): Damen Conversations Lexikon. Neusatz und Faksimile der 10-bändigen Ausgabe Leipzig 1834 bis 1838. Berlin 2005. 
                        H-Soz-Kult.
                    
                    
                        Thomas, G. (1992). 
                        A Position to Command Respect. Woman and the Eleventh Britannica. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
                    BERT and its Application to Digital Humanities
                
                Transformers (GPT, BERT) have become a central piece in NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017; Alammar, 2018; Tunstall et al., preprint). These language models bring new possibilities for pre-training algorithms with no labelled data, which can then be fine-tuned to new tasks (transfer learning) with fewer labels (few-shot learning). Their linguistic prowess has spurred discussions about their limitations, biases and societal and environmental impact (Bender et al., 2021; Carlini et al., 2021; Underwood, 2021).
                
                    These algorithms have also sparked the interest of the DH community. Specifically, BERT models (Devlin et al., 2019)
                     
                    have been explored mainly for the study of English (Han and Eisenstein, 2019; Sims et al., 2019; Fonteyn, 2020; Underwood, 2021)
                     
                    and German literature (Jannidis and Konle, 2020; Pagel et al., 2021; Ehrmanntraut et al., 2021), or in multilingual settings
                     
                    (de la Rosa, et al., 2021).
                
                
                    However, its applicability to other Humanities domains remains questionable. Because of the vast amounts of data required for pre-training, these models are usually fed with contemporary text types (web, journalistic, or administrative documents) from resource-rich modern languages. In contrast, the Humanities deal with diverse and heterogeneous datasets, non-standard orthography, historical genres, multilingual datasets, and often from low-resource languages. To assess the performance of multilingual models in this context, we analyze the abilities of a multilingual BERT model (mBERT) pre-trained on Wikipedia for 102 languages (Devlin, 2018)
                     
                    on a multi-genre, diachronic Bible dataset.
                
            
            
                Corpus of Bible Translations
                
                    Building multilingual corpora usually involves collecting texts produced originally in each analyzed language and period (Odebrecht et al., 2019; Novakova and Siepmann, 2020; Burnard et al., 2021). However, cultural and historical differences hinder the comparability of the results (Schöch et al., preprint). To circumvent this limitation while accounting for low-resource languages, we choose a corpus of translations of Bibles. Bibles as research objects have a long tradition in Corpus Linguistics and Digital Humanities (Radday, 1973; Neumann, 
                    1990; Holmes, 1991; Resnik et al., 1999; Christodouloupoulos and Steedman, 2015; Walczak, 2015; Lee and Yeung, 2016; Calvo Tello, 2020).
                
                
                    The corpus comes from Zefania-XML-bible
                     
                    and Bible Gateway.
                     
                    It contains 221 translations (11,455 books, e.g. Genesis and Psalms) in 54 languages from all continents, including historical ones such as Latin, Gothic and Syriac, and artificial languages (e.g., Esperanto).
                     
                    Figures 1a-b show the number of translations per language and the historical distribution for languages with translations before 1900.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Methods
                For the analysis, we apply five metrics on two fronts:
                
                    Tokenization: 
                        We apply the default mBERT tokenizer and a simple typographic tokenizer to the Bible dataset. The tokens identified by the mBERT tokenizer can be characters, sub-word units (part-tokens), or whole-word units resembling typographic tokens. For languages using white-space delimited writing systems, the higher the number of whole-word units, the easier to interpret for humans, as the resulting tokenized text resembles quite closely the original one. To formalize this notion, we calculate the ratio of mBERT part-tokens by typographic-tokens (Figure 2). We also count the number of unknown tokens, i.e. tokens that are not part of the tokenizer vocabulary and cannot be split into its constituents. Low scores in these metrics represent better results.
                    
                    
                        Classification tasks
                        : 
                        
                        We apply classification to three annotated categories for each book: genre (e.g., historical, law, letter, Zimmermann, 2010), historical group (e.g., Gospel, Pentateuch), and Testament (Old and New). We create balanced datasets and guarantee each language has at least the same number of Bibles per category. We then split in a training (80%), validation (10%), and test set (10%) and build models for each language as well as combined ones for each century (except for translations pre-1500). We assess the performance of each model using the F1-macro metric (the higher, the better).
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Hypothesis Testing
                We use the five tokenization and classification metrics to test several hypotheses on the capabilities of mBERT. First, we hypothesize that languages in the mBERT pre-train dataset should obtain better results in the five metrics. Thus, we expect languages in the pre-train dataset to obtain low values in the tokenization metrics, and high F1 classification scores. To test this hypothesis, we group Bibles by whether their languages were part of the pre-training of mBERT and run Welch’s t-tests on the tokenization (Figures 3a-b) and classification (Figures 3c-e) metrics. This hypothesis is supported by three of the five criteria: the number of unknown-tokens (Figure 3a) and the classification results on genre and Testament (Figure 3c and 3e).
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                Second, we hypothesize that the Wikipedia sizes correlate with the metrics. While this is rejected for tokenization (Figures 4a-b), the classification results show statistical moderate correlations (Figures 4c-e). Despite having smaller or no Wikipedia, some languages obtain good overall results, such as Haitian, Jamaican, Gothic or Esperanto.
                
                    
                        
                    Consequently, in our third hypothesis, we expect texts in Romance and Germanic languages to score better than the rest of the languages. Figure 5 shows the classification results.
                
                
                    
                        
                    When compared in binary groups, Romance and Germanic languages do obtain better results than the rest for the five metrics (Figures 6a-e). 
                
                
                    
                        
                    Fourth, based on Muller et al.(2021), we hypothesize that translations using Latin script will score better than translations in other scripts. Figure 7 shows the number of unknown-tokens, notably high for Coptic and Syriac scripts.
                
                
                    
                        
                    When compared in binary groups, the five criteria support this hypothesis (Figures 8a-e). This might explain the good overall results for some low-resource languages with small or no Wikipedia, but written in Latin script.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    Fifth, we expect better results for contemporary translations (20th and 21st century), as that constitutes both the core of the pre-training and Bibles datasets. We obtained the year of publication for 68% of the corpus. Figure 9 shows a positive trend over time, reaching stability after the 18th century.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    However, when compared in binary groups (20th-21st vs. rest), this is only supported by the unknown-tokens metric (Figures 10a).
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Conclusions
                
                    
                    Our evaluation effectively exhibits biases in favor of some high-resource families of languages (Germanic, Romance), although other languages (Haitian, Jamaican, Esperanto) perform reasonably well. At the historical level, the scores are high and stable not only for the 20th and 21st century as hypothesized, but since the 18th century, probably due to a more consistent spelling since then. However, the strongest bias is not towards language or period, but toward (Latin) script. Therefore, transliteration into Latin script and modernization could be mandatory steps for 
                    many 
                    DH corpora interested in using mBERT. The 
                    DH 
                    community needs to discuss 
                    in which cases 
                    modernization and transliteration
                     are acceptable and 
                    in
                     
                    which 
                    
                    ways these limitations could be effectively mitigated.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        
                        Alammar, J.
                         
                        (2018). The Illustrated BERT, ELMo, and co. (How NLP Cracked Transfer Learning) 
                        Visualizing Machine Learning One Concept at a Time 
                        http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-bert/ (accessed 7 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A. and Mitchell, M.
                         
                        (2021). On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? 🦜. 
                        Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
                        . Virtual Event Canada: ACM, pp. 610–23 doi:10.1145/3442188.3445922. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3442188.3445922 (accessed 3 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Burnard, L., Schöch, C. and Odebrecht, C.
                         
                        (2021). In search of comity: TEI for distant reading. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                        (Issue 14). Text Encoding Initiative Consortium doi:10.4000/jtei.3500. https://journals.openedition.org/jtei/3500 (accessed 10 September 2021).
                    
                    
                        Calvo Tello, J.
                         
                        (2020). What is a Genre? A Graph Unified Model of Categories, Texts, and Features. Ottawa: ADHO https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:31713/ (accessed 12 October 2020).
                    
                    
                        Carlini, N., Tramer, F., Wallace, E., Jagielski, M., Herbert-Voss, A., Lee, K., Roberts, A., et al.
                         
                        (2021). Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models. 
                        ArXiv:2012.07805 [Cs] 
                        http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07805 (accessed 7 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Christodouloupoulos, C. and Steedman, M.
                         
                        (2015). A massively parallel corpus: the Bible in 100 languages. 
                        Language Resources and Evaluation
                        , 
                        49
                        (2): 375–95 doi:10.1007/s10579-014-9287-y.
                    
                    
                        Devlin, J.
                         
                        (2018). 
                        Multilingual BERT Docummentation
                        . https://github.com/google-research/bert/blob/a9ba4b8d7704c1ae18d1b28c56c0430d41407eb1/multilingual.md.
                    
                    
                        Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. and Toutanova, K.
                         
                        (2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. 
                        ArXiv:1810.04805 [Cs] 
                        http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805 (accessed 22 October 2021).
                    
                    
                        Ehrmanntraut, A., Hagen, T., Konle, L. and Jannidis, F.
                         
                        (2021). Type- and Token-based Word Embeddings in the Digital Humanities. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2989/long_paper35.pdf (accessed 12 October 2021).
                    
                    
                        Fonteyn, L.
                         
                        (2020). What about Grammar? Using BERT Embeddings to Explore Functional-Semantic Shifts of Semi-Lexical and Grammatical Constructions. https://2021.computational-humanities-research.org/cfp/ (accessed 12 October 2021).
                    
                    
                        Han, X. and Eisenstein, J.
                         
                        (2019). Unsupervised Domain Adaptation of Contextualized Embeddings for Sequence Labeling. 
                        Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Hong Kong, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4238–48 doi:10.18653/v1/D19-1433. https://aclanthology.org/D19-1433 (accessed 7 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Holmes, D. I.
                         
                        (1991). Vocabulary Richness and the Prophetic Voice. 
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing
                        , 
                        6
                        (4): 259–68 doi:10.1093/llc/6.4.259.
                    
                    
                        Jannidis, F. and Konle, L.
                         
                        (2020). Domain and Task Adaptive Pretraining for Language Models. https://dh-abstracts.library.cmu.edu/works/10214 (accessed 12 October 2021).
                    
                    
                        Lee, J. and Yeung, C. Y.
                         
                        (2016). An Annotated Corpus of Direct Speech. 
                        Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016)
                        . European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 1059–63 http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2016/pdf/1061_Paper.pdf (accessed 20 April 2019).
                    
                    
                        Muller, B., Anastasopoulos, A., Sagot, B. and Seddah, D.
                         
                        (2021). When Being Unseen from mBERT is just the Beginning: Handling New Languages With Multilingual Language Models. 
                        Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
                        . Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 448–62 doi:10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.38. https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.38 (accessed 8 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Neumann, K. J.
                         
                        (1990). 
                        The Authenticity of the Pauline Epistles in the Light of Stylostatistical Analysis
                        . (Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation Series 120). Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press.
                    
                    
                        Novakova, I. and Siepmann, D.
                         
                        (2020). 
                        Phraseology and Style in Subgenres of the Novel: A Synthesis of Corpus and Literary Perspectives
                        . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
                    
                    
                        Odebrecht, C., Burnard, L., Colorado, B. N. and Schöch, C.
                         
                        (2019). European Literary Text Collection (ELTeC): Release with 10 collections of at least 50 novels. Zenodo doi:10.5281/ZENODO.4274954. https://zenodo.org/record/4274954 (accessed 17 February 2021).
                    
                    
                        Pagel, J., Sihag, N. and Reiter, N.
                         
                        (2021). Predicting Structural Elements in German Drama. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2989/long_paper35.pdf (accessed 12 October 2021).
                    
                    
                        Radday, Y. T.
                         
                        (1973). 
                        The Unity of Isaiah in the Light of Statistical Linguistics
                        . (Collection Massorah. Série 2, Etudes Quantitives et Automatisées 1). Hildesheim: Gerstenberg.
                    
                    
                        Resnik, P., Olsen, M. B. and Diab, M.
                         
                        (1999). The Bible as a Parallel Corpus: Annotating the ‘Book of 2000 Tongues’. 
                        Computers and the Humanities
                        , 
                        33
                        (1): 129–53 doi:10.1023/A:1001798929185.
                    
                    
                        de la Rosa, J., Pérez, Á., Sisto, M. de, Hernández, L., Díaz, A., Ros, S. and González-Blanco, E.
                         
                        (2021). Transformers analyzing poetry: multilingual metrical pattern prediction with transfomer-based language models. 
                        Neural Computing and Applications
                         
                        doi:10.1007/s00521-021-06692-2. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-021-06692-2 (accessed 22 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C., Erjavec, T., Patras, R. and Santos, D.
                         
                        (preprint). Creating the European Literary Text Collection (ELTeC): Challenges and Perspectives. 
                        Modern Languages Open
                         
                        doi:10.5281/zenodo.4742420. https://zenodo.org/record/4742420 (accessed 10 September 2021).
                    
                    
                        Sims, M., Park, J. H. and Bamman, D.
                         
                        (2019). Literary Event Detection. 
                        Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
                        . Florence, Italy: Association 
                        for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3623–34 doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1353. https://aclanthology.org/P19-1353 (accessed 7 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Tunstall, L., Werra, L. von and Wolf, T.
                         
                        (preprint). 
                        Natural Language Processing with Transformers: Building Language Applications with Hugging Face.
                         
                        Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media.
                    
                    
                        Underwood, T.
                         
                        (2021). Mapping the Latent Spaces of Culture 
                        Using Large Digital Libraries to Advance Literary History
                        . Humanities Commons https://tedunderwood.com/2021/10/21/latent-spaces-of-culture/ (accessed 3 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. and Polosukhin, I.
                         
                        (2017). Attention Is All You Need. 
                        ArXiv:1706.03762 [Cs] 
                        http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (accessed 8 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Walczak, B.
                         
                        (2015). Role of the Bible in the development of languages and linguistics. An outline of the issue. 
                        Forum Lingwistyczne
                        (2). Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Śląskiego / University of Silesia Press https://www.journals.us.edu.pl/index.php/FL/article/view/6066 (accessed 15 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Zimmermann, R.
                         
                        (2010). Theologische Gattungsforschung. In Zymner, R. (ed), 
                        Handbuch Gattungstheorie
                        . Stuttgart: Verlag J.B. Metzler, pp. 302–05.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            This short paper reports on Manicule, a web-based application for building digital tours of unique books. The application also includes a means of visualizing the structure of a codex, using the VisColl standard developed at the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies and implemented in, most recently, the BiblioPhilly database. 
            Since the New Bibliography of the first half of the twentieth century, bibliographic methods have been tethered to the needs of editing – namely, to identify from amongst a work’s many reproductions the kernel of a single, reproducible edition. Of course, many textual theories have challenged the notion that any work can be reproduced as a single entity, to the extent that all texts are now seen as plural, polyphonic, variant, or marked by 
                mouvance (Bornstein et al., 1993; Deegan et al., 2009; Egan, 2010; Pierazzo, 2015). This shift in thinking is reflected in the development of digital editing tools like Edition Visualization Technology, which allows editors to layer the digital text with annotations and cross-references, the Variorum Viewer of Frankenstein, or even the collation features of Mirador. Yet the idea that the goal of editing is to produce some form of text for reading and critical study remains baked into even the most variant-sensitive digital tools. 
            
            Meanwhile, book history – a more sociological offshoot of bibliography that has been growing steadily since the 1980s – has, contrary to bibliography and textual studies, begun to focus more on copy-specific work. For instance, book historians today increasingly pursue case studies of individual, idiosyncratic, and heavily “used books,” to borrow Bill Sherman’s term (Sherman, 2009). The scholarly telos of such work is very different from that in textual studies: whereas the latter tends to examine unique books only for what they might tell us about a literary work and its contemporaneous reception, the former imagines what such books can teach us about the long history of collecting and conservation (an interest that book history shares with digital humanities). 
            As a result of this split in focus, the digital editing tools devised under the regime of New Bibliography are not well suited for book historians working digitally with used books. For instance, a book historian does not often want to work with a text; thus TEI and TEI-based publishing technologies are useless to her. Rather, she is more likely to be interested in the text’s material instantiation: how a codex has been formed and reformed over time as it passes through many different hands and institutions. Manicule is devised to meet these emerging needs in digital book history. Built by Liza Daly and Whitney Trettien, it is a standalone React/Redux application for presenting unique printed books and manuscripts in digital facsimile. It allows editors to: 
            
                build guided tours through a book’s distinguishing features, 
                annotate the edges of interesting pages with extra information, 
                categorize and color-code each page in the facsimile, giving a birds-eye view of a book’s main elements, 
                and visualize the book’s structure. 
            
            
                
            
            
                
            
            Right now, the application is focused on visualizing and comparing Western codices. As part of our short paper, we hope to solicit feedback from ACH’s international membership on how to build out functionality to fit other book forms, like tekagami, often folded like an accordion, or Arabic and other manuscript traditions that read from right to left. If we think about the work of books as assembling, as gathering together information into new constellations and configurations – whether made up of stitched paper quires or bundles of digital text and metadata – then we should have to-hand bibliographic tools that help see how they do this work. Manicule is a step toward building that toolkit. 
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    Bornstein, G. et al., eds. (1993). 
                        Palimpsest: Editorial Theory in the Humanities. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993.
                    
                    Deegan, M. et al., eds. (2009). 
                        Text Editing, Print and the Digital World. Burlington: Ashgate, 2009.
                    
                    Egan, G. ed. (2010). 
                        Electronic Publishing: Politics and Pragmatics. Tempe: ACMRS, 2010.
                    
                    Pierazzo, E. (2015
                        ). Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and Methods. Burlington: Ashgate, 2015.
                    
                    Sherman, W. (2008). 
                        Used Books: Marking Readers in Renaissance England. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
            
            The aim of this presentation is to show the improvements in cataloguing and editing Asia news published during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries within the framework of the digital project CBDRS, Catálogo y Biblioteca Digital de Relaciones de Sucesos (
                https://www.bidiso.es/CBDRS). This project, part of BIDISO (Biblioteca Digital Siglo de Oro) and active since 1996, offers open access to Early Modern literature, in particular, pre-periodical press, printed works known as 
                avvisi, 
                nuova or 
                relazioni (Italy), 
                Zeitung (Germany), 
                tijding (Low Countries), 
                advis (France), 
                relación de sucesos (Spain), 
                news (England), or 
                nova (Portugal) (cf. Arblaster et al., 2016).
            
            Keeping in mind both pan-European communication during the Early Modern period and pan-Asian diversity, this presentation focuses on the news related to Japan, China, India, Korea, Taiwan, Vietnam, and Cambodia, among other regions. The diffusion of Asian news sheets, especially during the seventeenth century is attested in their several editions and reprints across Europe. Rapidly translated from one language to another, these documents are a valuable source to know the deep dimensions of cultural exchange throughout Asia and Europe (Rojo-Mejuto, 2021a, 2021b).
            For that reason, since 2020, the localization of news pamphlets on Asia has grown exponentially in the CBDRS project. At present, there are more than 200 editions, mainly related to Kirishitan presence in Japan, with one or more surviving copies catalogued and localized in libraries and other centers across the world (Rojo-Mejuto, 2019). CBDRS provides bibliographical and typo-bibliographical descriptions of the works, library’s signatures, classification by main genre (political and religious events, ceremonies and festivities, travels, and extraordinary events), a filter for languages (Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Latin, French, German), georeferentiation of the places mentioned in the texts, as well as descriptions of the illustrations included.
            The relational database is in continuous process of technologies and models adaptations to expand and to improve the data as well as the digital objects. It is possible to refine the search by the name and variants of the persons involved in the creation of the pamphlets (authors, translators, editors, printers) and to manage the uncertainty of the date of the event and of edition with the attributes "estimated" and "deduced" (Pena-Sueiro and Saavedra-Places, 2019). Likewise, searching by place of edition or location of event allows to find editions in the map (
                https://www.bidiso.es/CBDRS/lugares).
            
            
                
            
            We will improve exponentially our possibilities of analysis, manipulation, and reception with the implementation of XML-TEI editions, especially because this standard offers us two main advantages (Fernández-Travieso and Garrobo-Peral, 2021):
            A) Registration of all the characteristics of the news that we want to label in order to make compatible our main goals with the awareness that its use is not linked to a specific digital setting that may provoke loss of information.
            B) Manageability when feeding the preservation of our work, the migration or reuse of our data and the inter-operability with other projects, thus treating XML-TEI as an input-output format.
            In sum, the presentation addresses one of the main problems of working on sixteenth and seventeenth news of Asia, solving the dispersion of surviving copies in libraries, and providing access in one site to all these primary sources. Besides bibliographic matters, the work emphasizes the vitality of news networks between Asia and Europe, as well as other important press locations, such as Manila or Mexico.
            CBDRS, as other projects on early modern news (cf. Folch, 2006; Euronews Project), hopes to continue facilitating an easy and fruitful access to the knowledge treasured in these texts to scholars and society. Thus, another objective of this presentation is to showcase the possibilities of the Digital Humanities project CBDRS as a starting point for research works on Anthropology, Culture, History, Linguistics, and Press, besides the social interest of knowing the birth of journalism, that is, the birth of a way of shaping information, thinking, and international communication.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Arblaster, P. et al. (2016). The lexicons of Early Modern News. In Raymond, J. and Moxham, N. (eds.), 
                        News Networks in Early Modern Europe. Leiden/Boston: Brill, pp. 64-101. 
                        https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004277199.
                    
                    
                        EURONEWS Project. https://www.euronewsproject.org/.
                    
                    
                        Fernández-Travieso, C. and Garrobo-Peral, M. (2021). Creación de un corpus digital de textos de relaciones de sucesos: un modelado de datos XML-TEI para acoger diferentes tipos de edición. In Bazzaco, S. (coord.), Congreso Internacional Humanidades Digitales y Estudios Literarios Hispánicos, Verona 22-23 June. Università degli Studi di Verona.
                    
                    
                        Folch, D. (2006). La China en España. Elaboración de un corpus digitalizado de documentos españoles sobre China de 1555 a 1900. 
                        https://www.upf.edu/asia/projectes/che/principal.htm.
                    
                    
                        Pena-Sueiro, N. and Saavedra-Places, Á. (2019). Obsolescencia y resilencia en Humanidades digitales. El caso de la Biblioteca Digital de Relaciones de Sucesos. 
                        Artnodes, 23: 79-88. http://dx.doi.org/10.7238/a.v0i23.3243.
                    
                    
                        Rojo-Mejuto, N. (2019). Las relaciones de sucesos españolas sobre Japón en los siglos XVI y XVII. In Torres, L., Tropé, H. and Espejo-Surós, J. (coords.), IX Coloquio de la Sociedad Internacional para el Estudio de las Relaciones de Sucesos (SIERS). Rennes 19-21 September. Université Rennes 2.
                    
                    
                        Rojo-Mejuto, N. (2021a). Japón escondido: cosas muy notables en las cartas de las Indias. In Andrés-Renales, G. and Peñasco-González, S. (eds.), 
                        Buenas noticias: relaciones de sucesos en los siglos XVI-XVIII. Pesaro: Metauro, pp. 49-64.
                    
                    
                        Rojo-Mejuto, N. (2021b). La literatura informativa sobre Japón en 1621. In Borrego, M. (coord.), Seminario Internacional El mundo en 1621: avisos, relaciones de sucesos y conexiones culturales. Besançon 16-17 September 2021. Université de Franche-Compté.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            The AGODA project
                
                    
                        https://github.com/mpuren/agoda
                    
                 (Puren and Vernus, 2021) is one of five pilot projects supported by the DataLab of the Bibliothèque nationale de France. It aims to create an online platform facilitating the exploration and use of the parliamentary debates of the Chamber of Deputies published in the 
                Journal officiel from 1881 to 1940. In the framework of the DataLab, we are working on a test sub-corpus, namely the parliamentary cycle from 1889 to 1893, to test our hypotheses on a smaller dataset.
            
            Over the past sixty years, a great deal of work has been done on parliamentary debates (Chester and Bowring, 1962; Franklin and Norton, 1993). It is indeed a valuable source for historians (Marnot, 2000; Ouellet and Roussel-Beaulieu, 2003; Ihalainen, 2016; Lemercier, 2021), political scientists (Van Dijk, 2010), sociologists (Cheng, 2015) or linguists (de Galembert et al., 2013; Hirst et al., 2014; Rheault et al., 2016). Access to digitised and ocerised debates thus seems to have a positive effect on the number of historical works using these documents (Mela et al., 2022). The same effect can be observed for other disciplines using contemporary debates (Fišer et al., 2018; Fišer et al., 2020). AGODA is thus part of a wider movement to facilitate the use and analysis of parliamentary data, following the example of ParlaClarin (Fišer and Lenardič, 2018) and ParlaMint (Erjavec et al., 2022a; Erjavec et al., 2022b), which propose to produce comparable and multilingual Parliamentary Proceedings Corpora according to the XML-TEI standard. Naomi Truan has also produced a corpus of parliamentary debates encoded in XML-TEI (Truan, 2016; Truan and Romary, 2021). The production of this type of resource facilitates the publication of works exploiting this data to better understand French political discourse (Diwersy et al., 2018; Blaette et al., 2020; Diwersy and Luxardo, 2020).
            Between 1881 and 1899, 2596 issues of the 
                Journal Officiel were published (50791 JPG images). The debates are also in TXT format but put online without extensive post-correction: the quality of the OCR is not sufficient to provide a satisfactory online browsing experience, and it could have a negative impact on the analyses performed on these texts (van Strien, 2020). Therefore, we chose to ocerise the text, to obtain a better-quality result. We use the PERO OCR (Kodym and Hradiš, 2021; Kohút and Hradiš, 2021; Kišš et al., 2021) based solution developed by the SODUCO project
                
                    
                        https://soduco.github.io/
                    
                . This tool, still in private alpha version, has been used to prepare the data in (Abadie et al., 2022) that will be accessible via Zenodo.
            
            Ocerised texts are obtained in JSON format; we are developing Python scripts to convert this output into an XML file corresponding to the chosen TEI model. This model is formalised with an adapted XML schema, created using an ODD (Rahtz and Burnard, 2013). We chose to use the ODD created by ParlaClarin (Erjavec and Pančur, 2021) which can be easily adapted to annotate historical parliamentary debates. In the case of France, the rules for transcribing debates were set in the 19th century; thus, the recordings of today's debates are very similar to those produced during the Third Republic. The TEI-encoded corpus will be stored in an eXist-db database, and it will be visualised using the TEI Publisher application, which can transform the source data into HTML web pages. The parliamentary debates will thus be made available to online users as a digital edition and integrated into an application context.
            We will also present the first analyses we have carried out on this corpus with "bag-of-words" techniques - these being not too sensitive to the quality of the OCR. We first used topic modelling, an unsupervised learning method that allows us to discover the latent semantic structures of a corpus of texts, without using semantic and lexical resources (Blei et al., 2003). This method is well suited to study parliamentary debates (Bourgeois et al., 2022).
            
                
            
            Distribution of four different topics over time
            Alternatively, we can use word embeddings to reduce the dimension of the original space from several tens of thousands of forms to a hundred axes, and then apply classical data science tools such as clustering or correlation analysis on the reduced space (Mikolov et al., 2013). Word embedding has thus shown its interest in the study of parliamentary debates (Rheault and Cochrane, 2020). We used a continuous bag-of-words model for dimension reduction and an unsupervised classification algorithm - in this case DBSCAN - to group words into clusters.
            
                
            
            t-SNE projection of the centroïds of the clusters
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Abadie, N., Carlinet, E., Chazalon, J., Dumenieu, B. (2022). A Benchmark of Named Entity Recognition Approaches in Historical Documents. Application to 19th Century French Directories. DAS 2022 15th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems. La Rochelle, France. May 22-25, 2022.
                    
                    
                        Blaette, A., Gehlhar, S. and Leonhardt, C. (2020). The Europeanization of Parliamentary Debates on Migration in Austria, France, Germany, and the Netherlands. Proceedings of the Second ParlaCLARIN Workshop. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 66–74 
                        https://aclanthology.org/2020.parlaclarin-1.12 (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3: 993–1022.
                    
                    
                        Cheng, J. E. (2015). Islamophobia, Muslimophobia or racism? Parliamentary discourses on Islam and Muslims in debates on the minaret ban in Switzerland. Discourse & Society, 
                        26(5). SAGE Publications.
                    
                    
                        Chester, D. N. and Bowring, N. (1962). Questions in Parliament. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                    
                    
                        Diwersy, S., Frontini, F. and Luxardo, G. (2018). The Parliamentary Debates as a Resource for the Textometric Study of the French Political Discourse. Proceedings of the ParlaCLARIN@LREC2018 Workshop. Miyazaki, Japan 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01832649 (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Diwersy, S. and Luxardo, G. (2020). Querying a large annotated corpus of parliamentary debates. LREC, ParlaCLARIN Workshop. (Proceedings of the Second ParlaCLARIN Workshop). Marseille, France 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03317717 (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Erjavec, T. and Pančur A. (2021) Parla-CLARIN: A TEI Schema for Corpora of Parliamentary Proceedings 
                        https://clarin-eric.github.io/parla-clarin/ (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Erjavec, T., Pančur A. and Kopp M. (2022a). ParlaMint: Comparable Parliamentary Corpora. GLSL CLARIN ERIC 
                        https://github.com/clarin-eric/ParlaMint (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Erjavec, T., Ogrodniczuk, M., Osenova, P., Ljubešić, N., Simov, K., Pančur, A., Rudolf, M., et al. (2022b). The ParlaMint corpora of parliamentary proceedings. Language Resources and Evaluation doi:10.1007/s10579-021-09574-0. 
                    
                    
                        Fišer, D., Eskevich, M. and Jong, F. de (eds). (2018). Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). Paris: European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
                    
                    
                        Fišer, D., Eskevich, M. and Jong, F. de (eds). (2020). Proceedings of the Second ParlaCLARIN Workshop. Marseille: European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
                    
                    
                        Fišer, D. and Lenardič, J. (2018). CLARIN resources for parliamentary discourse research. Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018). European Language Resources Association (ELRA), pp. 2–7.
                    
                    
                        Galembert, C. de, Rozenberg, O., Vigour, C. (eds) (2013). Faire parler le parlement: méthodes et enjeux de l’analyse des débats parlementaires pour les sciences sociales. Paris: LGDL-Lextenso.
                    
                    
                        Hirst, G., Feng, V., Cochrane, C. and Naderi, N. (2014). Argumentation, Ideology, and Issue Framing in Parliamentary Discourse. In Cabrio E, Villata S. and Wyner A. S. (eds), Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers and Connections between Argumentation Theory and Natural Language Processing, Forlì-Cesena, Italy, July 21-25, 2014, CEUR-WS.org, 
                        http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1341/paper6.pdf (accessed 26 April 2022). 
                    
                    
                        Ihalainen, P., Ilie, C. and Palonen, K. (2018). Parliament and Parliamentarism: A Comparative History of a European Concept, New York, Oxford: Berghahn.
                    
                    
                        Ilie, C. (2010). European Parliaments under Scrutiny: Discourse Strategies and Interaction Practices. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
                    
                    
                        Kišš, M., Beneš, K. and Hradiš, M. (2021). AT-ST: Self-training Adaptation Strategy for OCR in Domains with Limited Transcriptions. In Lladós, J., Lopresti, D., Uchida, S. (eds) Document Analysis and Recognition – ICDAR 2021. ICDAR 2021. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12824. Cham: Springer, 
                        https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-86337-1_31 (accessed 26 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Kodym, O. and Hradiš, M. (2021). Page Layout Analysis System for Unconstrained Historic Documents. Document Analysis and Recognition – ICDAR 2021: 16th International Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 5–10, 2021, Proceedings, Part II. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 492–506.
                    
                    
                        Kohút, J. and Hradiš, M. (2021). TS-Net: OCR Trained to Switch Between Text Transcription Styles. In Lladós, J., Lopresti, D., Uchida, S. (eds) Document Analysis and Recognition – ICDAR 2021. ICDAR 2021. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12824. Cham: Springer, 
                        https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-86337-1_32 (accessed 26 April 2022). 
                    
                    
                        La Mela, M., Norén, F., and Hyvönen, E. (2022). Digital parliamentary data in action (DiPaDA 2022), workshop co-located with the 6th Digital Humanities in the Nordic and Baltic countries conference (DHNB 2022), 
                        https://dhnb.eu/conferences/dhnb2022/workshops/dipada/ (accessed 26 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Lemercier, C. (2021). Un catholique libéral dans le débat parlementaire sur le travail des enfants dans l’industrie (1840). Parlement[s], Revue d’histoire politique, 
                        33(1): 195–206.
                    
                    
                        Marnot, B. (2000). Les ingénieurs au Parlement sous la IIIe République. Paris: CNRS Editions.
                    
                    
                        Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. and Dean, J. (2013). Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. ArXiv:1301.3781 [Cs] 
                        http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781 (accessed 26 April 2022). 
                    
                    
                        Ouellet, J. and Roussel-Beaulieu, F. (2003). Les débats parlementaires au service de l’histoire politique. Bulletin d’histoire politique, 
                        11(3). Bulletin d’histoire politique: 23–40 doi:10.7202/1060736ar.
                    
                    
                        Puren, M. and Vernus, P. (2021). AGODA : Analyse sémantique et Graphes relationnels pour l’Ouverture et l’étude des Débats à l’Assemblée nationale. Inauguration Du BnF DataLab. Paris, France 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03382765 (accessed 26 April 2022). 
                    
                    
                        Rahtz, S. and Burnard, L. (2013). Reviewing the TEI ODD system. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Symposium on Document Engineering. (DocEng ’13). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 193–96.
                    
                    
                        Rheault, L., Beelen, K., Cochrane, C. and Hirst, G. (2016). Measuring Emotion in Parliamentary Debates with Automated Textual Analysis. PLOS ONE, 
                        11(12). Public Library of Science: e0168843 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0168843.
                    
                    
                        Rheault, L. and Cochrane, C. (2020). Word Embeddings for the Analysis of Ideological Placement in Parliamentary Corpora. Political Analysis, 
                        28(1). Cambridge University Press: 112–33 doi:10.1017/pan.2019.26.
                    
                    
                        Strien, D. A. van, Beelen, K., Ardanuy, M. C., Hosseini, K., McGillivray, B. and Colavizza, G. (2020). Assessing the Impact of OCR Quality on Downstream NLP Tasks. ICAART doi:10.5220/0009169004840496.
                    
                    
                        Study of parliament group (GB), F., Mark N. and Norton, P. (1993). Parliamentary Questions. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                    
                    
                        Truan, N. (2019). Débats parlementaires sur l'Europe à l'Assemblée nationale (2002-2012) [Corpus]. ORTOLANG (Open Resources and TOols for LANGuage) - www.ortolang.fr, v1.1, 
                        https://hdl.handle.net/11403/fr-parl/v1.1 (accessed 21 April 2022c).
                    
                    
                        Truan, N. and Romary, L. (2021). Building, Encoding, and Annotating a Corpus of Parliamentary Debates in XML-TEI: A Cross-Linguistic Account. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative 
                        https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-03097333 (accessed 21 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Over the last decades, several breakthroughs have made the dream to automatically transcribe thousands of handwritten documents a reality (Causer et al., 2018; Sánchez et al., 2017; Seaward, 2017; Yin et al., 2013). For example, software like 
                Transkribus (Kahle et al., 2017) and 
                eScriptorium (Stokes et al., 2021) provide non-specialist users with simple environments to conduct transcription campaigns relying on efficient HTR
                
                    
                         HTR stands for Handwritten Text Recognition.
                    
                 engines. While transposing scriptures from a piece of paper onto a text editor used to require effort and concentration, it is now possible to imagine simply pressing a button and letting your computer work while you start preparing your next cup of tea. A few minutes later, your drink is ready, and so is the transcription of the two thousand pages you needed. As automatic transcription software is about to produce huge volumes of data (Clanuwat et al., 2019; Camps, 2021. See also the Vietnamica project
                
                    
                        Vietnamica is a research project undertaken jointly by the École Pratique des Hautes Études, the Institute of Hán-Nôm Studies, the Social Sciences Academy of Viêt Nam and the National University of Viêt Nam (Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences). See 
                        
                            https://vietnamica.online/
                        
                    
                .), it seems crucial to think about how we can interact with the resulting files with maximum efficiency.
            
            In response to previous similar initiatives (Carius, 2020), we would like to present an end-to-end workflow revolving around the use of various automatic techniques to go from a set of digital images to the actual publication of a text edition. Such techniques include, on top of HTR, information extraction tools
                
                    
                         Rosa Stern defined information extraction as a task consisting of extracting and structuring, in semantic classes, the specific information elements contained in non-structured data for automatic processing, such as coreference resolution, relationship extraction, and named entity recognition (Stern, 2013, p. 59).
                    
                 and an open source and ready-to-use environment for publication. Moreover, we aim to make this framework as simple and generic as possible: it is independent from the transcription engine, and potentially compatible with any language, writing system, and any type of document (Balogh and Griffiths, 2020. See also the TEI Special Interest Group for East Asian/Japanese
                
                    
                         See 
                        
                            https://tei-c.org/Activities/SIG/EastAsian/
                        
                         and 
                        
                            https://wiki.tei-c.org/index.php/SIG:East_Asian
                        
                    
                ).
            
            Several key principles ensure the coherence of the workflow: transparency and availability of the data at each step and the use of a fully standardized format like TEI XML as the cornerstone to store all the available information. Other XML standards like ALTO
                
                    
                         See the Analyzed Layout and Text Object (ALTO) 4.2 schema specifications at 
                        
                            https://www.loc.gov/standards/alto/news.html#4-2-released
                        
                    
                 or PAGE (Pletschacher & Antonacopoulos, 2010) are commonly used by transcription software to export the output, but we advocate for a change of paradigm in order to give more importance to TEI earlier in the workflow (Scheithauer et al., 2020). The TEI guidelines define a set of elements to document this type of data, namely “sourceDoc” and its children
                
                    
                         See 
                        
                            https://tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-sourceDoc.html
                        
                    
                . Leveraging TEI from the start is essential to connect the metadata of the images
                
                    
                        Including when the images are distributed within the IIIF framework .
                    
                 and documents, the text and layout information generated during the transcription, and any further editorial layer added to the raw transcription.
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fig. 1: TEI as a threefold structure.
                    
                
            
            We imagine a configuration capable of processing a large family of TEI customizations as long as the file follows a structure (Fig. 1) in which:
            
                “teiHeader” stores the metadata,
                “sourceDoc” the raw transcription, and
                “body” the interpreted logical structure along with the editorial layers
                    
                        
                             Logical structure reconstruction can be performed semi-automatically (see the pipeline built for the LECTAUREP project called “LEPIDEMO”, 
                            
                                https://github.com/lectaurep/lepidemo
                            
                            ), or automatically with tools such as GROBID (
                            
                                https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid
                            
                            ).
                        
                    .
                
            
            We thus aggregate two phases in the digitization lifecycle which are often disconnected.
            Editorial operations can include preprocessing tasks such as post-HTR corrections (spell-checking) and text normalization, as well as information extraction (text mining). When the volume of data increases, extracting and linking named entities with indexes quickly risks becoming a laborious task. Instead, natural language processing tools can automate the process (Ehrmann et al., 2020; Frontini et al., 2015) all the while relying on the analysis of the sentences and words within their context. We developed 
                Semantic@, a proof of concept utilizing deep learning models, to extract named entities which are then cycled back into the TEI tree (Fig. 2). The extraction of named entities (i.e. names of people, places, or dates, etc.) is a crucial step before disambiguation which further permits to build links with open general or domain-specific knowledge bases. These steps allow for later explorations of the text with data mining technologies.
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fig. 2: Virtuous circle for the enriched TEI document.
                    
                
            
            Once all the layers of an edition are connected into the same TEI file, edited documents can be posted online with softwares like 
                TEI Publisher (Turska et al., 2016; Chiffoleau et al., 2021). It provides a fully customizable environment where templates generate “views” based on the content of the XML files. With the aforementioned TEI structure, we propose an edition template containing:
            
            
                a flat representation of the transcription,
                an imitative representation of the transcription based on SVG
                    
                        
                             An XML-based markup language, see the Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 2 recommandations at
                             
                            
                                https://www.w3.org/TR/SVG2/
                            
                             ; we wish to point at the fact that working with SVG when displaying transcriptions allows us to deal with different writing systems and languages.
                        
                     integrating the layout of the pages,
                
                a diplomatic edition of the source document, based on the content of the body element, and
                a facsimile, using the IIIF protocol (Fig. 3).
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fig. 3: A mock-up showing the four different views potentially available in an application like TEI-Publisher.
                    
                
            
            We would like to take the opportunity of presenting a short paper during the DH2022 international conference to subject our framework (Fig. 4) -and its robustness to different writing systems- to the scrutiny of the DH community. In particular, we believe that our proposition addresses challenges raised by Open Science, primarily the necessity to gain better control over every step within complex pipelines that involve various tools, thus facilitating reproducibility. A paradigm revolving around a pivotal element, like a TEI file grouping the different results, frees us from the constraint of a linear progression by maintaining multiple entry points in the workflow.
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Fig. 4: Simplifying the workflow by using TEI from the beginning.
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Balogh, D. and Griffiths, A. (2020). DHARMA Encoding Guide for Diplomatic Editions EFEO ; Humboldt-Universität (Berlin) ; CEAIS - Centre d’Études de l’Inde et de l’Asie du Sud report 
                        https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-02888186 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Camps, J.-B. (2021). Gallic(orpor)a: Extraction, annotation et diffusion de l’information textuelle et visuelle en diachronie longue Paper presented at the Inauguration du BnF DataLab, Paris 
                        https://www.academia.edu/58990010/Gallic_​orpor_​a_​Extraction_​annotation_​et_​diffusion_​de_​l_​information_​textuelle_​et_​visuelle_​en_​diachronie_​longue (accessed 9 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Carius, J.-C. (2020). Plateforme d’éditions enrichies à l’INHA : Premier point d’étape d’un projet en cours d’élaboration Billet 
                        Numérique et recherche en histoire de l’art
                        https://numrha.hypotheses.org/1107 (accessed 8 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Causer, T., Grint, K., Sichani, A.-M. and Terras, M. (2018). ‘Making such bargain’’: Transcribe Bentham and the quality and cost-effectiveness of crowdsourced transcription. 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities doi:
                        10.1093/llc/fqx064. 
                        https://academic.oup.com/dsh/advance-article/doi/10.1093/llc/fqx064/4810663 (accessed 11 June 2018).
                    
                    
                        Chagué, A. and Scheithauer, H. (2021). 
                        LEPIDEMO, a Pipeline Demonstrator for LECTAUREP to Go from EScriptorium to TEI-Publisher. Jupyter Notebook doi:
                        10.5072/zenodo.977657. 
                        https://github.com/lectaurep/lepidemo (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Chiffoleau, F., Baillot, A. and Ovide, M. (2021). A TEI-based publication pipeline for historical egodocuments -the DAHN project. 
                        Next Gen TEI, 2021 - TEI Conference and Members’ Meeting. Virtual, United States 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03451421 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Clanuwat, T., Lamb, A. and Kitamoto, A. (2019). KuroNet: Pre-Modern Japanese Kuzushiji Character Recognition with Deep Learning. 
                        ArXiv:1910.09433 [Cs]
                        http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09433 (accessed 8 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        e-editiones (2021). 
                        Eeditiones/Tei-Publisher-App. XQuery e-editiones.org 
                        https://github.com/eeditiones/tei-publisher-app (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Ehrmann, M., Romanello, M., Flückiger, A. and Clematide, S. (2020). Extended Overview of CLEF HIPE 2020: Named Entity Processing on Historical Newspapers. 
                        CLEF 2020 Working Notes. Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum. [online event]: Zenodo doi:
                        10.5281/ZENODO.4117566. 
                        https://zenodo.org/record/4117566 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Frontini, F., Brando, C. and Ganascia, J.-G. (2015). Semantic Web Based Named Entity Linking for Digital Humanities and Heritage Texts. In Zucker, A., Draelants, I., Zucker, C. F. and Monnin, A. (eds), 
                        First International Workshop Semantic Web for Scientific Heritage at the 12th ESWC 2015 Conference. Portorož, Slovenia: Arnaud Zucker and Isabelle Draelants and Catherine Faron Zucker and Alexandre Monnin 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01203358 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Kahle, P., Colutto, S., Hackl, G. and Mühlberger, G. (2017). Transkribus - A Service Platform for Transcription, Recognition and Retrieval of Historical Documents. 
                        14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), vol. 04. pp. 19–24 doi:
                        10.1109/ICDAR.2017.307.
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, B. (2021). 
                        Mittagessen/Kraken. Python 
                        https://github.com/mittagessen/kraken (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Lopez, P. (2008). 
                        GROBID. Java 
                        https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Pletschacher, S. and Antonacopoulos, A. (2010). The PAGE (Page Analysis and Ground-truth Elements) format framework. pp. 257–60 doi:
                        10.1109/ICPR.2010.72.
                    
                    
                        Sánchez, J. A., Romero, V., Toselli, A. H., Villegas, M. and Vidal, E. (2017). ICDAR2017 Competition on Handwritten Text Recognition on the READ Dataset. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1383–88 doi:
                        10.1109/ICDAR.2017.226. 
                        https://www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/icdar/2017/3586b383/12OmNy4IEXJ (accessed 9 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Scheithauer, H., Chagué, A., Gabay, S., Romary, L., Janes, J. and Jahan, C. (2021). From page to content – which TEI representation for HTR output?. 
                        Next Gen TEI, 2021 - TEI Conference and Members’ Meeting. Weaton (virtual), United States 
                        https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03380807 (accessed 7 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Seaward, L. (2017). Project Update – teaching a computer to READ Bentham 
                        UCL Transcribe Bentham
                        http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/2017/06/09/project-update-teaching-a-computer-to-read-bentham/ (accessed 4 June 2018).
                    
                    
                        Stern, R. (2013). Identification automatique d’entités pour l’enrichissement de contenus textuels Université Paris-Diderot - Paris VII phdthesis 
                        https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00939420 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A., Kiessling, B., Ezra, D. S. B., Tissot, R. and Gargem, E. H. (2021a). The eScriptorium VRE for Manuscript Cultures. 
                        Classics@ Journal. [online] 
                        https://classics-at.chs.harvard.edu/classics18-stokes-kiessling-stokl-ben-ezra-tissot-gargem/ (accessed 30 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Stokes, P. A., Kiessling, B., Ezra, D. S. B., Tissot, R. and Gargem, E. H. (2021b). The eScriptorium VRE for Manuscript Cultures. 
                        Classics@ Journal. [online] 
                        https://classics-at.chs.harvard.edu/classics18-stokes-kiessling-stokl-ben-ezra-tissot-gargem/ (accessed 30 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Terriel, L. (2021). 
                        Semantic@. Python 
                        https://github.com/Lucaterre/semanticat (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Tissot, R. (2021). 
                        Scripta/EScriptorium. Python 
                        https://gitlab.com/scripta/escriptorium/-/tree/v0.10.2a (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Turska, M., Cummings, J. and Rahtz, S. (2016). Challenging the Myth of Presentation in Digital Editions. 
                        Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative(Issue 9). Text Encoding Initiative Consortium doi:
                        10.4000/jtei.1453. 
                        https://journals.openedition.org/jtei/1453 (accessed 10 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        Yin, F., Wang, Q.-F., Zhang, X.-Y. and Liu, C.-L. (2013). ICDAR 2013 Chinese Handwriting Recognition Competition. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1464–70 doi:
                        10.1109/ICDAR.2013.218. 
                        https://www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/icdar/2013/06628856/12OmNxEBzcq (accessed 9 December 2021).
                    
                    
                        
                            https://gitlab.com/scripta/escriptorium/-/tree/v0.10.2a
                        
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                
                    Introduction
                    
                
                In this paper, we wish to show approaches in handling diversity in larger collections of training data for text acquisition pipelines, specifically handwritten text recognition for medieval manuscripts in Latin and French. Present throughout medieval Europe, Latin is one, if not the most used written language of the time on this continent, while French has known from a relatively early date (around the 12th century judging from preserved manuscripts) a vernacular production that soon became one of the most prominent of Western Europe, influencing the written culture of its neighbours from its central position. Combined, they provide a case study whose diversity and general scope could, we hope, allow to provide results with broader applicability, even beyond medieval Western manuscripts.
                Heterogeneity or diversity in the collections can result from intrinsic features (e.g. linguistic, palaeographic, diachronic variation in the sources), but also from extrinsic features (aim and provenance of transcriptions, idiosyncrasies of transcribers…). We propose to approach both types of diversity by reusing several open data sets from various research projects in diverse fields and involving many collaborators. We add a double focus, linguistic (Latin vs. French manuscripts) and graphic (abbreviated vs. normalised transcriptions). We hope to be able to overcome, to some extent, the issue of linguistic diversity and propose a common, modular pipeline for different languages, related but different in their inner structure and declension mechanisms.
                When, on the one hand, recent studies focus on “hyperdiplomatic” digital editions to study the production of specific items, the implementation of natural language processing and text mining is commonly based on a normalised text. Instead of aiming at defining a single universal translinguistic transcriptional standard to merge all existing standards – an utopic endeavour, and perhaps even not desirable –, and instead of designing a unified pipeline supported by dedicated libraries (e.g. image > hyperdiplomatic > normalised > lemmatised+POS-tagged > critical text) to constrain all existing editions, we applied a more modular approach to reuse and pool datasets to train multiple models and design paths more fitted to the variety of goals encountered in medieval studies.
                In this attempt, we will strive to answer more specifically the following questions:
                
                    To what extent can we (and should we) mutualise HTR training material between preexisting datasets and even related languages? (and is it worth the effort?)
                    Are approaches that decompose image to text prediction and further linguistic normalisations (abbreviation expansion for instance) better performing for that goal than straightforward “image to normalised text” approaches?
                
            
            
                
                    Diversity in our corpus
                    
                
                
                    
                        Extrinsic diversity: variation in data production
                        
                    
                    The most obvious source of diversity is artificial, in the sense that it is the result of the production of the data (and particularly of transcription choices) and not of the sources itself.
                    For this research three macro-datasets, themselves mostly aggregates of smaller micro-datasets, have been used, one French and two Latin.
                    The French dataset is Cremma-medieval, composed of 17431 lines from eleven Old French manuscripts written between the 13
                        th and 14
                        th centuries (Table 1). It is made from pre-existing transcriptions, and sample size is very different from one source manuscript to the other. A graphemic
                         We use the terminology graphemic (
                            graphématique) and graphetic (
                            allographétique) following (Stuzmann 2011).
                         transcription method has been chosen to maintain a many to one mapping between signs in the source and the transcription (abbreviations and their expansions are both kept, 
                        u/v or 
                        i/j are not dissimilated), but allographs are normalised (
                        e.g., round and long 
                        s are both transcribed 
                        s). Finally, spaces are not homogeneously represented in the ground truth text annotation, with transcribers reproducing the manuscript spacing while others are using lexical spaces. It must be stressed that spaces are the most important source of errors in medieval HTR models (see for instance the model Bicerin, where spaces represent 33.9% of errors Pinche 2021). In this cremma-medieval macro-dataset, several transcriptions from different transcribers, coming from different projects, have been collected.
                    
                    This diversity is also very present in the Oriflamms macro-dataset, containing 120 111 lines from no less than 779 manuscripts (Table 1). This dataset has been composed along several different projects over a substantial interval of time, and is a mix of aligned preexisting normalised editions (without abbreviations) and graphemic transcriptions (including abbreviations and their expansion). It is composed of both French, Latin and bilingual texts.
                    
                        Table 1: Composition of the cremma-medieval, Oriflamms and st-victor macro-datasets [For this abstract, only corpora in bold have been used]
                        
                            Corpus
                            Editors
                            Manuscripts
                            Pages
                            Lines
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Otinel
                            Camps
                            2
                            75
                            13568
                        
                        
                            Wauchier
                            Pinche
                            1
                            49
                            6148
                        
                        
                            Maritem
                            Mariotti
                            1
                            18
                            1026
                        
                        
                            CremmaLab
                            Pinche et al.
                            7
                            55
                            13568
                        
                        
                            —
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Total
                            
                            11
                            149
                            17431
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Reg.chancell. Poitou
                            Guérin
                              200
                            1217
                            30015
                        
                        
                            Reg.chancell. Paris
                            Viard
                            2
                            29
                            474
                        
                        
                            Morchesne
                            Guyotjeannin et al.
                            1
                            189
                            10394
                        
                        
                            Cartulaire de Nesle
                            Hélary
                            1
                            117
                            3899
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Chartes Fontenay
                            Stutzmann
                            104
                            104
                            1384
                        
                        
                            Psautiers
                            Oriflamms
                            27
                            48
                            5793
                        
                        
                            PsautierIMS
                            Stutzmann
                            48
                            132
                            3145
                        
                        
                            MSS dat. lat.
                            Oriflamms / 
                                ecmen
                            
                            101
                            101
                            2299
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Queste del saint Graal
                            Marchello-Nizia, Lavrentiev
                            1
                            130
                            10725
                        
                        
                            BnF fonds fr.
                            ecmen
                            159
                            189
                            13510
                        
                        
                            Mss dat. fr.
                            ecmen
                            45
                            55
                            3355
                        
                        
                            Album XIIIe.
                            Careri, et al.+
                                ecmen
                            
                            52
                            52
                            1992
                        
                        
                            Légende dorée
                            
                                irht+
                                ecmen
                            
                            18
                            679
                            31742
                        
                        
                            Pèlerinage
                            
                                opvs+
                                ecmen
                            
                            20
                            56
                            1384
                        
                        
                            —
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Total
                            
                            779
                            3098
                            120111
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                        
                        
                            Saint-Victor
                            Vernet
                            2
                            54
                            12596
                        
                    
                    The last macro-dataset Saint-Victor is the most homogeneous, composed of transcriptions from two Victorine mss, i.e., BnF latin 14588 and BnF latin 14525 written by no less than twelve scribes at the end of the 12
                        th century and the first part of the 13
                        th century (Table 1). Both mss have the same type of writing. It has been created during a master’s thesis. It is divided into two sub-corpus. A first corpus is transcribed without abbreviations. The transcription uses lexical spaces. It is the most important of the two sub-corpus with 10736 lines. The second sub-corpus consists of a small part of the first (1860 lines), which has been transcribed with abbreviations.
                    
                    Early tests have shown the tremendous variations in the choice of signs used to transcribed medieval graphemes, in particular abbreviations, including MUFI and out of MUFI characters. For example, the common abbreviative marker has been transcribed alternatively as U+0303 COMBINING TILDE, U+0304 COMBINING MACRON, U+0305 COMBINING OVERLINE, F00A COMBINING HIGH MACRON WITH FIXED HEIGHT (PART-WIDTH), and even, in composition, U+1EBD LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH TILDE, U+0113 LATIN SMALL LETTER E WITH MACRON, etc. Even when using MUFI (Medieval Unicode Font Initiative), different types of Tironian 
                        et or 
                        p flourish can be used. To facilitate machine learning, a conversion table was used to apply a first level of normalisation, and to reduce the 262 preexisting character class to around 30 (Clérice and Pinche 2021).
                    
                
                
                    
                        Intrinsic diversity: variation in language, script and scribal practice
                        
                    
                    Diversity is also due to linguistic differences inside the corpus, with a main distinction between Latin and French texts, the latter in a variety of regional 
                        scriptae, including Anglo-French, Eastern (Lorrain) and Picard, and also diachronic variation, from 12 to 14th century.
                    
                    The variety is also in the writing styles. Copyists used different script types according to their place and date of activity (e.g. 
                        praegothica, 
                        textualis, 
                        cursiva, 
                        semitextualis 
                         For classification criteria and the lack of consensus among palaeographers, see (Derolez 2003; Stutzmann, Tensmeyer, and Christlein 2020).). Some script types were used preferentially according to the genre of the text under copy (e.g. liturgy, literature, diplomatic and pragmatic texts). Conversely, textual genres could influence some specific scribal practices (layout, abbreviations, etc.).
                    
                
            
            
                
                    Pipeline description
                    
                
                Our aim is to evaluate the impact of data heterogeneity to build models for Latin and medieval French. Our corpus contains two levels of heterogeneity: it contains documents in one of two different languages (including internally some diatopic variation)
                     We excluded documents with mixed contents (i.e., parts in French intertwined with parts in Latin), except for the ECMEN corpus which only contains small quotations or single words in Latin., and variety of specifications for transcriptions. Each sentence of our corpus includes both abbreviated forms and expanded forms of words, thanks to the original encoding of the editions, that followed the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative, and used a combination of ,  and  (TEI Consortium 2022).
                
                Corpus have endured varying types of normalisations, sometimes contradictory (combined or decombined, etc.), to smooth discrepancies between transcriptions. The normalisation step follows this pipeline:
                
                    lowercasing;
                    normalising unicode (NFKD);
                    making substitutions based on an equivalence table and the use of “chocoMUFIn” (Clérice and Pinche 2021). In particular,
                    
                        
                            normalisation of allographs (hypernormalised);
                            suppression of ramist distinctions (
                                u/
                                v and 
                                i/
                                j);
                            
                            removal of punctuation;
                            suppression of editorial marks (diacritics, apostrophes, cedillas, …).
                        
                    
                
                We have divided our corpus into four training datasets to perform our evaluations and see potential benefits of fine-tuning for such an approach, on Latin or French texts and on abbreviated or expanded texts. The distribution of each corpus is described in table 2.
                
                    Table 2: Distribution of corpora into the four main datasets
                    
                        
                        Abbr (Lines)
                        Exp (Lines)
                    
                    
                        
                        TOTAL : 8,528
                        TOTAL :17,404
                    
                    
                        
                        Fontenay : 1,365
                        Fontenay : 1,365
                    
                    
                        
                        MsDat : 2,217
                        MsDat : 2,217
                    
                    
                        
                        PsautierIMS : 3,086
                        PsautierIMS : 3,086
                    
                    
                        
                        StVictorLite : 1,860
                        StVictorFull : 10,736
                    
                    
                        
                        TOTAL : 19,532
                        TOTAL : 19,530
                    
                    
                        
                        
                            ecmen : 9,831
                        
                        
                            ecmen : 9,831
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        otinel bodmer : 1,977
                        otinel bodmer : 1,977
                    
                    
                        
                        otinel vaticane : 1,758
                        otinel vaticane : 1,758
                    
                    
                        
                        wauchier : 4,582
                        wauchier : 4,580
                    
                    
                        
                        Pelerinage : 1,384
                        Pelerinage : 1,384
                    
                
                Based on the experiments made by (Camps, Vidal-Gorène, and Vernet 2021) on abbreviated manuscripts, two approaches have been considered. Training on abbreviated data has been carried out with Kraken (Kiessling 2019; Kiessling et al. 2019), an OCR and HTR system previously used with success on a wide range of manuscripts (Camps, Clérice, and Pinche 2021; Scheithauer et al. 2021; Thompson and others 2021), and training on expanded data with Calfa, an OCR and HTR system originally developped for highly abbreviated Oriental manuscripts (Vidal-Gorène et al. 2021). These two architectures use an encoder-decoder approach, the first one trained at the character level, the second one at the word level. If we keep the same hyperparameters defined previously (Camps, Vidal-Gorène, and Vernet 2021), we use a deeper architecture for the first one, architecture capable of high recognition rate in CREMMA (Pinche and Clérice 2021).
            
            
                
                    Preliminary results and discussion
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        Figure 1: Matrix of the cross evaluation of models
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                    
                        
                        Figure 2: Distribution of character error rates per page in the test sets; histograms (top) and boxplots (with outliers above 25% removed)
                    
                
                Current results show, perhaps counter intuitively, a better performance for expanded models, at least for Latin (fig. 1 and table 3), while, for French, the abbreviated model seem to perform slightly better (fig. 1). Perhaps more importantly, they show important variation in the distribution of the character error rates per page inside each test set and between test sets (fig. 3). Apart from a few strong outliers on the Latin corpora, with CER between 40 and 90% (due to issues in the test material), they show a situation that varies according mostly to the origin of the data. For some subcorpora, the CERs display very limited variation, with a very small interquartile range (CREMMA corpora for instance), while the results obtained for corpora such as ECMEN could reflect the larger variety of material they contain.
                Nevertheless, among various observations, the following cases can be noted. On the one hand, on LAT-Exp predictions, the efficiency of the model is especially linked to the script used. Thus, the particularly angular 
                    textualis quadrata, widely used in PsautierIMS and some manuscripts of MSS dat. lat, is poorly recognised. We find a lot of issues related to the stems 
                    ii / 
                    u / 
                    n / etc. In the most extreme cases a significant difficulty in differentiating 
                    c and 
                    e occurs. For these scripts, tildes are seldom understood and abbreviations are therefore badly expanded. Meanwhile, in diplomatic texts of Fontenay, although the form of the letters is often sophisticated and flourished - especially in the first line of the charters - the model is able to recognise tildes and abbreviations. We also observe that the quality of the ink greatly influences the efficiency of the model. On the other hand, this multi-level heterogeneity seems to affect benefits we could expect of fine-tuning. We do not notice any gain in recognition by fine-tuning abbreviated models with expanded data yet. Nevertheless we can already observe that cross-lingual fine-tuned models achieve similar recognition rates, even though abbreviations are widely different for these languages.
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    Table 3: Facsimile with ground truth abbreviated and extended and abbreviated and extended predictions from an extract of latin corpus of St Victor (BnF, Latin 14525, fol. 41va).
                    
                        GT Abbr
                        GT Expan
                    
                    
                        one pecc̃oꝝ sicut scͥptum ẽ gaudiũ ẽangl̃is d̃i suꝑ uno pecc̃ore penitentiãagente uñ ⁊ signis ext̃iorib penitẽtieplurimũ delectant᷑ ut pote usu ciliciiꝓfundis suspiriis deuotis or̃onib᷒ cre
                        one peccatorum sicut scriptum est gaudium est angelis dei super uno peccatore penitentiamagente unde et signis exterioribus penitentieplurimum delectantur ut pote usu ciliciiprofundis suspiriis deuotis orationibus cre
                    
                
                
                    Table 3: Facsimile with ground truth abbreviated and extended and abbreviated and extended predictions from an extract of latin corpus of St Victor. 
                    
                        Prediction Abbr
                        Prediction Expan
                    
                    
                        
                            one 
                                pec̃c̃oꝝꝝ sicut scͥptum ẽ 
                                sudiũ ẽ
                            
                            angl̃is dĩ suꝑ uno pecc̃ore penitentiã
                            agente uñ ⁊ signis ext̃iorib penitẽtie
                            plurimũ delectant᷑ ut pote usu cilicii
                            ꝓfundis 
                                suspinis deuotis or̃onib᷒ cre
                            
                        
                        
                            one peccatorum sicut scriptum est 
                                saudium est
                            
                            angelis dei super uno peccatore penitentiam
                            agente unde et signis exterioribus penitentie
                            plurimum delectantur ut pote usu cilicii
                            profundis suspiriis deuotis orationibus cre
                        
                    
                
                All of this is deserving of further investigations, particularly to evaluate the impact of training set size versus training set diversity, and to measure the robustness of models trained with and applied to mixed language corpora. . Moreover, further normalisation of the training sets, and a direct inspection of outliers could allow to increase performance and intelligibility of the results.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Camps, Jean-Baptiste, Thibault Clérice, and Ariane Pinche. 2021. “Noisy Medieval Data, from Digitized Manuscript to Stylometric Analysis: Evaluating Paul Meyer’s Hagiographic Hypothesis.” 
                        Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 36 (Supplement_2): ii49–ii71. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Camps, Jean-Baptiste, Chahan Vidal-Gorène, and Marguerite Vernet. 2021. “Handling Heavily Abbreviated Manuscripts: HTR Engines Vs Text Normalisation Approaches.” In 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 306–16. Springer.
                    
                    
                        Clérice, Thibault, and Ariane Pinche. 2021. “Choco-Mufin, a tool for controlling characters used in OCR and HTR projects.” 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Derolez, Albert. 2003.
                        The Palaeography of Gothic Manuscript Books from the Twelfth to the Early Sixteenth Century. Cambridge Studies in Palaeography and Codicology 9. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, Benjamin. 2019. “Kraken - an Universal Text Recognizer for the Humanities.” In 
                        Proceedings of the Dh2019 Conference - Digital Humanities: Complexities, Utrecht, the Netherlands, 9–12 July 2019. Utrecht: CLARIAH. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Kiessling, Benjamin, Robin Tissot, Peter Stokes, and Daniel Stökl Ben Ezra. 2019. “EScriptorium: An Open Source Platform for Historical Document Analysis.” In 
                        2019 International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition Workshops (Icdarw), 2:19–19. IEEE.
                    
                    
                        Pinche, Ariane. 2021. “CREMMA Medieval, an Old French dataset for HTR and segmentation.” 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Pinche, Ariane, and Thibault Clérice. 2021. “HTR-United/Cremma-Medieval: 1.0.1 Bicerin (Doi).” Zenodo. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Scheithauer, Hugo, Alix Chagué, Rostaing Aurélia, Lucas Terriel, Laurent Romary, Marie-Françoise Limon-Bonnet, Benjamin Davy, et al. 2021. “Production d’un Modèle Affiné de Reconnaissance d’écriture Manuscrite Avec eScriptorium et évaluation de Ses Performances.” In 
                        Les Futurs Fantastiques-3e Conférence Internationale Sur L’Intelligence Artificielle Appliquée Aux Bibliothèques, Archives et Musées, Ai4lam.
                    
                    
                        Stutzmann, Dominique, Christopher Tensmeyer, and Vincent Christlein. 2020. “Writer Identification and Script Classification. Two Tasks for a Common Understanding of Cultural Heritage.” 
                        Manuscript Cultures 15: 11–24. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Stuzmann, Dominique. 2011. “Paléographie Statistique Pour décrire, Identifier, Dater. . . Normaliser Pour Coopérer et Aller Plus Loin ?” In 
                        Kodikologie Und Paläographie Im Digitalen Zeitalter 2 - Codicology and Palaeography in the Digital Age 2, edited by Franz Fischer, Christiane Fritze, and Georg Vogeler, 3:247–77. Norderstedt: Books on Demand (BoD).
                    
                    
                        TEI Consortium. 2022. “3.6.5 Abbreviations and Their Expansions.” In 
                        TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, V4.4.0. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium. 
                        .
                    
                    
                        Thompson, Walker, and others. 2021. “Using Handwritten Text Recognition (Htr) Tools to Transcribe Historical Multilingual Lexica.” 
                        Scripta & E-Scripta 21: 217–31.
                    
                    
                        Vidal-Gorène, Chahan, Boris Dupin, Aliénor Decours-Perez, and Thomas Riccioli. 2021. “A Modular and Automated Annotation Platform for Handwritings: Evaluation on Under-Resourced Languages.” In 
                        International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 507–22. Springer.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            In this contribution, we investigate to what extent data from one digital scholarly edition project (
                Dehmel digital
                
                     https://www.slm.uni-hamburg.de/germanistik/forschung/forschungsprojekte/dehmel-digital.html
                ) can be used to fine-tune a large-scale language model, which was pre-trained for the purposes of another project (
                The Complete Works of Uwe Johnson
                
                     https://www.bbaw.de/en/research/uwe-johnson-werkausgabe-the-complete-works-of-uwe-johnson
                ). We discuss the opportunities and practical limitations of such an attempt dealing with differences in the language properties of the material that was used to pre-train the transferred model and the material that is applied to fine-tune this model for the specific NER task. As part of this, we investigate to what extent the quantity and quality of training data affects the performance of NER models. This places our contribution in the line of approaches dealing with computational analysis of textual material from different periods of time (Labusch et al., 2019; Schmidt et al., 2021; Ehrmann et al. 2022).
            
            
                Technical prerequisites
                We use the software 
                    NEISS TEI Entity Enricher (NTEE).
                    
                         https://github.com/NEISSproject/tei_entity_enricher
                     Following a Transfer Learning (Kamath et al., 2019) approach the tool provides access to large-scale language models in a Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) architecture (Devlin et al., 2019; Underwood, 2019) for different languages, which can be fine-tuned to be applicable for NER tasks. The pre-trained model selected for our investigation is a representation of modern German of the 20th and 21st centuries, trained on 8 GB of text data from German Wikipedia and a web crawl of various German newspaper portals (Zöllner et al., 2021: 2–3).
                
            
            
                Datasets
                The investigation is based on two differently sized datasets, which were taken from the 
                    Dehmel digital project and consist of German-language letters from the early 20th century (see table 1). 10 per cent of the sets were taken for validation purposes respectively.
                
                
                    
                        
                            Token category
                        
                        big
                        small
                    
                    
                        Person
                        9397
                        3683
                    
                    
                        Place
                        3056
                        1092
                    
                    
                        Organisation
                        635
                        269
                    
                    
                        Work
                        654
                        294
                    
                    
                        unlabeled
                        190970
                        52271
                    
                    
                        total
                        204712
                        57609
                    
                
                Table 1: Composition of the big and small set of training data used as ground truth for NER model training
            
            
                Assumptions
                Historical-linguistics insights show that grammatical properties of language change slowly over long periods (Nübling et al., 2017). We assume that the difference in time between the 21st and the early 20th century is not associated with an essential difference in the German language system, that would prevent useful entity predictions.
                We suppose that the difference at hand in text types (newspaper and encyclopedia articles vs. letters) can be neglected for our purpose based on the experiences made in the 
                    Complete Works of Uwe Johnson project: The same language model has already been successfully used for NER tasks on a corpus of letters.
                
            
            
                Investigation
                The investigation focuses on the question of how the amount of training data affects the performance of NER models for the detection of places, persons, organisations and works in historical letters. 
                The evaluation of the performance happens in two steps: We evaluate the E-
                    F
                    1 of each training epoch determined on the validation set by NTEE itself during the training processes and we use the created models to predict entities on four specific sample texts, which are not part of the validation or the training set. Subsequently, we calculate Precision, Recall and E-
                    F
                    1 for all of them. To determine the strengths and weaknesses in detail this quantitative approach is accompanied by a qualitative analysis of the predictions.
                
            
            
                Selected results
                
                    
                
                Figure 1: E-
                    F
                    1-scores of four models comparing the performances depended on the ground truth data amount and annotation consistency
                
                
                    
                
                Figure 2: E-
                    F
                    1-scores of four models calculated in the sample text prediction analysis, entity-wise and overall
                
                The big model performs worse on the validation set of its respective ground truth than the small one (fig. 1). This finding contradicts the general assumption, that more ground truth leads to better prediction results. But if we take a closer look at the data, we encounter a problem inside the big ground truth dataset: About 5.3% of the text was not annotated. In this case, fixing the big ground truth by adding the missing annotations or by deleting the unannotated sequence leads to equivalent performance values to just using the small one.
                The data collected leads to qualitative insights regarding the training process and the difficulties that come along with it. From the incorrectly predicted annotations, three problem categories can be derived:
                
                    a lack of ground truth data, including a lack of samples for representatives of the categories ‘work’ and ‘organisations’ within the training data,
                    inconsistent annotations,
                    ambiguous entities, which can belong to several categories.
                
                In the talk, we would like to go into more detail on the quantitative and qualitative analyses to present conclusions with which we shed light on the computer-assisted, transfer-learning-based analysis of historical letters in digital scholarly editions.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova
                         (2019): Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: 
                        Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 1
                        , p. 4171–4186.
                    
                    
                        Ehrmann, Maud, Ahmed Hamdi, Elvys Linhares Pontes, Matteo Romanello, and Antoine Doucet
                         (2022): Named Entity Recognition and Classification on Historical Documents: A Survey. URL: 
                        
                            http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.11406
                        
                        .
                    
                    
                        Kamath, Uday, John Liu, and James Whitaker
                         (2019): Deep Learning for NLP and Speech Recognition. Cham: Springer. URL: 
                        
                            https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14596-5
                        
                         [Access: 8th December 2021].
                    
                    
                        Labusch, Kai, Clemens Neudecker, and David Zellhöfer
                         (2019): BERT for Named Entity Recognition in Contemporary and Historical German.
                    
                    
                        Nübling, Damaris, Antje Dammel, Janet Duke, and Renata Szczepaniak
                         (2017): Historische Sprachwissenschaft des Deutschen. Eine Einführung in die Prinzipien des Sprachwandels. 5th revised and updated edition. Narr Francke Attempto: Tübingen.
                    
                    
                        Schmidt, Thomas, Katrin Dennerlein, and Christian Wolff
                         (2021): Emotion Classification in German Plays with Transformer-based Language Models Pretrained on Historical and Contemporary Language.
                    
                    
                        Underwood, Ted
                         (2019): Do Humanists need BERT? URL: 
                        
                            https://tedunderwood.com/2019/07/15/do-humanists-need-bert/
                        
                         [Access: 8th December 2021].
                    
                    
                        Zöllner, Jochen, Konrad Sperfeld, Christoph Wick, and Roger Labahn
                         (2021): Optimizing small berts trained for german NER. arXiv. URL: 
                        
                            https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.11559
                        
                         [Access: 8th December 2021].
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            In recent years, given that the Unicode Standard has been updated, the number of Chinese character (Hanzi/Kanji) codes available for text databases of historical documents written in Chinese and Japanese has increased significantly. With the addition of the CJK Unified Ideographs Extension G in 2020, the current Unicode Standard now contains a total of more than 93,000 Chinese characters (Lunde, 2021). To maximize reproduction of the content in historical documents, it is desirable to use Chinese characters that can be displayed in a form that is as close to the original glyphs as possible.
            TEI-encoded
                
                     https://tei-c.org/
                 text databases are also becoming increasingly common. However, there are still few examples of the use of these extended Chinese characters in publicly available text databases. Possible causes are the difficulty of checking whether a character can be represented in Unicode and determining how to input those newly included characters in Unicode without input method support.
            
            The most common computer-based Chinese character input method entails reading the character. If the reading is inconclusive or if the character has not yet been incorporated into an input method, Ideographic Description Sequence (IDS) can be used to search for the input (The Unicode Consortium, 2021).
            IDS describes Chinese characters according to their mechanism and components. For example, 紅(red) can be described as 
                ⿰糸工 (Figure 1). Tools such as CHISE
                
                     https://www.chise.org/
                 (Morioka, 2008) and GlyphWiki
                
                     https://www.glyphwiki.org/
                 (上地, 2018) are useful to search for Chinese characters (in Japanese), but no existing tools specialize in inputting Chinese characters and allow TEI-encoded output data in a format suitable for reprinting. Regarding actual reprinting, there are three issues that need to be addressed.
            
            
                Searching: Transcribing old documents is complex on a computer. Moreover, it is difficult to input components as search keywords (e.g., 氵or 𦍌).
                Display: Results display depends on the font installed on the device; characters that are not part of the font will be displayed in Tofu. Without a suitably designed results page, it is difficult to select and copy Chinese characters for input.
                Application: Searching should be fast and accurate. Given that it is necessary to search for all Chinese characters in Unicode, deal those data may takes a lot of time before the results are displayed.
            
            
                
            
            Figure 1: a sample of IDS
            To solve the above issues, we have developed a tool for searching and inputting Chinese characters that cannot be input via ordinary input methods using Chinese character components and stroke numbers. The tool has the following features, and the corresponding issue is given in parentheses:
            
                With data on characters’ components from CHISE. IDS
                    
                         https://gitlab.chise.org/CHISE/ids
                    , can search up to 93,000 characters based on the newest Unicode Standard. [Searching]
                
                Filter results by the number of strokes remaining. The data stroke number is from Unihan
                    
                         https://www.unicode.org/Public/UCD/latest/ucd/Unihan.zip
                    . [Searching]
                
                Decomposition of Chinese characters to input complex parts. [Searching]
                Search results are displayed as SVG or PNG images from GlyphWiki to avoid displaying in Tofu.
                Copy the target character to the clipboard with one click. [Display]
                The user does not need to have fonts to cover all the Chinese characters in Unicode because the results display as SVG glyphs from GlyphWiki. [Display]
                Data are cached in the memory to avoid communication latency with a server. [Application]
                Output in multiple formats (encoded character, Unicode scala, XML block). XML block is customizable with template (Figure 3). [Application]
            
            The tool uses IDS data from CHISE and glyph images from GlyphWiki. Compared to both, users can search and input Chinese characters more efficiently by filtering according to the number of strokes remaining (Figure 2). Furthermore, it is easy to select and copy the result in one click, offering a fast response. It is also possible to copy the Chinese characters you want to input as a block of TEI-encoded XML to create a text database. This saves database creators’ time. Here is an example (Figure 4).
            
                
            
            Figure 2: interface of the tool
            
                
            
            Figure 3: customizable XML block template
            
                
            
            Figure 4: TEI-encoded sample
            This tool has been applied to the creation of TEI-encoded text databases at the Historiographical Institute, University of Tokyo
                
                     https://www.hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp/en/
                . Details will be presented in the poster.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Lunde, J. H. J. C. K. (2021). 
                        Unicode® Standard Annex #38 UNICODE HAN DATABASE (UNIHAN)
                        https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr38/#BlockListing, (accessed 20 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        Morioka, T. (2008). 
                        CHISE: Character Processing Based on Character Ontology. In Tokunaga, T. and Ortega, A. (eds), Large-Scale Knowledge Resources. Construction and Application. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 148–62 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78159-2_14.
                    
                    
                        The Unicode Consortium (2021). 
                        The Unicode® Standard Version 14.0. 
                        https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode14.0.0/ch18.pdf, (accessed 20 November 2021).
                    
                    
                        
                     上地, 宏一
                  (2018). 
                        GlyphWiki：漢字字形自由共有サイト
                  . 学芸国語国文学, 48: 181–91 doi:10.24672/gkokugokokubun.48.0_181.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                Broadly defined, a corpus is a collection of machine-readable texts that are somewhat representative of a particular reality of scholarly interest (McEnery et al. 2006: 5, Xiao 2012: 147). Corpus creation has been part of the research practices of linguists and philologists for decades, and it has recently entered the computer sciences via the mixture field of natural language processing (NLP). Corpora have become a key resource in the development and evaluation of computer systems that deal with language. As these approaches from NLP are being re-discovered, applied, and enriched within the computational humanities, the making of these corpora and their transformation into structured or plain digital texts is of vital importance. Just in the literary domain, there are arguably thousands of corpora available to download or query. In a comprehensive survey, Xiao (2010) describes over a hundred well-known and highly influential corpora in English and other languages. Smaller corpora for understudied or endangered languages have also recently appeared (see Scannell 2007, Ostler 2008, Cox 2011). Notably, only five corpora in these surveys contained poetry and only one of them was annotated with relevant poetic features. As newer poetic corpora with rich annotations are becoming available, we need a proper tool to uniformly access them.
            
            
                Averell
                Among the characteristics that should guide the building of a corpus (McEnery and Wilson, 2001; Gries and Berez, 2015), two are commonly desired: machine readability and availability to researchers. Unfortunately, even when corpora is made fully available in electronic format, it is often the case that scholars struggle to find a proper way to address their research questions using the ready-made corpora (see e.g., Xiao, 2010). In this sense, Averell is a tool that tries to lower the barrier for researchers interested in the study of multilingual poetry corpora. It provides a unified interface to query, manage, download, and merge corpora of poetic nature in multiple languages based on features relevant for poetry scansion and meter analysis. At its core, Averell is a Python library that connects existing annotated corpora in either JSON, XML, or TEI formats, and makes them available into rich CSV and JSON-lines formats that can be later converted into semantic RDF according to the POSTDATA network of ontologies (González-Blanco et al., 2020). Averell exposes a consistent programming application interface to integrate its functionalities into larger software projects, and it is also packaged as a command line tool for its direct use from the terminal.
            
            
                Granularity
                Averell is structured around two key aspects: the catalogue and its granularity. Each corpus defines a granularity level at which its documents can be split. All corpora support splitting by poems and lines (verses), but a line can also be split into words, and then syllables, for which metrical patterns might be provided. In some cases, stanzas, a set of structural and often semantical units within the poem, are also available. Extra information such as the lengths of verses, the amount of lines per stanza, or the type of rhymes is also added when available. This granular annotation allows scholars to merge different corpora and extract sets of poems that meet specific criteria. For example, a corpus of hendecasyllabic safic verses, or poems for a specific period only at the level of the stanza. Instances of the use of Averell to carry out studies in poetry already exist. De la Rosa et al. (2020, 2021) used Averell to create training and validation datasets to fine-tune transformers-based models and to create rule-based systems to a metrical prediction task.
            
            
                Catalogue
                The current catalogue in Averell (Table 1) contains corpora in Czech, English, French, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish. A total of 12 corpora with 3,847,739 verses are available to download and remix, with different levels of granularity but all of them annotated to a certain extent.
                Since corpora have different sizes, formats, and metrical information, we pre-processed each corpus looking for common metadata tags and structures. We then created reusable parsers to extract the relevant information exposed by Averell. The result is a JSON-lines structure capable of capturing the common details of the different corpora. From this common intermediate format, Averell is able to produce data in formats suitable for analysis such as CSV, Parquet, XML TEI, and even POSTDATA RDF triplets.
            
            
                Conclusions
                In this work, we have introduced the tool Averell for the management and remixing of annotated poetic corporar in a multilingual setting. We have described its structure and showcased a few of its uses in existing scholarly work. We hope to enrich the tool supporting more formats, better interoperability, a larger catalogue, and an easy-to-use web interface.
                Table 1. Corpora available and granularity levels for each
                
                    
                        51
                        141
                        51
                    
                    
                        Name
                        Description
                        Granularity
                    
                    
                        Disco v2.1 and v3
                        The Diachronic Spanish Sonnet Corpus (DISCO) Spanish 15th and the 19th centuries sonnets corpus
                        stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                    
                        Sonetos siglo de oro
                        Spanish 16th and the 17th centuries sonnets corpus (Miguel de Cervantes Virtual Library)
                        stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                    
                        ADSO 100
                        Spanish Golden age sonnet corpus
                        stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                    
                        Poesía Lírica Castellana del Siglo de Oro
                         Golden Age Castilian lyric poetry corpus 
                        stanza
                            line
                            word
                            syllable
                        
                    
                    
                        Gongocorpus
                        Luis de Gongora poetry corpus 
                        stanza
                            line
                            word
                            syllable
                        
                    
                    
                        Eighteenth-Century
                            Poetry Archive
                        
                        English Eighteenth Century poetry corpus
                        stanza
                            line
                            word
                        
                    
                    
                        For Better For Verse
                        University of Virginia poetry corpus
                        Stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                    
                        Métrique en Ligne
                        Université de Caen Normandie (CRISCO) french poetry corpus
                        stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                    
                        Biblioteca Italiana
                        Italian Medioevo to Novecento poetry corpus
                        stanza 
                    
                    
                        Corpus of Czech Verse
                        Corpus of Czech poetry of the 19th and of the beginning of the 20th centuries
                        stanza
                            line
                            word
                        
                    
                    
                        Stichotheque Portuguese
                        Stichotheque project portuguese poetry copus
                        stanza
                            line
                        
                    
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Cox, C. (2011). 
                        Corpus Linguistics and Language Documentation: Challenges for Collaboration. Brill doi:
                        10.1163/9789401206884_013. 
                         (accessed 28 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        De la 
                        Rosa, J., Pérez, Á., Hernández, L., Ros, S. and González-Blanco, E. (2020). Rantanplan, Fast and Accurate Syllabification and Scansion of Spanish Poetry. 
                        Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
                        65(0): 83–90.
                    
                    
                        De la 
                        Rosa, J., Pérez, Á., Sisto, M. de, Hernández, L., Díaz, A., Ros, S. and González-Blanco, E. (2021). Transformers analyzing poetry: multilingual metrical pattern prediction with transfomer-based language models. 
                        Neural Computing and Applications doi:
                        10.1007/s00521-021-06692-2. 
                         (accessed 28 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        González-Blanco, E., Ros Muñoz, S., De la Rosa, J., Pérez Pozo, Á., Hernández, L., De Sisto, M., Díaz, A., Khalil, O., Rodríguez, J. L. and Leguina, L. (2020). Towards an Ontology for European Poetry doi:
                        10.5281/zenodo.4299645. 
                         (accessed 28 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Gries, S. Th. (2009). What is Corpus Linguistics?. 
                        Language and Linguistics Compass, 
                        3(5): 1225–41 doi:
                        10.1111/j.1749-818X.2009.00149.x.
                    
                    
                        McEnery, T. and Wilson, A. (2001). 
                        Corpus Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh University Press.
                    
                    
                        Ostler, N. (2008). Corpora of less studied languages. 
                        Corpus Linguistics: An International Handbook, 
                        1. Walter de Gruyter Berlin: 457–83.
                    
                    
                        Scannell, K. P. (2007). The Crњbadсn Project: Corpus building for under-resourced languages. 
                        Cahiers Du Cental, 
                        5. Citeseer: 1.
                    
                    
                        Xiao, R. (2010). Corpus creation. In Indurkhya, N. and Damerau, F. (eds), 
                        The Handbook of Natural Language Processing. 2nd edition. CRC PRESS-TAYLOR & FRANCIS GROUP, pp. 147–65.
                    
                    Corpus-Based Language Studies: An Advanced Resource Book 
                        Routledge & CRC Press
                         (accessed 28 April 2022).
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            We, the SAT Daizōkyō Text Database Committee, maintain a database of the e-texts of the Buddhist scriptures contained in the Taisho Tripitaka, which contains 2,920 Buddhist scriptures and over 100 million Chinese characters, and have made them available to the public in searchable form [1]. However, these text data are based on tagged e-texts designed in 1990’s, and are not yet structured enough. For this reason, we are in the process of converting e-texts of the Taisho Tripitaka into the TEI-compliant format.
            While undertaking such a large-scale renovation, it is imperative that the information in the Taisho-Tripitaka be reproduced in electronic form to the greatest extent possible without loss of information. This is because for more than one 100 years, the Taisho-Tripitaka has been the foundation for Buddhist studies to this day, and distributing e-texts that differs from the published Taisho-Tripitaka would cause unnecessary confusion in research. Today, it is rare for Buddhist scholars to conduct research without the use of e- texts, and the platform for research seems to be shifting from the Taisho-Tripitaka as published texts to the Taisho-Tripitaka as e-texts. However, the status of the Taisho-Tripitaka as a standard text for reference in Buddhist studies has not changed. It would be beneficial for researchers to have e-texts that are as accurate as possible so that the basis for discussion can be shared even when e-texts did not exist.
            However, in some cases interpretation is unavoidable in markup. How to distinguish between the preservation of the edition itself and the contribution of the person in charge of the work is one of the most important issues for our project, and I will discuss this point in this presentation.
            As a precedent work, CBETA (Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association) which publishes e-texts of Buddhist scriptures including Taisho-Tripitaka, has added its own punctuation marks which are not written in the Taisho-Tripitaka itself [2]. While these are certainly useful in many cases when reading the text, there might be a possibility that any arbitrary interpretation of the person who edited the e-text may enter uncritically.
            Our research group has decided to adopt a markup policy that takes care to describe as much information as possible about how the text is actually written in the Taisho-Tripitaka, while making it possible to identify the parts that are the responsibility of the person who marked up the text. In addition, even if it is clearly a typographical error by an editor of the Taisho-Tripitaka, we try to retain the original description, such as ,  and , rather than correcting it without notification. I show an example [fig1], where the information of variant readings in the Taisho-Tripitaka is indicated. In general, lemma, i.e.,  in the  should be the same as the string written in the text body. However, if we compare them, we will notice that the Chinese character “盖” in  is slightly different from the character “蓋” in the text body. In fact, these two characters are just variants, not semantically different, but it should be noted that different characters are used here. In such a case, we mark it up as shown in this figure to describe the difference between the two characters.
            
                
            
            [Fig 1] See [3]
            In addition, if a text is structurally analyzed by previous research, it would be possible to markup the text to reflect the content of the research. In this case,  tag in  indicating the research used as the basis for the markup is provided, and the @resp attribute is also used to distinguish it from the original Taisho-Tripitaka structure such as paragraphing.
            
                
            
            [Fig 2] See [4]
            [Fig 2] is one Zen text. There are seemingly no line break or paragraph changes. However, Zen texts are well-structured in general and if read by a specialized researcher, the structure can be understood as I have shown in the red dashed line. We can mark up this part as following [Fig3] with @resp.
            
                
            
            [Fig 3] Marked up text of [Fig2]
            In this way, it is possible to save the descriptions of Taisho-Tripitaka and reflect the interpretations of the workers at the same time. In addition, our group has introduced GitHub, which allows us to keep detailed records of the actual work of workers and their contributions.
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    [1] The SAT Daizōkyō Text Database, 
                        https://21dzk.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SAT/
                    
                    [2] CBETA (Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association), 
                        https://www.cbeta.org/
                    
                    [3] 
                        Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō, Junjiro Takakusu and Kaigyoku Watanabe (eds), Tokyo: Taisho Issaikyo Kankokai, 1924-1934, vol. 14, p. 48.
                    
                    [4] 
                        Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō, Junjiro Takakusu and Kaigyoku Watanabe (eds), Tokyo: Taisho Issaikyo Kankokai, vol. 82, p. 344.
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                Computational Literary Studies (CLS) are an evolving, interdisciplinary field of research combining research questions from the traditional field of Literary Studies with methods and technologies from Computer Sciences and Computational Linguistics. The German Research Foundation (DFG) is funding a priority program to foster the ongoing evolution of the field and the development and establishment of innovative computational methods in literary studies:
                    
                        
                            https://dfg-spp-cls.github.io/ [last request: 24th of November 2021]. 
                        
                     The priority program comprises eleven research projects in Germany and Switzerland and one central project (Pielström et al. 2021) for improving the interdisciplinary exchange between the projects and developing a common and domain-specific research data management (RDM) strategy.
                
                Research data produced within the CLS is, similarly to many other disciplines in the humanities, heterogeneous (Pempe 2012). The management of this research data is a key element of scientific progress (Bryant, Lavoie & Malpas 2017) and a substantial aspect of good research practice (DFG 2019); in this respect, a major landmark are the FAIR Principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). Within the central project of the program, we interviewed all projects (Helling et al. 2020) with regard to their discipline specific methods and approaches as well as the data and software they both use and produce during their research. We analysed the interviews qualitatively and quantitatively. The results of the survey (Helling et al. 2021) are used to develop and establish a common RDM strategy for the whole priority program to meet the FAIR Principles and enhance the sustainable findability, accessibility, interoperability and reusability of the data and outcomes of the projects.
                In this paper we present our experience in RDM within the program. We will illustrate both pragmatic RDM solutions and major barriers in making research data FAIR. We will show that these barriers are intrinsic in the discipline itself.
            
            
                Pragmatic Solutions and Barriers in Making Research Data FAIR in the CLS 
                We recommended Zenodo, which meets the FAIR principles, as a fallback solution for storing the outputs of the projects within the program, because overarching domain-specific infrastructures within the CLS are very rare. In fact, most of our projects were already using Zenodo for publishing outputs that do not fit into other infrastructures. However, the research data of the program is also stored and published in institutional, generic and domain-specific repositories (see Figure 1 and 2).
                
                    
                
                Figure 1: Used infrastructures for archiving within the program.
                
                    
                
                Figure 2: Used infrastructures for publication within the program.
                
                    Technical Perspectives on FAIR
                    From a technical perspective, repositories used within the program address the FAIR Principles fairly well. Regarding the findability and accessibility of research data, outputs of the program are usually registered or indexed in searchable resources (F4), which are accessible via standardized, open, and universally implementable protocols (A1/A1.2). Besides Zenodo, some of the used infrastructures support the assignment of a persistent identifier (PID) (F1). Moreover, supplied metadata is often based on the generic DataCite scheme (F2).
                        
                             DataCite Metadata Schema 4.4, 
                                
                                    https://schema.datacite.org/meta/kernel-4.4/
                                 [last request: 07th of December 2021]. 
                            
                         In addition, most of the repositories and infrastructures offer the definition of generic licenses and the possibility of making the research data gradationally accessible (R1.1).
                    
                
                
                    Domain-Specific Perspectives on FAIR
                    A large set of primary data in the priority program is beyond copyright by age, thus licenses for reuse in research and education are unproblematic. The remaining smaller set of data can be restricted by personal rights (studies) or individual copyright negotiations with authors, publishers, or libraries. In the community, there is a large interest to make data as accessible as possible and provide secure licenses (R1.1). Still for some aspects there are no clear solutions or test cases, such as the context necessary in derived formats (Schöch et al. 2020). The matter is regularly discussed in a working group on copyright within the program. 
                    Schemes to capture provenance metadata (R1.2) are still evolving in the DH domains (cf. Gärtner et al. 2018). In contrast to e.g., the life sciences the objective is not a fully automatically reproducible workflow, but an equal treatment of automatic and manual steps which pose the domain-specific challenge. Individual documentation is available as well as commit histories from GitHub repositories.
                        
                             GitHub, 
                                
                                    https://github.com
                                 [last request: 07th of December 2021]. 
                            
                         So overall these aspects are evolving along the lines of FAIR. 
                    
                    Regarding interoperability (I1/2/3) and the relevance of attributes (R1) and standards (R1.3) the CLS requires to distinguish between resource-related metadata, content-related metadata, and data from annotations. Resource-related metadata is and can be based on DataCite (cf. F2 above), whereas more domain-specific metadata ranges from information on time period, genre and author uncertainty over technical settings like encoding (e.g., TEI variants) to the overall application of very different methodologies (see Figure 3) which comprises the existence of specific annotation layers as well as different segmentation schemes. Thereby neither content-related metadata nor annotation categories can come with a fixed, agreed on, common vocabulary since these categories are an integral part of the research (outcome) itself.
                        
                             Regarding annotations, Eckart and Heid (2014) argue for a separation of content-related interoperability and representation format-related interoperability. For the latter we found the projects in the priority program to agree on CATMA (Gius et al. 2018-2021) using its own TEI Export Format.
                         Still this vocabulary poses the basis for search, exploration and the FAIRness of the built resources.
                    
                    
                        
                    
                    Figure 3: Used methods and tools within the program.
                
            
            
                Conclusion
                While different domain-specific as well as generic/institutional repositories meet the FAIR principles at least partially, Zenodo (also in combination with GitHub) is the closest infrastructure to the FAIR principles which is used in the context of the program. Nevertheless, it is still difficult to make research data stored in generic/institutional repositories findable for specific research communities, especially since a domain-specific metadata scheme is missing. Moreover, a common vocabulary for such a scheme possibly cannot exist without losing relevant content, differing between research fields within the domain. This problem is of course addressed by some more domain-specific infrastructures but still a comprehensive and domain-specific description model for the CLS is not existing.
                In sum, without domain-specific metadata schemes, sustainable infrastructures and guiding legal implementations of copyright handling for the CLS, the FAIR principles can hardly be addressed in their entirety in this research domain.
                Currently, pragmatic RDM seems to be the only way to meet the FAIR principles at least partially and to do effective RDM for the research community. In our talk, we will present more of our pragmatic RDM solutions and illustrate our approach to improve FAIRness of CLS research data for the CLS community. In this regard, a pragmatic approach for harvesting the heterogenous achievements of the program will be discussed. Finally, we will address specific RDM requirements for the CLS for fulfilling the FAIR principles and plead for a more domain-specific and measurable interpretation and implementation of the FAIR principles.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Bryant, R., Lavoie, B. and Malpas, C. (2017). A Tour of the Research Data Management (RDM) Service Space. The Realities of Research Data Management, Part 1. Dublin, Ohio: OCLC Research. DOI:
                        
                            10.25333/C3PG8J
                        .
                    
                    
                        DFG - Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2019). Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice. Code of Conduct. DOI:
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.3923602
                        .
                    
                    
                        Eckart, K. and Heid, U. (2014). Resource interoperability revisited. 
                        Proceedings of the 12th edition of the KONVENS conference Hildesheim, Germany, pp. 116-26. URN: 
                        
                            https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:gbv:hil2-opus-2725
                        .
                    
                    
                        Gärtner, M., Hahn U., and Hermann, S. (2018). Supporting Sustainable Process Documentation. Rehm G., Declerck T. (eds) 
                        Language Technologies for the Challenges of the Digital Age. GSCL 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 10713. Springer, Cham DOI:
                        
                            10.1007/978-3-319-73706-5_24
                        . 
                    
                    
                        Gius, E., Meister, J. C., Meister, M., Petris, M., Bruck, C., Jacke, J., Schumacher, M., Gerstorfer, D., Flüh, M., and Horstmann, J. (2018-2021). CATMA. Concept DOI:
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.1470118
                        .
                    
                    
                        Helling, P., Jung, K., Reiter, N. and Pielström, S. (2020). Interviewleitfaden zur FDM-Bestandsaufnahme im Schwerpunktprogramm Computational Literary Studies. DOI: 
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.4269639
                        .
                    
                    
                        Helling, P., Jung, K. and Pielström, S. (2021). Disziplinspezifisches Forschungsdatenmanagement - FDM-Bedarfserfassung in den Computational Literary Studies. 
                        FORGE 2021 Konferenz: Forschungsdaten in den Geisteswissenschaften - Mapping the Landscape - Geisteswissenschaftliches Forschungsdatenmanagement zwischen lokalen und globalen, generischen und spezifischen Lösungen (FORGE 2021), Cologne. DOI: 
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.5379629
                        .
                    
                    
                        Pempe, W. (2012). Geisteswissenschaften. In: Neuroth, H., Strathmann, S., Oßwald, A., Scheffel, R., Klump, J. and Ludwig, J. (eds), 
                        Langzeitarchivierung von Forschungsdaten. Eine Bestandsaufnahme. Boizenburg: Verlag Werner Hülsbusch, pp. 137-60.
                    
                    
                        Pielström, S., Helling, P. and Jung, K. (2021). Zentralprojekt des DFG-Schwerpunktprogramms Computational Literary Studies.
                         Program General Meeting, virtuell. DOI: 
                        
                            10.5281/zenodo.5041338
                        . 
                    
                    
                        Schöch, C., Döhl, F., Rettinger, A., Gius, E., Trilcke, P., Leinen, P., Jannidis, F., Hinzmann M. and Röpke, J. (2020). Abgeleitete Textformate: Text und Data Mining mit urheberrechtlich geschützten Textbeständen. 
                        Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften. Wolfenbüttel. DOI:
                        
                            10.17175/2020_006
                        .
                    
                    
                        Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J.-W., Bonino da Silva Santos, L., Bourne, P. E., Bouwman, J., Brookes, A. J., Clark, T., Crosas, M., Dillo, I., Dumon, O.,  Edmunds, S., Evelo, C. T., Finkers, R., Gonzalez-Beltran, A., Gray, A. J. G., Groth, P., Goble, C., Grethe, J. S., Heringa, J., ’t Hoen, P. A. C., Hooft, R., Kuhn, T., Kok, R., Kok, J., Lusher, S. J., Martone, M. E., Mons, A., Packer, A. L.,  Persson, B., Rocca-Serra, P., Roos, M., van Schaik, R., Sansone, S.-A.,  Schultes, E., Sengstag, T., Slater, T., Strawn, G., Swertz, M. A., Thompson, M., van der Lei, J., van Mulligen, E., Velterop, J., Waagmeester, A., Wittenburg, P., Wolstencroft, K., Zhao, J. and Mons, B. (2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. In: 
                        Scientific Data 3, Article number: 160018. DOI:
                        
                            10.1038/sdata.2016.18
                        .
                    
                
            
        
    



        
            Despite the existence of huge amount of textual material, TEI has not been as widespread in East Asia as in the West. The reason for this may be due to socio-cultural differences, but also probably to the fact that East Asian characters were difficult to use on computers in the past, thus there was little incentive to address text encoding. However, as the characters have become somewhat easier to use, the environment is now ready for scholars to work on text encoding. This presentation will describe our attempts to encode an East Asian literature under the situation.
            As a part of effort to digitalize the scholarly standard text of Chinese buddhist canon, 
                Taisho Tripitaka 
            大正新脩大藏經, the authors are working on the markup of 
                Xu Yiqiejing Yinyi 
            續一切經音義 (Xilin, 1928), which has a non-trivial structure. The text is a kind of dictionary which glosses characters, words, and their pronunciation occurred in Buddhist scriptures. As the headwords are sequenced by the order of occurrence in the scriptures, it provides at least two pieces of interesting information, that is: firstly, the glosses usually explain them in the contexts of each text; and secondly, it preserves more traditional forms of the characters and the words rather than what in ordinary scriptures referred by the dictionary. Since the editor of the dictionary consulted or annotated against various manuscript texts of the Buddhist scriptures available in the 8
                th century before woodcut printing became popular in East Asia, it often preserves the older forms than the texts we currently know, which has been changed through the historical inheritance. The feature makes it useful in reconstruction of the original texts and the old form of the characters. However, since many characters cited by the dictionary are marked as non-standard at that time, those characters are sometimes difficult to gain support for encoding, in spite of the increasingly academic attitude of character encoding communities including Unicode Consortium, ISO/IEC JTC1/SC2/WG2, and IRG (Ideographic Research Group).
            
            According to the situation, encoding of the dictionary requires not only the structure of a dictionary, but also linkage to the targeted scriptures. So, we aim to mark it up according to the following policy based on the Best Practices Level 3 (
                Best Practices for TEI in Libraries, n.d.).
            
            
                
                    The dictionary has a common style in East Asia, that a headword is glossed by following doubled lines (Fig. 1). It is necessary to encode not only the headword and the gloss, but also the typical style of the sub-lines with a line break. We currently adopt  and  with @type=”wari” to describe it (Fig. 2) but see the necessity of unambiguous handling of sub-linear layout with additional attribute(s).
                    
                        
                            
                        
                        
                            
                        
                    
                
                The structure of the dictionary is related to both the physical form of itself and that of referenced scriptures. While the two divisions are sometimes overlapped, we constructed the basic hierarchy based on the latter and the former is marked up by .
                
                    As mentioned above, character encoding is an issue in this text. Although our proposal to encode several hundred characters occurred in this text have already accepted in the UCS (Universal coded Character Set), that is, Unicode, many remain unencoded due to not only the uncertainty such as erroneousness and blur, but procedural restrictions (Lu, 2022). In this case, gaiji module in TEI Guidelines (
                        Characters, glyphs, and Writing Modes, n.d.) is useful. The following situations are seen in East Asian literature: a) appearance of characters not reducible to an existing UCS character are fairly common; b) with a high number of unencoded characters, they need to queue long for Unicode standardization and take progressive steps before completion; c) character sets with questionable Unicode compatibility are sometimes popular to cover missing characters. The gaiji module is almost compatible with East Asian characters, but not enough for self-contained character description needed at this level. To solve the issue, we suggest the following extensions to the TEI Guidelines in the meantime.
                    
                    
                        To add declaration of non-Unicode source to  as @scheme.
                        To add minimum and maximum version numbers to , , and  as @minVer and @maxVer for mutable properties.
                        To add datable attributes (att.datable) to  for traceability of historical identities of a character in standards.
                    
                    The extension provides a way to keep persistent reference of non-Unicode characters in TEI document.
                
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Lu, 
                        Q
                        . 
                        (ed). (2022). IRG Principles and Procedures (IRG PnP) Version 15. https://appsrv.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/~irg/irg/irg58/IRGN2515PnP15Confirmed.pdf (accessed 19 April 2022).
                    
                    
                        Xilin [希麟]. (1928). Xu Yiqiejing Yinyi [續一切經音義]. In Takakusu, J. and Watanabe K. [高楠順次郎・渡邊海旭] (eds), 
                        Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō [大正新脩大藏經], vol. 54. Tokyo: Taisho Issai-Kyo Kanko Kwai, pp. 934–979.
                    
                    Best Practices for TEI in Libraries. (n.d.). https://tei-c.org/extra/teiinlibraries/ (accessed 1 December 2021).
                    Characters, Glyphs, and Writing Modes. (n.d.). https://tei-c.org/Vault/P5/4.3.0/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/WD.html (accessed 10 December 2021).
                
            
        
    



        
            Knowing how to navigate and explore data in your encoding can be an important way to learn how to work with TEI and XML generally. This workshop is designed for people who have some experience with markup languages and seek to learn more about how to work with digital scholarly editions as a basis for analysis and research. We seek to raise awareness of the long-term sustainability of XML and TEI and the tool stack designed to process it. A little working knowledge of the query language XPath and the transformation language XSLT can help reduce reliance on software, packages, and plugins that may become obsolete without warning. Further, XSLT's functional programming can serve as a way of articulating research questions around a document data model expressed in XML. 
            
                The emphasis of our workshop is “pull-processing”, that is, extracting data and metadata from markup documents for analysis rather than providing the reading view of a digital scholarly edition. Markup in documents supplies structures and contexts that are particularly useful for processing data beyond what we can do with so-called “plain text”. Our workshop will teach the pull-processing of data from XML/TEI with simple, reusable XSLT templates to represent in TSV/CSV and HTML tables/charts. 
            
            
                 We will begin by sharing and reviewing together several markup-based projects that visualize data, and we will first study the encoding of these projects. Featured encoding will include projects developed by the workshop instructors and their students, drawn from student projects in the Newtfire organization (
                
                    https://newtfire.org
                
                ) 
                
                    , 
                
                from the 
                
                    East Asian/Japanese SIG
                
                 of the TEI consortium (
                
                    https://github.com/TEI-EAJ/
                
                )  and the 
                
                    SAT Daizokyo Database project
                
                 (
                
                    https://21dzk.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SAT/index_en.html
                
                ), and projects in the GAMS (
                
                    https://gams.uni-graz.at)
                
                  repository. A sampling of project markup will provide a basis for us to review XML elements and attributes and give participants an opportunity to refresh their understanding of the XML tree structure. 
            
            
                A particularly interesting challenge of our workshop is to share XML documents written in multiple languages. We will also work with source documents composed in languages unfamiliar to the European and North American members of the instructional team, with guidance from our Japanese colleague in order to show that the code we write is transferable to multiple projects across language and cultural borders. Workshop instructors will collaborate on preparing source materials to establish an international foundation for this workshop. This will help us to explore how XSLT works in an international communication and processing context, as long as we are clear on what we wish to process and the significance of the data. 
            
            We will demonstrate some basic navigation and calculation functions with XPath, before proceeding to show how XPath is applied in XSLT templates to address specific nodes that hold data of interest for visualization in statistical processing programs and simple online tools, where the structure of the output data is transferable to many different online calculation programs and amenable to statistical processing. During the workshop we will produce some structured documents: HTML lists and tables as well as plain text tabulated data (CSV or TSV files). The XSLT that we supply and that we write together in the workshop will be carefully documented with an interest to assist participants with revising and adapting the code to their own projects. We also hope to process some participant-supplied XML before, during, and after the workshop. 
            
                In a half-day workshop we cannot teach everything that XPath and XSLT can do. However, we can share some commonly used methods to do pull processing (XPath axes, especially descendant::), simple arithmetic (count(), sum(), avg(), multiplication and division operators), output into TSV (CSV) text formats for processing. Making an HTML list and table would be desirable. If we have time, we will model simple transformations of calculated data from XML to SVG to draw a bar or line graph.
            
            Outline
            
                Review and refresh understanding of XML tree structures, working with XML and TEI projects in multiple languages that explore and analyze data pulled from structured documents.
                Orientation to XPath, working with source documents provided by the instructors.
                Teach basic XSLT to produce simple outputs that curate data and show how these can be used in simple charts and graphs.
            
            Participation and requirements
            If you wonder or worry about how to process or share data from your markup, this is a good workshop for you! Familiarity with the TEI in an introductory context is desirable, but participants may also be relatively new to markup technologies. No programming experience is necessary, but some experience with markup is useful. We will provide some introduction to TEI (why TEI is useful for projects that care about data) but we will not have time to do a full introduction of the TEI in the interest of emphasizing simple data processing with existing data. People may find themselves gaining a fresh perspective on the TEI on the basis of what they learn in this workshop.
            Our past experience as instructors has shown us that to guarantee a high-quality experience, the instructor team must take great care to monitor and assist our participants. To ensure the instructor team can provide assistance and work with everyone, this workshop is limited to a number of 25 participants. There is no additional charge beyond conference expenses for workshop participants. Instructors will be in contact with participants well in advance of the workshop to provide software installation instructions and helpful resources before we meet, and we will provide means to remain in contact to assist participants after the workshop ends. 
            Workshop instructors 
            Elisa Beshero-Bondar, PhD
            
                Program Chair of Digital Media, Arts, and Technology | Professor of Digital Humanities | Director of the Digital Humanities Lab at Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
            
            An active member of the 
                
                    Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
                , Dr. Beshero-Bondar has been serving since 2016 on the 
                
                    TEI Technical Council
                , an eleven-member international committee that supervises amendments to the TEI Guidelines. She has been teaching since the 1990s, and began teaching markup languages and XML stack processing almost as soon as she began learning them in the 2010s. Before moving to direct the 
                
                    DIGIT program
                 at Penn State Erie, she was Director of Pitt-Greensburg's 
                
                    Center for the Digital Text
                . Her research often involves working with archival letters and manuscripts, and has led her to study what early 19th-century poets and dramatists understood about human physiology and electricity, cultural first contact on Pacific islands, and the mutiny on the HMS Bounty. She is the architect of the 
                
                    Digital Mitford Project
                 and other digital research projects involving TEI XML to build editions and prepare structured analyses of variants and collocations in texts. Find her on GitHub at 
                
                    https://github.com/ebeshero
                 and her projects on the site named for her pet firebelly newt at 
                
                    https://newtfire.org
                .
            
            Dr. Martina Scholger
            
            Centre for Information Modelling - Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities, University of Graz
         
            Martina Scholger has a PhD in Digital Humanities and holds a Senior Scientist position at the Centre for Information Modelling – Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities at the University of Graz. Her main research field is digital scholarly editing, the application of digital methods and semantic technologies to humanities’ source material, and text mining. In addition to teaching data modelling, text encoding and X-technologies, her work at the centre involves the conceptual design, development and implementation of numerous cooperation projects in the field of digital humanities (see http://gams.uni-graz.at). She has been an elected member of the TEI Technical Council since 2016, where she is currently its chair, and a member of the Institute for Documentology and Scholarly Editing since 2014. She has been teaching at a number of Summer Schools and workshops in the context of digital scholarly editing, e.g. at the Digital Humanities at Oxford Summer School and Schools organised by the Institute for Documentology and Scholarly Editing (IDE).
            
                Kiyonori Nagasaki, Ph.D.
            
         
                Senior Fellow at the International Institute for Digital Humanities in Tokyo. 
         
                
            
                    His main research interest is in the development of digital frameworks for collaboration in Buddhist studies. He is also engaging in investigation into the significance of digital methodology in Humanities and in promotion of DH activities in Japan. He has been participating in a number of Digital Humanities projects conducted at several institutions in Japan and abroad such as the University of Tokyo, Kyoto University, Osaka University, the National Diet Library, the National Museum of Ethnology, the National Institute of Japanese Language and Linguistics, the University of Tsukuba and the University of Hamburg. His activities also include postgraduate education in DH at the University of Tokyo as well as administrative tasks at several scholarly societies including Japanese Association for Digital Humanities, and the Japanese Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies. 
                
            
        
    



        
            
                Introduction
                VedaWeb, developed in the course of a project funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) from 2017-2021, is a web-based platform for linguistic and philological work with Old Indo-Aryan texts (
                        https://vedaweb.uni-koeln.de
                    ). In this contribution, we report on the key features of the VedaWeb platform and give a prospect on the recently started follow-up project VedaWeb 2.0 (2022-2025), which aims at transforming VedaWeb from a locally developed and curated platform into a collaborative workspace which will be shaped by the needs of the community of Indo-Aryanist researchers as a whole.
                
            
            
                The VedaWeb project
                The VedaWeb platform was developed on the basis of the Rigveda (about 160.000 words) as the pilot text, supplemented by multiple translations and linguistic annotations, lemma- as well as word form-based links to dictionary entries, alongside a tailored search engine based on elasticsearch.
                        
                            
                         The Rigveda was annotated by researchers of the University of Zurich with rich, albeit partially incomplete morphological glosses. Gaps in the annotations were filled in and existing ones stream-lined by the VedaWeb project team. Moreover, novel information was added (e.g. morphological annotations of verb classes, verbal stem formations such as desideratives, nominal forms such as comparatives and superlatives, word classes such as local particles, etc). Additional translations, metrical information, and access to APIs for Sanskrit dictionaries (Mondaca et al. 2019a/2019b)
                        
                            
                         were integrated. All data layers have been modeled and encoded in TEI-P5
                        
                            
                         and a state-of-the-art web application
                        
                            
                         has been developed for accessing data offered via APIs.
                        See also Kiss et al. (2019) for reflections on collaboration within and beyond the project team.
                
                There are several web portals making ancient Indo-Aryan texts available such as TITUS (Thesaurus Indogermanischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien, University of Frankfurt
                        
                            
                        ), GRETIL (Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages, University of Göttingen
                        
                            
                        ), DCS (Digital Corpus of Sanskrit, University of Heidelberg
                        
                            
                        ) and SARIT (Search and Retrieval of Indic Texts
                        
                            
                        ). By providing a combination of several text versions, translations, linguistic analyses and combined searchability across morphological, syntactic, lexical and metrical features, VedaWeb by far exceeds the scope of existing platforms and has already significantly improved the digital presence of Old Indo-Aryan texts.
                
            
            
                VedaWeb 2.0
                Primary goal of the follow-up project is to develop the VedaWeb platform into a collaborative workspace to open it up to more texts and to further enrichment through annotations and analyses. Particularly in view of the widespread traditional practices of work in this field that hinder local and international collaboration (e.g., excel files, paper, or similar approaches), the further development of VedaWeb promises substantial advances for anyone working with Indo-Aryan texts, including linguists, philologists, cultural anthropologists, and researchers in philosophical and religious studies. 
                Furthermore, we will add several new textual and lexical resources. This includes the Śaunaka version of the Atharvaveda, the second oldest Vedic text, and the early Vedic prose text Aitareya Brahmana. These texts and their nearly complete morphological annotation will be provided by our project partners at the University of Zurich (Paul Widmer and Oliver Hellwig). Our cooperation partner J.S. Kim (Würzburg) will provide an 
                    index verborum to the Atharvaveda.
                        
                            
                         In addition, parts of the Maitrayani Samhita, Jaiminiya Brahmana, and the Śatapatha Brahmana will be added. As for lexical resources, we will integrate several additional dictionaries that are part of the Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries.
                        
                            https://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-koeln.de
                         These have been modeled in TEI-P5 and OntoLex-Lemon (Mondaca/Rau 2020), and are available via the C-SALT APIs for Sanskrit Dictionaries.
                        
                            
                        
                
                Additionally, we will include audio recordings of recitations of the Rigveda and Atharvaveda, made available through the National Library of Denmark.
                        
                            
                         These recitations stand in the tradition of the uninterrupted oral transmission of the early sacred texts of Hinduism since their conception roughly three millennia ago. Supported by the Language Archive Cologne
                        
                            
                        , the recordings will be segmented and made available for online listening, aligned with the corresponding hymns, stanzas and verses.
                
            
            
                Summary/Outlook
                VedaWeb is already a well-established platform for linguistic and philological work with Old Indo-Aryan texts. VedaWeb 2.0 will further boost research on Old Indo-Aryan languages in linguistics, philology, and beyond. As a collaborative research platform, VedaWeb 2.0 will integrate several additional Indo-Aryan texts which can be enriched by users with diverse types of annotations, multiple translations, and links to dictionary entries. Data layers in all possible combinations and in a variety of formats will be exportable. In addition, a powerful search engine will allow combined queries across all data layers, including similarity searches. Above and beyond the already sizable number of users of VedaWeb 1.0, we expect a further increase in participants working and networking on the platform.
            
        
        
            
                
                    Bibliography
                    
                        Kiss, B., Kölligan, D., Mondaca, F., Neuefeind, C., Reinöhl, U., Sahle, P. (2019): 
                        It Takes a Village: Co-developing VedaWeb, a Digital Research Platform for Old Indo-Aryan Texts. In: Steven Krauwer und Darja Fišer (eds), 
                        TwinTalks at DHN 2019 – Understanding Collaboration in Digital Humanities. Kopenhagen, 2019.
                    
                    
                        Mondaca, F., Rau, F., Neuefeind, C., Kiss, B., Kölligan, D., Reinöhl, U., Sahle, P. (2019a): 
                        C-SALT APIs - Connecting and Exposing Heterogeneous Language Resources. In: Book of Abstracts of the Digital Humanities Conference 2019 (DH2019) 09.07-12.07.2019. Utrecht, Netherlands.
                    
                    
                        Mondaca, F., Schildkamp, P., Rau, F. (2019b): 
                        Introducing Kosh, a Framework for Creating and Maintaining APIs for Lexical Data. In: Electronic Lexicography in the 21st Century. Proceedings of the eLex 2019 Conference, Sintra, Portugal. Brno: Lexical Computing CZ, s.r.o., pp. 907–921.
                    
                    
                        Mondaca, F. and Rau, F. (2020): 
                        Transforming the Cologne Digital Sanskrit Dictionaries into Ontolex-Lemon. Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics: Building Tools and Infrastructure at LREC 2020. 11–16 May 2020. Marseille, France, pp. 11-14.
                    
                    
                        Reinöhl, U., Kölligan, D., Kiss, B., Mondaca, F., Neuefeind, C., Sahle, P. (2018): 
                        VedaWeb – eine webbasierte Plattform für die Erforschung altindischer Texte. In: Book of Abstracts der 5. Jahrestagung der Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum (DHd 2018), Köln 26.2.–2.3.2018, pp. 485–486.
                    
                
            
        
    

